TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 11 o'clock. Russian and Ukrainian forces are still fighting in the
streets of Bakhmut, which has been at the centre of conflict for months. The
Russian army are putting increasing pressure on Ukraine's soldiers to withdraw
from the eastern city. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale explains why
the battle for Bakhmut has been so hard fought. Western analysts and officials
will tell you that Bakhmut has little strategic value. It's not a garrison town,
it's not a transport hub. And yet both sides are giving no quarter in this
fight. The Kremlin desperately wants a propaganda victory of sorts. It certainly
also wants a stepping stone to potential future territorial gains. And Ukraine
simply wants to inflict losses on Russia's army. Iran has agreed to give United
Nations inspectors more access to its nuclear facilities. The head of UN's
nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, held talks in Tehran after the discovery of
uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at an underground site. Iran has
insisted its nuclear programme is peaceful. Prince Harry has described writing
his book, Spare, as an act of service and says he hopes sharing details of his
life and mental health will help others. He was speaking to the author and
therapist Dr Gabor Mate at a virtual event in California, organised by the
publishers of his memoir. The prince also compared being part of the royal
family to living in a container. Greater Manchester Police say a 15-year-old boy
has been taken to hospital with serious stab wounds. He was found earlier this
evening outside a McDonald's restaurant in Salford. A stop and search power is
in place in the higher Broughton area and police are conducting further
enquiries. And it's emerged that a sonic boom, which was heard across large
parts of the East Midlands, was caused by RAF Typhoon Jets scrambling to escort
a plane. The Ministry of Defence says they were authorised to fly at supersonic
speed after contact was lost with a civilian aircraft. The passenger plane, from
Iceland to Kenya, landed at Stansted airport. BBC News. On BBC iPlayer... Step
right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter?
The order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight years late. But the midwives of
Nonata's house are forever constant. You've a home here now, and purpose, and
people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every step of the
way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. We're off to the Poet Laureates, shedding the pen-
irons in half an hour, as Simon Armitage will be chatting to the fellow poet,
Pam Ayres. That's at 11.30. Before poetry, music. Counterpoint, the general
knowledge music quiz, chaired by Paul Gambacini. Hello. You join us at the Rodeo
Theatre in London with another three music enthusiasts for the penultimate heat
in Counterpoint's 36th series. We'll be testing them with an eclectic collection
of questions covering every genre of music. They'll have to demonstrate the full
range of their knowledge if they're going to achieve a place in our semifinals,
which start a couple of weeks from now. Let's meet today's trio of competitors.
Hello. I'm Catherine Johnson. I live in Northwood in Middlesex, and the first
recording I have acquired was a budget disc of the Peer Gynt Suite. Hello. My
name is Mark Jones. I'm from York, and the first record I bought was the Push
Bike song by The Mixtures. Hello. I'm Harry Shaw. I'm from Cheltenham, and the
first record I was ever gifted was Hunky Dory by David Bowie. Welcome, all of
you, and the very best of luck. The opening round tests your musical general
knowledge. There are two points available per question. If the person asked
can't answer correctly, I'll open it up to the others for a bonus point. In the
words of the Temptations, get ready, because here I come with the first question
for you, Catherine Johnson. Wales is a land long shrouded in myth and legend,
storytelling and music regularly combined to forge the culture. An event in
Cardiff marking St. David's Day sees the BBC National Chorus of Wales recognize
the work of Welsh composer Grace Williams. Her four illustrations written in
1939 concern the legend of a woman of the other world depicted in the
Mabinogion, often portrayed as a horse goddess or as a beautiful woman on
horseback. What is that deity's name? Rhiannon. That's right for two points.
From Wales, let's head to the northeast of England for music from the folk group
The Unthanks. In 2019, they released a trilogy of song cycles, the second of
which is inspired by the poetry of Siegfried Sassoon. Which conflict is
remembered here? My heart was shaken with tears and horror drifted away. Oh, but
every word was a bird and the song was wordless and painless. My heart was
shaken with tears and horror drifted away. Oh, but every word was a bird and the
song was wordless and blissing in never will be done. That's the first conflict
was remembered there. That's the first world war. That is correct. Everyone Sang
was set to the words of Sassoon's poem published in 1919. Harry Shaw released in
2013, which album by the French electronic duo Daft Punk is named after the
hardware component that acts as a temporary storage space for a computer to
handle data, usually referred to by the abbreviation RAM? Random access
memories. for two points. Catherine Johnson, time to randomly access your memory
with some music. Upheld by Stillness is the debut album of the 18-voice chamber
choir, Aura, which pairs Renaissance gems with specially commissioned
reflections. Here the ensemble perform the Kyrie from the mass for five voices,
after which I'd like you to identify the English composer of the work. William
Byrd. That is correct for two points. Mark Jones, the British rapper Stormzy's
2019 song Superheroes, references several people including Michael Dapa, fellow
rappers Little Sims and Dave, tennis legends Serena and Venus Williams and the
British author of Knots and Crosses, who was Children's Laureate from 2013 to
2015. What's her name? Mallory Blackman. That's correct. Harry Shaw. Stormzy's
Superheroes also cites one of the all-time great American vocalists. 2023 marks
the 90th anniversary of her birth and the 20th anniversary of her passing. Here
she performs one of the first civil rights songs in response to racially
motivated murders in the early 60s. After you've heard Mississippi Goddamn, I'd
like you to name her. Can't you see it? Can't you feel it? It's all in the air.
I can't stand the pressure much longer. Somebody say a prayer. Alabama's gotten
me so upset. Tennessee made me lose my rest. And everybody knows about
Mississippi Goddamn. Nina Simone. It is Nina Simone for two points. Katherine
Johnson, song inspiration of a different kind. The Killers frontman Brandon
Flowers told GQ magazine in 2009 about writing one of his group's best-known hit
songs. I was asleep and I knew something was wrong. I have these instincts. I
went to the crown and anchor and my girlfriend was there with another guy. Which
Killers song is he referring to? Mr. Brightside. That's right for two points.
Mark Jones. In March 2023, the Royal Ballet revives a 2015 production
choreographed by Wayne McGregor with music by Max Richter and spoken word by
Gillian Anderson. The ballet is inspired by the novels, essays, diaries, and
letters of a 20th century British writer. After you've heard The Waves, I'd like
you to name her. What I want to say is I owe all the happiness of my life to
you. You have been entirely patient with me and incredibly good. I want to say
that. Everybody knows it. As Virginia Woolf. That's right. Harry Shaw, the
German-born singer-songwriter and actress Nico had roles in several films
including Andy Warhol's Chelsea Girls. Nico made her official screen debut in
which 1960 film directed by Federico Fellini? Let's try La Dolce Vita. You try
and you get it. Two points. Katherine Johnson. 2022 marks the 50th anniversary
of the world-renowned soprano Jessie Norman's debut at the Royal Opera House
where she appeared in Berlioz's The Trojans. After we've heard part of her aria
Malheurois, I'd like you to name the ill-fated Trojan prophetess and daughter of
King Priam she played. Cassandra. Cassandra is the correct answer. Mark Jones.
Over its 300-year history, the Three Choirs Festival has premiered works by
Edward Elgar, Arthur Sullivan, Samuel Coleridge Taylor, Judith Weir and many
others. To which three English cathedrals does the name of this festival refer?
Hereford, Worcester and Cheltenham. Oh you've got two of the three correct. So
we'll give you one point and we will go to Harry Shaw. Gloucester, Worcester and
Hereford. And that is right and you get a bonus point. Finally in this round,
music for you Harry Shaw. Laurie Anderson's eight and a half minute half sung
half spoken experimental single Oh Superman was a number two hit in 1981. For
obvious reasons we can't play it all though I'd love to but after you've heard
several ha's a question will follow. Oh Superman Oh Judge Oh Mom and Dad Oh Mom
and Dad Anderson has said that the origins of the song lie in the words Oh
Sovereign, Oh Judge, Oh Father from an aria in L'Ecide, a 19th century opera by
which French composer? Massénais. That's right and that is why the full title of
the song is Oh Superman for Massénais. Let's see if your scores are super after
the opening round and they are in third place with seven points. Mark Jones
lying second with eight points. Katherine Johnson and in the lead with nine
points. It's Harry Shaw. In the second round of counterpoint our competitors
have to choose special subjects on which to answer their own individual set of
questions. I'm about to give them five categories to pick from of which they've
had no warning until this moment. They are Roll Over Beethoven, Choral and
Chorus, Musical Freedom and Human Rights, Animals in Opera, and the Fantasy
World of Bernard Herrmann. Harry Shaw you're in the lead at the moment what
would you like? Musical Freedom and Human Rights please. And for you Katherine
Johnson. I would like Chorals and Chorus please. That leaves three for Mark
Jones which are Roll Over Beethoven, Animals in Opera, and the Fantasy World of
Bernard Herrmann. Roll Over Beethoven. We'll start with Mark Jones and your
specialist questions on Roll Over Beethoven. Originally released in the mid-50s
the Chuck Berry song Roll Over Beethoven celebrates the supplanting of classical
music by rock and roll. 2023 marks the 50th anniversary of the release of a
cover version by ELO which features an opening quote from which Beethoven's
symphony? This. That's right. Beethoven's music was given an electronic makeover
in 1971 by the pioneer of the Moog synthesizer Wendy Carlos. It was produced in
collaboration with Rachel Elkind for the soundtrack of a controversial film
based on a book by Anthony Burgess. After you've heard the scherzo I'd like you
to name the film. That's right Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange. Leonard
Bernstein often quoted classical composers in his works. The melody of which
song from the musical West Side Story nods to the second movement of Beethoven's
Emperor piano concerto number five? Somewhere. That's right. Here's an
adaptation of Beethoven's piano sonata number one which provided a 1965
Eurovision Song Contest win for Luxembourg. I'd like you to name both singer and
composer. I've no idea. Poupée de Cyr, Poupée de Saun was recorded by Franz Gall
and written by Serge Gainsbourg. Beethoven's music continues to inspire every
genre. In 2012 when hip-hop producer DJ Premier teamed with the rapper Nas for
the song Regeneration they combined it with a 1787 Beethoven work based on a
Goethe play. Which overture is that? Leonardo? No it's the Egmont overture. For
your next extract here's the Billy Joel song This Night from his 1984 album An
Innocent Man. The chorus is based on a second movement of a work by Beethoven.
Can you identify it? A Moonlight Sonata? No I'm afraid it was the Patek, the
sonata number eight. And finally in this Beethoven themed round his Moonlight
Sonata has been sampled on a number of songs including Past, Present and Future
by the Shangri-Las and Piano Manai by Alicia Keys. For the song Because by the
Beatles John Lennon was inspired to use the piece after hearing Yoko Ono playing
it on the piano. What is distinctive about its use in that Beatles song? No I
don't know. It is played backwards. That is true. And Mark Jones in that round
you scored six points added to your previous seven you now have 13 points.
Katherine Johnson here are your questions. Choral and chorus. The Hallelujah
Chorus closes part two of which English language oratorio composed in 1741 by
Handel? Messiah. Yes Panis Angelicus is the penultimate stanza of the hymn
Sacris Solemnis written by Saint Thomas Aquinas. The first section was set to
music separately from the rest of the hymn by César Franck. Can you identify
which tenor performs it here alongside the Vienna Boys Choir? Placido Domingo.
That was Placido Domingo for two points. The first musical appointment of the
16th century British composer Thomas Tallis was as organist of a priory in 1532.
There he composed Misa Salve in Tamaroto his earliest known work. The priory is
now the site of a college where a stone gate post bears a plaque dedicated to
Tallis in which Kent town? Dover. That's right. From Dover College let's head
northwards to a Cambridge College for a setting of Psalm 51. Here's the Miserere
which provides the title track of Clare College Choir's album release of 2000.
Can you name the Italian composer of this work? Gregorio Allegri. That's correct
for two points. Which choral piece am I describing? Inspired by the text of a
William Blake poem it premiered at Winchester Cathedral on the 22nd of December
1982. Now a common part of church services especially around Christmas it is
also a set work for the Edexcel A-level music examination. No I can't think of
that. It's The Lamb by John Tavener. Well I think that's charming that's the
first time that's been said by a woman on this program. You should have heard
what I might have said actually. Music again here's the Santa Monica based
ensemble Globus with Scott Siskin and choir. Madre Terra is an Italian song for
the ancient goddess of the planet. After you've heard it I'd like you to name
that deity the English translation of Madre Terra. Madre Terra. Mother Earth.
That's right and finally in this round the critically acclaimed acapella choir
Accentus was founded by the French conductor Laurence Eckelbe widely respected
for her work in choral music. Since 1998 the choir has been in residence at the
Opéra de Rouen which is located in which geographical and cultural region of
northwestern Europe? It's in Strasbourg. I'm afraid it's not it's Normandy. Oh
thinking of a totally different place sorry. Okay but don't fret because you did
very well in that round you got 10 points added to your previous eight you now
have 18 points. Harry Shaw here are your questions on musical freedom and human
rights. A song written in 1984 by the British musician Jerry Dammers and
performed by the special aka protested against the imprisonment of which South
African anti-apartheid activist? Nelson Mandela. That's right here's a song
about another anti-apartheid activist. In 1986 I compiled an album on behalf of
Amnesty International featuring major artists united by the theme of humanity
called Conspiracy of Hope and included tracks by various artists including Elton
John, Sting, Dire Straits and Peter Gabriel. Here's Gabriel paying tribute to
one of the founders of the black people's convention in South Africa. Can you
name him? Biko. That's right Stephen Biko. Two benefit shows I organized on
behalf of Amnesty at the London Palladium involved artists including Peter
Gabriel, Jackson Brown and Joan Armatrading culminating in a finale of everyone
performing a Bob Dylan song. It includes the lyric I see my light come shining
from the west unto the east. What's the name of that song? Times are not
changing. No it's I shall be released. Okay time for more music here's Mary
Chapin Carpenter with a song telling the story of a young army soldier involved
in the slaughter of hundreds of unarmed protesters. The track is called Fourth
of June 1989. After you've heard it I'd like you to name the tragedy to which it
refers. Oh I was 17 that spring. Oh we were just obeying orders. Oh I still see
everything through the factory's yellow windows. In the dirty stinking river in
the messages that find you and vanish in the evening. Four June 1989 refers to
what? The Tiananmen Square Massacre. That is correct. 2023 is the 10th
anniversary of the release from prison of which Russian feminist punk band whom
Amnesty International designated women as prisoners of conscience. No clue pass.
Pussy Riot. In 2014 John Legend and Common joined forces to release the song
Glory. Originally it was used as the theme of a film about the 1965 Montgomery
marches for which it won an academy award for best original song. I'd like you
to name that film. One day when the glory comes it will be ours it will be ours.
Oh one day when the war is won we will be sure we will be sure. Oh glory glory.
Selma. That's right for two points. And finally in this round Same Love is a
song by the American hip-hop duo Macklemore and Ryan Lewis with vocals by Mary
Lambert. Containing the lyric it's human rights for everybody there is no
difference. It was recorded during the campaign for Washington referendum 74
which upon approval in November 2012 legalized what? Let's try cannabis. No it's
same-sex marriage in Washington state. Harry in that round you scored eight
points added to your previous nine you now have 17 points. And so these are the
scores after the individual round. Lying third with 13 points is Mark Jones. In
second place with 17 points is Harry Shaw and our leader with just one round to
go with 18 points is Katherine Johnson. Anyone could win. It's fingers on the
buzzer as we enter our quickfire final round. Things can change quickly. A
correct answer wins you one point but you lose a point if you buzz in and fail
to answer correctly. There are no bonuses. So fingers poised here we go. In band
names which word follows swing out and Shakespeare's and Mark says sister. He's
right. On which album does Jim Steinman ask on a hot summer night and Harry says
Bat Out of Hell. Correct. Act one of which Verdi opera begins on a stormy
evening with the people of Cyprus anxiously and Katherine says Othello. Yes. The
composer Rafe Vaughan Williams was the great nephew of which English naturalist
widely known for his contributions and Katherine Johnson says Charles Darwin.
Yes. Moon Age Daydream is a 2022 documentary film and Harry says David Bowie.
Yes. Which British folk band's name comes from a character mentioned in the
traditional song Horkstow and Katherine says Steelye Span. Correct. Which Robbie
Williams hit shares its name with a song from the musical Gypsy and Mark says
Angels. No I'm sorry it's Let Me Entertain You. Minus one. Pink Floyd's album
cover for The Dark Side of the Moon features which and Harry says Prism. Yes.
Which singer's 10th studio album is titled 50 Words for Snow. Harry. Capelish.
You're right. The country music hall of fame and museum is situated and Harry
says Asheville. Yes he's right. What's the name of the long horn played by
Alpine villagers sounded and Katherine says Alphorn. Yes. On which instrument
was the composer Johannes Brahms a virtuoso. Katherine. Piano. Yes. Which Roxy
music album shares its name with a mythical place and Harry says Avalon. Yes.
The popular song from William Walton's Facade was used as theme music for which
TV game show hosted by Joseph Cooper. The TV game show hosted by Joseph Cooper
was Face the Music. In 2023 which singer from Pontypriddh marks a 60-year career
after starting out as the front man and Katherine says Tom Jones. Yes. And
finally press agent Oscar Davis and announcer Horace Logan are both credited as
early users of which phrase spoken at the end of an Elvis Presley concert and
Katherine says Elvis has left the building. Correct. Elvis has left the building
but we haven't before we leave the building there's just time to announce the
final scores in today's heat of counterpoint. Third with 13 points is Mark
Jones. Runner up with 23 points is Harry Shaw and our winner going through to
the semifinals with 25 points Katherine Johnson. So congratulations Katherine
Johnson. We'll be welcoming you back in a few weeks time for the semifinal. Warm
thanks and commiserations to the other two of you for a most enjoyable show.
Join us next time for the last of the heats when we'll complete our semifinal
lineup for 2023. Until then from all of us here at the Radio Theatre goodbye.
Counterpoint is hosted by Paul Gambaccini and produced in Salford by Paul
Bajoria and if you'd like to put yourself forward for a future edition of the
quiz you can request an application form by emailing counterpoint at bbc.co.uk.
Welcome to the spot. I feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. They're
juggling flaming torches but they could just as well be juggling chainsaws. The
monkeys might be hypothetical but the issues are real. Part of what we need to
be well is a world that we can feel that we belong to. I'm Helen Lewis back with
a new series of big conversations talking to people who bring radical new
thinking to vital questions like when to quit, social prescribing, scientific
fraud and preventing suicide. Small acts of reaching out, small acts of
interrupting those thoughts could be life-saving. The Spark, Tuesday mornings at
11 on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And now on BBC Radio 4 we're off to the
Pennine Hills to find out who Simon Armitage has invited into his writing shed
this week. It's the poet laureate has gone to his shed. My guest in quite a
windy day in the shed today is as recognisable by her voice as she is by her
work. In fact the two things are very much intertwined. I can't read her work
without hearing her very particular style of delivery and for many people over
several generations now she's been the voice of poetry as we might hear it on
the telly, on the radio, in theatres and in many places of performance and
entertainment. Pam Ayres, welcome to the shed. Thank you Simon. It's actually
smaller than I anticipated. I thought it might be a big fancy shed that called
itself a shed but was actually a fancy studio but it's not at all. It's quite a
modest shed, suitably stained with rain. I like it and I particularly like the
spectacular view which is just sumptuous. I need to start by telling you Pam
that I'm a huge fan. The story of your dad wringing out his waterlogged hand
knitted swimming trunks while still wearing them still makes me roar with
laughter. I think because I saw my own dad doing the same thing. Yeah it's got
that kernel of truth in it hasn't it. I mean it's perfectly true. Now I'm not
sure how many people remember those old knitted swimming costumes but certainly
my dad had a terrible old loose knitted ginger coloured droopy swimming costume
with white elastic threaded around the waist with a big knot in the front and
you know it did get horribly waterlogged and heavy and they'd sort of wring out
the gusset before you could emerge with any decency. I usually describe this
part of West Yorkshire as semi-rural even though the view in front of us as you
were noticing is entirely rural. Am I right in supposing Pam that you're at home
in the countryside? Yeah I'm not an urban person. I did live in London for a few
months in the 70s when I didn't know what I was doing and I had a flat in the
King's Road and it was quite interesting to be able to go out to the cinema and
walk spronts down the King's Road. You were a Chelsea girl right? Yeah until I
spoke. Yeah but I understand the country. I was brought up in it. I understand
the community and how it all works and the farms and what's happening around me
and I feel entirely at home and I feel really like a fish out of water in towns
and cities particularly in places like New York. I've been to New York a few
times and it petrifies me to be honest. They're like canyons and the wind
whistles down these terrible high-rise buildings and it just seems alien to me
that there's nothing growing. Was your childhood a rural one? Yes definitely.
I'm one of six children. I'm the youngest of six children. My dad worked for the
electricity board and we lived in a council house on the village green and at
the back of us there was a market garden run by a peppery old brigadier, a
retired brigadier, who everybody tugged their forelock to. There were just farms
and cows going up and down through the village but it was very quiet and flocks
of sparrows dust bathed in the road and it was entirely rural and very insular.
There was only one bloke who had a car. Johnny Moss had a car. What sort of car
was it? One of those little boxy jobs at Austin 7 is it? Could have been, yeah.
We all used to laugh at it but really we were jealous because Johnny Moss could
get in his car and go further afield. So a childhood of collecting frog spawn in
jam jars and corn dollies, that kind of thing? Well I didn't make any corn
dollies, certainly we collected frog spawn and we used to give them pieces of
liver which seems a bit grotesque now. You put liver in the frog spawn? For the
tadpoles to suck. Don't take my advice because I have no idea it's good for
them. It's much more suitable than that actually. Tadpole and liver constantly.
Yeah it sounds quite French doesn't it? You were talking about being the
youngest of six. Did your position in the family make you a natural entertainer
either because you had to speak up to be heard or you know because you were
expected to be the the apple of everybody's eye would you say? I don't think I
was the apple of everybody's eye. I don't think it was that sort of a family. I
mean there were six of us and without trying to give you a hard luck story we
were pretty hard up and so there was no time to pamper one. We were all in it
together really. One wasn't made a fuss of. If anybody was made a fuss of and I
say this with no envy whatsoever it would have been my sister Jean because my
mum had four boys and she longed for a girl and she finally got one when she got
my sister Jean and Jean was very beautiful and had lovely long blonde hair and
was a proper little girl and I think I was a bit of a tomboy and was always
bringing home half dead crows and things that I'd found. So I think mum was
delighted with my sister and I love her dearly so I'm not jealous and Jean
wanted the things that I didn't. She wanted a family. She longed for a family of
her own and I couldn't think of anything worse. That was the last thing I
wanted. You know it was sort of hand to mouth really. My dad had two huge
allotments and a big back garden and he produced an extraordinary amount of food
so we were well fed but I don't think anybody was particularly spoiled and I
don't think that I stood up and started cracking jokes. I think I would soon
have been slapped down if I'd done that. They were amazing weren't they that
generation for growing their own food. Extraordinary yeah the knowledge. When I
think about my dad's allotments they were extraordinary. You know he was so
meticulous. There'd be two rows of runner beans and there'd be big patch of
broad beans and then rows of peas and a great acreage of potatoes and all the
staples that people needed. There was a post office in the village and it used
to sell a few vegetables and he used to laugh. He'd say oh look at that bloody
old cabbage you've been cut a fortnight. You know because they'd be all brown
where you cut them not nice and fresh and juicy like ours. Did your parents,
either of your parents, encourage you particularly in a literary direction or as
a performer? Well my mum was very good at English. Her father was a soldier. He
was killed on the railway and so her mum was left with five children and no
husband and so my mother was offered a scholarship because she was good at
English which they were unable to take up because of financial restraints
constraints. Were there books in the house? No not really we had hardly any
books. I'll tell you what we had. We had a book called Character from the Face
which was a load of photographs of people's noses and eyes. What you could make
assessments about their personalities? Yeah so this person is not to be trusted.
Eyes too close together. Yes and then there was an awful book about birds. For
instance the sparrows were considered to be cockneys and were given painful
dialect to speak in. And one of the first books that came into our house that I
read was A Stone for Danny Fisher by Harold Robbins and I devoured that. I
thought it was a great read because there were no books in our house and I don't
say that as a criticism. Everybody was concerned with the business of making a
living and getting by and when at the village school teacher announced that
there was going to be a library I was one of the first to go and have a look and
it was only one shelf of books and the teacher was called Miss Edmonds and she
said I think you'll like this book Pammy. They all used to call me Pammy and she
gave me a book called Wish for a Pony by Monica Edwards which gave me all sorts
of snobby inclinations but and that was the start really of me loving to read
and expanding my reading. What were you like as a student? I was good at
English. I was good at art. I was afraid of authority. I was always afraid of
getting into trouble. I wasn't a very brave little girl and on one occasion we
went up from the first class when I was six to a class and it was run by a
teacher called Miss Bedford and everybody was scared of her. She was very stern
and one day I had an exercise book with an orange cover and in lifting up my
desk I caught the cover under my thumb and I ripped it and to this day I can
hear the rip and feel the realisation that I had done something terrible because
I was going to get into trouble Miss Bedford and for all I know I didn't go to
Oxford. I went to Oxford and I was a doctor. I was a doctor and I went to
Bedford and for weeks if not months I claimed to be ill. I had a bad arm. I had
a bad tummy. I had a bad this. I had a bad that and they've got the doctor to me
lots of times and they thought it was appendix but it wasn't. I was lying
because I was so frightened and I think the reason I mention it is because it's
so easy to sort of traumatise a child without realising and another time I was
the dame said, where's Jack? When he gets back here I'm gonna skin him alive and
those words I thought oh no I'm gonna have to watch him have his skin pulled off
like I see my dad skinning rabbits and I woke up screaming that night mum said
you're not going to any more pantomimes if this is what's gonna happen. It's
very easy to traumatize a child without realizing. Were you funny at school? I
mean were you like the class clown or a bit of a wag? I think I was with my
little group of friends I was considered to be funny but only in a small way.
You were in the Armed Forces were you? I was in the WRAF yeah. Was that a
natural breeding ground for somebody who'll end up with a sort of literary
career and as an entertainer? You know were you called upon at office parties as
it were in the what do you call it the naffy to perform? Yeah the reason I
joined the Air Force was because three of my four brothers had done National
Service they had to they didn't have a choice and they went to interesting far
away places at no cost to themselves and I watched them come back with all
manner of souvenirs and tales and when I left school at 15 having failed the
11-plus I took the Civil Service exam which I passed and then I became a clerk
and it was the most stultifyingly boring and terrible job just writing forms out
with a lot of women older than myself and in the end when I was 17 I couldn't
stick it I thought I'm gonna do what my brothers did and join the Air Force and
I joined the Air Force because it seemed to be more elegant and had a nice hat
than the Army. Palmeir's top gun. You said that on me. Yeah and I achieved my
aim in that I was posted to the Far East I was in Singapore for a year and a
half and the great thing about the services then I don't know if it is now but
they had great facilities so you didn't get bored so there were choirs and there
were theatre groups, sports and you know really whatever you wanted to do and
they particularly in Singapore we had this wonderful theatre and that's where it
all kicked off for me really because I went along to the theatre club and I got
parts in the funny plays and people liked me and they laughed and laughed and
that was very addictive and on Friday nights they used to have club nights where
you could write things and stand up and perform them and that was when I first
started to write daft poems and it went from there really because people liked
them and wanted me to write more. That's really interesting. If the received
narrative is to be believed your big break came with a recital of your poem The
Battery Hen on Radio Oxfordshire followed by an appearance on a talent spotting
show Opportunity Knocks. Radio Oxford were great. When I came out of the Air
Force I discovered folk clubs. There was a good folk club in Cambridge called
the Red Cow and a boyfriend called Hank he took me to the Red Cow and it was up
above a pub and I'd never seen an environment like it. It was dark and it had
candles with all the wax running down the sides and people got up and sang all
these lovely ballads and everybody joined in the chorus and I just thought it
was magic and I became very fond of the folk clubs and people making their own
entertainment in that way and so I was able to go on writing my poems for that
environment and then when I came back to Whitney where I then got a job as a
sort of secretary there was a folk club nearby and I used to go there and
declaim my poems and BBC Radio Oxford had a folk programme and they came around
recording around the folk clubs and they recorded me doing one of my deathless
works. The parrot or um, I wish I'd had so many teeth or one of them and they
asked me to go on to Radio Oxford and that's where I was then given a weekly
spot and I started to hear the magic words where can we buy a copy of that poem
which was the most marvellous unexpected thing. Yeah it's an amazing moment
isn't that kind of affirmation when it comes from elsewhere other people going
in search of your work or recognising you or identifying you as a poet that's
when it's really special. Do you think humour is valued in poetry? I mean it's a
strange question to ask someone who's published several best-selling collections
and achieved enormous commercial success but do you think there's a literary
snobbery which ranks seriousness and and whoa and difficulty above humour in
poetry? I don't know really Simon I never felt myself to be a part of poetry as
a thing I felt rejected from the beginning. From sort of literary poetry? Yeah
and despised really from the beginning there were people saying this isn't
poetry you know this is some awful dogger all you know there was a lot of that.
The only thing that really upset me about that was that I wasn't trying to be a
poet in the accepted sense I was just writing what thrilled me because it made
people laugh and I could use my love of words and my vocabulary and my timing to
put together things that would make people convulse with laughter and that was
the thrill of it I wasn't trying to be a poet so to be kicked out so early was
unfair so I've always applaud my own furrow if you like I've written what I felt
I could do well and could perform well because to me they're absolutely hand in
hand I don't like other people reading my poems they never get it right they
never pause where I would pause to get the impact so from very early on I felt
that poetry wasn't much to do with me and I wasn't trying to be a proper poet
anyway. I'm sorry to hear you say that because I think you are a proper poet the
spectrum of what poetry is is wide. It's huge I know well thank you that and I
think some of the things I've written are poems some of the more serious things
I've written but I agree with you and I but I don't think certainly in the early
days that many people felt that there could be funny knock about music hall type
poems at one end and there could be the wandering Angus at the other you know
but there was this feeling certainly early on that you were only allowed to
enjoy certain types of poetry and the more impenetrable the better. I'm pretty
sure I once saw you at a literary gathering at Buckingham Palace on a bonquette
in the picture gallery having a good old chinwag with Geoffrey Hill who's
sometimes described as one of our most difficult and unapproachable poets or did
I dream that? No no I was there yes I was I was invited which was nice yeah it
was quite an august gathering as I recall. Yeah I remember thinking that night
that if there was something not quite right in the prawn sandwiches it might
have cleared the whole poetry world out for a generation several generations.
Yeah a great loss to the world of poetry. We're gonna have the one or two other
section in the program now Pam where I just offer you a series of alternatives
and you can choose whichever one you want you can play a pass if you don't want
to answer the question. Okay this sounds intriguing. Day or night? Night. Sammy
Davis jr. or Samuel Taylor Coleridge? Coleridge. Oxford or Berkshire? Berkshire.
Burial or cremation? Burial I think I'll go on the compost heap. Somebody once
asked their dad I think about whether they wanted to be buried or cremated and
he said I don't know surprise me. The Holy Bible or the Oxford English
Dictionary? I think I'll have the Bible thanks. Edward Lear or Hilaire Belloc? I
like them both I'll have them both please. A good night in or a good night out?
A good night in. Dog or cat? Dog. Secrets or confessions? Don't know. A good
internet connection or good plumbing? Grumps. The plumbing I think. Fried,
scrambled or poached? Scrambled please. Desert Island Discs or the Poet Laureate
has gone to his shed? Oh definitely the Poet Laureate has gone to his shed.
That's a good answer. I didn't have much choice really. Body or soul? Soul.
Passenger seat or driving seat? Passenger seat. Shed or greenhouse? Greenhouse.
Wellies or slippers? Wellies. The Sun or the Moon? The Moon. Time travel to the
future or time travel to the past? I'll go backwards. And last one a trowel or a
pen? A pen please. We end up in the shed talking a lot about place and where
where people come from and often have conversations about dialect and I wanted
to ask you about your accent I mean I mentioned Berkshire and Oxfordshire I
think the village you grew up in was reassigned across the border wasn't it? It
was you're absolutely right yes. But a lot of people I know assume you're from
the southwest from Somerset with with your accent is that a Berkshire
Oxfordshire accent that you have? I don't know I'm not an expert on accents but
I am attributed to a marvelous rainbow variety of origins most of which are
wrong I've been called a Geordie, I've been called East Anglia Norfolk and as
you say Devon Cornwall Somerset all that but I was born in the village of
Stamford-in-the-Vale and Stamford-in-the-Vale was in North Berkshire and it's a
village very insular village in a big shallow valley below White Horse Hill and
there were innumerable little villages and I lived in one of them and the
accents were just like people didn't travel you know it's like I said about our
village it was anyone bloke with a car Johnny Moss and so those accents endured
for centuries and that's that's where mine is from is the Vale of the White
Horse a very specific area. Do you think if you went back there now people would
still sound like that? No I don't it's gone unless you're talking to people of
my generation it's gone because now it's very much a dormitory village for
Oxford Swindon etc whether you like it or loathe it and I know plenty of people
loathe it it's a genuine accent I never think about how I speak I lived there
till I was 18 and then unless you go to elocution lessons and try and get rid of
it you're stuck with it really. Yeah I was going to ask you whether you were
ever threatened with elocution I'd actually written electrocution down here but
were you ever threatened with elocution lessons because we were as kids because
well certainly my grandma's generation they thought we'd never get a proper job
if we spoke like this. I know my dad used to be very apologetic he'd say oh I'd
be very broad and sort of send it up in a way I didn't like because all it says
about you is where you come from it doesn't it doesn't signify anything other
than that. You were a successful act on screen in theatres in a world that might
have been thought of as a stand-up at a time when most of your fellow performers
were fellows a lot of you worked from a woman's point of view isn't it I was
thinking about that poem they should have asked my husband you know about
mansplaining a long time before the word mansplaining was ever coined probably.
Yeah that is one as one everybody asked me to do is it or they should have asked
my husband because I think everybody knows somebody who's a man who's a know-all
you know overwhelms the conversation with this sort of vast knowledge or not and
that's it that was that is one of my most popular ones and I was at Glastonbury
I got the street cred yeah I got great street cred because I was performing at
Glastonbury by family it came as well which was lovely and when I asked the
audience what they'd like to hear they all said I should have asked my husband
and that's really that gives me a lovely feeling. It's great that you're at
Glastonbury did you get a good crowd there? I did get a good crowd I did my son
I think my sons we got two sons and they brought their families I think they
were all petrified that nobody was going to turn up you know but actually as
you've asked me I will tell you that we had the biggest crowd in that particular
tent that they had had at all. That's brilliant. It was lovely. Congratulations.
Thank you. Glass do granny they call me now. How much of the real Pam Ayres is
in the work and the performances? Yeah I think what you see is what you get I
talk about things that matter to me I'm very interested in wildlife as you
probably know I try and do as much as I possibly can to preserve some of the
species I grew up alongside in Stamford-in-the-Vale and so a lot of my time
these days is spent in trying to I've got a piece of land that I manage as a
wildlife reserve and and that really matters to me. In more recent years I've
written a lot about wildlife and hedgehogs and the value of hedgerows and you
know the things that matter to me. Maybe you could read something Pam or recite
something they're all in your head aren't they? Well not all of them this is a
poem I wrote about the hedgerow for the People's Trust for Endangered Species
they were doing a hedgerow week because hedgerows are immensely valuable. Now
the hedgerow casts its shade, the tall, the sparse, the neatly laid, with
campion and parsley lined and honeysuckle intertwined. Here a butterfly may rest
or blackbirds build their sturdy nest and little creatures in the green can slip
along and not be seen. Here may livestock sweetly browse, here may sickly sheep
or cows in the hedgerows rich allure seek a comfort and a cure. Then
blackberries and rosehips red, sloughs and damsons freely shed their autumn
bounty, spread the news to native birds and voles and shrews. Come now make a
winter store, fatten up and carry more to bramble, burrow, crevice, lair for
when the winter boughs are bare. Regard again and celebrate the hedgerow with
its beauty great which in pollution ever rife breathes oxygen to give us life.
You're making me think of John Clare there. I like John Clare. His nature poems
and of course written in his Northamptonshire accent as well. Yeah thanks Pam.
It's alright, you're welcome. We asked people who come to the shed to bring an
object to talk about. Have you brought something with you? I have. I have
indeed. Are you ready? Let me just clear a space. Yeah. It's in a bag. It's in a
shoe bag. I'll let you describe that Pam. Well it's a piece of pottery that I
bought in Vancouver in about 1976 and it's a parrot with the most utterly
gormless expression on his face and he's got great big yellow feet and I just
love him because I can't look at him and not smile and I brought him along
because I think it is his gormless expression. His beak's wide open and he's got
his head on one side and he just looks excruciatingly daft and I bought him in
Vancouver which was a place I'd never been to before and the reason I brought
him along is because he represents quite a lot of things to me. Sculpture, he is
a kind of sculpture so on the one hand you could have Michelangelo's Pietà which
would make me cry or you could have this it's like a wide spectrum this is a
piece of pottery that somebody's made and they've made him look funny so that I
can't look at him without laughing and I always want to cuddle him he's so
friendly and he sort of underlines to me that there is a great spectrum in the
arts of the elite and the friendly that works a bit like me in a way and it also
underlines to me that my work has enabled me to travel all around the world and
also I wrote a poem about a parrot a very early one which I did on Opportunity
Knox which won so he represents all sorts of things to me. So it's a kindred
spirit. Yeah. Great well thanks parrot. Yeah. I can't let you go Pam without
giving you a few things I've been writing about butterflies and moths in the
shed not haikus but fly-ku's where I've made that the wings of the poem bigger
than the sort of little body bit in the middle so everybody who's come in the
shed I've written them a little butterfly or moth poem and given it to them as
an origami butterfly. Oh I'm terribly impressed. So somewhere inside that. Take
it home and clutch it to my bosom forever. You've made me very nervous about
reading it now. It's about the butterfly the small white touching down it tips
the scales of summer then flies off weighing less than its shadow. I like that
that's very sweet less than its shadow I love that. Pam thanks for being such a
wonderful guest. I've enjoyed it I really enjoyed it thank you it's really
lovely to meet you. Simon Armitage was talking to Pam Ayres next week his guest
is a musician Loyal Karner. The poet laureate has gone to be shared was produced
by Susan Roberts and if you enjoyed that she might like to know that a longer
version of Simon's conversation with Pam Ayres is available now on BBC Sounds.
This is BBC Radio 4