TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Starting this morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 10
o'clock. The BBC understands that some energy companies are expecting the
government to extend its package of financial support for households gas and
electricity bills. The current measure is due to finish at the end of this
month. The Treasury says it's reviewing the situation. Our business editor Simon
Jack says falling wholesale energy prices have made the move a possibility. The
ABR estimated the package would cost something like 50 billion pounds across the
entire period but wholesale costs have fallen around 70 percent so the cost to
government of those subsidies has fallen by many billions of pounds. That
subsidy was due to be withdrawn at the end of March. The government's been under
intense pressure to use that. Now unspent kitty to keep bills at or near their
current level. A parliamentary watchdog has recommended that the MP for
Bermondsey and Old Southwark Neil Coyle be suspended from the Commons for five
days. It ruled that he had breached its bullying and harassment policy by
drunkenly abusing another MP's assistant. Mr Coyle has apologised. He had the
Labour whip removed last year. Labour has defended offering the former senior
civil servant Sue Gray the role of Sakir Starmer's chief of staff. She led an
investigation into lockdown parties in Downing Street. Some Conservative MPs say
the offer cast doubt on Ms Gray's impartiality during her inquiry. An MP who was
suspended from the parliamentary Labour party for saying the Chancellor at the
time, Kwasi Kwarteng, was only superficially black has had the whip restored.
Rupa Huck, who represents Ealing Central and Acton, said she had completed anti-
racism and bias training. A court in Belarus has sentenced the Nobel Peace Prize
winner and pro-democracy activist Alias Bialyatsky to 10 years in prison. He's
the founder of the country's most prominent human rights group. Mr Bialyatsky
was detained on suspicion of funding opposition activities. He says the charges
against him are politically motivated. In cricket, England have set Bangladesh
327 to win the second one-day international in Dhaka. Jason Roy top-scored with
132. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, it's time for Woman's Hour with Anita Rani. And
this morning, who's in a rebellious mood? I am, but then I usually am. As women,
we always get the message, particularly when we're little girls, you have to
behave, you have to be good little girls, stay small, stay quiet, look pretty,
obey the rules. Well, not today. Today, I want you to share with me your first
act of teenage rebellion. Did you stand up to your teacher? Did you defy your
parents? Did you protest for something you believe in? Did you break a rule? Did
you listen to Meet His Murder by the Smiths and become a vegetarian? Did you
roll up your school skirt to shorten it the minute you were on the bus? Did you
snog someone inappropriate? Did you make a stand for some kind of change? After
a couple of years of campaigning, my old school finally allowed girls to wear
trousers. I'd already left at that point, but the change came, so it was worth
the fight, sisters. Or was it something a lot more fundamental and life-
changing? Coming out to your parents, to your community, fighting for your
politics, your liberty, for your voice to be heard. Whatever your acts of
rebellion were or are, get in touch. I would love to hear about them today.
84844 is the number to text. You can email me by going to our website. You can
contact us via social media, at BBC Woman's Hour, or of course, you can drop me
a WhatsApp message or a voice note. It's 03700 100 444. Do check all the terms
and conditions. You can find all of those on our website. Maybe your acts of
rebellion came later in life. What was it? How did it feel to stand up for what
you believe in? Get in touch with me today. Also, the actor Bukhi Bakri, who won
the EE Rising Star BAFTA for her acting debut in the excellent film Rocks, is
coming along to tell me about her stage debut. And we'll also be hearing about
the reports of young girls being poisoned in schools in Iran. Could this be a
retaliation of the protests earlier in the year? Well, we'll find out all about
it now. Let me bring you up to date with what we know. Dozens of schoolgirls in
Iran have been admitted to hospitals this week after being poisoned whilst at
school. According to reports from an Iranian news agency, more than 1000
students have been affected since November. They've suffered respiratory
problems, nausea, dizziness and fatigue. Many Iranians suspect the poisonings
are a deliberate attempt to force schoolgirls schools to close and prevent them
from going to school. The Iranian government has not said whether it believes
they are premeditated. Here to talk about this are Azadeh Porozand, a human
rights researcher, and Farinak Amidi, BBC correspondent. Welcome both of you.
Farinak, I'm going to come to you first. What do we know about what's happening
to the schoolgirls? Well, basically, we really don't know much because there
hasn't been a proper investigation into what has been happening. The poisoning
started around three months ago. That was in November. And it started the first
school that the incident took place in was in the city of Qom, which is a very
conservative religious city. And it's known for being the center of religious
studies and religious schools in Iran. In that first incident, 18 students were
poisoned. Then the second time a couple of weeks after that, again, the same
school was attacked. And then after that, it started spreading to other cities.
Erdabil and other cities started spreading. And then I was reading a report by
the daily newspaper Etemad in Iran, which was published in Iran. And they said
that 58 schools in 10 different provinces have been attacked. But it's very it's
very interesting that this has been going on for three months. Parents have
protested, they have been asking officials to investigate and look into what is
happening. But nothing really has taken place. And when you listen to what the
officials are saying, either MPs or other officials, police chief, interior
minister, health minister, all you get a sense of confusion, you don't really
get any kind of information or you cannot really map out what is happening. So
we don't know what the gas is. That is very interesting that after all of these
students, 1000 students have been poisoned and not a blood sample has been taken
nothing you don't you cannot determine what the gas was, what caused poisoning
or how did this gas get into the schools or who was behind it? Nothing is really
clear. So what do we know then how are these girls being poisoned? What have you
have you spoken to anybody? Well, when you speak to and I have to mention that
that is so difficult to speak to people in Iran. This is after one of the
largest waves of the largest waves of protests and uprising in Iran since 1979.
So the oppression in Iran and the censorship and the harassment by security
forces is at its peak right now in Iran. So people are very scared to speak to
journalists and journalists are all arrested. Most of the journalists that are
independent are arrested in Iran at the moment. So it's very hard to get
actually personal accounts and statements from people. I was able to speak to a
couple of people. And what we are seeing what they are reporting is that some
strong pungent smell fills the air. And after a while, students start getting
sick. They some of them even reports feeling a bit paralyzed and their legs and
not being able to move. They feel dizzy, nauseous, and then they collapse. But
what we also understand is that the symptoms go away, mostly in 24 hours. Now,
there are reports of some students saying that they have seen an object being
thrown into the school from outside and then the smell comes. There are some of
the students reports hearing something like a small explosion before the smell
fills the air. So but but none of these can be verified independently. Is there
any kind of investigation into this yet? What's happening? Well, yeah, the
Islamic Republic claims that it's going to investigate that, you know, different
authorities are, you know, claiming that the investigation has started.
According to one of the news agencies affiliated with the Islamic Republic, I
think yesterday, three individuals are arrested. You know, you see on their sort
of propaganda, TV stations that they interviewed, you know, it's clearly
somebody has been intimidated, and they interview them to say, oh, I was a truck
driver. And you know, I was carrying oil. And I, I neglected by leaving my car
next to a school. So I think basically, what it is, is that usual scenario of
the Islamic Republic regime of claiming investigations that are not adequate,
are not independent, and just simply is to distract the public and mostly for
international consumption at this point. Do we know do we have any idea who
might be behind it as well? In my opinion, it doesn't matter who is directly
behind it, because the intentionality at this point lies with the Islamic
Republic of Iran. When we don't have enough information and evidence as human
rights researchers, we have no choice but to look into precedents. And when you
look at the precedents and the performance of the Islamic Republic, you know,
you see a regime that is heavily anti women and girls. And, and after especially
the recent protests, extremely vulnerable to the power of women and their
collective uprising, and in particular, the Gen Z women. So we have to... Here
we are today, I mean, you know, we opened the program by saying, let's talk
about teenage acts of rebellion. But this is this is the severe consequences of
what could happen. And the rebellion of these young girls, it got the attention
of the world, because, you know, people were being killed. Let's not forget 600
people, at least 600 people were shot dead on the streets of Tehran for
protesting. And these girls so bravely were protesting in their schools, they
kicked out officials of the government out of their schools. So it's, it's
interesting. A lot of people in Iran, when I when you go on social media, and
you see the reactions of people, the public to to these poisonings, they say
that this is the revenge that the state is taking out on on these girls. What do
you think? Well, I just cannot help but to remember the speeches of the Supreme
Leader Ali Khamenei in the past few months, one in one of which he explicitly
said, you know, these children, these girls who got involved in the uprisings,
you know, they were just, it's out of naivete, and a little bit of punishment
will fix them. You know, these are threats from like the higher, you know,
authority of a very brutal regime. So I really, I really think we have to not
dismiss the high probability of a speculation that this is indeed a systematic
revenge. And usually when the leader Ali Khamenei gives such speeches, we do see
such reactions against women. It was a few years ago back in Isfahan, when the
topic of hijab was really hot, and women were wearing their hijab a bit more
loose, loosely, and Isfahan is a traditional conservative society, actually,
it's where I come from. But then a wave of acid attacks started happening
against women. So women were walking down the street, and they were being
sprayed with acid. And this came after, you know, high ranking officials and the
leader were talking about the hijab and that women need to obey the rules and
issues like that. So it is, and again, right now that this is happening to the
school girls, people are bringing up that incident as well saying, where did you
talked about investigations, because back then they said, we are investigating,
we are going to look into this. No one ever got arrested for those acid attacks.
And the investigation really didn't go anywhere. Is it working? Is it preventing
girls from going to school? These are these poison attacks that we're seeing
now? What's the response been? Personally, I've seen sort of mixed reactions on
social media. So obviously, you know, many parents are worried, you know,
they're thinking of potentially keeping their kids at home for a bit. But I also
have seen, you know, very courageous tweets, for example, by some moms who are
saying we are thinking with other moms to get together and start patrolling
outside of school so that our kids can still go to school. So they're taking the
initiative into their hands. It's incredible. Yeah, I spoke to a few mothers,
their daughters are not in schools that have been attacked. But they are
worried, they are anxious. And they have this dilemma because one of them has a
son as well. And she was like, there's no way I'm gonna keep my daughter at home
and let my son go to school because this is actually what certain people want.
The radicals, the hardliners, super conservatives, ultra conservatives. That's
what they want. They want our girls to stay at home and the boys to go to
school. And you say what do they want? This is a question that comes up time and
time again. What is it that they want? What's the end game here for women? I
think when you look at this system, this regime since 1979, from the beginning
that they took power, their goal and all of their policies was directed at
marginalizing women and getting them back to home. So the first thing that
Ayatollah Khomeini did was to revoke the Family Protection Act that gave women
power in marriage, gave them right to divorce, made them not equal but semi-
equal to their partner, to their husband. That was the first thing that was
revoked. Then the mandatory hijab came. So always the policies have been towards
marginalizing women. So maybe this is actually what they are looking for. I just
wonder what the atmosphere must be like. There must be a climate of fear. Yeah,
I mean, fear certainly. And this is an intimidation technique. So to a degree,
it may be serving its purpose. But I still think that even though these protests
that we saw since September are not on the street like in high numbers, I don't
think the protest movement has died. And this is a protest movement led by the
women. And I think that's the protest movement led by women. And so I think the
spirit of protest, of grievances, of wanting change is as strong as ever. So I
really see, I think, this spirit stronger than the fear element at the moment.
And Azadeh, you grew up in Iran. How does it compare to your experience of being
a young girl going to school? I did grow up in Iran. And I grew up, I mean, I
was born into a family of activists. So I was in, you know, my parents were in
and out of jail. They had threatened to harm me if my parents continued their
work. And I remember that how the schools that I used to go to were so
supportive of this threat. A couple of times, even my school had to go into
lockdown only because of me. And, you know, many parents, even some of the
parents who would wear the complete veil, sometimes they would be taking care of
me when my mom was in jail. They would even bring me a chador, like the full
veil, when I had to go see my mom at the Revolutionary Court. So, you know, yes,
these schools are highly ideological. You know, you as a seven-year-old have to
wear a full veil to go to school. The history that you read is distorted. You
know, the religious studies that you read are much more than you should be
exposed to. But at a grassroots level, school, I think, in many ways is where
the coalescence of parents, of children happens. And I think the Islamic
Republic has realized this is a political hub more than they had hoped for. So
they're fearing schoolgirls? Yeah. During the Cultural Revolution, soon after
the Islamic Republic was established, they felt free to close down universities
and cleanse them of non-Islamic elements. The Cultural Revolution. Yeah, the
Cultural Revolution. And so I think that now it has gone into schools and it's
going to be a battleground for women. I really think so. And I'm sure we will be
talking about this again. And I want to thank you both for coming in. Thanks for
having us. Thank you, Saadeh, Prasad and Faranak. Thank you. 84844 is the number
to text. We are talking about all acts of rebellion this morning that you may
have experienced at the age of 15. Someone has said here, Anne, Anne has said at
the age of 15, I'd hide my clog hopper shoes behind our garden shed to change
into once out of the house. My mum found out after the school call to say I had
fractured my wrist falling off them, messing around at lunchtime behind the
school halls. Oh no, Anne, you were caught out. Rosie says every time I had an
argument with my parents as a teenager, I would pierce my ears in my bedroom,
which I couldn't do it. And when I couldn't do it anymore, I concluded it wasn't
I wasn't angry enough anymore. Ouch. Sounds painful. On to my next guest. She's
just arrived in the studio. Let me introduce you. In 2019, Bucky Bacray was 16
when she delivered a critically acclaimed performance in Sarah Gavron's
brilliant film Rocks and at 19 became the youngest BAFTA Rising Star Award
recipient, as well as one of the youngest best actress in a leading role
nominees. Now Bucky is starring in Netflix thriller The Strays and Apple TV
drama series Liaison alongside Eva Green and Vincent Cassell. She's also made
her stage debut playing Fumi in Matilda Fessi's Fessi Faisio Ibini's Sleepover,
directed by Jade Lewis at the Bush Theatre in London. It's a coming of age play
with four teenage black friends holding a sleepover with snacks and gossip and
here to tell us all about it is Bucky herself. Welcome to Woman's Hour. Hello,
thank you for having me. Stage debut. How is it? It's crazy. It's amazing. I
keep telling people like this is the first time that I've ever finished a
notebook. It's just full of notes from the director and from the other actors.
As well as doing a play for the first time, I feel like I'm absorbing so much
information that I can take with me forever. Tell us about the play, tell us
about Sleepover. This is four main characters, four friends. Yeah, so it's a
play about four girls who have these sacred sleepovers. Ray, Elle, Shan and
Fumi. They've been friends since day dot and they have these like series of
sleepovers and in those sleepovers we see how they like, they talk about
themselves, how they talk about their experience at school and how they talk
about their relationships with their parents and it just goes back and forth
between houses. Shall we have a listen to a clip? Our very first sleepover. I
can't believe we convinced our parents. What? My dad's picking me up at
midnight. Elle, but you said. I know that I could come over but not that I could
stay over but my mum was not having it. Okay but did you try everything? I tried
everything in the plan. I gave them your mum's number, her email, her work
address. They know she's a Christian. She goes to church every Sunday. She's not
a tourist Christian and I showed them the personal statement that your mum wrote
and it worked because I'm here but they will pick me up at midnight. All right
Cinderella. I knew we should have got my mum to do the DBS check. No, my mum
says why are you sleeping in other people's houses when you're not homeless?
Yeah, sleepover. Brilliant clip though. You've probably not heard yourself on
stage before, have you? No. As you say it focuses on these four teenage girls.
What does the sleepover represent? Oh, I think it represents them in their
truest form. They're not bound by like space. They're not bound by like trying
to be who they're not. They're just themselves in these sacred spaces. And it's
a safe space for them, isn't it? Yeah, exactly. It's a safe space. It's a
beautiful space. It's a sanctuary. It's very real and it's a big deal for them
to be able to sleep over. And a big deal for four teenage black girls to be able
to express themselves freely. Exactly. And we get an insight into that. Yeah,
exactly. To be honest, it's one of them plays where you shouldn't really be
watching but you're getting to view a moment in time that you wouldn't really
get to in real life, which is really interesting. So like what these girls say
in the space is stuff that people will never really get to hear. You never
really get to hear these young girls' thoughts on like the boys in their school
or themselves or these adult things. It's really a chance to get into their
minds. What was it like actually coming together with the other three actors?
Three of you, it's the stage debut, only one person has been on stage before.
I'm going, I always want to know about the process when you get into a rehearsal
room and you're reading the script. What comes up between the actors? I think
Jatinder, the casting director, he was really smart with this because it was
really unusual. Usually you would do chemistry tests with the actors beforehand
but Jatinder knew what he was doing. So the first time we met was when we were
doing the read-through for the script and I felt like as we were reading we all
kind of knew that making the connections and the chemistry was going to be the
easy part and the hard part was putting it on stage. So there was like a, I
wouldn't say an instant click, but there was an instant symmetry between the
girls, like with us and the characters, like we knew why we were picked to do
this and we knew why each other were picked to be each other's friends. Did you
see any parallels, draw any parallels with your own lives? I feel like, I feel
like the all girls school secondary experience transcends like a lot of things
and I feel like we could all relate to different parts of the characters and we
could, our characters and the other characters, so it just showed how we
understood why these girls were friends in the first place. And you went to an
all girls teenage school as well. Yeah, yeah. So it was nice, like there's this
old app called Snapchat that I deleted as soon as I left secondary school and
like wanting to attack the character I kind of logged back in to see my memories
from my old school and it was like a different person but it was crazy, it was
such a nice thing to look back on and it made me realise that this whole play is
much more than an old, it's like a, it's a great memory. And that must have been
an amazing experience for you because so much has happened since you left
school. Yeah, yeah. Because you were plucked from school at 15 to star in Rocks,
by the way, I know you are going to be told this for the rest of your life.
Thank you. Incredible. Thank you. Such a beautiful film, so moving and quite
right that you are a shining star from it because you were fantastic. But even,
that wasn't that long ago, five years ago? So much has happened, when you sit
and reflect, what do you think about? I just think like how did, it's like you
blink and it just happens. How much do you have to thank Rocks for that, for
your life now? I think like most, if like my thanks isn't towards my family,
it's towards Rocks, I think. It seems really dramatic to say like an opportunity
changed your life but it did because the people I met, I met friends that I will
take with me for life if I'm allowed to. I met people who opened up my ideas. I
remember I loved English and stuff like that but I never really read because I
didn't like the literature that they gave us in school and my English teacher
told me that you're never going to get the grade that your brain deserves but
you're going to get the grade that you worked for and I feel like the Rocks lot
taught me what it means to work and enjoy, what it means to read literature that
you enjoy and I started reading more. It was those kinds of life changing things
that Rocks gave us girls. It wasn't just about an opportunity, it was about a
change of body, mindset, soul, do you know what I mean? It was such a
transformative experience. That's very powerful and what's interesting is that
watching the film Rocks would have given so many girls another story, a British
story that you wouldn't necessarily see, we haven't seen before that. Yeah, I
mean I never really, I never clocked how like important identification is like
when it comes to film and TV and theatre. Well who did you identify with when
you were growing up? It's a great question. Probably like old American men
because of my love for hip-hop. Yeah. So like I would watch stuff like Training
Day and Love Denzel. I mean, do you know what I'm saying? Yeah. Or like even
Hawk, I would fall in love with who inspired me but then not seeing yourself
within that creates some sort of like confusion. So I feel like, I'm so grateful
I'm in projects like Rocks and Sleepover because I feel like if I had watched
Sleepover when I was like 15, 16, 17, I would have, it would have changed my
bank of like, of thoughts of what I could do in the festival, you know? Yeah,
you will be doing that for the next generation. We should talk about some of the
other work because you have been busy. Liaison. Liaison. Yeah, it's a character,
the character's drawn into an international cyber terror plot alongside Eva
Green and Vincent Cassell. I mean, amazing actors. What was it like to work on a
big budget program like that? It was cool. It was like one of the scenes,
there's like a big, there's a big attack and like the budget for just one scene
was incredible. I love independent film but seeing something able to transform,
like build a train, do a crash and do all of that, seeing Gravitask behind the
camera, it just opens up your like, your thoughts of like what can be done and
how stories can be told with Gravitask. It was like, it was dope. Daniel
Francis, who played my dad, like we got along so well. He's mad cool. He told me
about his past, like he's, he's, he's a secret. He's got so many secrets that I
won't, I won't say but yeah, he's mad cool. All right, we'll wait till the
microphones are switched off and you can tell me one of your secrets. And then
you're in a social horror called The Strays as well. You confront a mixed race
woman who's trying to hide her past. What was it like to play such an unsettling
character? It was like, it was really cool and like hearing everyone describe
the character as unsettling and when the opportunity came, it was, the words
described for Abigail was on the spectrum and stuff like that. So the eeriness
and like the horror stuff, it was only introduced to me after the film came out.
Oh, that's so interesting. You know what I'm saying? So it was like, it's
interesting. I always like put Abigail in my life as the person who taught me a
different level of empathy because I understood how people got to places where
they're seen as outlandish in society. They're seen as crazy, but really and
truly it's, there's like, there's a lot that got them there. So there's a lot of
trauma that got them there. And society making judgments. Exactly, exactly. So
here you are exploring different characters, different roles. You've been in
films, TV series, big budget, art house, you're on stage, new writers and in and
amongst all of that, you are experiencing a new landscape and life for yourself.
You must have grown so much in the last five years. Yeah, proper, like, I mean,
grown so much, still growing. I'm like so grateful that I've been able to do
things that have been so different to each other, like from doing that to doing
a play, working with Jade and Matilda. Was acting something you wanted to do? I
feel like it's one of the, it's one of the careers that you just look at as a
child and you think about it for a second. Like I remember a memory of like
watching Training Day, then I decided I wanted to be an actor. Can I just say I
love that Training Day is your reference because it is such a good movie. It's
an amazing film, probably one of my top 10 films. Yeah, and then I looked up how
to, I was laughing about this with my friend Curtis the other day because I feel
like everyone's done this. I feel like every actor's done this. You typed in how
to be an actor. And then like, there's this agency that everyone probably knows
and you have to pay for it. And then when everyone clocks that you have to pay
for an agent, you're like, I'm not going to do this. I'm going to go back and do
something else. But it was just like another career, like me wanting to be a
chef because I've been in MasterChef, do you know what I mean? It was just
another one of those dreams. Like I feel like every, every young people feels
like they can do everything at one point, but then life hits and then they start
going on Indeed and looking at the highest pay per annum for the degree that
they're going to get, you know what I mean? Is it about the money now? Is it
about the money or is it about something more than that? I think when I was a
child, it was definitely about that. It was definitely about me getting me and
my family into a place that I could. But again, that's one thing that Rocks and
everything I'm doing now has taught me is that it doesn't have to be about that.
And I feel like that's important to have at the back of the mind, but it's nice
to have that being a part of the subconscious rather than something that's on
your head all the time. And that's why I feel really grateful. I'm doing what I
want to do because I love it, but because I'm trying to get to a certain place.
Yeah, and more power to you. I think you've got a brilliant bright future ahead
of you. I need to ask you one last thing before I say I can talk to you all day.
I love there was a moment where you were on stage, you'd want you were
announcing the next E! BAFTA rising star and you announced Lashana Lynch and you
can she came on stage and you just what did you say into her ears? Queen tings.
Yeah, I said Queen tings because Lashana's yo that was like a dream to give that
to Lashana. She's like she's such a great person and I'm grateful that I was
able to do that. I feel like in any world it should have been the other way
around or even just me watching it behind on TV. Do you know what I mean? But
like she she's mad cool and she's been someone who's been really supportive.
Yeah, from the beginning even without even knowing me. No, it wasn't you
watching at home on TV. You were on that stage handing over the mantle. It's
been such a pleasure talking to you. I want to wish you more power for the
future and come back and talk to us. I know you've got a huge career and loads
of success ahead of you and good luck with the sleepover. Thank you so much. I
wish I was able to ask you some questions. We can do that later. Yeah, I know
where you live. Bucky Bacro, thank you so much. Thank you so much. Your thoughts
coming through 888 no 84844 is the number to text. Lots of you getting in touch
with your acts of rebellion. When I was 10 and going on a school trip, girls
were told they couldn't wear trousers on the trip. A couple of us lied to our
parents and said we were allowed to wear them. So turned up wearing trousers. We
got into big trouble and were sent to the headmaster, which was really scary. We
then had to change into PE kit for the trip. Sheila Chilvers outrageous. Susan
says all I did at school was to ask our PE teacher if girls could wear Navy
shorts for high jump as PE skirts were off were often touched the bar. We ended
up doing it in our Navy Serge knickers in the late 60s. Pee knickers question
mark. That's a whole other item for another day. So called TikTok protesters
have continued to take take TikTok protests have continued to take place in
Britain schools as hundreds of pupils rebelled against teachers over new rules,
with some clips attracting millions of views. Although the specific grievances
vary from school to school, the social media trend appears to be spreading with
children in Southampton, Blackpool and Essex staging demonstrations in the last
few days that were posted on the platform. Protests over a ban on school skirts
at an Oxfordshire school led to police being called and the school being forced
to temporarily close. The school has now u-turned on its uniform policy. So
where is the balance between standing up for your rights and breaking school
rules? Can the two ever be compatible or always at odds? And how can girls and
young women in particular learn to find their voice and be listened to? Becca
Caddy is a journalist and author who writes about technology and innovation and
joins me now. Morning Becca. How does this, how does TikTok, let's talk TikTok
activism. How does it work? So TikTok's a social video app, but the key thing is
there are some ways that it's really quite different to say Twitter or Facebook
and those ways that it's different actually really lend itself to kind of
finding your people, finding community and ultimately activism. And a few of
those things, one of the most important things for me, when I first logged on
TikTok was there's such a low barrier to entry. So unlike something like say
Twitter or Facebook, you need to find people to follow, they need to follow you
back. On TikTok, once you've got an account, that's it. You're seeing things
come up on your for you page immediately. What are the problems of activism via
a social media platform? I guess a few of the problems would be, you know, who
owns TikTok? Right now, I think it's quite, on the whole, quite a positive place
for this kind of activism, for bringing people together, for a lot of young
people finding their identity in loads of ways. But we have to ask kind of who
owns it? There's a lot of issues around TikTok in terms of government
surveillance and how people's data is being used. So although there are so many
positives to using it to kind of connect with like-minded people, there are a
lot of things happening at the top that really we just don't really know about,
which is quite worrying. Yeah. How does the movement snowball into a real life
protest? So I think with TikTok, it's really interesting because in a way, what
we're seeing isn't all that new. People have always used kind of tech to arrange
protest, right, in some way. But with TikTok, everything is just quicker and
easier to share. And like I said earlier about that low barrier to entry, I
could sign up to a new account now and start creating video content immediately.
And there's nothing really to stop it kind of, if it connects with the right
people, the algorithm is really hard to kind of, for us to unpick, but it could
kind of go viral straight away. You know, I don't need to be someone with loads
of followers to make that kind of content. So there are so many, with the way
it's designed, there are so many opportunities for things to snowball quite
quickly. I'm going to bring in a couple of guests to talk about their teenage
rebellion. Stay there though, Becca. Sangeeta Pillai built a whole platform on
breaking taboos and speaking her truth. She's the founder of Soul Sutras and
creator of the hit Masala podcast for South Asian feminists. And also Molly
Fenton, founder of Love Your Period, which she started back in school in 2019.
I'm going to come to you first, Molly. What was it that made you feel you had to
protest while you were at school? Well, that's, you know, that's actually quite
a good question. It kind of got out of hand. I never saw it happening. And when
I realized that, you know, this term period poverty was being thrown around a
lot and, you know, there just weren't products available. There weren't products
around. I was kind of, you know, talking to people around me and realizing that
either people didn't want to talk about their period, or it was a case of, oh,
well, the products are expensive. They were getting more and more expensive. So
I kind of just started raising awareness on social media and it got picked up
by, you know, lots of different schools, the Welsh government, all sorts. Within
a few months, I had a full blown campaign that was working alongside the Welsh
government. What was it about you then, Molly? Why wasn't it, you know, could be
any single person, any of the girls in school that could have done that, but it
was you. What is it about you, do you think, that felt I've got to say something
about this? It was, I think, the first thing I came across in my whole life that
I knew I really wanted to do. I just felt really passionate about it. I've
always been one of those people that never knew what they wanted to do with
life, never know what options to pick at my GCSEs or A-levels. And this was just
making me really angry. And it was the one thing that I could get up and do
public speaking about. And that was kind of a sign for me to go, well, this, you
know, this is what I, I need to do this for everyone else around me. Sangeeta,
I'm going to bring you in. Sangeeta, when we were discussing this in the office
about women who want to, who are rebellious, you're one of the first names that
jumped to mind. Take that as a compliment. We've been talking this morning, I
know you've been listening, about protests by girls, women in Iran and the
consequences for them. How is it, how important is it for girls here in the UK
to have their voices heard on issues that they feel strongly about? I think it's
important, really important. We must remember that teenagers are the ones
pushing existing structures and boundaries, and that's kind of their definition.
For me, kind of, I think, rebelling when I was 15 and challenging the structures
that I was part of, you know, I was part of a very traditional Indian family. I
grew up, I was the first woman in my family to have a job, go to university. So
that rebellion led me like 30 years later to set up Masala Podcast, which you
were on, Anita, and my kind of feminist network. So I think, unless we're
challenging, unless we challenge as teenagers what is, nothing changes. So I
think it's really, really important that we do. And I think it's, for me, it's
wonderful when I speak to young people. I love what they say, and they have this
activism and this kind of fire that older people don't. So I think it's super
important. What were you rebelling against? You said you're a conservative
Indian family, but tell us more. And how did it go down? Not very well. So
imagine this, I'm a young girl, I'm 14, I live in Mumbai, I grew up in quite a
poor family. No one in that structure did anything different. I was kind of
standing up and saying, well, you can't make me do these things. And those
things were things as small as wearing the clothes I wanted to wear, choose the
job I wanted to kind of apply for, the friends, the clothes, two things like
everybody was having an arranged marriage around me. The word feminism didn't
exist in the India that I grew up in. So at about, I think I put up with it for
a couple of years, and about 15, I kind of had this awakening, I think, within
myself. And I was like, well, I don't want this, you're saying this to me, but
this doesn't sit right with the person I want to be. And it didn't go down well
at all. So I was, the way I see it, I waged war for about 15 years with my
family. I lived at home because Indian girls didn't leave home at that time. And
I fought with my family. And it was really difficult for them, I think, because
no one around me was saying the kind of things that I was saying or wanting the
kind of things I was wanting. Now looking at it from, you know, in Britain in
2023, like I was asking for very normal things. Can I choose the person I want
to marry? Can I have the job I want? Can I wear the clothes I want? Can I cut my
hair short? You know, they were very simple things. But at that time, they were
extremely challenging for my family. But I'm so glad I did it because that was
the making of me. That made me the person I am that is now able to sort of stand
up and say the things I say within my feminism and my activism for South Asian
women. And here's the thing when your parents are trying to stop you from making
you live by their rules. What was your reaction to that? Does it fuel your fire?
Or did it, you know, did you think, oh, maybe, maybe I need to tone it down? It
absolutely fuelled my fire. And it was, I'll be very honest, it was hard because
I could see that they were coming from a place of love. But I could also see
that they were limited in their understanding of what was possible for me as an
Indian girl. Like the best my mother could think of was a nice guy would marry
me. Like that was the best aspiration she would have for me. But I kind of knew
that there was more to the world and life than what I was being told. So it did
fuel me. And to this day, I think that that fire is what keeps me going. And
that's what kind of wakes me up. And when I hear stories like what's happening
in Iran, it fills me with so much pride, you know, the girls are challenging
what is being said to them. It's amazing. Including Molly. Molly, I want to know
about how you dealt with the backlash to what you were standing up for. Well, of
course, we all know that when we do pick up on taboo topics or anything like
that, that we're going to have someone that's not happy with us. But I think the
campaign that I have is probably 60% hate and 40%, you know, people actually
being really accepting. So how do you keep going? Much more? I don't know,
actually. It kind of encourages me, it encourages me to carry on. It shows that
it's needed. You know, we launched a period Proud Wales last week, which we've
been working on the government with since 2019. And it was a really big
achievement for us. And we had to shut down the social media pages for three
days, because we were having all sorts of horrific messages and threats and all
sorts. But that just kind of shows that the Love Your Period campaign, you know,
the name itself, it's needed, because how is it that just blood that's in all of
our bodies is all of a sudden become something that makes us less of a human
being? Or, you know, should get in the way of our everyday lives? What is the
issue around it? And you know, it's obviously something that I think all of us
face in society with the jokes around PMS, or, oh, she's on her period, jokes
like that, but you know, shouldn't really be jokes. And women shouldn't be
taught that they're being held hostage to their hormones their whole lives. You
know, it seems to be you're a teenage girl, you're hysterical. And then, you
know, as you grow up, and you're looking at pregnancy and motherhood, again, and
then you hit menopause and those hormones, you know, even though they've been,
you've been blamed for them your whole life, you're all of a sudden, people are
being pushed out of work and being told that, you know, their value decreases.
It's a whole life. And your campaign has got to the Welsh Government, you've
been working with them. Yes, we work with the Welsh Government and UK Parliament
on period dignity. And we work with many international organisations, such as
Planner International and iRise International on big, you know, campaigns in
order to, around period stigma and legislation for both menopause and period.
You're gonna have to go on Sangeeta's podcast, aren't you? She's nodding away.
And this is how things change, right? This is the fundamental, isn't it,
Sangeeta? You need people to be the rebels to make the change for the next
generation. Particularly as young women, I think we have to kind of encourage
our young women to kind of challenge what exists, because unless they challenge
what exists, things carry on. And we know there's a lot that needs changing this
world today. So I think it's amazing. And yeah, you're very welcome on my
podcast. Sangeeta Pillai, Molly Fenton, and Becca Caddy, thank you very much for
speaking to me about that. Lots of you getting in touch with your acts of
rebellion. I was got thrown out of swimming baths numerous times in 1968. Why?
Girls had to wear swimming hats and boys did not, even though they had longer
hair than me. I was 14. Carol says, my rebellious nature began very early. I'm
now in my 60s. I've challenged girls expected school years to be a bit more
respectful. I've challenged girls to wear their expected school uniform whilst
at school. And when teaching, I've called out racism and sexism when it was when
it had been expressed. And I suppose the first time I expressed rebellion openly
was about age 10, when I challenged my mother about why it was that I had to
help lay the table for dinner. Yet my brother did not have to. Her answer that
he was a boy was my road to Damascus moment. Amen to that, sister. 84844 Now
onto my last item. I've been teasing everybody about this. I said you would have
some music and indeed you will have some. The Carpenters were one of the biggest
bands of the 1970s. Let's remind ourselves of some of their hits. Why do birds
suddenly appear every time you are near? Just like me, they long to be close to
you. There's a kind of hush all over the world tonight. I'm walking around some
kind of lonely cloud. Rainy days and Mondays always get me down. Don't you
remember you told me you loved me baby? I'm calling occupants of interplanetary
most extraordinary craft. Stop. Whoa. Yes. Wait a minute. Mr. Postman. Sharon.
Karen Carpenter's voice became the backdrop to the 1970s, but this year marks 40
years since she died at the height of her fame, shocking the world when she was
only 32 years old. She had a heart attack brought on by her longstanding eating
disorder. The condition anorexia nervosa became a household topic, but has her
tragic end overshadowed her legacy? Who was Karen Carpenter really? Well,
biographer Lucy O'Brien has looked back over her life for her biography, Lead
Sister, the story of Karen Carpenter and Lucy joins me now. Hearing those songs
can transport people back to the 70s. What were your memories of the Carpenters?
Oh, well, I remember I was in primary school and we sang Top of the World in the
school choir. And I do remember the Carpenters as being this symbol of, you
know, in the 70s, growing up in rather gray, cold England, America seemed this
amazing, bright, sunny place with blue skies and big, fat, wide cars. And then
the Carpenters sort of big, fat, wide music to kind of, they really symbolize
that time. Why did you want to write about Karen Carpenter? Don't we know
everything there is to know? Well, I, you know, a lot of my work is kind of
looking at female artists and kind of reframing what they've done and
understanding what they've done with the awareness that we have now. So for
instance, I did a book about Dusty Springfield, the 60s singer, and the more I
looked into it, the more I thought she was an actual producer, but she didn't
get the credit. And my feeling about Karen Carpenter was here was this woman at
the top of her game, you know, an amazing singer and also an amazing drummer who
didn't get enough credit for that. Which is, think of a drummer and a lead
singer so ahead of her time. Yes. I mean, now people are, it's very interesting,
you know, when sadly it was the 40th anniversary of her death last month. But
what people were kind of putting on Twitter and kind of the whole conversation
on social media was about her drumming, interestingly. And there's some amazing
footage of her expertise. So I kind of, I felt that her tragic death had really
overshadowed the way we receive her and the way we think about her. And I wanted
to explore, was she a fragile victim? Yeah. Or was there more to her? And the
more I went into it, the more I realised, gosh, there was someone who was really
determined and really quite a tough cookie. You started the book at the
beginning, her childhood. So what was her family like? Mother question mark.
Right. Okay. Strange. Yeah. Go on, strange. As you know, I interviewed Nikki
Chin, one of her former boyfriends, I said, you know, what were her parents
like? And he said strange. And a lot of people seem to use that word. I think a
very, very close knit family. Probably there were quite a few issues within the
family. And you know, significant that Richard and Karen, her brother, were,
their parents were living at home with them after long after they'd become
successful. And, you know, in their kind of early mid 20s, they thought maybe
it's time for us to live separately from our mum and dad. And they bought a new
house for their parents to move into, but the parents didn't want to move. So
Richard and Karen moved out instead. So interesting. And we just had that tweet
from somebody saying that she was told that your brother doesn't lay the table.
Well, Richard was really favoured, wasn't he? Yes. And I think that's part of
the problem. Nikki Chin said to me, he felt that a lot of the root of her pain
was the fact that Richard was undoubtedly the favourite and certainly in their
mother's eyes could do no wrong. He was the genius. He was the reason they moved
from Connecticut to Los Angeles in the early 60s to kind of further his career.
And he was often credited as the architect of the Carpenter Sound. He was the
whole genius behind it. Whereas the more I looked into it, the more I could see
how much Karen contributed in so many ways. And she was also in the studio 24-7
with the musicians, with her brother. Yeah. So the mother lavished all her
attention on the son. He was described as the genius. Like you said, they moved
from Connecticut to LA. What impact did that have on Karen? Well, again, this
thing of looking again at someone's life, what I noticed, the more I looked into
it was she was a high achiever at school in New Haven, Connecticut. When they
moved, she was 12, 13 years old. Her grades plummeted. She stopped doing sports.
She was a keen sportswoman. She was snacking on junk food. She was clearly not
happy. And a lot of research shows that, you know, if you, if for teenagers,
particularly teenage girls, if you move and you move like she did thousands of
miles away, away from her friendship group, that causes stress and trauma. And
her way, and I thought it was significant that she started to become much more
happy when she joined the school marching band and she was playing drums and she
was up front playing drums. Back to her mum. Her mum was the one who took her to
the doctors. Oh my goodness. Yeah. Everyone listening, you're going to love this
or not. Well, I was so shocked at this. Okay. So here's Karen, 17 years old,
starting out by then, starting out in the music business with her brother, going
to auditions, playing drums, et cetera. And then her mother charmingly says,
you're hefty round the butt and takes her to the doctor and the doctor
prescribes a Stillman diet, which is mostly just drinking water with a little
bit of carbohydrates. And I just think, oh my goodness, you know, we, we realise
now, and I'm the mother of a teenage daughter, is you have to be so careful
about the language you use, the way that you, anything to do with weight or body
image, you have to be so careful. And then of course, she, on top of all of
that, had the pressures of being a woman in the music industry. Yes, which were
considerable when we go back to the 1970s American music industry, which was
pretty ruthless, very male dominated. She still managed to find a way through,
not just as a singer, but as a drummer. And she was very happy singing and
drumming at the same time. Not many people can do that. Could you do that? I
couldn't do that. So, you know, that was an incredible skill that she had. And
that was taken away from her by the record company and the management. When?
What happened? So the Carpenters started having hits, they were signed to A&M
Records. They had their first hit in 1970. And then by 1971, they were in the
charts being played on the radio constantly, constantly touring. Karen was very
happy playing drums, touring with the band. She liked being with the guys. And
then her brother said to her, they were driving across the States one day to
visit some relatives. I think you need to let the drums go now. And we just want
you to stand up front and sing the songs. Because there was a view, a widespread
view at the time, that it was unfeminine to play the drums. It didn't, you know,
as Lester Bangs, the rock critic said, you know, Karen's, she's a good drummer,
but it doesn't give you much to look at. Shocking. And then, you know, it was,
do you think that her eating disorder started at that moment, possibly when her
mum took her to the doctors? Well, I think she was probably vulnerable anyway.
And I think, yes, I mean, being taken to the doctors and put on a diet. I mean,
that's just, yeah. Do you think she ever knew the extent of her own eating
disorder? No, I don't. And I talked with quite a few people about this, and
including one of her very good friends, Cherry Boone O'Neill, who was also a
singer at the time, also struggled with anorexia. And she said that she felt
Karen was in denial about her illness. But she also said that there was a
culture of silence then, you know, no one really, the terms anorexia, bulimia,
even the term eating disorder, people didn't have the language for it or the
understanding of what was going on. Reading the book, it just made me want to
give her a huge hug and tell her how brilliant she was. But she was told, but
she didn't believe it when John Lennon, I love this little anecdote in the book,
John Lennon walked past her and what did he say? He said, you've got a lovely
voice, love, you know, and she was just gobsmacked. A beetle just said to me, he
thought my voice was amazing. And she couldn't believe it. She just couldn't
take it on board. Well, you've written the book to reframe the story of Karen
Carpenter. Anybody who's a fan should pick it up. It's by Lucy O'Brien. It's
called Leeds Sister, the story of Karen Carpenter. Thank you so much, Lucy, for
coming in to talk to us about her. And we've thoroughly enjoyed having listening
to a bit of the music. I'll probably be listening to a bit more over the
weekend. Lots of you getting in touch with your Rebellion sacks. Rebellion got
thrown out of the swimming bath numerous times because I was told to wear a hat
and the boys didn't have to. That's it from me. Join me tomorrow for weekend
Woman's Hour. Woman's Hour was presented by Anita Rani and produced by Kirstie
Starkey. The studio engineer was Emma Hearth. Coming up later here on Radio 4,
the body positivity movement has changed the way we see ourselves. But now it's
being accused of promoting obesity and unhealthy lifestyles. Well, can we be
healthy at any size? Where did the body positivity movement come from? But
should we be worried about the return of size zero? We are making changes to the
way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And
the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If
you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message,
please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. And people who love you. Call the
midwife. We will be with you every step of the way.