TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 will turn to snow across Scotland. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello, good evening.
It's 10 o'clock. Welcome to The World Tonight. I'm Razia Iqbal. Police in
Georgia are using force to disperse thousands of protesters who've surrounded
the Parliament building in the capital, Tbilisi, for a second night. This is not
only about one specific thing, it's about the future of Georgia and it's about
how we will function as a country. That's why they're so afraid and that's why
the government is trying to use everything that they can, but we will not be
silenced. We'll hear from one of the protesters on the streets and look more
closely at a country caught between Russia and the West. Also, can new
legislation designed to stop migrants crossing the channel work in practice? No
one is saying that we now need to build 40,000 new detention places to support
people who are going to be detained. The running theme throughout this bill is
deterrence. We'll speak to a former chief inspector of borders and immigration
and later in the programme why women should be at the table in Yemen's peace
negotiations. There's a lot of disputes that we're having over lands in Yemen
and a lot of Yemeni women were mediating those disputes. If you want the peace
process to proceed in Yemen, bring Yemeni women into the conversation. That's
all after the BBC News read tonight by Viji Alice. Police in Georgia are using
tear gas, water cannon and stun grenades to disperse thousands of protesters who
have surrounded the country's parliament. It's the second day of demonstrations
against a draft law that would label many media outlets and rights groups as
foreign agents. The legislation was given initial approval yesterday. From
Tbilisi, Rehan Dimitri reports. Anger against the proposed law is still very
real among Georgians who fear their freedoms will be eroded. They'd taken to the
streets on Tuesday after lawmakers from the governing Georgian Dream Party
backed its first reading. In a statement, Georgia's Interior Ministry said that
50 of its officers had been injured in last night's protests. 66 demonstrators
were arrested. Among those detained was one of the leaders of the opposition,
Zurab Djaparidze, who was reportedly beaten. The opposition says the Russian-
style law marks a shift towards authoritarianism and would damage Georgia's
chances of joining the EU. Rishi Sunak has defended his plan to reform the UK's
asylum system, saying it shows his government is on the side of the British
people. The proposed legislation would ban people who arrive in the country on
small boats from claiming asylum, returning to the UK or seeking British
citizenship. Speaking at Prime Minister's Questions, the Labour leader, Sakhir
Starmer, called the plan a gimmick and accused Mr Sunak of being absolutely
deluded. Our political correspondent Damien Grammaticus followed the exchange.
Conservative MPs cheered as Rishi Sunak said his plan to detain and deport those
arriving in the UK on small boats reflected the people's priority. In a clear
sign of the way Mr Sunak hopes to capitalise politically, he said the Labour
leader was on the wrong side of this issue, calling Sakhir Starmer just another
lefty lawyer standing in our way. Sakhir's approach was to say that this was the
fifth Conservative Prime Minister with the sixth plan and the seventh Home
Secretary, and all have failed to tackle the issue. Downing Street has described
criticism of the government's asylum plans by Gary Lineker as not acceptable and
disappointing. The Match of the Day host, who is one of the BBC's highest paid
presenters, tweeted last night that the language used in setting out the
proposals was not dissimilar to that used in Germany in the 1930s. The
corporation said it was having a frank conversation with him. Here's our media
correspondent David Silito. Gary Lineker's comments yesterday on Twitter,
describing a statement by the Home Secretary as beyond awful, has once again
raised concerns about whether such a high-profile presenter with the BBC should
express such views. The Director General Tim Davie has in the past spoken to him
about the issue, and in October a complaint about a comment made by Gary Lineker
about the Conservative Party and Russian donors was upheld by the BBC. And while
Gary Lineker has been criticised by Conservative MPs and some members of the
public, others have rallied to his defence. Mr Lineker tweeted today that he'd
never known such love and support and said he would continue to try and speak up
for those who have no voice. A Japanese scientist claims to have created eggs
from the cells of male mice. Professor Katsuhiko Hayashi from Osaka University
told a summit in London he was able to change the cells' chromosomes from male
ones to female ones. It could be a major breakthrough for human fertility
treatment and allow male couples to have children that are genetically related
to both of them. German investigators say they've searched a ship suspected of
transporting explosives used in the attacks on the Nord Stream gas pipelines in
the Baltic Sea last September. US media have quartered anonymous intelligence
officials suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group carried out the sabotage, but
investigators say they've found no evidence any state was involved. More from
our security correspondent Frank Gardner. Six months after mysterious explosions
ripped gaping holes in two underwater pipelines from Russia, there is still no
definitive explanation as to who was behind it. Reports in the US media cite
unnamed intelligence officials as believing it was an attack carried out by pro-
Ukrainian activists. But Western intelligence analysts say the way it was
conducted, successfully crippling a strategic pipeline to Western Europe,
implied the attackers must have had state backing. Ukraine has emphatically
denied any involvement. German media say it was a Polish ship, owned by
Ukrainians, that set off from a German port. Russia has responded by demanding a
full and transparent investigation, and it wants to take part. That may not be
welcomed by NATO countries, many of whom still suspect a Russian hand in this
ongoing underwater mystery. A 14-year-old boy has been given a 12-month referral
order and a five-year driving ban for causing the death of a woman while
illegally riding an electric scooter. Linda Davis, who is 71, was knocked to the
ground on a pavement in Nottinghamshire last June. She died six days later in
hospital. The RMT union has said it will not advise members how to vote on an
amended pay offer from Network Rail. The union has called off industrial action
set for next week, but other strikes are expected to go ahead at 14 train
operating companies. Here's our transport correspondent Katie Austin. When the
RMT put a previous version of Network Rail's offer to a vote in December, it
recommended members rejected the proposals. This time, the union's General
Secretary Mick Lynch said members would decide whether to accept what the RMT
views as an improved offer. The referendum will close on Monday 20 March. While
the government has not put more money on the table, under these proposals,
Network Rail employees would get this year's pay increase backdated by three
months, ending up with a bigger lump sum. Network Rail's chief executive Andrew
Haynes described the development as a constructive step forward. The RMT has
tonight confirmed that the rail delivery group, which represents the train
companies, has invited it for talks tomorrow on condition the strikes next week
are called off, but the union has decided they will stay in place. Viji, thank
you. You're listening to The World Tonight with Razia Iqbal. We begin tonight
with Georgia, a small country which borders Russia in the Caucasus region of
southern Europe. It was once a Soviet republic. For a second day, thousands of
people have been protesting on the streets outside Parliament in the capital
Tbilisi, despite police using water cannon and tear gas. Their chant is, no to
the Russian law. They're referring to Parliament's initial backing of a law
modelled on a Russian one that has all but destroyed civil society across the
border. Demonstrators on the street think the proposed Georgian law, which would
require some organisations receiving foreign funding to register as foreign
agents. They think it'll do much to curtail civil society and limit press
freedom. And it's also raised fears that it could derail the country's
aspirations to join the EU and NATO. I've been speaking to one 25-year-old
protester whose women's rights organisation receives some funding from outside
the country. It will be directly affected by the law should it pass into the
statute books. Her name is Tekla Tevdorashvili. The mood is quite good despite
yesterday's event and despite the fact that people are tired and maybe some
people are also injured because of the water cannons that they used and the
other things that they used against peaceful protesters. But the general mood is
quite good and people are really hopeful because we really see that a lot of
people are in the street and a lot of people are against this law and we're not
going to give up on the recification of our country so easily and we are really
going to fight for this because it is our future that we're talking about. And
in what way is the law going to make an impact on what you do? Yeah, so I'm a
co-founder of the feminist multimedia platform and an NGO, Girls Wave. And this
law is going to touch upon all NGO and media outlets that are financed by
foreign agencies like European or American organisations or embassies. We have
to register as agents in the country and it's going to have a lot of different
consequences in terms of law because we're going to have fines in place and
yeah, it would not only stop us from operating but also bigger NGOs and
independent new media outlets that are currently vital to the country to have
because Georgia is not a big country and we don't have a lot of media outlets,
especially the ones that are talking about all the problems that we're facing
currently in the country. New media outlets are giving us true information when
there is a lot of power that they're trying to hold over the channels that are
owned by governmental structures. So we really do need this new media outlets
and also NGOs that are doing the work that the government should be doing to
help the people, whether it's women who went through violence or like a person
of disability, people who are being discriminated against and so on. You
mentioned that part of the protest is that you want to stop the Russification of
Georgia. What is it that you think is going on here? Because the government that
is in power, the party that is in power has campaigned on looking to the West.
So why is this happening? Yeah, actually, even now they're trying that their
mission is to go towards West, but it's actually not happening because we are
seeing that it's all a big lie and they've been noticed, we've noticed that
they're big liars, so to say. And how long do you think the protests will
continue? What is it that you're looking ahead to now? I don't know exactly, but
as I'm also part of the organizing group, we are thinking that it's not going to
end today or tomorrow. It's going to end when things will change. In terms of
what Russia is doing inside Ukraine, is that also informing the people who are
out on the street? Yeah. So the thing is that Georgia is really standing strong
for Ukraine. Even when the war started, there were big protests in the country.
So I think that whatever is happening in Ukraine is also quite close to Georgian
people because we have been invaded by Russia twice in the last 30 years. The
authorities have used water cannon. Many people have been arrested. But you feel
that this is a determined crowd and that you're not going away anytime soon?
Yeah. This is the first time that I'm seeing that so many people are coming
back, even after they're using the gas or the water cannons. People are leaving
just to stay away from the gas so they don't inhale it. But as soon as the gas
goes away, they're coming back. And that was the case also yesterday. They used
gas a couple of times, but people keep coming back. And they used water cannons
and they used pepper sprays, but people were coming back. And then they used the
robocops, like fighting with people directly and arresting them at the place.
What's your sense of the kinds of people who are protesting? Yeah, it's
everyone. It's old people, young people, people with different backgrounds,
people with different interests, really political parties, but also NGOs and
just like musicians or writers and artists and really everyone. Everyone is
involved in this fight because it is about each and every one of us. How would
you define how significant this particular protest is? I think this is maybe
even bigger than we had in 2019. People are really angry because this is not
only about one specific thing. It's about the future of Georgia and it's about
how we'll function as a country. Everyone is really against this. And I think
that's why they're so afraid. And that's why the government is trying to use
everything that they can against the people to silence us, but we will not be
silenced. That was Tekla Tevdorashvili. Now, Georgia has in many ways been
caught between the West and Russia. Before the end of the Soviet Union, Georgia
was a prominent Soviet republic, the birthplace of Stalin. It's known for its
warm climate, ancient wines and a sprawling cave monastery dating back to the
12th century. But it's also been a country with a rebellious character and in
2003, it rattled the Kremlin with an outbreak of regime change. Its Rose
Revolution was the first of several colour revolutions in Russia's backyard. As
there is a bloodless uprising replaced then Georgian president and former Soviet
foreign minister, of course, Eduard Shevardnadze with the young Western-leaning
Mikhail Saakashvili. Of course, we don't want to alienate Russia. And I think I
have very good personal chemistry with President Putin. But of course, Georgia
is independent. Of course, Georgia is European. And of course, Georgia is moving
towards the integration to all European organisations. But he couldn't have it
all. His desire for closer ties to the West for eventual membership of the EU
and NATO ensured a breakdown in relations with Russia, culminating in the short
war of 2008. The BBC's Richard Galpin witnessed some of that war as Russian
planes bombed Gori in northern Georgia. Panic in this strategic northern town,
which for a second running has come under attack from Russian warplanes. They
were aiming for Georgian military facilities, but here they missed. Well, what's
been hit here is a civilian block. This is a normal apartment block. And we're
told that civilians have been killed and injured. This woman begs to know what's
happened to her family. They were inside, she says, but she can't find them. The
bombing has also been forcing the Georgian troops to run for cover. A first
taste of what's in store when they move up to the front lines nearby to face the
Russian military. Richard Galpin ending that compressed history. Let's speak now
to Tom De Waal, who is a senior fellow with Carnegie Europe, specialising in
Eastern Europe and the Caucasus region. Good evening to you, Tom. Were you
surprised by the protests? I think this has been building for some time, Razia.
The Georgian Dream government has been in power for more than a decade and
actually started, I think, quite well. For a while, Georgia was actually the
leader in the region for European integration. But the last few years has seen a
sort of democratic backsliding, regime consolidation. They seem to care really
only about their own survival. And then since the war in Ukraine started,
they've been very afraid to criticise Russia. I think it's probably a mistake to
call them pro-Russian, but they're certainly balancing between Russia and the
West and not moving forward towards the EU. And this is why we're seeing this
backlash now between the young, the educated, particularly in the capital,
people who fear that democracy is being lost and their chance to make a move
towards the EU is also being lost. Is it significant that the president of the
country has come out in support of the protesters? Yes. I mean, we have to
clarify that the president, Salome Zerebeishvili, who's actually out of the
country at the moment, she's a kind of constitutional head of state with rather
weak powers, a bit like the German president. But she said that she will veto
this law on foreign agents. So that is significant. I think the Georgian dream
parliamentarians probably have the numbers to overturn that veto. But I think
they've certainly dug themselves into a bit of a hole here. I don't think they
expected this massive public backlash against them. And clearly the crowds, you
know, it's more than just about this one law, dangerous as it is. It's clearly
the crowds on the street really want to get rid of this government altogether.
And how likely is that, given that we're already seeing tear gas and water
cannon being used? The woman we heard from said that the crowds she felt were
very determined that they would not be silenced. How do you interpret what you
think might happen? Well, I think it's quite dangerous, to be honest. I think we
have two very determined groups here. We have peaceful protesters, although
there have been incidents of violence. I think a couple of police cars were
overturned this evening. But, you know, in their tens of thousands, the young,
the educated, who are absolutely not going to back down. And we have a very
determined government on the other side who's prepared to use riot police tear
gas and who have everything to lose, as we know in other situations in places
like this, should they lose power because they're going to be exposed to all
sorts of corruption investigations and so on. So I think it is really quite a
difficult moment. And I don't, to be honest, see anyone who can mediate between
the two. And in terms of the slightly bigger picture, to what extent are these
demonstrators informed by Russia's invasion of Ukraine? I think absolutely this
is what they fear. They fear, as you heard, a Russification of Georgia. Now, we
have to be clear here that that's not really going to happen in the sense that
Georgia has no diplomatic relations with Russia since the 2008 war. It's the
government, however, mealy mouthed, is formally committed to EU integration. But
clearly, there's a kind of soft Russification going on, if you will. It's a kind
of what we're seeing is a government which is really not interested in full
democracy, is trying to play games between Russia and the West. And really, as I
see it, it's just basically trying to cling on to power. And just briefly, from
Brussels' point of view, the foreign policy chief, Joseph Burrell, has warned
that this bill is completely incompatible with EU values and standards,
something that also is clearly informing the protesters. That's right. I mean,
this is not going to go away because the big thing which is on the table is a
conditional offer for EU candidate status, something that Georgia wouldn't have
dreamed of getting before the war in Ukraine started. Ukraine and Moldova have
that unconditionally. Georgia has that conditionally. And clearly, what's going
on at the moment means that those conditions are not going to be met. And
there's going to be a lot of very angry Georgians if that happens. Tom de Waal,
Senior Fellow with Carnegie Europe, specialising in Eastern Europe and the
Caucasus region. Thanks for joining us. Let's turn now to the government's new
asylum plan that anyone found to have entered the country illegally would not
only be removed from the UK within a maximum of 45 days, but also be blocked
from returning or claiming British citizenship in future. Those who arrive in
small boats would either be returned to their home country or another safe third
country, like Rwanda. In executing this plan, there are practical hurdles as
well as legal ones. On the Today programme this morning, the Home Secretary
Soheila Braverman was asked about how the scheme to detain and deport migrants
would work in practice. No one is saying that we now need to build 40,000 new
detention places to support people who are going to be detained. That is not
what we are doing. We are going to increase our detention estate in our
capacity. That will be necessary. And we've got plans which are fairly far
advanced in order to do that. But the running theme throughout this bill is
deterrence. We want to ensure that people understand that they shouldn't make
the journey in the first place because they will be removed if they do so.
Soheila Braverman, well, two sites have reportedly been mooted for extra
capacity, former RAF sites at Scampton in Lincolnshire and Wethernfield in
Essex. Threadwood Lee is the Conservative MP for Gainsborough, where Scampton is
located. He says he's concerned by the plans to detain migrants there. I'm
extremely annoyed that I only found out about this a couple of weeks ago because
of a tip-off, frankly, a leak. I'm very annoyed I've had no official
notification. Obviously, I object very strongly, but I've just lobbied the Home
Secretary personally in the lobby and they are looking at it. But the Home
Secretary said to me that if the migrants come there, it will be, in her words,
strictly temporary. Soheila Bradley, so how could the government manage the
detention and deportation of potentially tens of thousands of cross-channel
migrants? John Vine was the independent chief inspector of borders and
immigration from 2008 to 2014 and he joins me in the studio. Good evening. Good
evening. Let's start by getting you to just outline what you think would be the
challenges here. OK, how long have we got? So let's start with the immigration
detention estate. I think at the moment it comprises around 2,000 places. It's
usually full. So there needs to be an exponential expansion in the immigration
detention estate in order for it to cope with anything like the number of people
who are crossing the channel on a regular basis. And remember, at the moment,
these people go to a reception centre, they claim asylum and then they're
distributed to hotels and other places where they stay at public expense and
then they go into a queue. And that queue for asylum decision-making is 150,000
cases at the moment. So in future, under these plans, they'll go straight into
immigration detention and the issue is going to be, well, if the Secretary of
State is under a 28-day time limit to remove them, that's a very short time
limit, so there needs to be tremendous throughput through whatever estate exists
in order for these people to be deported. So last year, 45,000 people arrived.
That is the equivalent to half of the UK's prison capacity. Yes. Holding people
in a secure unit as opposed to hotels or apartments is far, far more expensive,
isn't it? It is and it's far more unpleasant. I mean, if you actually visited
one of these immigration detention centres, they are like prisons. I mean,
they're very unpleasant places. And, you know, remember the outcry over the
Manston reception centre at the beginning of the year, where the influx of
people coming, you know, into the country via small boats sort of overwhelmed
the facilities there. And people were being held there in numbers in excess of
the capacity that the centre had. And so whatever happens under this new regime,
there needs to be tremendous logistics put into place fairly quickly in order to
ensure that that sort of thing doesn't happen in this new expanded immigration
detention estate. But isn't deterrence part of the point? If you make them
unpleasant, word will get out and people will not want to come. Well, but it's
never been tested. I mean, this theory about deterrence has not been tested. It
was due to be tested with the Rwanda policy, remember. So I think, what have we
arranged with Rwanda? About 250 places. And the idea was to deport people to
Rwanda and then that would be a deterrent. But of course, Rwanda is stuck in the
court of appeal and there's no immediate prospect of Rwanda coming on stream. So
not only do we need to, the Home Office need to expand the detention estate,
they need to find the staff to run the estate. They need to find the caseworkers
with experience. A lot of those caseworkers are working away to try and reduce
the backlog of asylum cases. So I think a special task force needs to be put
together to actually manage. Of how many people? What are you talking about? I
really haven't, I mean, I would assume the Home Office is working on some
projection of numbers of people coming, but we've seen 500, 1000 people arrive a
day. But even when the Prime Minister was asked about how this was all going to
work, he wasn't clear and didn't really answer the question. Well no, and
there's a number of aspects. The immigration detention estate is one of them,
the asylum backlog is another. We've just not been very good at removing people
in recent times as well. The Home Office doesn't remove many people. Removals
of, enforced removals have fallen dramatically over the last decade. And
removing people is not easy. Judicial reviews are lodged, claims are lodged.
Individuals very often resist physically removal on planes. And so it's very
difficult to actually see how this can be done quickly and easily in order to
cope with the people arriving. Just briefly, do you think that the Prime
Minister meeting with President Macron on Friday might be a potential
breakthrough if it goes well, if those conversations go well? Well there's no
doubt that the very best relationships need to be developed with France in
tackling this whole issue. Because not only in terms of law enforcement and
tackling criminal gangs, and there has I think been improvement in that, there's
certainly been millions of pounds given by the British government to bolster
cooperation with the French, but I think a diplomatic solution has to be on the
cards. France is the most important partner we have here in dealing with this
whole issue. And so it may be that the Prime Minister and the President come up
with something which we haven't heard of before. John Vine, who was the
Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration from 2008 and 2014,
thanks for being with us. Now with the war in Ukraine absorbing so much
attention and light for so many months, there are many conflicts that have
continued in the shadows. What's happening in Yemen is among them. Before the
civil war, it was already one of the poorest countries in the world. The war has
created one of the world's worst humanitarian crises. And the people who are
most adversely affected are women. I've been speaking to Oxfam's policy advocacy
lead in Yemen, Fatma Jafar. She says women are already making a difference on
the ground and they should not be excluded, as they are, from official peace
talks and negotiations. Yemen was already suffering from gender inequality even
before the conflict happened in 2015, mainly as a result of very conservative
social norms combined with legal systems. So the conflict have increased the
level of impact we have on women. More displacement was happening. And Yemeni
women were almost representing 80% of the displaced people along with children.
So this pushed women to suffer from lack of access to basic services. Now Yemeni
women have to travel hours to get water. So all of these impacts were mainly a
result of the conflict. And the conservative nature of the society before the
war, of course, meant that there were many restrictions on women. Have those
restrictions become worse in very particular ways? Are there examples that you
can give us of the way in which those restrictions have become worse?
Definitely. I think mainly restrictions on movement. And this is something that
females have endured as a result of the conflict. And it had direct impacts on
female humanitarian workers because we're trying to respond to one of the worst
crises in the world. Having complicated movement restrictions complicates our
response. And when you say restrictions on movement, it's to do with women
having to be accompanied. Is that what it is? Yes. Yes, exactly. Why does it
matter that women should be involved? Because Yemeni women have been the most
impacted in this war. A lot of families have lost their male members and now 26%
of families are headed by women. And those women had to go through so much,
especially with the economic crisis that was happening in the country. So the
journey of building the new Yemen should include voices of Yemeni women. Can you
give me an example where women have at a local level made a difference in terms
of the kinds of lives that they can lead? There's a lot of disputes that we're
having over lands in Yemen. And a lot of Yemeni women were mediating those
disputes. Another issue was water, women who led on initiatives to mediate
people access to water. One of the cities was Taiz and Taiz was controlled by
the two governments in the country. And a lot of people couldn't access water
because of all of the military escalations that were happening. And after six
years of people not being able to access water, they were finally able to access
water. And this was a huge achievement that was mainly led by local Yemeni
women. And you are convinced that that is an example of how effective women
might be on a slightly bigger scale? Definitely, because, you know, Yemeni women
have played a major role in the response. They know what's happening. They know
all of the complexity that this war have brought to Yemen. How can you do that?
How can you persuade people that you are at the table? I think more pressure
should be placed on the UN and mainly on the government to guarantee that there
are available seats for women to be present in the current peace negotiations. I
think more pressure. So you want more pressure to be put on the UN and so on.
But do you think part of the reason why they are not is because there is a
recognition that the society is very conservative. The men do not want the women
involved. I don't think it's the case because we had, for example, in 2013, the
UN pressured parties to include women in the national dialogue. And this was way
before the conflict. And each political party in Yemen included Yemeni women,
and they managed to have 30% women being represented from each political party
that was in Yemen. And it was, there was a lot of, you know, conservative
political parties in Yemen, but managed to get women because they were
pressured. If they want to participate in the national dialogue, they must have
women and they included women. And it was a huge success. If you want the peace
process to proceed in Yemen, bring Yemeni women into the conversation. Fatma
Jafar. Now, if you're listening to the programme last night, you will have heard
the story published by the New York Times, which said that intelligence examined
by the US suggested that a pro-Ukrainian group carried out an attack on the Nord
Stream pipelines last year, pipelines built to carry Russian natural gas to
Germany. Today, Ukraine has denied any involvement. Russia blames the West for
the explosions. There are currently three investigations underway, a Danish, a
Swedish and a German one. I've been speaking to the BBC's Berlin correspondent,
Jenny Hill. She told me about new details that have emerged today from Germany's
federal prosecutor. They have searched a boat, which they believe was used to
take explosives to the site of this apparent attack on the Nord Stream
pipelines. They revealed that today. They say the search was carried out back in
January. This was a German owned boat, but the company which owned it apparently
hired it out to some individuals. We don't know anything about those individuals
nor the nationalities at this stage officially. But this came on the same day
that we heard via various media reports here in Germany that a Polish company
owned by two Ukrainian nationals had rented a boat and put upon it six
individuals, divers, a doctor, a captain, who according to these reports, took
explosives on the boat and apparently carried out this attack. It would appear,
according to these reports, at the behest of a pro-Ukrainian group. So, you
know, a lot of intriguing detail. And I think here in Germany, a great deal of
caution, actually, certainly amongst the authorities, senior politicians who
have been coming out one after the other today to say, look, don't jump to
conclusions. One politician, actually, the German defence minister, even raising
the possibility that this could be a so-called false flag operation. The
implication being that perhaps another state may have tried to make this look
like it was an attack by a pro-Ukrainian group. As you're aware, ever since this
apparent act of sabotage took place last September, rumours have been swirling
through Western capitals that this could have been the act of a state-backed
group, i.e. carried out at the behest of a national government. All sorts of
culprits being named, you know, the Russians, even the Americans among them. So
the detail that's come from the office of the Federal Attorney General is part
of the German investigation into this. There are two other countries that are
also investigating this. Yeah, that's correct. Because this all happened deep in
the seas, international waters, there are investigations being carried out by
the Swedish, Danish and German authorities, all of whom are keeping fairly
tight-lipped about what they know. The reports in the German media, quote
intelligence sources, as does a report in the New York Times, which was
published at around about the same time. It quotes US intelligence sources,
unnamed of course, but that report also says a pro-Ukrainian group is suspected
of involvement. But at this stage, it's very difficult to get any more official
detail from the authorities who all say, look, we're continuing our
investigations, we'll let you know when we know. The authorities are saying,
let's wait until the full investigation has been completed. What kind of
reaction has there been in Germany amongst other political parties? Broadly
speaking, the consensus even amongst the main opposition party here has been,
yes, we need to get to the bottom of this and quickly, but let's not jump to
conclusions. I think of course, most senior politicians are aware that the
extremely sensitive thing diplomatically to do to start pointing fingers at the
Ukrainians before there's actually any hard evidence on the table. But there
certainly is, I think, an impulse amongst many here to get the investigation
concluded as quickly as possible and to get some of that information out into
the daylight. The BBC's Jenny Hill. Let's hear now from Andre Juncker, who is a
German MP and the European spokesperson for the left-wing Die Linke party. He's
among a small number of MPs in the Bundestag who have questioned how the
government has handled investigating the explosion. I'm still quite doubtful
concerning this new theory yesterday published by New York Times, because we
always heard from our government that it is a state actor, that this kind of
explosion could not be organised by a small terror group or something like this.
So now it seems that it was possible. So there are several inconsistencies for
me. You sound sceptical to say the least. Yes, I'm sceptical. Yes. But I wonder
whether perhaps it would be better to wait until the full investigation has been
completed. I wonder if you have faith in the way in which the German government
has actually conducted the investigation so far. What would you like to see them
do that they haven't been doing? We were calling since September for an
international investigation, maybe led by the United Nations or something. Now
we have the situation that individual states like Germany and Sweden and I think
Denmark, they are investigating. But I think there should be a transparent
international investigation. Well it's interesting that you are calling for an
international investigation, perhaps led by the United Nations, because that is
exactly what Moscow is calling for too. Well, I don't know, could be. But I
think it is the best way. There are, as you say, three independent
investigations currently going on. The Danes, the Swedes and the Germans. Do you
not trust that these investigations will elicit exactly what happened? I'm not
100% sure. They will find it. I don't know if they have the means. I mean, in
the history of Germany, we had several things where we could not trust 100%. I
think this investigation has so far reaching implications that I'm not 100% sure
that there is no political pressure on these bodies. This is clearly a very
complicated story. And there is another dimension to this today with the German
defence minister saying that this could in fact be a false flag operation aimed
at pinning the blame on this pro-Ukrainian group. What do you make of that?
Because that throws another spanner in the works, doesn't it? The implications
of this investigation is so far reaching that there are a lot of intelligence
services from all sides, from Russia, from US, from Britain. I don't know. They
are playing their games now. There are people who are arguing that this issue is
being politicised to suit a pro-Russian or at least an anti-war agenda. And in
fact, an agenda that might lead to a reduced role for Germany in Ukraine. Well,
of course, I know the political implications of this. But nevertheless, we have
to look to the facts and to investigation. And so far, we have theories more or
less plausible, but we don't know. And there's, of course, high interest to push
it in the one or the other direction. And I think the best way to prove it is an
international investigation. Andrei Hunko, German MP from Dlinka party. Since
the invasion of Ukraine, there have been many individuals who've been named
under EU sanctions. Among them has been the mother of Yevgeny Prigozhin, who is
the head of Wagner, the Russian mercenary group, which has got thousands of men
fighting in Ukraine alongside the Russian army. Today, Yevgeny Prigozhin's
mother has won a legal bid to overturn those sanctions against her. Violetta
Prigozhin successfully convinced an EU court that even though she previously had
financial ties to her heavily sanctioned son, there is no evidence save that
they are related. Let's speak to George Voloshin, who is a global export with
ACAMS, an Association of Financial Crime Specialists. He joins us from
Washington, DC. Does this set a precedent, do you think? We appear to have lost
that line. Let's see if we can get him back. George Voloshin, we've got you
back. Great. Justin, do you think that this victory for Prigozhin's mother sets
a precedent? I think it's a precedent of sorts because it kind of opens the door
for further litigation on behalf of the families of Russian oligarchs. So
it's... I'm sorry. We can hear you. Mr Voloshin, we can hear you. Absolutely. So
I think there is some kind of a precedent here because other family members of
Russian oligarchs could sue the council using these grounds that the reasons for
listing were not really necessarily clear, that there is not enough of a
connection to the sanctioned person. Although I think the council could actually
quite quickly resolve this by just adding one more listing ground to the
framework, which would be listing family members in case there are suspicions of
sanctions evasion through them. So I think it's not much of a case actually
here. Right. OK. But does it also expose or at least highlight the different
approaches to sanctions that exist in different countries? So for example, if
you had to compare the approach that the EU has taken as opposed to the United
States? Absolutely. I think the US approach has been much more aggressive. The
ability to overturn US sanctions in the past, like for example, by Russian
oligarch Oleg Deripaska, who sued, who first tried to resolve this with OFAC
directly, then went to court unsuccessfully. I think the US approach has been
quite strict in terms of the protection of personal rights, protection of
humanitarian rights of people. And so I think the European approach has been
very cautious around this. And this highlights actually the challenge that you
have in the EU with the rule of law concept, which goes much further than what
you have in the US, where the government can actually make a much stronger case
for national security. And do you think that because this case actually rested
on a technicality, is it possible that the EU can appeal against this? Well, I
think what happens here is that first of all, we should remember that this lady
has been sanctioned under two different decisions. One that was the first one in
February last year and then the second one six months later. So she needs to
overturn the second decision as well in order to be able to delist it. I think
what the council needs to do is probably not appeal the decision as is because
its case has been pretty weak and the court has shown some holes in the
argumentation of the council. What the council may actually do is for future
cases and for future litigation opportunities to restrict the ability of
litigants to infer this lack of connection to the sanctioned person. We just
need to amend some of the framework. We will have to leave it there. George
Voloshin, thank you for joining us live from Washington, DC here on The World
Tonight. That's it for tonight's programme. I'll be back tomorrow. Good night.
Tonight's editor was Emily Craig and the studio director was Andy Mills. One
man's fight for civil rights and to enrol at the University of Mississippi. It
was really the centerpiece of segregated education in Mississippi. Triggering
what some have called the last battle of the American Civil War. And I say
segregation now, segregation tomorrow and segregation forever. Now aged 89,
James Meredith tells his story. I knew the state of Mississippi would stop at
nothing, including killing me. Breaking Mississippi with me, Jen White starts
next Monday to Friday morning at 9.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4
we continue our reading of The Advocate by Marcello Foyce. Months after Zenobi
has been sentenced in absentia to six years for stealing his employer's sheep,
the body of his boss, Cosma, is discovered in an olive grove. Zenobi's lawyer,
Bustiano, and the police sergeant head to the scene together. The readers are
Stephen Hogan and Breige Brennan. Sergeant Pauley elbowed his way through the
small crowd that had collected round the body. Two carabinieri gave him a brief
summary. They had been together, Cosma and Sisinia looking over the farm. Cosma
had brought his gun along, on the chance of bagging a hair or two. Sisinia had
had a picnic prepared and they ate under a giant wild olive tree. The girl had
slipped off on her own for a few minutes to fill her apron with chicory and wild
fennel. Then she heard a shot. He's bagged a hair, she thought. So she made her
way back quite calmly and she found him on the ground as if asleep, not a dead
hair in sight, but blood, rivers of it. Sergeant Pauley gave Bustiano a
meaningful look. He bumped him off. Zenobi bumped him off while he was asleep.
It's obvious. He wasn't killed in his sleep, said Bustiano, approaching the
olive tree. You see here? he asked the sergeant. Pauley turned to the part of
the trunk Bustiano was pointing at. It was about a metre and a half from the
ground. Hundreds of pellets had penetrated the wood. Tiny spatters of blood and
flesh had stained the bark. He was on his feet when they shot him, concluded
Bustiano. Even if that were so, returned the sergeant, it wouldn't change
matters. It does change them substantially, reflected Bustiano. Sergeant, he
said at length, why shoot him? The sergeant smiled faintly. What a question. To
kill him? Yes, yes, of course. But why shoot him with his own gun? Perhaps your
client had no weapon with him. What? A fugitive from justice going around
without a weapon? He wasn't to know he would meet his sworn enemy. Cazulapes
probably put down his gun for some reason and Sana seized his chance. The
sergeant continued. Most likely, the victim had decided to take a rest in the
shade of the tree and Sana took him by surprise. Yes, he just happened to see
him, went up so close as to take his gun, then backed off far enough to be able
to shoot. Come off it, sergeant. You make it all too complicated. But the
situation is as clear as daylight. Cazulapes had nodded off and Zinobisana shot
him dead with no trouble at all. He wasn't asleep. The shot was too high. Cosma
Cazulapes slipped down into the position in which he was found. We're wasting
time making improbable conjectures, Avocado. The sergeant gave me a stare. The
decent person I had been until then was changing before his eyes into a shady
lawyer prepared to go to any lengths to save his own client. Except for the fact
that, technically, Zinobisana could not be held to be my client. I had never met
him. The only picture I had of him was a photograph which did not exonerate him
from anything. Indeed, on the contrary, it forged the strongest possible link
between him and the murdered photographer, Lechis. There was another thing I
knew, and it was no small matter. Cisernia had revealed to me that it had been
none other than her murdered father who had organized the little trick with the
lambs which had cost Zinobisana a sentence of six years' imprisonment. So the
sergeant was right. I was bending over backwards so as not to admit that my
client was nothing but a dangerous fugitive from justice. And yet he was wrong.
Have you ever had an absolute certainty with nothing to back it up? A certainty
that grows all the more certain the more appearances are against it? The old
woman scrutinized Bustiano. You've come all this way for nothing. Luisi took his
family and they went off to America. He says they're right. They'll send money.
Bustiano was sweating. But perhaps you can help me all the same. About a year
ago, your son branded a number of head of cattle belonging to his employer. A
farmhand came down from Nuoro to help him. A fair-haired young man with blue
eyes. You can't fail to have noticed him. The woman looked at Bustiano. A
handsome youngster. Fresh in the face, she said. Wait here. When she came back
out, she had something in her hand. Another photograph, taken at the farm by the
same roving photographer. It showed Zinobi with the branding iron in his hand
and Luigi Pereda holding a calf by its head, dated Galtelli, December 28, 1897,
and a cipher on the back. AQB and the number 28. Now, there was no doubt about
it. Bustiano had been right. The numbers showed that the photographs, the
branding and the young man's portrait, had been taken one after the other, on
the 28th of December, the same day as the disappearance of the lambs. So Zinobi
was innocent. Sergeant Pauly puffed warm breath on the fingers of his right
hand. With the hint of a smile, Bustiano drew the two photographs from the
pocket of his greatcoat. He laid them on the desk. Arturo Pauly scanned them for
a very long time indeed. Zinobi Sanna and Luigi Pereda busy branding cattle for
Cosma Casula Pace, Bustiano said, indicating the other photograph. With a date,
he added. The sergeant laughed out loud. I still don't follow you. I can help
you there, said the lawyer. If Zinobi Sanna was at Galtelli on the 28th of
December, he cannot have been at Mareri that same night to steal his employer's
sheep. Secondly, seeing that he had had himself photographed, he had no reason
to eliminate the photographer. Do you mean that the murder of Lechis is not
connected to the Casula Pace affair? I mean nothing of the sort. I only said
that it was not Zinobi Sanna who killed him. The matter is much simpler than it
appears to be. Cosma Casula Pace does not want Zinobi for a son-in-law. He has
an only daughter, Sisinia. He would jump in the lake rather than deny her
wishes. He therefore organises the business with the lambs. He sends Zinobi to
Galtelli and arranges for Luigi Pereda to keep him there for at least 48 hours.
He has no way of knowing about the photographer, and Pereda can only warn him
when it is too late. In the meanwhile, the young man declares that he is
innocent and unjustly accused. He takes to the hills to avoid arrest. Casula
Pace gets scared. He is afraid of retaliations, all the more so because his man
down at Galtelli, Luigi Pereda, has informed him about the photographs. It
therefore becomes indispensable to eliminate the photographer. And with him
everything that might prove that Zinobi Sanna was at Galtelli for the branding.
He employs Pereda himself for this purpose. In exchange, he provides him with
enough money to emigrate to America. But his luck is against him, because the
photographs have already been delivered. One to Galtelli, the other to Nuoro.
And here they are. All right. But in the meantime, Cosma Casula Pace is
murdered, and Sanna, although the victim of an injustice, is still the leading
suspect. So we are back at square one, the sergeant concluded. When they bury
Don Cosma, the whole town is there. Donna Dolores seems like the Madonna of the
Seven Sorrows. It takes three people to support her as she follows the coffin.
Then comes Sissinia, upright as a spindle. There is Bartolomeo Casula Pace,
thirty-ish, thinner and taller than his dead brother. A handsome race, the
Casula Pace, but an unlucky one as well, having no male heirs. After Sissinia,
Donna Dolores was unable to bear more children. And as for Bartolomeo marrying,
there was no question of it. He was more of a priest than anything else. But he
had money sense. He was the ready reckoner of the family firm. Bustiano took a
seat. You made me do this, said Sergeant Pauly. Was embarrassing. So what does
Bartolomeo have to say? the lawyer asked. Nothing. Nothing at all. As polite as
could be. At my service, in fact. He can find nothing. No sum paid to Pireda. No
payoff on leaving their service. No sign even that he has gone to America. But
according to him, these matters were entirely in his late brother's hands, God
rest him. Not to mention the fact that the farm at Galtelli belonged to his
sister in law, said Sergeant Pauly. What? To Donna Dolores? Precisely. And
therefore, outside his financial control. Therefore, the farm at Galtelli was
not part of the estate itself? It seems not. In fact, it appears that Donna
Dolores dealt with it personally. How interesting, commented Bustiano. It was
obvious that there was something fishy about the death of Cosimo Casullapes.
Glances were exchanged and eyebrows raised. For example, this business of the
murder had fallen right on cue just as Bartolomeo Casullapes's 30th birthday was
coming up. According to the will of his father, Batista Casullapes, if he
reached 30 years of age without issue, he could claim only such an annual income
as would enable him to live in a dignified manner. It made one think he looked
not quite right. Not to speak of Donna Dolores, who appeared to be the mistress
and matriarch of all, but no use asking her the simplest question. It was always
Bartolomeo who came up with the answer. Good Lord, how they understood each
other, those two. They stuck to money like leeches. They say that in the matter
of Batista's will, she was quite angry with her brother-in-law because he was
against claiming rent for a farm at Convento, because he was hand in glove with
the priests and had no wish to lay claim to a farm which had always been in
their hands. But she was dead against this. Betch Prennain and Stephen Haugen
were reading The Advocate by Marcello Feucht. It was abridged by Isabel Crede
and Jill Waters and produced by Jill Waters and the Waters Company for BBC.