TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 who was a child living under Japanese occupation. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. Coming up on Outlook, the children's TV star
who found herself on China's most wanted list. Gulchekha Hodja was a popular
face on television in the 1990s, the star of the first Uyghur language kids'
show in China. Everybody can recognise me when I was in the street, everywhere.
They will approach me, oh Gulchekha, you are part of our childhood. It makes me
so happy and proud. But the Chinese authorities began a crackdown on Uyghur
culture and Gul had to toe the party line. She felt her TV show was being used
to promote government policies that were making life hard for her people. That
moment I feel I betrayed my people, betrayed those kids who love me and trust
me. I feel guilty. Gul found a way out, but it would mean saying goodbye to her
family, possibly forever, and it would make her an enemy of the state. Her story
on Outlook after the news. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. As Ukraine
marks one year since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion, the UN General
Assembly has overwhelmingly backed a call for Moscow's forces to pull out
immediately. More than 140 countries voted in favour of a resolution condemning
the war. Ukraine's Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said it was a clear sign of
global support. 141 votes. This is much more than the West represents. This vote
defies the argument that the global South does not stand on Ukraine's side,
because many countries representing Latin America, Africa, Asia, voted in favour
today. Some didn't, but there are very few of them. Seven countries opposed the
resolution, 32 others abstained, including China and India, but the British
ambassador to the UN, Barbara Woodward, said abstaining was a bold move for some
countries. I think it's worth bearing in mind that Russia, a bit like it has in
Ukraine, is a bully when it comes to UN votes, and so it intimidates countries
and it makes very clear that an abstention counts as a vote against Russia. So
that's a pretty brave thing for some countries where Russia is closely involved,
economically or militarily, to do, even to put down an abstention. Poland has
started fortifying its border with the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Warsaw
says there's been a rise in flights into Kaliningrad from Turkey and the Middle
East. It fears migrants arriving there will be encouraged by Moscow to cross
into the European Union. North Korea has test-fired four strategic cruise
missiles into the sea, the state news agency said. The drill demonstrated the
readiness of what it called Pyongyang's nuclear combat force. It's the latest in
a series of weapons tests. A court in Los Angeles has sentenced the former
Hollywood film mogul Harvey Weinstein to a further 16 years in jail for rape and
sexual assault. The offences date back 10 years. Weinstein is already serving a
23-year sentence after a separate conviction in New York. Sophie Long reports
now from Los Angeles. Harvey Weinstein's victim tearfully told the court how
she'd carried the trauma of what he did to her for years, that she'd been a
happy, confident woman who valued herself before he brutally assaulted her in
2013. She said no prison sentence could erase the damage, but the maximum term
would restore faith in the justice system among victims. Harvey Weinstein
responded and said, I maintain my innocence. I do not know her. She does not
know me. He's 70 and in ill health. The man who lived life in the luxury Beverly
Hills hotels where he committed some of his crimes will likely die in prison.
This is the latest world news from the BBC. The government of Madagascar says a
powerful storm which battered the east coast of the island is now known to have
killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie brought torrential rain and strong
winds. The storm is now heading towards Mozambique. It's expected to make
landfall in the coming hours. A senior federal investigator in the United States
has called for an end to the politicization of a rail disaster in Ohio. Jennifer
Homandy was announcing the findings of a preliminary report into the crash,
which caused a major chemical spill three weeks ago. She said there was no
indication that the train's crew did anything wrong, and described the
derailment as entirely preventable. Peru's government has declared a state of
emergency in more than a dozen areas because of an outbreak of dengue fever. So
far this year, the illness has killed 16 people. Dengue fever is transmitted by
mosquitoes and is often found in tropical areas. A Russian Soyuz capsule has
lifted off from Kazakhstan to bring back three men stranded on the International
Space Station. It'll be some time before the two Russian cosmonauts and an
American colleague return to Earth, as Rory Gallimore now reports. Missions on
the International Space Station usually last six months. By the time these three
men are scheduled to leave in September, they'll have spent a full year in
orbit. That wasn't the original plan. A capsule already attached to the ISS was
supposed to make the return journey, but it began leaking coolant late last
year. Liquid particles were seen spraying into the blackness, forcing the
cancellation of a spacewalk. The new capsule is carrying supplies, although
there's no replacement crew on board. Last month, a NASA spokesman said the men
were willing to extend their stay, but he joked a delivery of ice cream might be
needed as a reward. BBC World News. Hello, welcome to Outlook. I'm Jo Fidgen.
Let me whisk you to a living room in northwest China in the 1970s. It's an
unusually grand house, an old embassy building in fact, and home to Gulchekhra
Hodja's grandfather. He was an important man in the area and owned one of the
very few televisions in the neighbourhood. So when they switched it on, they
soon had company. Yeah, because of my grandpa's unique position, that's why we
have a TV at home. It's like black and white. When I was very young age, the TV
shows once a week or something. But when we have a program, all our neighbours
will come with their little stall to our, you know, home and watch together. We
don't really watch what's going on. We're just happy to see them, you know.
Happy to see the pictures. We were like, just spend time together. It was the
happiness for all of us. And I feel like, wow, TV is very special things, you
know. And I was dreaming about, oh, I'm going to dance in that TV. I'm going to
sing on that TV like that. But I never have a dream to speak on the TV. So you
wanted to be a singer and dancer. Yeah. That was your plan. Yeah. My very young
age, my dream was being a star. Whatever is it, being a star, you know.
Gulchekha Gul, for short, did become a star, a famous presenter of the first
ever Uyghur children's TV show. The Uyghur are a minority in China, culturally
and racially distinct with their own language and history. They are Muslim. This
kids' programme that Gul devised was designed to teach them about their society.
It made her madly popular. A few years later, life took a dramatic turn and now
Gul lives in exile, her name on China's most wanted list. We spoke on Video Link
from her home in the United States where she lives with her husband and three
children, surrounded by memories of her family back in Urumqi, the capital of
Xinjiang province. Gul's grandfather, the one with the TV, was revered in his
community as a composer of mukham, traditional Uyghur music. You can play 24
hours non-stop. It's like life, celebrating life. It makes you dance, makes you
cry, makes you laugh. We play all those music, even from our mom's womb, we
start hearing those music. And it's in our blood, actually. And fortunately, I
was born in a mukham master's home. Your grandfather? My grandpa, Zikr al-Betta,
is one of the composers who wrote so many Uyghur music. So I've grown up with
this. That's why I feel it, music, inside of my blood. You had an unusual
access, didn't you, to your traditional culture? Because as you mentioned, your
grandfather was a mukham master. Master. Your father, an archaeologist, who knew
all about the history and so on. What would he teach you about what it is to be
Uyghur? About the Silk Road, about what is under the Taklimakan Desert.
Taklimakan means the land under the sand. He will teach us, for example, the
beautiful landscape. One time we saw millions of flowers blooming in the wide
open land. And my father said, look, this is like natural carpet. Natural
carpet. Oh, wow. Go discover how many flowers you can pick. And we were run to
that garden. And we picked all the flowers just like this, you know. Gather them
in your arms. Yeah, and I run to my father, look, so many in the garden. And he
says, OK, do you know about those flowers? Do you know about the names? I said,
no. And he taught us one by one. This is this flower, this is that flower, you
know. He taught you to love the place, the culture, the people. Yeah, he unique
way to teach us how to love and appreciate what we have. Can I ask, in your
childhood home, was there much talk of politics? Was there much talk of the
Chinese Communist Party? Was there much talk of what was going on elsewhere in
China? No, we avoid. We avoid talk about the politics. And the politics getting
harsh to us, the religious politics, you know. What do you mean by religious
politics? Freedom of religion we lost day by day because of Chinese government
control. And they control all the religious activities in daily life also.
Because it's an officially atheist country. Yes, so many new rules make people's
life change and harder. The Chinese Communist Party, you'll hear them referred
to as the CCP, had banned anyone under the age of 18 from entering a mosque in
Xinjiang. Praying became strictly regulated. There was also a campaign called
Project Beauty, which prohibited what were described as abnormally large beards
and the wearing of veils in public places. The government claimed this was to
combat Islamic extremism. At the same time, there was a move to impose
mainstream Han Chinese culture on the region. Uyghurs felt their own culture was
being eroded and complained that they were facing arrest simply for sticking to
their customs. Gul's family felt it very keenly. Then, a terrible shock, when
Gul was at university, her younger brother was arrested for theft and drug-
related offences and jailed for 10 years. It's the most sad and hard time for
entire family. We just live without lights, you know. Everything turned dark. I
stopped smiling, and my parents too. Even we don't watch TV anymore. Very quiet,
very late, barely talk. I was in third year of my university. I am just going to
school, sitting there, nothing going to my ear. I just think about him and how I
missed him. And my character, everything was changed. I don't dance anymore
after that. You didn't dance. Yeah, I gave up for three years. All that joy had
gone. I feel guilty if I laugh or do something. But today I feel I appreciate
those days, what I experienced. Maybe those moments make me more stronger. Tell
me about the next very big step in your life. You said right at the beginning
that when you were little, you wanted to sing and dance on TV. You didn't want
to speak on TV. At what point in your life did you decide, I want to be a TV
presenter? I studied in a nursery to be a middle school teacher. I still feel
like I can do more. I can give children more things to teach, even they cannot
learn in the school. What sort of things did you want to teach them? Just what I
have learned from my family. Culture, history, arts, all those things. Uyghur
culture and history and arts. Yes, of course. And because we don't have a TV
program for the Uyghur children, I want to make a Uyghur TV program. Were there
political implications to making a children's program? Yes, yes. The purpose of
TV station or the radio in China is all propaganda tools for CCP. Of course, you
have to say good things about the government. You have to praise for CCP in the
program. But because it's a children's program, we're just talking about
childhood stuff, what is interesting for children. So naturally, they don't pay
attention that much to what children are saying. So that's why there are less
censors for the children's program than others. One of the most innovative
aspects of Gul's TV show was that it was broadcast in Uyghur rather than
Mandarin, the main Chinese language. First program, it's very colorful program.
I love camera. I am TV personality. I feel like I'm born for that. I believe
myself so much in front of camera. And your first program was about music,
Uyghur music. What kind of reaction did it get? Immediately, we received so many
letters from the children, from the parents, even teachers. And they all love it
and appreciate me and say thank you and even sending a very beautiful cards. And
they ask, come to their school to film them and ask me to show this, show that.
Even village kids asking me to show what is in Urumqi, you know, what is Urumqi
school looks like, what is different life with the city, with village. They want
to make friends with each other, you know, using my program. And there's so many
ideas coming even to making our program more interesting. So actually the
program itself for children, but children's actually giving me idea how to
develop this program. That's good. I take it TV sets were more common in Uyghur
households by then, if so many people were watching. Yeah, because that time in
1996, people start have color TV. Color TV. And because one TV program for the
Uyghur children, so when the children want to watch, whole family sit together.
That's why the children program was the most watched program many years in the
Uyghur region. Was it? Yeah. Wow. How famous did you become? Pretty famous, I
can say. Because everybody can recognize me when I was in the street everywhere.
They will approach me, especially kids. Oh, Gulchehriya, everybody knows my
name. And they call me sister. The little kids, Gulchehriya Heda. Even right
now, they grown up, they still call me Heda. And around the world, so many
Uyghur exiles contact me with social media and Facebook. They always say, oh,
you are sister forever for us. You are part of our childhood. So it makes me so
happy and proud. It's very sweet thing. They still remember my voice, my smile,
my stories. And if I go to restaurant to eat food, they don't accept my paying.
They just say, oh, no, no, this is show our respect because we love you. Please
don't. I feel so blessed everywhere. Yeah. When did you first become aware of
the Chinese Communist Party taking a more active interest in the material that
you were covering in your programs? After 1997, they tighten up the rules for
programs. Every Uyghur program become more censored. Before we air, we have to
pass three editors. Also, they have put someone to translate our program. Into
Chinese? Yes. Before that, they don't translate. And then they will say yes and
then we air. That year, 1997, when Gul says she came under stricter editorial
control, there had been protests by Uyghurs, some demanding equal rights, some
calling for Xinjiang's independence from China. There were clashes with police
and a number of deaths. The CCP, the Chinese government, described it as a
violent riot. Uyghurs called it a massacre. Thousands of Uyghurs were detained,
some convicted and imprisoned, others charged with separatist activity and
executed. The authorities stepped up their assimilation policies. And then they
demand us to collaborate with CCP's in Uyghur region, the headquarter. We have
to listen to their command what to put in our program. What kind of thing do
they want you to put in? They want us to teach friendships, Han Chinese and
Uyghur kids program. Showing friendship between Uyghur children and Han Chinese
children. And you didn't like that idea? No, because in the real life, they
don't play together, they don't interact. If you forcefully put them together,
it looks like fake. It's just for propaganda. And we tried, we tried so hard, we
did some programs, but feel fake, not natural, because the society is not like
that. But do you not think it could have been a sort of a desirable thing to
have more mixing between the two types of children? Yeah, we were thinking
playing together with kids, of course, it's good thing, it's make friendship.
But real life, they are not, that's why it makes uncomfortable. And also, the
Chinese education politics changed to teaching kids this Han Chinese. Uyghur
language more and more dropped. And every year, thousand village children,
Uyghur children, moved to Mainland China boarding school. A Chinese government
planning document published in 2017 recorded that nearly half a million Uyghur
children had been separated from their families and placed in boarding schools
in Mainland China. When the policy began in the 90s, Gou says the authorities
asked her to cover it in her program and give it what she considered a positive
spin. I was producing all those programs with those children. And emotionally,
those kids, they were scared in the Mainland China. They have very harsh rule to
follow. So I feel those children, I saw from their eyes how they cry. But
Chinese government ordered us to show good stuff about those kids. How happy are
they in those schools? And I asked questions, those kids have to answer me the
written script. So you were given a script by representatives of the Chinese
government to make the children say they were happy in these schools. Yes. That
moment I feel I betrayed my people, betrayed those kids who love me and listen
to me and trust me. I feel guilty. And then I don't want to do any more of those
programs. But there is no way. If you want to continue your career, you must
follow Chinese government's rule, CCP's rule. As Gou's unhappiness at work
increased, her bosses were wanting to promote her. I was the first bilingual
anchor using our native language and Han Chinese. You have to pass the
examination for that. I passed the examination. Then they started to invite me
to present in other Chinese TV programs. They gave me more opportunity to
develop and more chance to shine, actually, that moment. So it's because they
didn't see any threats from me. That's why they like me. Gou's opportunity to
make a change came in 2001. Her husband had got permission to study in Europe,
in Austria, and Gou was able to visit him. The big difference when you got to
Austria was that you now had access to the uncensored Internet. Internet,
uncensored everything, actually. In Austria, I opened the Internet. It was like,
wow, you can type anything, you can find anything. Even I typed Uyghur region,
Xinjiang, so many things coming up. I never saw those. It was like a new world
for me. I was studying. I was learning everything from the beginning. I was just
like a child. What were you learning about the Uyghur region and what the
international press was saying about the Uyghur region that you didn't know from
living there yourself? Many things. BBC, CNN, even have Uyghur news. I know
there is a radio station about Uyghur region and the politics in America, but we
never have opportunity to listen to the whole program. It will be jamming with
some kind of music. So I listened to whole programs, and when I was listening to
the Uyghur program, everything they said was shocking me. Like, whoa, they can
say this? We never in Uyghur region can discuss those things. And then I feel,
wow, freedom of speech is this. And then I realized, wow, this is the journalism
I want to work for. Then I decided to call the radio director, and I said, I'm
Guchekhra. I'm ready to work for you if you need me. So can I just interrupt
there? Because I think there's something we need to make really, really clear,
which is how big a deal it is that you decided you wanted to work for this radio
station. This is not like applying for an ordinary job in radio. This is a
decision that will mean that you cannot go home, that you cannot see your family
again, that you are choosing a life in another continent, in a country where you
don't speak the language, to pursue freedom of speech and give everything up for
it. It is a massive decision you were making. Yes, but this is the only way I
can escape from doing sin to my people. From doing a sin to your people? Yes.
Sin means to promote Chinese government's assimilation politics to yours. I
don't want to be part of this assimilation politics. But you could have just
given up your job at Xinjiang TV. You can. You have to have reason. I don't have
other choice. What about your family? Of course it's hard to make decision, but
I believe my family, they want me to be free. Ghoul took the job at the Uyghur
radio station and moved to America. After a short break, we'll hear what
happened when China made her an enemy of the state and why she keeps a 20-year-
old nan in her freezer. This is the BBC World Service bringing you the story
which uncovered a multi-million dollar fishing scandal. After independence in
1990, Namibia set out to reclaim the riches of its shores. Instead, the Namibian
fishing sector is embroiled in a scandal on an industrial scale. A friend of
mine called me and told me that you have to meet this guy. I'm Johannes Dell and
I've come to Namibia to find out how the great hopes invested in its fishing
industry have been dashed. It's a story too about how journalists here and in
faraway Iceland are working together, sometimes at personal risk. We were taking
on the most powerful political group in the country. While this was happening, I
was getting texts, now it's time for you to get what you deserve and you don't
know what's coming for you. Fish Rot. Clear Waters. Murky Dealings. At
bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries. Coming up in part two of Outlook,
Uyghur journalist Guljehra Hodja on the heavy price her family in China have
paid for her reporting on human rights abuses and why she keeps 20-year-old
homemade nan bread in her freezer. It's beautiful handmade nan. This is very
valuable. When I see that I'm happy and also I will be sad. We're back after the
international news headlines. BBC News with Neil Nunes. Ukraine's President
Volodymyr Zelensky has welcomed a vote at the United Nations, calling for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The resolution was
backed by an overwhelming majority of countries, which Mr. Zelensky described as
a powerful signal of global support. Today marks exactly a year since the full-
scale invasion began. Poland is fortifying its border with the Russian exclave
of Kaliningrad. The Polish government fears that migrants from Turkey and the
Middle East are being encouraged to travel to the area where they could cross
into the European Union. North Korea has launched four cruise missiles into the
sea. It's the latest in a series of provocative weapons tests. A court in Los
Angeles has sentenced the former Hollywood film mogul Harvey Weinstein to 16
more years in prison. The rape and sexual assault charges date back to 2013.
He's already serving a long sentence for another conviction. Madagascar's
government says a powerful storm which battered the island's east coast has
killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie is now heading for Mozambique. A
senior federal investigator in the United States has called for an end to the
politicization of a rail disaster in Ohio. Jennifer Homendy was announcing the
findings of a preliminary report into the crash, which caused a major chemical
spill three weeks ago. The American billionaire financier Thomas H. Lee has
died. He was 78. The financier was found dead in the New York headquarters of
his investment firm. A Russian Soyuz capsule has taken off from Kazakhstan to
bring back three men stranded on the International Space Station. The two
Russian cosmonauts and an American are due to return to Earth in September. The
original capsule sprang a leak. BBC News. Welcome back to Outlook. Hello, I'm Jo
Fidgen. Today we have the shocking story of how a popular children's TV
presenter ended up on China's most wanted list. In the 1990s, a young woman from
China's Uyghur minority, Gulchekhwa Hodja, created the country's first Uyghur
language program for kids. It made her a star. But Gul became deeply unhappy
when the Chinese Communist Party started to dictate what she could include in
her show. She felt they were expecting her to put a positive gloss on its
increasingly repressive policies towards her people. In 2001, she managed to get
out of China and was hired as a journalist by an independent Uyghur radio
station operating out of the United States. She is still there with her husband
and their three children who were born there. She is unable to return to China
or to see her family. I know you didn't tell them before you left for America in
2001. But when you called them to say where you were and that you were working
for this radio station and that you basically couldn't come home anymore, what
did they say to you? When I called my father, he was quiet a little bit and
says, oh, my brave girl, then quiet again. And my mom started crying. Yeah, we
didn't talk about, oh, you cannot come back. But we all understand. You were
advised by the radio station to use a false name on air so that you wouldn't be
identified. You chose not to. You chose to use your real name. Why was that?
First, it's my dignity. I want to tell Chinese government this is my decision.
This is me. I want to be me, myself. And second, my voice, my face is very
recognizable for my people. Even if I don't use my real name, they will
recognize me from my voice. And because of that, there is no point. I don't want
to be seen. I'm scared. Right after I started voicing in radio station in
America, Chinese government, they banned my voice, my profile from the Internet,
from the TV, from everywhere, even my image. And they announced first red notes
about me. First red notice? Yes. What is that exactly? What does that mean? What
does it signify? It comes from the CCP. They just blame you. Some kind of crime
I didn't even do. So it's a notice that you are a serious criminal that is
issued on behalf of the Communist Party. Yes. I see. I didn't physically see the
notice. What I hear from the people traveling from Uyghur region to America or
other countries telling me, they saw the notice saying I betrayed Chinese
government. I am a separatist. A separatist. Yes, separatist. And then they're
warning my families and my friends not to contact with me. And I cut all
contacts from that. I didn't call anyone. You must have felt lonely. It is. It's
very hard. But to protect them, to love them, I have to make this distance. What
kinds of stories were you covering for this radio station that alarmed the
authorities in China so much? First, I start with what I know the best, the
education program. Also human rights issues and forced labor in the Uyghur
region. Also other sensitive topic about the politics. Gul started hearing from
her contacts in Xinjiang about the appearance of a vast complex of camps that
they called Jail City. We now know what is happening inside those camps. The
United Nations estimates that more than a million Uyghurs and other Muslims have
been detained there. China says the camps are re-education facilities for
combating terrorism and denies accusations of forced labor, sterilization,
torture, rape and genocide. Back in January 2018, Gul secured the first
interview with a former detainee willing to go on the record about his
experience. He was the first witness. Never had the full picture of what's
behind the wall, what's going on inside those camps. He gives us very detailing
information. The response was swift. After two days, my mother's neighbor's
daughter, she's living in the US, studying here. She called me. She says, oh
sister, I need to inform you, your whole family arrested because of you. It's
all together 24 people. 24 people from your family arrested? In one night. In
one night? One night, including your father and mother. That's the message. And
I couldn't believe what I hear. Then I start calling everybody, the family.
Nobody answers. Then finally one of my aunt answer. Her answer was, don't call
again. Don't worry about us. Just hang up. Yeah, that makes sense. Something
happened. So what happened to your relatives, your parents in particular? My
mother, she was 72 years old at that time. My mom was locked with 30 other
women, young and old. And she was so scared. And you cannot sleep enough. You
have to take turn to sleep. And one woman always watch her, make sure she
doesn't pray. And she was shackling. She cannot get up straight. And for food,
just one steamed bun. A steamed bun. That was all she had to eat in a day. In a
day. And little bit of rice, water, maybe soup. And she says, you cannot imagine
how disgusting is it. But I was telling myself, you have to be alive for your
daughter, she was saying. She stayed alive for you? For me. She was fighting for
her life. You went public with what had happened. You taped a letter saying,
this is what's happened to my family. And you posted it to various
organizations, human rights organizations, and to media outlets. And it drew a
lot of attention to your case. And you were asked to speak at a US congressional
hearing. And started speaking very, very publicly about what you describe as
human rights abuses. I want to help my family. I need to do something because I
was the only hope. Because everybody's gone. Even don't know that moment,
where's my father. And I feel that's the last, you know, I need to get up and
fight for them. I cannot wait no more. Because for my freedom, for my life, they
already paid so much. Gul says that all of her relatives were released from
jail, but she continues to speak out. In 2021, Gul, along with other Uyghurs
living abroad, was publicly smeared by Chinese officials in a press conference.
She was accused of bad morality and declared an enemy of the state. And I was
put in the wanted list, saying I'm a terrorist. I was participating in some kind
of terrorist organization, but didn't say what kind of terror organization. So
it's baseless accusation. It doesn't matter how they call you. I believe myself.
I know who I am. And my people know who I am. So it doesn't define me, what they
say. It's like, I don't know, it's a badge of honor, you know, actually. At the
same time, the Chinese authorities released a video showing Gul's mother and
brother talking about their lives and about her. And your brother says in that
video that he thinks what you're doing is wrong. How did you feel when you saw
and heard that? How do I describe this? I'm just happy to see them. I didn't pay
attention to what they said, because they forced to say it. It's clearly, I
know. And I see this video again and again, just how I miss them, you know. I
was like, paying attention to every detail of their face. And so much changed.
My mom, unrecognizable, and my brother, too. The image in my mind always is 22
years ago when I was there. I'm imagining them, I'm dreaming about them, this
bad face, not this one. But I was like crying, watching again and again,
watching again. Your father wasn't in the video. Do you know how he is or
anything about him now? Yeah, he's in the bed after he had a stroke. Half of the
side of his body paralyzed, barely speak. I know you have very, very limited
contact with them. The only person you're allowed to speak to is your mother on
occasion. They did find ways to send you mementos of your family and of your
homeland. Your mother sent you food. Your father sent you a stone. Will you tell
me about those gifts that they sent you? Yeah, I received some packages from
home in the first couple years. So that's more than 20 years ago. Yeah, it was
naan, homemade bread, we called naan. Naan, uh-huh. Made by my mom with her
hand. It's still in my freezer. So you kept that bread that was made by your mom
for 20 years or more? 22 years. 22 years. Yes, it's beautiful handmade naan,
reminds my mom. And when I see that, I'm happy and also I will be sad. Gould's
children have strict instructions never to remove it from the freezer. They know
that's not allowed to touch without my permission. This is my naan. This is very
valuable for us. No second naan in the world the same. This is only naan we have
from mama, from your grandma. So we have to keep this until we saw her, until
she made for a second one. And they all know, okay, mommy, we don't touch it.
And second thing is my stone. And they know that's like my most precious. Stone
is the most random things in the world. You can pick everywhere, you know,
everywhere have stones. But the stones is from my neighborhood. It's piece of my
homeland. And more interestingly, it smells like home. How would you describe
that smell? The soil after the raining. After rain. Yeah. After the rain, the
soil will have very special smell, especially in Ürümqi. For me, the most
delicious fragrance, I traveled so many places in the world, but never had the
same smell as Ürümqi soil after the rain. So where do you keep that stone that
smells of soil from Ürümqi? In my bedroom, in my bookcase, next to my father's
picture. The smell still in that stone. When I'm missing them, when I'm thinking
about them, I just grab that stone, well, smell deeply. Do you think your
children, who are of course American, do you think your children will ever smell
the soil of Ürümqi for themselves? I wish, but of course not these days. Do you
have regrets for the decisions you've made? No, never. If I have a chance to
make a decision again, I will make the same decision. Because freedom is
everything. Because I made this decision, we have hope right now. I have three
beautiful children living in a free country, to be we were American, so they
continue our legacy. That's my achievement, actually. Your children? Yeah, I can
give free life to my children. That's my biggest achievement. Do you speak
Uyghur at home together? Yes, I always speak Uyghur in our home. Sometimes I
teach them to dance. We love to dance together sometimes. Every Saturday
morning, beginning with music, and I make breakfast. When I listen to music, I
feel more, you know, happy. Music is part of our life. Uyghur children's TV
presenter turned dissident Gulchekhra Hodja, speaking to me from her home in the
USA. She's written a memoir. The title was inspired by the stone her father sent
to her. It's called A Stone is Most Precious Where It Belongs. I'm Jo Fidgion.
Thanks for your company. Outlook's back at the weekend. BBC World Service and
now Witness History with me, Josephine McDermott. Today I'm taking you back to
the Chinese city of Shanghai during World War II. I've been talking to a former
foreign resident, 93-year-old Christopher John Huckstep, known as John, who was
a child living under Japanese occupation. These were the Easter holiday
activities at the school. Initially it was senior girls' netball, followed by
senior boys' football, and then junior girls' and junior boys' tennis. Yes, I
think I enjoyed school. Remember that list? We're going to come back to that
later. This is a story about a school like no other. In the 1930s, thousands of
European civilians were living in the glamorous city of Shanghai. Only part of
the port city was governed by China. Another section was controlled by the
French, and the international settlement was run by the British and Americans.
After serving in the First World War, John's father, Herbert Huckstep, moved to
Shanghai in the 1920s to take up a teaching position. There he met John's
mother, Agnes. They were both teachers, and my father ended up as superintendent
of education in the Shanghai Municipal Council, which is a very important
institution. It is responsible for education in the whole of international
settlement in Shanghai. In 1937, Imperial Japan, allied with Nazi Germany,
invaded Shanghai. As the sounds of war fade into the distance, and Japan's
armies swing into Shanghai, there comes one of the tensest international
situations of the whole war. Britain's army commander hurriedly confers with
Japan's officers in an effort to avoid an incident which might lead to more
bloodshed, for Japan refuses to recognise the immunity of the international
settlement. For several years, the settlement carried on, with Japanese
occupiers surrounding it. But in 1941, the United States declared war on Japan.
The people living in the settlement, who were from allied nations, mainly the UK
and United States, were rounded up to be held at civilian internment camps. For
John's British family, life was turned upside down. We were at school in
Shanghai, at the Cathedral Boys' School, until April 1943, and at that stage we
were rounded up and sent off to Lung Hua Camp. And how old were you at that
time? I was 13. Lung Hua Civilian Assembly Centre was a former teacher training
college on the outskirts of Shanghai, a number of two- and three-storey blocks,
many with red brick, all behind barbed wire fencing. The buildings had cracked
windows and disease was rife. We arrived there in a great bus load, a total of
about 2,500 people. What would a typical meal have been like? When we first
went, it was entirely rib and fish and rice, and for breakfast, congee, which is
a wet rice thing, or cracked wheat. And when we started off, of course, we had a
lot of cracked wheat which was full of weevils. Initially we would take the
weevils out and put them on the edge of the plate, but later on, because it was
protein, we ate them. People basically were rarely starved. The way the Japanese
worked was that if anyone escaped, people in the next bed in their dormitories
were immediately hoiked off and taken into Shanghai for what we think was
torture in many cases. Paranoid about escape attempts, the Japanese would count
the inmates in the middle of the night. We used to have roll call at two o'clock
in the morning, and we had no heating and it was below freezing. We used to have
stands outside our dormitories for sometimes an hour, two hours, and they used
to come and count us all. It's very close to the Yankee River, and the wind used
to come over us quite strongly. We were certainly not well set for clothes. How
would you keep warm? Just use everything you had. You'd have to put your
blankets in the lock just to make sure you could survive, really. We had a fair
amount of exchange of clothes between different people. After all, we were 2,500
people, so we had quite a variety. We were very much restricted what we could
and couldn't do, and we had very much curfews and lights out, and the last post
was sounded at 10 o'clock. Now remember that list at the beginning where John
mentioned the activities at school? Well, those actually took place at the camp.
Remarkably, in the midst of all this hardship and suffering, John's father set
up a school. Looking through the papers from the camp, which John keeps in his
attic, he's listing here some of the subjects available at Leung Hwa Academy, as
they called it, but not even regular lessons. These were just the evening
classes for adults. French, advanced, there was shorthand, there was Russian,
Spanish and English. We were able to actually start a school after three months.
Chinese Mandarin for beginners, followed by Chinese Mandarin for advanced. There
was a part of the camp my father set up, the school. We were very lucky.
Although we had 350 children, we had probably as many as 300 people who were
prepared to teach. It was no casual endeavour. A board was set up, there were
timetables, and exams were even prepared for and taken. Our problem was that we
were very limited. We only had brown paper bags to write on and pencils. And
what did you do for books? We were very lucky that we were given a week's notice
that we were going to be interned. So my father and my brother and myself went
to the Cathedral Boys' School and we were able to bag up great baskets of books
and pencils and everything we could from the school. And that was then shipped
over to the camp and we used that. There was a very considerable source of
textbooks and they had to be passed around from one to another. But we were
lucky enough, I think, because we had a very good group of teachers, some of
whom were missionaries, and of course they basically didn't need textbooks. They
just taught from the top of their heads. What kind of subjects would you have
been studying? I was studying most of the ones that you would expect,
mathematics and Latin. Religious knowledge was very high on the agenda, and
French and things like geography and history, probably about eight or nine
normal subjects. Children received certificates complete with an intricately
hand-drawn school emblem on them. You might think a simple design would have
been chosen for ease, given that it would need to be copied hundreds of times,
but it has an elaborate dragon with scales and a pagoda reaching to the sky. On
it is the Latin motto which translates as, From nothing we have built this. It
was quite professional in a way. Did you ever receive a certificate? Oh yes, we
all got a very nice school certificate for whatever we managed to accomplish.
Music and sport were also a part of life. The Red Cross were able to give us
football, so we were able to pretend that we were back in normal times. What do
you think it meant to you, having this focus on education? Well, I think we were
very fortunate that we were able to continue our education in almost the same
way as if we'd still been in Shanghai at the Cathedral Boys' School. I was able
to go to a school called Chathouse, I was able to fit in very quickly and resume
my normal studies. A testament to how professionally the school was run is that
after the war, an examinations board in the UK upheld the qualifications the
children sat at Lung Hwa, which meant they would count towards their continued
education. In September 1945, China's war with Japan finally came to an end. The
thousands of foreigners held in internment camps were free to go. Christopher
John Huckstep left Shanghai in 1946. He went on to study natural sciences at
Cambridge University and spent most of his career with the company Shell in
India and the UK. He was speaking to me, Josephine McDermott, for that episode
of Witness History. This is the BBC World Service, and on this week's
assignment… Why do so many Russians support, or at least accept, a war against
their closest neighbour, Ukraine? Join me, Tim Hewell, and Nick Sturdy as we
talk to some of those who've persuaded them and helped create Russia's power. We
are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.