TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 VT next Monday evening at eight o'clock on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at
two o'clock. Rishi Sunak, who's in Belfast, says he'll give political parties
time to study his deal on new trade arrangements in Northern Ireland. He wants
the Democratic Unionists to sign up to the plan so the stormant government can
be revived. The Prime Minister also argued the agreement meant Northern Ireland
would have the world's most exciting economic zone, with access to both markets
in the EU and UK. Stephen Farrie, who's the deputy leader of the Northern
Ireland's Alliance Party and the MP for North Down, gave the World at One on
Radio 4 his assessment of that claim. Prior to Brexit, I mean, the UK had free
access to the European Union so none of these issues ever existed, so we had the
best of both worlds then, but in the context of Brexit having happened, Northern
Ireland does have that dual market access, but in the main, yes, that point
still stands. A rapist who changed gender while waiting to stand trial has been
jailed for eight years. Isla Bryson attacked two women in Clydebank in Glasgow,
well known as Adam Graham. There was controversy when Bryson was initially sent
to a women's prison before being moved to a men's jail. Police are continuing to
search for a missing two-month-old baby after its parents were arrested in
Brighton last night. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were on the run for more
than seven weeks. They've so far declined to say where their child is. The
Syrian civil defence force, the White Helmets, has warned that 22 people have
died in a cholera outbreak in the north-west of the country. It said there had
been nearly 600 cases of infection. People have endured atrocious conditions
because of the devastating earthquake at the beginning of the month. Around
33,000 more civil servants across nine government departments have voted to walk
out next month in a dispute about pay, pensions and job security. They join the
100,000 members of the PCS union to have already announced industrial action on
Budget Day, the 15th of March. BBC News. It's the archers and the laurels has a
new member of staff. Ben! Oh hi Lou. So you started then? Yeah as you can see,
got my uniform and everything. It suits you. How's the shadowing been going?
Yeah, yeah good. Who's been looking after you? Farida. Oh yeah, she's great. And
then I'm flying solo. Already? Wow. Well I've done a lot of the training already
through my nursing course so I suppose I'm a bit ahead of the game. Well you
should find it pretty straightforward then. That's what Farida said. She's been
very encouraging. I'm sure she has. You seem very positive. Yeah, yeah I'm so up
for this. It's a really good way of filling the time till I go back to uni. Ah
definitely. So you're here for your regulars then? Yep, I got a few scheduled
this morning. First I need to put this up. Oh that Lower Loxley one could come
down. Ah yeah, it was yesterday wasn't it? Yeah, not sure why they're trying to
recruit volunteers from here anyway. I think it was aimed at the staff, not the
residents. But this one is definitely for the residents. Seated exercise class.
Yeah I could do with drumming up some more support. Yeah? Christine and Ron are
keen but I haven't had many other takers yet. Well I need to get on. Oh yeah,
sorry to hold you up. No, no, no that's fine. I meant I could try to recruit a
few people for you. Oh that'd be great, thanks. Make sure you've got a room big
enough. I'm actually speaking for the whole family. We didn't think it was
necessary for us all to come along. No, absolutely. But we've talked through the
points that you asked about and everyone's agreed on what we'd like. Good. So...
Kate, before we start, obviously there has been an element of friction between
us recently. Oh, over Gran's window you mean? Yeah, I know we've talked about it
but it has been playing on my mind. Oh Alan, no. I want to put it behind us
completely. Well that would be wonderful, of course. It just seems so trivial
now. Yes, things like this do have a habit of putting disagreements in
perspective. Yes. But I am delighted to hear you say that. You know, Jennifer's
funeral should be an important step in your journey. An early step but an
essential one. That's how I see it. So are you ready to get into the details?
Certainly am. Right then, let's start with the music. What have you decided on?
About time. Yes, come in for heaven's sake. Morning. Blimey, another one. Sorry,
what? Where did they dig you up from? Local infant school by the look of you.
Well, you're just gonna stand there looking gormless. No. And close the door.
Yep. So my name's Ben and I'm here... To give me me tea. No, no, it's morning so
I'm first... I'm gonna give you your breakfast. I know what time it is. Oh,
sorry, I... I was ready for me breakfast hours ago. Yeah, I'm very sorry about
that. Belly thinks me mouth's gone on strike. It's my first proper day. And your
last if you carry on like this. Well, I'm here now, so should we get you out of
bed and then I can get you something to eat? You sure you can manage a big fella
like me? Yeah. You don't look strong enough to lift a pork pie. Well, you'll be
the one doing all the work. I'm just here to guide you. Right then, do your
worst. Morning, William. How are we doing? Oh, you're still in bed. Nothing gets
past you, does it, Sherlock? Yeah, I'm sorry, Lou. It's just we've got a therapy
session due. Not on my empty stomach we haven't. Oh, does that mean you haven't
had breakfast? Everything's taking a bit longer than I expected. Dine of hunger,
here? Well, you could afford to lose a bit of weight. Cheek. I've still got
three residents to see yet. Okay, well, don't worry about it, Ben. I can jiggle
things around. Not in public, I hope. I'll pop back later. Don't bother yourself
on my account. I'm really sorry. It's all right. You'll soon speed up. Good
riddance, too. Flipping torturer in chief. Lee, he's a physiotherapist. KGB
taught him all he knows. And you say Phoebe is going to read the poem? That's
right. Phoebe, granddaughter. So, what's next, Kate? This eulogy or tribute or
whatever you call it. Oh, either's fine. I'll be saying a few words about your
mum myself, of course, as part of the service. Sure. But I take it you'd like
one of the family to speak to? Yes. That's why it's me who's here, actually.
Everyone thought it would be nice if it was one of the children. You know, my
generation. Yes. And Alice and Rory didn't feel strong enough to do it. It can
be quite a task. And, well, Adam reckoned I'd make a good job of it. I actually
thought Debbie would be much better, but she was happy to go with the flow. So
you've taken it on? Yes. I mean, I have got a little experience in this sort of
thing. Not so much in a Christian setting, more pagan and wicca ceremonies.
Well, yeah, I'm sure there'll be similarities to what you've done before. But
this is so much closer to home. To be honest, Alan, I'm really struggling with
it. Well, as I said, it is often challenging. So if it's not too much trouble,
can I just read out what I'm planning to say? Yes, of course. And please tell me
honestly what you think about it. And there's your tea. Hope you enjoy your
breakfast. Unlikely. And I'll be back in a bit. I'll make a note of it in my
diary for 2026. Just before I go, when Lee comes back, you might like to ask him
about his seated exercise class. No. It'll be ideal for you. I said no. You'd
probably find it beneficial and you might even enjoy it. The only thing I'm
going to enjoy is that door closing with you the other side of it. OK, well, I
just want to be left alone and drink my tea. OK. What? What? You trying to
poison me? What? No, no. Sugar. Where's the sugar? You said as it comes. Yes.
And tea comes with two sugars. People who only knew her superficially might have
thought she was a bit aloof. And it's true. She did have her funny ways. But
when it came to what was important. When one of us was in need. She never put
herself first. She was there for you. Whatever it took. Whatever it took. She
was... She was our... Our rock. I'm sorry. It's all right. I'm so sorry. No, no,
no. Don't worry about it. Have a tissue. Thank you. Oh, this is what I was
worried about. Would you like to take a break? I'm not sure there's any point. I
tried to read it to Jakob last night and I did exactly the same thing. Ah. If I
can't even do it for one person in a small room, how am I going to manage in a
packed church? Oh, don't be too hard on yourself, Kate. I've come across this
plenty of times before. The answer is quite simple. If in the moment you feel
you can't go ahead or if you falter partway through, then I can take over. I'll
read your words for you. I don't think it's going to be a case of if, though. I
just can't see myself keeping it together. I just can't see myself keeping it
together. Well, you don't know. I'm grateful for the offer, Alan, but I don't
want to spoil the flow of the service. Well, I understand that. I'm so annoyed
with myself. No, no. I really wanted to do this for mum. Look, you shouldn't
feel under any pressure. If you think it would be too much for you, it doesn't
mean you've failed Jennifer or that you love her any the less. Quite the
opposite, in fact. You're very kind. Just telling the truth. I've got to be
honest, haven't I? See if someone else could take it on. Well, you could still
work with them on the wording, if that felt right. And when you think about it,
it doesn't have to be one of the children. Of course not. It could even be a
close friend. No. No, I'd like it to be someone in the family. Well, that's your
choice, obviously. But as I say, go easy on yourself. This is an extremely
challenging time, full of difficult emotions. It certainly is. It's really
shaken me up. And made me think about my own life. Oh, in what way? Well, I've
decided I want to be much more involved running the farm, for a start. Aren't
you already very busy with spiritual home, though? Yeah, but I'm wondering if
now might be the time to step away from that. You mean, what, bring in a manager
or something? No, shut it down completely. Oh, I see. Oh, I see. Um, I would
suggest you don't rush into that, Kate. It's generally good advice not to make
any big decisions too soon after a bereavement. No. It'd be a shame to see the
place close. I know that Usha has benefited so much from the sessions that she's
had there. The more I think about it, the more I feel it's right. Everything has
its allotted span, doesn't it? Well... And I think the universe is saying this
is the end for spiritual home. Do you need a hand with the chairs? No, it's
fine. Still not expecting many for the class. I'm sorry, Lee. I did my best to
get people interested. It is what it is. A few said they were busy, which as far
as I can see, meant they didn't want to miss their favourite TV show. There's
enough coming to make it worthwhile. And some of the ones with dementia I just
couldn't get through to at all. Oh, it's their choice. Our job is to encourage
people, not force them. Sure. So, how's your first morning been? Honestly? Of
course. Really tough. It's so full on, isn't it? This is literally the first
time I've stopped. I'm so sorry about messing up your appointment, by the way,
with Mr Padgery. That's okay. I saw him later. Good. Looked like he was giving
you a hard time. Yeah. I mean, I know I was running late, but he was a bit...
Yeah, he is a bit. I was doing my best. It takes a bit of time to warm up,
that's all. His bark's worse than his bite, trust me. Not sure I want to find
out. Honestly, I think some people get a lot out of places like this, living all
together. And others, like Mr Padgery, find the adjustment quite hard. I just
think he misses his independence. Admittedly, takes it out on the staff
sometimes. It didn't make things any easier, that's for sure. Ben, it will get
better. A bit better, anyway. But all the time I've been coming to the Laurels,
the staff have always been rushed off their feet. I'm sure you're going to get a
lot out of your time here, but I'm not going to lie, you are going to have your
work cut out. We're back in Ambridge tonight at seven to find out whether
Chelsea knows what she's volunteering herself for. And after the archers this
evening. Discover the very best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when
the theatre becomes absolutely silent and they're like, what's happening? With
live discussions, news and reviews. It was extraordinary, I got very moved. And
interviews with the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I
pay a lot of attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to
inspire me. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me, Samira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the
lines that I write, I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to
Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15, with thousands of episodes now on BBC
Sounds. And tonight, Samira Ahmed talks to Tracey and Oberman about playing
Shylock in a new adaptation of The Merchant of Venice and Michael B. Jordan,
about starring and directing the new boxing film Creed III. That's on tonight's
Front Row, just after 7.15 here on BBC Radio 4. Now, we return to David Edgar's
three-part political drama, May Days. In the 1960s, students in the West sought
to bring about a revolution. But on the other side of the Iron Curtain,
Communism faced a revolution of its own. May Days, Kronstadt, by David Edgar.
4th of November, 1956. At the request of the Hungarian workers and peasants, the
Soviet army extends temporary help to the Hungarian government and people in
overcoming counter-revolution and restoring order. Underlined in inverted
commas, exclamation mark, it's Sunday, 4th of November, 1956. Soviet troops have
poured into the Hungarian capital, Budapest, in a massive dawn offensive. At
least 1,000 Soviet tanks are reported to have entered the city, and troops
deployed throughout the country are battling with Hungarian forces for strategic
positions. Soviet tanks and guns are roaring over Hungarian soil. At daybreak,
Soviet troops attacked our capital with the obvious intent of overthrowing the
legal, democratic Hungarian government. Comrades, take care. Counter-
revolutionaries are everywhere. No less than 10 million landowners and
capitalists and bishops roam the country, laying waste to all that they survey.
Comrade? Comrade Lieutenant Lermontov, I have prepared your desk. Thank you.
What's this? I believe it is weaponry confiscated from counter-revolutionary
insurgents. Knives, hand grenades. Yeah, right. You like operetta, Comrade? Beg
pardon? On the radio. Oh, yes, Comrade Lieutenant, very much. Do you? Well, yes.
Yes, but perhaps not now. It's a very beautiful city. Perhaps that's why they
produce such beautiful music. Yes, I think that was Offenbach. Where do you come
from, Comrade? Oh, just a small village, Comrade Lermontov. And have you ever
been to Moscow? Leningrad? No, Comrade. Well, they are beautiful cities too.
Even more, perhaps, than Budapest. Yet how sad that such a place has fallen
victim to a counter-revolutionary coup by reactionary forces. But how fortunate
that we have come to its assistance to prevent that coup's success. Hear, hear.
Comrade, what is your name? Klara Ivanovna. Klara Ivanovna, summon for me, if
you will, Parlochi Miklosch. Parlochi Miklosch. Stan, follow me. Will you take
notes? Yes, of course. Thank you, Comrade Sergeant. Comrade Lieutenant. Sit. My
name is Lieutenant Lermontov. Your name is Miklosch. Parlochi, you are 21 years
old and a student. You were arrested at 3 o'clock this morning in charge of a
radio transmitter broadcasting illegally. Yesterday afternoon, you made a
broadcast of an apparently slanderous and provocative character. In it, you
apparently claim that millions of people are watching you. Apparently claim that
millions of landowners and bishops are at large. That 40,000 aristocrats and
fascists are on strike in Ksepel. This seems unlikely. Could you explain this to
me, please? I'm afraid I don't speak Hungarian. Do you speak Russian? I can
speak Russian. You can all speak Russian. Good. Ksepel is pronounced Chepel.
C-S-E-P-E-L. It is a large industrial district to the south of Budapest. It's
where a general strike is going on. Budapest is the city you have just invaded.
It's the capital of Hungary. You're saying that the working class of Ksepel are
all fascists? I was being ironical. Ironical? That's I-R-O... Comrade, I would
seriously advise you not to be too clever. It was, after all, your government
who invited us to aid the working class and peasantry of Hungary in their
struggle against the white terror and reaction. Do you know the function of this
building? It appears to be an army barracks. But till yesterday, it was a
distribution centre for free food, which the peasants brought the workers from
their villages. The peasants bring the city's food for nothing. You know, it's
no wonder you're all told to stay inside your tanks. Or else you might find out
what's happening here. Comrade, please leave us. Beg pardon? I said please leave
us for a moment. But I was told I... Can't you hear what I'm saying? Do I have
to spell it out in semaphore? Please go away! All right. There's some of them,
so slow and stupid. Villagers. Comrade? Never seen a city. So, tell me, what's
happened here to make the peasants give away their food for free? As opposed to
at the point of a bayonet. Exactly. Okay. Last week, a meeting in a village. All
talk and shouting, bickering and chaos. And a group of stolid peasants in some
corner, furrowed brows, attempting to elect something or other. And they
apologized to me, eye-cunting. Why? That this is all taking such a time. You
see, they hadn't actually elected anything before. And I thought glory be, this
time a real revolution. Ours. But communists were murdered. Were they? Criminals
and killers were set loose from prison. Ordinary communists, good communists,
were lynched. Look, a revolution is a festival. Lenin said that. I was surprised
to learn. And the thing about festivals is that it's very difficult to control.
Mistakes get made. But the point is, they stopped the collectivization of the
farms and compulsory deliveries of food. And so the peasants loaded up their
cars with everything that they could spare, and brought it here and gave it to
the people. Because at last, they trusted them. You know, I think you're right.
About? I think there's been an error. I think you are the wrong man. You are not
Miklos Palotsi. Eh? I think it's a mistake. You should go. That door goes
straight onto the street. You can still get to the border now. Why can't I let
them on top? Because I am of the view that revolutions should correct mistakes,
if they're not to lose people's trust. And so, I'm trusting you. The border,
now. Will I get five yards beyond that door? Maybe, who knows? Give me your
pistol. You know I can't do that. I won't get far without it. I can't go that
far. Take that, it's a sort of hand grenade. Thanks. How long? How what? For how
long do you think we'll keep this up? For how long do you think we'll peasants
give their food away? A month? A year? Forever? Maybe. Who knows? Maydays.
Maydays. Don't help! What's going on? A terrorist with a hand grenade! Where's
the bloody doctor? Is there a doctor? How terrible. Where's the young man who
was here before? Where is he? He wasn't who we thought he was. It was a mix-up.
Such things happen all the time. August 13, 1961. In the face of the aggression
of West Germany and its imperialist allies, an anti-fascist protection barrier
has been erected in Berlin to ensure the territorial integrity of the German
Democratic Republic. Equals, the East Germans build a wall across Berlin. 21st
of August, 1968. To confront a reactionary assault upon the foundations of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the government calls on the friendly countries
of the Socialist Bloc for fraternal assistance. Equals, the Soviets invade
Czechoslovakia. Comrade Lermontov. Comrade Pukachev. Why are we here? Leonid
Sergeyevich, Doctor of Philology, candidate member of the Academy of Sciences.
Pavel Mikhailovich, translator of the Institute of International Cultural
Exchange. What is going on? We're going on an investigative expedition. In the
middle of Red Square? That's right, because this is where it happened. What
happened? This is the position of the pram, wheeled by the poetess, who meets
the other seven, who have converged on the square from different directions,
choosing this spot, because it isn't near a traffic lane. I see. Poetess reaches
under the mattress of the pram, under her baby, and produces banners. One bears
the ancient Polish slogan, for your freedom and for ours. Right, yes, fine. And
if you take another step, I will shout out what the other banner said. All
right, just be quick. Be quick. They sit here on the ground. A whistle blows.
KGB men in civilian clothes rush from all sides. Yes, they do that. As they run,
they shout, look at those Jews and traitors. And that too. The art historian is
here when they hit him in the face and break his teeth. The physicist is here
when they hit him with a heavy suitcase. The cars arrive there, there, and
there, and take the six away. The mother and her baby sit here for ten minutes,
when they come and take her too. They beat her in the car. The other slogan
reads, hands off Czechoslovakia. That's the country we've just invaded. That's
the country into which we were just invited. What? Yes, of course I heard about
it. I'm assembling a petition to request their release. Look, Pavel, I'm sure
it's all a regrettable mistake. I remember Hungary. I was there. That too was a
regrettable mistake. And yet, here it is, happening again. Look, can we go now,
please, Pavel? My petition reads... I'm afraid my memories are less dramatic. To
the Procurator General, the Union of Soviet... I just remember living with three
other families in a freezing room, divided by old sheets hung from the ceiling,
and being hungry from the age of eight to the age of seventeen. And now you're a
comfortable professor, and you want to stay that way. Look, of course I'm on
their side, but a demonstration, seen by no one, lasting twenty seconds? That is
just ridiculous. I'm so sorry, Pavel Mikhailovich. Comrade Lermontov, how good
of you to drop by. Please, do sit down. My name is Skuratov. Perhaps you can
guess the reason for our chant? No, I'm afraid I can't. Then perhaps you would
explain this document to me. It's a petition to the Procurator General about
seven people who were arrested... So I think that's probably the answer. In
other words, a completely legal document... Which you drew up and then released
to foreign correspondents. I sent it to Izvestia. They didn't print it. Oh,
well, a paper can't print everything. And so instead you sent it to the New York
Times so the Americans could try to beam it back on shortwave radio. That was
never my intention. No? Read this. Out loud. All week, the raucous and corrupt
voice of America has been shrieking hoarsely. True to their creed of
provocation, this CIA-backed organ of war criminals and émigrés have sought...
Has sought... To elevate a gang of adventuristic ne'er-do-wells to the status of
defenders of the people. Sadly, in their unsavoury campaign, the imperialists
have secured a willing ally. In the shape of one P.M. Learmentov, the Soviet
people will not stoop to parley words with haughty renegades and turdcoats. Now,
this was accepted by Izvestia. I didn't see it. No one has seen it. It's not
being published till tomorrow. The author, C.I. Cuminskaya, goes on... Will go
on... To call upon the office of the procurator to bring the full force of the
law to bear upon such arrogant and nihilistic elements. What do you want of me?
I want you to write an article. What, for Izvestia? Izvestia. About? Your change
of mind. I haven't had a change of mind. Well, then, your change of heart.
Something along these lines. I have no doubt you'll have views about the
grammar. Now, look, old chap, this country nursed you, raised you, taught you,
and now you turn on us. As C.I. Cuminskaya stresses, you were an army officer
for seven years. You served in Hungary. And yet, here I am, an agent of U.S.
imperialism. What? And a fascist, naturally. You don't mean that. No, I mean it.
You're a fascist. I'm a fascist. You're a fascist. And a fascist, naturally. You
don't mean that. No, of course I don't mean that. Then why? I was being... It
was irony. Of course I won't write this. Well, irony, of course. How stupid of
me not to pick it up. You didn't seriously think that I'd agree. No, but now you
will think seriously about your actions and their consequences. Don't say I
didn't warn you. This is the BBC World Service. Following a one-day trial behind
closed doors, a leading Soviet dissident, Pavel Yermontov, has been sentenced to
three years in a labor camp for discrediting the system. Hey, Adam and Eve,
first communists, know why? No, why? No clothes, one apple between them, and
they thought they were in paradise. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Okay, three zeks on their
way here on the train, telling each other what they're in for. First one, I
spoke ill of Comrade Popov. Second, I spoke well of Comrade Popov. Third one, I
am Comrade Popov. Ha ha ha ha. So, what are you in for? Me? I spoke to the wrong
people. Oh, it's different with me. I spoke to the right people. What do you
mean? Please, sir, please, Comrade, sir. Yes, what? Please, Comrade, sir, we
need an escort to take this patient back to his block, sir. Patient? Yes, sir,
he's had an operation, the anaesthetic will be wearing off. An operation?
Anaesthetic? What do you think I am, a doctor? No, sir. Well, then, there you
are. Well, it all started, something of a cock-up, really. You see, I was
working in a coal mine in Donetsk. Do you know it? Well, I've heard of it. And
there were all kinds of problems, safety regulations weren't being met,
dangerous build-ups of methane gas, and we were being forced to work red
Saturdays. So I started writing letters. I wrote to Comrade General Secretary
Brezhnev and to Comrade Premier Kosygin and to many other comrades, and I gets
hauled up in court, accused of causing them considerable agitation. But I've
only three weeks left, and then I'm free. Look on the bright side, eh? Ah,
Doctor! Comrade Doctor! Yes? We are the stretcher party, Comrade Doctor. We need
an escort for this prisoner to return him to his block before light's out. Am I
a doctor? Yes. Am I an escort? No. Do you need a doctor or an escort? Well...
He's coming round. He definitely moved. What was his operation? Oh, an
ironmonger's job. Sorry? Swallowed a kettle spout, spoon handle, bits of barbed
wire, stuff like that. So, what did you do before? I was a translator. Ah, a
destabilising element, if not a parasitic lackey of the West. Exactly. So were
you writing in here, then? Things for the West, in here. I sometimes think, if
people only knew... Then what? It wouldn't happen. No. I have a friend in
Moscow, and he's a university professor, and he has most of what our society can
offer. Good job, good apartment, foreign travel, even sometimes to the West. And
he knows. Of course he knows. You think so? And I think also of a writer whom I
don't know personally, and I doubt if I ever shall, called C.I. Kaminskaya, who
writes articles in Izvestia, and who once wrote an article on me. An
extraordinary polemic, nihilist, turncoat, parasite, renegade. And my fear is
that C.I. Kaminskaya really is the trumpet of this people, that the dull and
stupid hatred she expresses really is the general will. But really, even here?
My friend, apparently, they say, somewhere on the further reaches of this
wilderness of camps, there is a prisoner who fought at Kronstadt, who's been
here ever since the sailors' rising was put down by Trotsky 50 years ago. And
that old man has seen Utopia's refuse pile up all around him all those years,
all those generations of class enemies, class traitors, ists and ics and ites,
the endless cycle of accuser and accused, betrayer and betrayed, until the pile
of shit and sewerage, the effluent of paradise, rose up to drown the spires and
steeples of the city. And through all of them, this old man passes like a ghost.
A holy fool. And having seen it all, says nothing. So you are writing, then?
Writing things like that down, for the West? I'm out in three weeks, me. What's
your name? I'm Anatoly Korolenko. Look at it this way. I grass on you, you get a
few more years. I take your writing and it's published in the West, you get a
few more years. You get a few more years. What have you got to lose? How can a
human being not trust someone? That's the spirit. Chief officer! Chief comrade
officer! Two prisoners require an escort to transport this prisoner to his ward.
Comrade chief officer! Chief sir! Is this... are you complaining? No, sir! Do
you want the cooler? No, sir! Right! I think you're wrong. I think there's
millions out there, renegades and turncoats, if they only knew. And now it's
lights out. Lights out! We're still here. What? Oh, so you write it down and I
take it to your friend. Me in my army cadet corps uniform. Glass, Martin B, yes
sir? Wearing my ban the bomb badge. I'm Mr Crowder. In the rain. Jeremy H. I'm
always keen to see, sir, how far people are prepared to go. Well, are you now?
Seize the time from resistance to rebellion by Martin Glass. Comrades, my name
is Grain and I'm on the central committee of an organisation called Socialist
Vanguard. 31st of March, French general strike reaches 10 million. Tick, tick,
tick. Oh, so it's legitimate to ask. What sacrifices are you prepared to make to
prove that you're serious about all this? That you're a real traitor to your
class? That you're not just on holiday? You think that I'm not serious? Today is
May Day and we must remember all the May Days. The days when what we think
should happen did. I'm never going back. Bombs and bullets, weapons of despair.
Tell that to the Black Panthers and the Bietcong. By any means necessary. Burn,
babies, burn. 9th of January, 1972, miners all-out strike. Well, if you insist,
I think there was a Kronstadt moment. The moment when you realise the revolution
has eaten its own children. Join, baby. Join. 1st of January, 1974, three-day
week comes into force to counter miners' work to rule. The workers' week, kick
out the Tories. James! 14th of January, miners' strike ballot 80% in favour.
Revolutionary worker, back the miners' strike. 7th of February, Heath calls
election. Who governs Britain? Socialist vanguard, build a revolutionary moment.
James, morning star. No, thanks. If I want to do a crossword, then I'll buy the
time. Hey, James! Comrades, the plenary will commence in two minutes. Take your
seats. James! Ah, Martin. James, I need to talk to you. What about? You, what do
you think? Your decision to dump me from the editorial committee. The political
committee's decision. Why? Well, for a start, your insistent demand that we
publish long and tortuous articles by you about friends of yours in jail for
acts of nihilistic terrorism. Comrades, please take your seats. He was, he is a
revolutionary. You may think he's a revolutionary. Objectively, he's nothing of
the kind. Like, objectively, some people are just human dust. I beg your pardon.
Wasn't that your phrase? Now, look, I have to speak. You look. I won't resign.
Oh, I rather doubt there'll be any need. I beg your pardon. The political
committee is considering its position on adventurous elements within the party.
Adventurous? Elements like you. You can't be serious. Martin, it's very simple.
There are things you're not prepared to sacrifice. Deep down, there's an
arrogance in you which fundamentally distrusts the concept of a leadership,
particularly if it's on the surface less articulate than you. You mean you're
purging me? Well, if you like. And of course, the party never makes mistakes.
Well, not on this occasion. James, we need you on the platform. Look, look, I
stopped. I pulled out of the Free Phil Mandrell campaign. I did what I was told.
Reluctantly. Like now. It was a very bad time. The appeal was just beginning. As
was the second national miners' strike in two years. Yes, I'm coming. Great. And
actually, we were right. He got off. On a technicality. And yes, he is my
friend. James. Well, as I said... And you don't feel that matters? What? That
he's your friend? Comradeship. Solidarity. Behaving like the change we want to
bring about. I mean, just a little. And act the way we feel. James, we're
starting. Yes. Martin, as I've said before, I couldn't care less what you feel.
It's what you think and do. And what your present thought to doing is to
undermine the seizing of the time through which we are passing at the moment,
which is principally defined by the fact that, yes, objectively, the working
class appears to be bringing down the government. I'm sorry, Martin. Well,
that's all. That's all? So what did you expect? Well, not a gold watch, I
suppose. I'm sorry? Man, I don't suppose you've got a drink? Yeah, take your
coat off and sit down. So do you know what struck me? Very forcibly. I've spent
four years of patient toil trying to make socialist vanguard the government. And
I looked at him and thought, come on, do you really want this man to run the
country? And now he's dumped us both. Oh, yeah. Well, Hunt, I'm full of
sympathy. But if you ask me, you're well off out of it. When I left SV, my
feelings were of pure relief. You jumped. I was pushed. Well, cheers. And then
today of all days, when the working class is actually behaving in a way that
Marx and Lenin said it would, when our rhetoric comes real... Why should it be
the end? Why should the party be the only place to be? You've changed your tune.
What about the tools of understanding? Yeah, pretty limited, I realised. It was
Phil. It was me supporting Phil. Well, intermittently. And in fact, Hunt, he's
involved... Well, here you are in your collective living situation, building
little islands of pure socialism within the capitalist sea. Well, trying to live
the revolution. Trying to be the change we want to bring about. No purges. No
objectively. No chance. So where's everybody else? There's a squat in Lissom
Grove. The pigs gave notice of a bust. Then everybody's round there manning
barricades. And you? I still have a small child. Tanya? Eight? Nine. But well
done. Look, look, Mand, would you like to go out for a meal or something? Talk
of old times, weep into our Rogan gosh. Still nine. Then tomorrow when the
gang's all back? No, tomorrow there's a tents meeting. Friday? Women's group.
The weekend? I would have to check, but I think we're blocking Westway. Mand,
how can I put this? Rearrange the following into a well-known phrase or saying.
Something I've, you, always rotten fancied. Beg pardon? You know, the game like,
um, glass shouldn't people stones in houses throat. Yes, I got that. Well? Glass
shouldn't. I should not with glass. Why not? Never on a rebound. I'm not on a
rebound. I'm not on a rebound. No? The best years of my life. That I feel as if
I'm, I'm nothing. Well, you're not. As long as you don't kill off the bit of
you, you value most. What's that? Martin, I used to cry every... Well, good
evening, happy campers, and welcome to the nonstop revolutionary cock up show.
What happened? They got the time wrong, didn't they? When we arrived, the pigs
were already there. Be quiet, baby. Where's mother? In the pig pen. She went all
hysterical. Rule one, do not go all hysterical. Uh, Phil? Well, if it isn't
comrade Glass. Phil. I tried to tell you. Um, how are you? Well, I'm out of
jail. Yes, I'm very pleased. No thanks to you. Who's that? That isn't really
fair. It's Martin Glass. S.V. Who offered us his help to promote my case. Who
gave his help? Shh, come on, baby. Until the party tells him I'm objectively a
putty bourgeois adventurist. As I say, I don't think that's your time. We've had
time together, comrade Glass and me, but it seems there's still things he can't
give up. Like, he has this real problem working in a group that isn't led, or if
it is, is led by everyone. Please, please, don't tell me what I think. Uh,
there's nothing wrong with what you think, mate. It's what you don't appear to
feel. Phil, he left the party over his support for you. Oh, did he? When? Too
late. Now, we need to get mum out of the pig pen. Right. Can I help? No, Martin.
Objectively, I don't really think you can. Everywhere I turn, people telling me
what I think and what I feel, objectively. I don't think that Phil needs to...
Thanks for defending me. It's only... Rock and roll. You know, I could... It
might be possible to skip the tenants group. Um, should you care to? Yeah, yeah.
I'd care to, very much. Could someone... There's no milk. Could someone... Yeah,
go, go. Sure. Look, we thought it wasn't us. We weren't purges, Kronstad's,
objectively. We were a new left. We were different. From socialist vanguard to a
collective living situation in North London. I mean, man, is it everywhere?
First of March, 1974. Heath Gamble fails. Conservatives lose their majority.
Tick, tick. 26th of April, 1974. The Carnation Revolution. Fascism is overthrown
in Portugal. Tick, tick, tick. 10th of August, 1974. The British government is
overthrown. The British people are left with no choice. The British people are
left with no choice. Tick, tick, tick. 10th of August, 1974. President Nixon
resigns. Tick, tick, tick. Exclamation mark. No, thank you. It wasn't carol
singers, just three grumpy boys. Oh? It sounded like... Not proper carol
singers. Did you give them anything? Oh, no. I asked them if they're collecting
for some charity, and if they say, no, I don't give a thing. I mean, it's
actually begging, isn't it? Do you want another sherry? No, I'm drinking scotch.
So you've got a proper job now? Yes. If you can call the Islington and Hackney
messenger a proper job. And you've moved? Into a state of unwed bliss with a
single mother, yes. So they'll let you keep the vicarage? Well, I have to pay
the rent, but yes, now the parish shares a vicar. There was actually a captain
or lieutenant from the base asking if it was going to be available. Bloody
Yanks. But I said no. Do you want to come to midnight mass? I thought you
said... Oh, it's here this year. It's on a kind of rotor, actually. Yes, if you
like. I'll be there. I'll be there. I'll be there. I'll be there. I'll be there.
I'll be there. I'll be there. If you like. I do. I was clearing out some rubbish
in the attic, actually. I was thinking about other Christmas Eves. You and your
father sledging in the afternoon, in with a shiver to the smell of wood smoke,
mince pies and mulled claret, and nearly midnight crunch across the snow. I
found the crib you and your father made. We'd lost a wise man in the ox. Oh, and
Joseph, actually. Oh, mother, please do stop. Stop what? Saying actually, you
know.