TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Starting next Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at
midday. President Zelensky has issued a message of defiance on the first
anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, pledging to do
everything he can to achieve victory this year. In a speech in Kiev, he said his
country hadn't been defeated and that it would not stop fighting until what he
called Russian murderers had faced punishment. Our international correspondent
Ola Geren was in the eastern city of Kramatorsk when the invasion began. She's
back there now. I thought that Vladimir Putin would focus on the east. Instead
he came in from three sides with an offensive that he couldn't really sustain.
It's very clear President Putin believes that the advantage of time is on his
side. He can continue pouring in more troops into this fight and I think he
believes that he can wear out Ukraine's resistance or if not he can wear out the
Western support. There's been no mention of the anniversary on Russian state
television. The country's former president Dmitry Medvedev, who retains a senior
security role, has insisted that victories in reach and Ukrainian forces should
be pushed back to the Polish border. Jens Stoltenberg, the secretary-general of
the NATO Military Alliance who is visiting Estonia, said President Putin had
failed. He wanted to break the will of the Ukrainian people and he wanted to
break our unity. President Putin failed. Ukraine stands and NATO and the EU
stand with Ukraine. The king has marked the anniversary by praising what he
called the remarkable courage and resilience of the Ukrainian people. He said he
hoped they could draw strength from the outpouring of solidarity from around the
world. Rishi Sunak let a minute silence outside Downing Street to reaffirm the
UK's support for Ukraine. The British ambassador in Kiev, Dane Melinda Simmons,
said she was determined to help those who needed it. It's genuinely really
horrible to think back to this time last year. It was such a traumatic time for
everybody. For me, for all my staff, those of us who were evacuated and
particularly my Ukrainian colleagues who found themselves fleeing, I've
characterised this myself as this time last year being consumed with uncertainty
and I was certainly afraid. And this time we think of ourselves as people who
are determined. In other news, a fourth man has been arrested in connection with
the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma. Detective Chief Inspector
John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in Wednesday's attack and remains
in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Our Ireland correspondent Chris
Page has more details. The fourth man to be arrested in this investigation was
detained in Koul Island, a town in County Tyrone. He's 22. He has been taken to
be questioned by detectives at a police station in Belfast. He's been detained
under anti-terrorism legislation. Three other suspects who were arrested
yesterday remain in police custody. They are 38, 45 and 47 years old.
Nominations have just closed in the contest to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as leader
of the SNP and Scotland's first minister. The Health Secretary, Hamza Yousuf,
the Finance Secretary Kate Forbes and the former Minister Ash Regan are all
standing. Ms Regan, who stood down over Scottish government plans to make it
easier for people to change their legal gender, formally launched her campaign
this morning. I am the candidate for change, not continuity. I want to restore
the mission which allowed the SNP to replace Labour as the dominant party of
Scotland. That is independence for Scotland and good governance. The winner of
the ballot will be announced next month. The British Medical Association has
announced the dates for a three-day walkout by junior doctors in England. The
union says its members will go on strike from the 13th of March in their dispute
about pay. BBC News. Friday lunchtime on Radio 4 and it's time for Antisocial.
Hello it's Antisocial, I'm Adam Fleming. Every week we'll take one thing that's
been shared a lot on social media but instead of fishing for likes we'll be
aiming for understanding. This episode. Protests erupted on Mersey's side
earlier this month after an asylum seeker was accused of asking a 15-year-old
girl for her phone number. There have been demos in other places where asylum
seekers are being housed in hotels. The protesters are labelled far right but
some say far right has just become another way of saying I think you're wrong.
But this is far more than just an isolated event, it's a symbol of the rising
power of fascism in this country. There's nothing wrong with it. These people
care about their community, these people care about their country and they care
about their family. Why do you have to call them names? What's the point in
leaving them festering in a hotel with far right screaming abuse and setting
light to cars? Give them status, get them going, get them working and get them
out of the hotels. These fears are not unreasonable, these fears are not
illogical, they're not unfounded. It's not fascist, it's not racist, it's not
hateful to be worried about this sort of thing. Is it time to rethink the labels
we use in these arguments? So in the programme today, who was protesting against
what, on Merseyside, will speak to somebody on the ground? Who are the far right
these days anyway? We'll map it out. And political scientists have spent decades
attempting to define these terms. We will decode them. And if you want to get
involved in the discussion online, you can use the hashtag BBC anti-social. With
me live throughout the hour on anti-social are two people who have been reacting
to this story in quite different ways over the course of the week. Let's meet
them. First up, it's Zoe Gardner, who's the migration policy expert. Hi Zoe. Hi
there. Thanks for coming on. How did you become a migration policy expert in the
first place? Oh, I've been working in various organisations in the charity
sector, supporting refugees and migrants for as long as I've been working,
actually. I got involved when I was a student, campaigning for the rights of
asylum seekers who are being made destitute by this government. And
unfortunately, despite my best efforts, things haven't got much better since
then. But I've been dedicated to this all along. I've worked for a number of
different organisations focused both on the UK system and on the European wider
asylum and migration systems. And you're quite active on social media. And one
of the things that went quite viral of yours this week was you were talking to
some MPs about this issue about why don't people just apply for asylum in the
first country they arrive in or the safest country they pass through, like
France, for example. And you were kind of schooling the MPs and why that's not
necessarily what international law says. Yeah, that's right. It's been really
great to see the reaction and people being really pleased to have a clear answer
to that question. I mean, you know, obviously, just because France is a safe
country doesn't mean that France has responsibility to take in all the refugees
in the world. And international refugee protection is based on a system of
sharing responsibility. I think it's reasonable that the UK should do our fair
share. And at the moment, we are falling far short of that. And there's this new
phrase cropping up that politicians have been using, well, particularly
government ministers when they talk about illegal migrants. Now, that's not
really a status that existed before. But last year, the law changed to actually
make it a criminal offence to arrive in the country through an unapproved route,
for example, crossing the channel in a small boat. Now, we don't quite know yet
how that will that change in the law will interact with the asylum and the
refugee and the immigration system as a whole, because it's not really been
tested in court yet. But that's why you you now hear this label of illegal
migrant being used. I think that's just worth sort of catching up on because not
everyone is across that change in the law. Also with us for the hour down the
line is Reqib Isan, an independent researcher into social cohesion. Hi, Reqib.
Hi, Adam. What sort of research are you doing at the moment then? And have you
done in the past? So just to talk a little bit about my background, I'm very
much a Lutonian through and through. And I think that's why I got into social
cohesion work. Luton was the home of the anti-military butchers of Basra
demonstrations and the subsequent formation of the English Defence League,
better known as the EDL. So naturally, I'd say that I have a personal stake in
social cohesion because of where I live. Then academically, I did a PhD at Royal
Holloway University of London that investigated the impact of social integration
for British non-white ethnic minorities. In terms of the work that I'm doing at
the moment, I'm looking at the economic, social and cultural impacts of
contemporary immigration and the issues surrounding the integration of asylum
seekers in modern day Britain. And how would you sort of describe the
temperature of this whole debate at the moment? I think it's very heated, Adam,
if truth be told. I think there was a bit of a cooling of the immigration debate
after Brexit. I think there was a mainstream public perception that we were now
in control of our national borders. We will have a well-ordered immigration
system. I don't think that's materialized. And I think that's why issues
relating to immigration and asylum are very heated at the moment and they're
becoming quite high up into the public policy priorities of the day. Okay, lots
to untangle over the next hour. Glad you're both here. Right. These protesters
in Nozli and other places are opposed to asylum seekers being housed in hotels
in their areas. That's earned some of them, the label, far right. But before we
discuss that and the pros and cons of that label, it'd be good to get a bit more
clarity about what actually happened on Mersey side a couple of weeks ago. I'm
pleased to say that we're joined by Phil McCann, who's political reporter at BBC
North West tonight. Hi, Phil. Hi, Adam. Before we talk about the actual day
itself, do you want to just give us a bit of background to what was going on in
the build up? Yeah, so in the background really began in January of 2022,
because that is when this hotel started being used to house asylum seekers meant
it was meant to be temporary accommodation for asylum seekers while their
applications are being approved. But of course, you know, whilst it might be
temporary for the people inside, although many of them are there for quite a
long time, the hotel has been used for that purpose since then. So we're talking
over a year now, it's worth making clear, of course, it's the government, it's
the home office that decides where asylum seekers are placed. And they've been
increasingly using these hotels, haven't they, to try to reduce the pressure on
its processing centres, places like Manston and Kent, which, you know, was in
the news a lot a few months ago for being overcrowded. The hotel itself, well,
it's a four star spa hotel that might make you, you know, give you kind of
pictures you need ahead of kind of rolling hills and ponds and lakes and things.
Well, it's not really that, it's perfectly nice, but it's on the edge of an
industrial estate. And that itself is on the edge of Kirby, which is, to all
intents and purposes, a big suburb of Liverpool, with lots of houses built as
after World War Two is what's called an overspill estate, pretty horrendous
word, but what it basically means, it was housing that was built to take people
out of the slum housing in the middle of Liverpool. Nozli is the borough that
it's in, neighbouring Liverpool, it's actually the second most deprived borough
in England. And that doesn't just mean economic deprivation, you know, low
incomes, it means all sorts of things about health, about educational
attainment. So it is an area with lots of problems. And it's an area where lots
of people feel kind of left behind by the system, which possibly to some extent
explains why people go to take direct action like this. It's also worth saying,
of course, that as is the case with lots of areas with deprivation, it's an area
that's very close knit, lots of people know each other, lots of people know
what's going on. And before the protests on February the 10th, which is what
we're talking about here, had there been kind of growing concerns and maybe even
other protests beforehand? Yes, so growing concerns, definitely. And this is a
lot of concerns that were flying around on social media, what seems to have led
up to this for a lot of the people who went were rumours flying around on social
media that seem to link people in the hotel to various things that occurred.
What we also know, though, is that there were protests by, well, certainly a
group that would be considered to be on the far right. This is called Patriotic
Alternative set up some years ago now by a man who used to be quite senior in
the BNP, the British National Party. Now they're active in Kirby. They're also
active in lots of other parts of the country. They're known for mostly kind of
dropping leaflets through doors that people get shocked by because they come
across to lots of people as being thoroughly racist. And we know that PA,
Patriotic Alternative, had done a leaflet drop in Kirby about this hotel, kind
of more in general, just saying, you know, they don't think it's a good idea to
be housing people in this hotel. I've seen those leaflets. They basically kind
of pit migrants against, pit the asylum seekers in the hotel against ordinary
people by saying, you know, people in Kirby are poor and look here, migrants,
asylum seekers being housed in this four star hotel. They also held a small
protest themselves, non-violence, small protest themselves in the week before
the disturbances that broke out there. Okay, so there was already some quite
long simmering tension that was being, you could argue, being a bit stoked a bit
by some people. And then you got this video of the 15 year old girl that started
circulating. Yes, so it is important to be clear that when just after this
protest, there were lots of kind of counter protesters saying the people there
were from the far right. And at Northwest Tonight, where I work, we got lots of
people getting in touch with us saying, hey, I'm not from the far right at all.
That doesn't describe me. I'm here because I'm worried about the children. And
what that's what we were subsequently able to learn from speaking to people who
were there and from speaking to people who kind of, you know, represent the
community, know a lot about what's going on in Kirby is that an awful lot of it
came down to this video that was circulating online, mainly through local
Facebook groups and through TikTok. And in it, you can see a girl in a school
uniform, who the police say is a 15 year old girl, who was being talked to by a
man who were told is about 25 years old, who it looks it can appear to be the
case that he was propositioning her asking her for her phone number. And the
police said that the 15 year old girl appeared to be the victim of inappropriate
advances from a man. They said that they arrested a 25 year old man, but the
Crown Prosecution Service decided not to take any further action against that
person. Enquiries there were ongoing. And the man that they arrested no longer
lives now in Merseyside. On top of that, there are a lot of other rumours
linking people supposedly in that hotel with various things that are going on,
children being abducted. Allegedly, the police said they were made aware of one
video in circulation of a woman taking a photo of a child at a local
supermarket. But they said they believe that was used to further to spread
further misinformation about a couple attempting to abduct children. And
Merseyside police have said that lots of the other rumours that are flying
around haven't actually been reported to them. So an awful lot of things being
said on social media. And that is actually what led to an awful lot of the
people, the 300 to 400 or so people to go outside that hotel two Fridays ago and
protest in the way that they did. Wow. So there was a lot going on. How would
you then describe what actually happened, as you said, two Fridays ago? Well,
it's very clear there are two parts to this process. There was the initial part,
which kind of took place in the early evening where you had possibly around 300,
400 people who you would, I think, describe an awful lot of them as being
ordinary people from Nozli. And I say that because what I'm trying to imply is
that they're not part of a political grouping. They weren't necessarily there
for political reasons. I spoke to a local charity fundraiser. He said, I knew
everyone that was there. And I said, everyone really? He said, yes. Well, at
least at the beginning, because there are these people who are there holding,
you know, a peaceful protest relating to all the rumours that they heard online.
Of course, some questions about whether it's appropriate to protest outside a
hotel where the people inside might be worried and where the vast majority of
them would have done nothing wrong at all. But what then happened was, and this
seems pretty much universally agreed, is that another group of people came along
who were intent on causing trouble. Some of them had hammers in their hands.
Some of them had lit fireworks. And one of them then set fire as well to a
police van and others threw the fireworks and other missiles at the police.
That's when you had these disturbances. And all the while this was going on,
it's worth mentioning there was a counter protest, which itself was initially
peaceful by people who were basically supporting their refugees and opposed to
those who were opposed to the refugees. So that's what happened on the night.
And there are various theories about exactly who these people were who turned
up. And to what extent the people who weren't from the far right may have been
influenced by those on the far right. And are the police investigating what
happened? Yes, there have been 15 arrests that have been made. And the police
themselves also agree that the initial protest itself was nonviolent, was
peaceful. But yes, arrests being made and investigations ongoing. And just as a
journalist on the ground covering all of this, how do you go about piecing
together what happened? Because as you said, there are so many different factors
here and theories and people to track down to find out what really was going on.
Yeah, it's difficult. And a lot of last week just evolved talking to people
who've been writing about this or putting videos about it online on TikTok and
Facebook and understanding it from their point of view. And just about everyone,
well, nobody that I spoke to said I'm from the far right. Of course, you know, a
lot of people who are from the far right don't like to kind of label themselves
as that. But an awful lot of people that didn't come across in any way as
political, but just seem to have seen these these things online and heard lots
of rumors about there being a protest. But they didn't see this as a protest
that was organised by some kind of far right grouping. They didn't see posters
up from patriotic alternative or anybody else saying come and protest here
tonight. They basically saw their friends posting about it on social media. So,
you know, to a large extent, it was organic. But, you know, to what extent was
it the case that some at least a majority of them were influenced by the
leaflets that they had had just a week earlier from patriotic alternative?
That's a valid question, of course. And, you know, but an awful lot of them
didn't seem to know anything about these leaflets and just saw this video. So
many people have seen this video that's been circulating online and were driven
to go there in many cases with their children because of that. Thank you very
much, Phil. That was very clear. Thank you. So, Zoe, having heard all of that,
would you describe that protest in Nozli as a far right demonstration? Well, I
think it was a really interesting report there and it highlights probably why
we're having this discussion is, you know, obviously there is a real serious
issue that needs to be addressed and needs to be called by its name of far right
white nationalist, white supremacist, really horrible racist street movements
organizing. And they are organizing in that area. They're sharing
misinformation, racist smear campaigns online, and those are getting shared more
and more beyond sort of coming from directly from those sources and then just
being shared, as the report said, more organically. And so people who aren't
necessarily people who identify with any particular political ideology are then
whipped up by far right racist smear campaigns. And, you know, I was listening
to that. I felt that there was a huge sort of parallel with stories you heard
about QAnon conspiracy theories in the United States and how people were, you
know, mutually sharing among their online networks, these completely false
stories about child abductions and trafficking rings and, you know, a sort of
moral panic and hysteria that developed around that and that resulted in, you
know, and drawing the line between people who are ordinary and people who are,
you know, members of political movements is obviously something that is, you
know, questionable, but, you know, so-called ordinary people then showing up at
demonstrations, which, I mean, in the case of the United States, we saw got
completely out of hand, extremely violent and dangerous. And you know what,
let's listen to a little audio clip that might illuminate some of that, because
there was a guy at the protest who was filmed on a lot of people's phones, and
we can have a little listen to what he was saying. And he was very vocal. I
mean, quite a lot of people are vocal in this clip, but let's just have a
listen. It gives you a sense of just how tense it was there. But Zoui, you
talked about the distinction between kind of ordinary people and people who are
part of a movement. I mean, how do you draw the line? How do you start drawing
the line? Is that guy ordinary or is he part of a movement now? Well, I don't
think that there's a clear line that you can draw. And that's precisely the
problem. I mean, that guy was clearly rejecting the label of himself as far
right. And any individual is free to do that. But, you know, having been a
15-year-old schoolgirl in this country, you know, I'm very well aware that every
older man who harasses you on the street does not get a huge angry mob outside
of their place of residence or supposed place of residence, calling for them to
be removed from the country. So there's clearly something more that's happening
here than just concerned local parents having seen a video of a 15-year-old
being asked for her phone number and this being the response. Because, like I
say, I mean, I've got to say, you know, I've seen that video. When I was 15, I
was far too embarrassed and scared and confused by what was happening to stand
up for myself in the way that that girl did. So, you know, props to her. She's
really brave. But the response from her community is clearly not just a simple
response to seeing that happen where you might be angry, you might be concerned,
you might want to talk about this. To go from that to, you know, 400 people with
printed out placards saying, this is our city, this is our country outside of a
hotel housing people who have fled from war and persecution. That's a big step.
And it's not something that just happens, you know, out of just a few local
parents being concerned. This is something that's been, you know, seeded and
organized over time by far right groups. And you talk about watching the video,
I watched it this week too, and it just feels so intimate. And I don't mean in
terms of the content about what the two people are discussing, but just the fact
that you are sort of there in the moment with them. And it's and it's
irrespective of what's actually going on. Rakeeb, having heard all that stuff
about what happened in Nozli on February, February 10. I mean, how would you
describe that demonstration? Is that was that a far right demo, ultimately?
Well, I think that what we've seen in recent times, Adam, is the hijacking of
protests and demonstrations. And I think that we've seen that with protests that
cut across a variety of variety of political persuasions and social causes. I
thought the film made a very important point about deprivation. For me, Nozli is
the definition of left behind. Recent data shows that nearly one into state
funded secondary pupils are eligible for free school meals as one of the highest
rates in the whole of England. And the education system there is crumbling to
such an extent that in recent times, young people in Nozli had to leave their
own borough and go to neighboring St. Helens College, if not six forms in
Liverpool just to do their A level exams. It has one of the highest rates in the
country when it comes to the proportion of people who are identified as disabled
and limited a lot. It has a very high port, a relatively high portion of people
who are providing a form of unpaid care, people who are aged five years and
over. So this is an area, in my view, that needs emergency level public
investment and social support. And I think this comes on to my next point that
we have an asylum seeker dispersal system in the country, which is grossly
unfair on the poorest communities. Back in April 2017, there's data which showed
that 57% of asylum seekers are being rehomed in the poorest third of the
country. More recent data showed that one in four asylum seekers were being
rehomed in just 10 local authorities, some of those authorities being some of
the poorest in the country. So I think that there needs to be a discussion about
where asylum seekers are being rehomed in the country and how fair that is on
some of the most underprivileged communities in England. Okay, Raki, but you're
sort of drilling down there into some of the stats about where asylum seekers
are being placed. Producer Ellie is here to give us a bit more of an aerial view
of the system overall. Hi, Ellie. Hello. First of all, do you want to just tell
us what numbers you've got about this, this hotels phenomenon? So back in
February 2021, there are around 10,300 asylum seekers in 97 hotels across the
UK. And by November that year, that had more than doubled to 21,500 asylum
seekers in 181 hotels. And then by the end of last year, the number of asylum
seekers in what's called contingency accommodation, largely hotels, had risen to
around 49,500. So it's quite a big increase recently. So that was almost like a
doubling in the space of one year and then a doubling again a year later. And I
mean, hotels, hotels are not cheap. They cost money to put people in. What's it
costing the government? So at the end of last year, it cost about 5.5 million
every day. And that number, if we include Afghan asylum seekers is 6.8 million
each day. And then if we just zoom out even further, just to look at the entire
asylum system, what can you tell us about how many people are going into it? How
many people are making applications? So if we go back to 2002, that was the peak
that we've seen so far, more than 84,000 number of applications to for asylum in
the UK. That number fell. And so by 2010, it was a low of just under 18,000. But
it's been on the up again. So at the end, in 2022, there were nearly 75,000
asylum applications. That's more than twice the number from a few years before,
and is the highest number of applications in almost two decades. Also this week,
we've been hearing well, actually, the last couple of years, we've been hearing
about this idea of the backlog, the number of cases that are still in the system
or put it another way, the number of people who are waiting to find out their
fate. Yeah, it's a long wait. So the average wait at the moment in the UK to
find out if you've been granted asylum is over a year. That's longer than in
France and Germany and Austria. And this delay in the UK has created a backlog
of over 160,000 people who are just waiting for their application to be
processed. Thank you very much, Ellie. More stats from you, I'm sure later on.
Rakeeb, what is it about the system that is driving people's or inflaming
people's opinions? I mean, you refer to the fact that the hotels issue is one of
them, but are there other factors too? Well, I think that based on Ellie's
figures, just to make a comparison, the amount of money that's being spent on
rehoming asylum seekers in hotel related accommodation, the average of that over
two to three days is roughly the same amount of money that Nozli was given as
part of the government's levelling up fund. So I think that tells you why people
are frustrated with how public finances are being allocated. I think that what
we have... Well, hang on. If that's just one fund, I suppose, like the amount
that's maybe spent on housing benefit or employment and support allowance or job
seekers allowance might be if you cooperate all the money that's spent in Nozli,
it'd be more than that, wouldn't it? Well, I mean, I'm referring specifically to
the levelling up fund because that was the government's flagship policy, which
was a big part of its manifesto that it was elected on. So I think that one of
the main problems is that we have the ongoing small boats crisis, I think in
2022, there's 45,576 people that cross the English Channel into the UK on small
boats. And I think that there may well be now a growing public sentiment that
the country's not really in control when it comes to the immigration system. And
there may well be the perception that our asylum regime is not fit for purpose.
And if you combine that with the fact that, as I said before, the dispersal of
asylum seekers across the country is not necessarily fair on some of the most
deprived parts of the country. I really do think that is genuinely a gift and
provides fertile ground for far right extremists to make headway with narratives
that exploit people's economic and cultural anxieties. Right, let's go back to
Nozli and the protest on February the 10th. And we've looked at lots of the
videos that are circulating online. And the only video evidence that we could
find of something that you could maybe call racist was this video in particular.
Now it starts with a man referring to the fact that we have what he calls an
Indian Prime Minister, and he swears quite a lot during that section. So we're
not going to bring you that. But then the crowd start chanting this along with
him. Now, Zoe shouting get them out to the people in the hotel. Is that a racist
phrase? Is that a racist chant in your perception? I think within this context,
it's really important that we are able to name this as racism. Whatever sort of
concerns people have about, you know, a video they've seen, a rumor they've
heard, connecting that to a much wider group of people they perceive to be
foreign, people perceive to be from a specific ethnic minority, perhaps
perceived to be Muslim, and calling for them to be kicked out of the country.
That is racism. Yeah, but we don't some of those people could be shouting get
them out of that hotel and put them in a hotel somewhere else. We can't say for
sure. We can't say for sure everyone in the crowd is saying that. I think the
context, you know, you can try to be as generous as you like. What matters, I
think, is that the people in those hotels and there have been some sort of first
person accounts come out in the media from some of the asylum seekers in those
hotels and how they experienced that situation. And they were absolutely
terrified. There was one story from an Iranian young man who had escaped the
regime after having been beaten and then having been searched down by the regime
for, you know, purportedly taking part in protests, which carries the death
penalty in that country. He was watching those people set fire to a van and
shout get them out and he perceived it as absolutely terrifying. And so I think
that we need to bring our minds back to, you know, think about these people.
They have nothing to do with any of these supposed videos going around online.
They've come to the UK because they think that they'll be safe and they've
experienced extremely traumatic situations and they're all being sort of tarred
with a brush that is fueled by racist misinformation. And we do have to be able
to call a spade and talk about racism. I'm not saying that every person on that
protest is an irredeemable racist. Of course, that isn't the case. And I think
that is really important work where I keep has been saying, you know, you made
some really excellent points about how the government has totally mishandled
this situation of asylum seekers and their accommodation around the country.
It's a grossly unfair system. I agree with you. It's grossly unfair on the
communities. I think we also need to remember that it's grossly unfair on the
asylum seekers themselves. I mean, if you imagine that, you know, we're talking
about the backlog, people who've arrived here and have been trapped in the
system for such a long time. You know, those people, they've arrived in the UK
fleeing war persecution. Yeah. So let's just put some of that to Rakeeb there.
Rakeeb, do you want to respond? Think back to that chant of get them out.
Listen, if anyone questions Rishi Sunak's Britishness, I would actually consider
that to be a formal far-right sentiment. He is the Prime Minister of the UK. He
is a British citizen. And I'd make that point, questioning his Britishness is
very much a fringe position. The overwhelming majority of British people,
ultimately, they don't care about the Prime Minister's ethnicity and skin color.
It's ultimately about their values and their ability to deliver policies that
work for their families and communities. I also have to make this point, as a
social integration expert, respect for the rule of law is a fundamental British
value. And that the disorders outside of Nozli must be condemned, especially by
leading politicians. The point that I'd also make, though, is that there's some
people, Adam, who suggested that it was the language used by Home Secretary
Swala Braverman. It's the anti-immigration narratives which are peddled in
papers such as The Sun. It's creating what took place. It fed into what took
place in Nozli. Do you think it did? Well, I have to question it, Adam, because
it's a Labour voting stronghold. Labour did terribly in the last general
election, but it still performed very well in Nozli, in that constituency. And
if anyone has an understanding of the history of Merseyside, The Sun is loathed
across Merseyside, mainly because of its disgraceful reporting of the
Hillsborough football tragedy. So I think that what we have to see here, we have
to look at the variety of social, culture and economic factors at play, not for
a second are we condoning the violence and intimidation which took place outside
this week's hotel. But if we want to avoid that taking place in the future,
repeat that in different parts of the country, we have to address those social,
economic and cultural factors which are feeding into those kinds of incidents.
Rakeem, you mentioned the Home Secretary, S ella Bravman, she famously described
the small books coming across the channel as quote unquote an invasion. Was she
okay to use that word? And as far as you're concerned? Adam, I would say that
I'm quite conservative when it comes to matters of immigration, national
security. I would never use the term invader in any of more writings or any of
more media appearances. I think it's unhelpful. What I really want to see is the
home office get a grip of the situation. They talk a great deal about
introducing a well ordered immigration system, a streamlined asylum regime. But
truth be told, I don't see any evidence of that at the moment. Right. Well, we
saw a bit of streamlining this week with an announcement that some nationalities
of asylum seekers will be filling in a form rather than having a face to face
interview. And it was interesting to see that that provoked criticism from kind
of all quarters on all sorts of different levels. Right. So so far, we've used
this term far right. But it's clear that different people mean different things
by that phrase, which is pretty similar to how the term is thrown about a bit on
social media. So let's get a better understanding of what it might mean and
where it came from. I spoke to Paul Jackson, professor in history of radicalism
and extremism at the University of Northampton. We're talking about the idea of
the far right. When in kind of political science and the political world does
that emerge as a thing? I mean, the far right is quite an interesting term to
date. I mean, we start to talk about terms of the left and the right from really
the French Revolution onwards. And then the far right becomes a term that's used
in various ways, especially sort of after the First World War, we saw things
like the rise of fascism, first of all, in 1920s, Italy, and increasingly over
the years, and especially after the Second World War has become quite a common
term for talking about more radical types of right wing politics. Okay, well,
let's start working our way through the list of different far rights. Where do
you want to start? Perhaps one place to start could be at the most extreme end.
So one phenomenon that we've seen of late is a type of far right politics called
accelerationism, which is people, especially kind of young men who are quite
engaged by the idea of accelerating the collapse of Western society in order for
some sort of new white supremacist order to emerge. And these sorts of far right
phenomena are present largely in online contexts, and I say they idealise
terrorist activity in particular. And so that feeds into sort of people like
Brendan Tarrant, who carried out a really kind of atrocious mass killing in New
Zealand in 2019. Hello, and welcome to BBC News. We now know that 50 people were
killed in Friday's attack on two months ago. And we now know that 50 people were
killed in Friday's attack on two mosques in the New Zealand city of
Christchurch. So there are some of the kind of the most extreme types of far
right politics that we can see at the moment. And then as we kind of move
perhaps a little bit more towards a more moderate end of the far right, you can
get phenomena like far right parties, if we look, for example, at the British
National Party in the 2000s. Now a party election broadcast by the
administration. And we must help the immigrants return home. British National
Party, 655. That would be a really good example of a party on the one hand
looking towards moderating and achieving electoral success. On the other hand,
housing some really extreme and neo-Nazi views amongst many of its members. And
then as we move perhaps into the more sort of moderate territory again, what
often gets called the populist radical right, here we're seeing parties and
organizations that are much more wanting to engage with the democratic
processes, but are perhaps ebbing away and chipping away at aspects of liberal
ideas in particular. What is the kind of academic definition of a neo-Nazi? Neo-
Nazi is perhaps kind of simply defined as somebody who takes aspects of ideas
from the Nazi era, from the German National Socialist Party, from Hitler's Mein
Kampf, and then kind of combines them with new issues or new aspects. So in the
Cold War era, people could relate Nazi ideas as the solution to the Cold War
conflict. In kind of cultural terms, in the 1980s you've, for example, saw white
power music which often expressed neo-Nazi themed idealized Hitler, but you
know, kind of used punk type music to express those. So, they say neo-Nazi is a
combination of bits of Nazi ideas from the 30s and 40s with new phenomena and
sort of believing that the ideology is the solution to a society in crisis
today. Online in the debate, you see a lot of terms being kind of used
interchangeably with far right or extreme rights. And I just wonder if you could
help me understand if they are synonymous or if there's a slightly more
complicated relationship. Things like authoritarian. Yeah, I mean an
authoritarian style of politics is perhaps something we might associate with
right-wing regimes like Hitler's Germany or Mussolini's Italy, but we can also
find left-wing forms of authoritarianism as well. What about nationalism and
ultra-nationalism? Yeah, I mean I think that's a really interesting distinction.
I mean there's lots of different types of nationalism through history and
nationalism isn't necessarily far right, but within kind of the academic
literatures on the far right, we do talk about ultra-nationalism as a type of
nationalism that believes the nation is an organic entity that can live or die
as a life of its own that's more important than the individual. So this feeds
into all sorts of far right ways of thinking and especially kind of
idealizations of sacrificing one's own life for the nation or needing to kill
people in order that the nation may become healthy again. Thank you very much to
Paul Jackson for that history lesson. You're listening to Anti-Social live on
BBC Radio 4 and a podcast on BBC Sounds and we're using the hashtag BBC Anti-
Social. Right, let me put some of that to migration policy expert Zui Gardner.
Zui, when you are tweeting or talking about this, what's your personal
definition of far right or do you even use far right that much? Yeah, I mean I
do use the word and I think like many people I use it just to convey a sort of
just unspoken understanding of, I don't want to say it's the vibes, but you know
it's not used, at least certainly I will admit that I don't use it in any sort
of precise political science type of meaning. I really use it to convey the
meaning that it's used in sort of common discourse. So that means ultra-
nationalist views, authoritarian views, that kind of positioning that was
outlined also by your report there. So I do think that when you start to dig
down and it gets a lot more murky, what is inherently far right? Well I think
that if you think about what's right wing, what's left wing, there's social
right wing and left wing attitudes, there's also economic right wing and left
wing attitudes and the two don't always match up perfectly. So it does get much
more murky and I do think it's legitimate for people to self-define their own
political position, but I do think also it's interesting how the term far right,
people reject it, even ones who quite clearly are members of these far right
groups and we need language to describe them. Let me put it to Rakeeb, how do
you understand the term far right and how do you use it? Well I think Adam
there's some classic hallmarks of what I consider to be far right extremism, one
would be a commitment to the establishment of a ethno-state, that could also
include support for the forced repatriation of ethnic and racial minorities and
at the more extreme violent end that could be support for the eradication of
those minorities. In a number of far right circles they will be characterized by
the peddling of anti-Semitic conspiratorial beliefs, anti-Muslim prejudice, but
if you see, I think that Professor Paul Jackson, they talked about
accelerationism, that's also incorporated within the wider far right beliefs.
There's an ultimate belief that then there must be a destruction of Western
liberal democracy so that a new authoritarian order rooted in white nationalism
can be ushered in and replace that. So I think those would be the sort of
classic hallmarks that I would identify when it comes to talking about far right
extremism. Yeah I mean sometimes on social media you see people talking about
Brexit being a kind of right wing project or a far right project. Ricky, where
does Brexit fit on that spectrum that we just were talking about? Well I have to
say Adam, I think I find some of those narratives quite insulting. I feel that
when we look at Brexit, if you actually see some of the highest pro-Brexit
percentages that were delivered in the EU referendum back in June 2016 were in
traditional Labour heartlands. So for me I think it's really simplistic to
describe Brexit that way, it misses the kind of anti-establishment factors that
were at play, especially in left behind areas which I would say were rallying
against the harsh winds of globalization and trying to give the political
establishment a bit of a kicking by voting to leave the European Union. So I
think that I have seen a number of commentators describe Brexit as almost like a
far right fascist enterprise. I think that's incredibly divisive and overly
simplistic. Brexit is complicated, who knew? Now a few minutes ago both of you
were having a bit of a pop at the asylum system and the home office and there
was a statement from the home office that they issued lately where they're
saying that they are working to speed up asylum processing and to remove
everyone who doesn't have a legitimate claim to be here and they've recruited
hundreds of caseworkers to help with this. And of course we know that one of
Rishi Sunak's five priorities for the year is to stop the small boat crossings.
Right so far we've heard about what happened in Merseyside and we've discussed
what people mean when they say far right or think that they might mean. Putting
to one side how protesters are described there is a level of organization from
far right groups around the asylum hotels issue and people worry that they
represent a threat. Now Daniel De Simone is one of our BBC reporters who spent a
lot of time covering terrorism cases but he's spending some time here in the
anti-social studio. Hello. Hello. First of all Daniel just that phrase far
right. How do you deploy that when you're reporting on this phenomenon? I use
that, I distinguish that from some of the very extreme right-wing groups that
are almost overtly terrorist groups because I think those are so far to the
right that to kind of put them in the same basket as groups that sort of do
campaigns and leafletting and sort of engage in what might be obviously politics
that they are a bit different. So a lot of the terrorist cases that have been in
the in the courts over the last five years and there's been quite a big increase
in right-wing terrorism cases are this really neo-nazi extreme right-wing which
is very committed to terrorism. It's got no interest in leafletting and
campaigning it kind of scorns that kind of activity. So you just try to be quite
precise and really understand who you're talking about yeah. Yeah because I
think there is a bit of a spectrum and although violence can come from different
bits of the spectrum they're not all as overtly extreme and they are a bit
different but I think that is the complexity of it that we've had we haven't had
that many right-wing terrorist attacks in this country with quite a number of
foiled plots from right-wing extremism but when the actual violence happens
think like think of the Fingery Park van attack a few years ago the actual
inspiration or the thing that the attacker is referencing may not be the very
extreme right-wing stuff it might be actually stuff that is far right rather
than extreme right. When you hear the the the authorities and the security
services talking about this quite often they say this is the source of the
fastest growing threat in terms of security. What do they really mean by that?
How are they judging that? They mean in terms of it's it's grown faster as a
percentage of their casework than other threats so they would sort of say that
the Islamist extremist threat and the kind of the volume of work they're doing
has not grown as quickly. So right-wing extremism until really 2016-2017 wasn't
a regular feature as a terrorist threat in even in the courts it was a bit of a
novelty now we see it all the time we've had five groups banned as terrorist
groups who are neo-nazi groups in this country we've it's just a really common
thing and MI5 now has responsibility in primacy for right-wing extremism whereas
in the past they didn't only if it was a very top end of it. One of the parts of
the kind of the country's counter-terrorism armory is that there's this Prevent
programme so this is the idea that that organisations identify people at risk of
radicalisation or extremism and then they get sort of channeled into other
activities to divert them. How does that programme handle right-wing extremism
and the far right and what are some of the kind of the conversations around how
that's done? Well the number of referrals for sort of right-wing extremism in
Prevent are if you like higher than the number of cases in the kind of the MI5
and the counter-terrorism policing are looking at. There's been some criticism
from some quarters that perhaps Prevent is a bit too sensitive and it's almost
prevent it's almost there's almost too many referrals for for right-wing
extremism relative to the actual terrorist threat so there are quite a lot of
Prevent referrals there's also a lot of Prevent referrals which are almost
undefined that it's kind of sometimes it's in-cell ideology or it's mixed
ideologies and sometimes that can have features of right-wing extremism but not
really be fixed and clear. Again back to that kind of precision point about who
are you talking about and in terms of what we've been discussing today on
antisocial these protests in Nozli and protests elsewhere about asylum seekers
being housed in hotels what's your kind of professional take on how kind of the
organised far rights are getting involved in that? What's noticeable recently is
that we had this period where quite a few youth right-wing extremist groups
ended up being banned under the Terrorism Act because they'd sort of strayed
into overt encouragement and glorification of terrorism with with patriarchal
alternatives in some other groups. They are far right and they have members and
you know people activists within them who have been associated with groups that
are now banned but they are engaging in what might be more recognisable as
politics they do leafletting campaigns they try and get members. So it's
interesting because it's almost swung back a bit that these groups are now
overtly out there people are tweeting they've got kind of social media accounts
they're not hidden away like where some of these terrorist groups are they
almost can't show their face. Thank you very much Daniel. Zoe does all this add
up to us needing some new words some new labels some new language to discuss all
of this? I'm not sure that we necessarily need any new language I think it's
interesting that people reject the label far right and sort of associate it and
I think it was in the in the first clip that you shared you know people saying
oh they shouldn't we shouldn't be name calling these people and saying things
like they're on the far right I mean that's not calling people a bad name it's a
simple descriptive term we use in language and we need to be able to talk about
this issue because you know as that report has just showed this is a growing
movement that's coming sort of out of the underground and showing its face a lot
more and trying to recruit and recruiting as we've seen through you know the
spreading of racist disinformation online and through leaflets and so on and so
we do need to have a language that we all agree on that is understandable and
that we can talk about this and I do think that you know the while I agree that
you know it's much more this online sharing of rumors and the leafleting and so
on and the local activity that has fueled the protests in Nausea and it's not
sort of that they're taking their cue from Sohla Braviman I do think that there
is responsibility on the part of government to think about their language and
their approach and there's been numerous reports where government has sought to
play down the issue of racism in our society and and yeah I mean it's quite
ironic that right after that prevent that report on prevent came out saying that
the far right is not a threat we immediately saw a violent far right protest
well that the review didn't say they weren't a threat it just was talking about
the threshold for it being judged a threat by by for a prevent reform I think
there is just this issue about this this this being sort of played down and it's
all all just local people with with religious concerns I don't think that's true
and I think that we need to be able to draw some firm lines in the sand okay so
well let me ask we'll keep let me ask we'll keep them what should we call say a
person who turned up in Mose Noseley who had been perhaps influenced by the far
right or the extreme right but had a genuine kind of local concern rooted in
themselves and their family what what label do you attach to them or do you just
not label them at all maybe we don't even need to I I think Adam we have to take
a degree of care and I think Daniel's report was fantastic in that he's he made
a very clear differentiation between what's to be non-violent far right
extremism and then violent far right extremism I think it's important to make
that point I think that when it comes to somebody shouting get out at a at a
hotel even though that's verbal is that actually in itself almost a form of
violence because I mean that could be perceived as a very threatening act I
think Adam we can we can describe that as a form of intimidation very clearly we
can express concern surrounding the integration of asylum seekers the ability of
our country to absorb newcomers that may come from parts of the world with
vastly different prevailing social and cultural norms without going to a hotel
which is hosting asylum seekers and then screaming get out so I think I think
that that's a very important point to make I think that more generally though I
think I've seen over the past week that some of Kate Forbes's comments oh who's
standing for the SMP leadership indeed she's standing for the leadership of the
Scottish National Party because she's expressing views such as you know the way
she wants to live her life she wouldn't agree with having children outside of
wedlock I consider that to be a very mild form of social conservatism which by
the way even the most liberal minded British Muslims would consider that to be
their personal belief being labeled as far right so I do think that we have to
take a degree of care when it comes to using these kind of terms because if
these terms are overused we're draining them of their historical weight and
significance Daniel I'm really going to put you on the spot here but as a as a
professional in this field can you give us all some tips for just how to discuss
this and how to think about what's going on here what some good advice leave us
with some good advice well what was said about the difference between violent
right-wing extremism and perhaps right-wing extremism isn't encouraging violence
that is true obviously it doesn't as I said though it doesn't mean that far
right extremism which isn't overtly terrorist it can still generate violence it
can but it might just might not not just be saying it and clearly devoted to it
but it is also true that just although there's a lot of focus on this very
extreme right-wing neo-nazism in the kind of terrorist sphere there can be
racism and you know other types of right-wing extremes that can be very
corrosive and upsetting for people that isn't actually terrorism but it can
still be a problem and so I think it's important to distinguish between them but
it doesn't mean that one isn't an issue. Just very quickly Zoe I mean thinking
back to tweets and things do you ever regret any of the tweets that you've said
about about this issue? No I think what's really important is that and my tweet
in my tweets I always really try to do this is to to come back to who's to blame
here you know people who are going out and shouting at asylum seekers because
they've been forced in into hotels and left there without the right to work or
to rebuild their lives for years that's not acceptable and I think we do need to
draw a line on that those people should be transferring their energy towards the
government who has mismanaged this the asylum system to such degree that it's in
chaos after 13 years of them being empowered. At a point you made a few times.
Raquib yes or no do you regret any of your your tweets or anything? All fine? I
think for me it's a no but you've missed your chance anyway I'm guessing that's
a no then. Thank you very much to everyone in this week's Antisocial. We'll be
back with another hot topic next week the hashtags BBC Antisocial and our back
catalogue is available on BBC Science. See you soon. Antisocial is presented by
Adam Fleming the producers Lucy Proctor and Ellie House. A look at the weather
forecast now and Thomas Schaffernacher is joining us. Hello Thomas. Hello Tom
and a very good afternoon to you. It is chilly out there believe it or not the
temperatures are actually close to average for the time of the year but there is
quite a nagging northerly wind especially on the North Sea coast and over the
weekend temperatures may reach around eight degrees celsius but it'll feel
closer to two degrees or so and even in the northern isle is probably below
freezing so really nippy out there but let's get the forecast for the here and
now. A bit of a mixed bag has to be said this lunchtime out there across
southern parts of the country it is pretty cloudy we've had a few spits and
spots of rain just a week cold front is moving through that rain won't last very
long elsewhere across the UK the northern two-thirds certainly much brighter
some sunny spells and really very decent weather at the moment for example on
the north coast of northern island beautiful weather currently here around the
western isles also lots of sunshine and i think through the rest of today if
you've got the sunny spells now you will keep the clear weather into the evening
hours also in the south of the country where it is cloudy right now we do
anticipate that cloud to thin as we get into the evening now today's
temperatures have already mentioned it feels chilly but they should reach around
12 degrees in some sunnier spots in western parts of the UK and about eight or
nine degrees on the North Sea coast forecast into tonight and we're going to see
a frost developing across western and central areas where winds will be a little
bit lighter and we'll have clear skies but along the North Sea coast with that
wind continuing out of the north temperatures should be around three degrees so
no frost for example in new castle hull or Norwich and into tomorrow we're going
to see a sunny start to the day many of us but clouds will build through the
afternoon and whether you're north or south tomorrow the weather is going to be
more or less the same we're talking about sunny spells with cloudier moments
temperatures typically around seven or eight degrees but remember it will feel
colder in that northerly wind especially if you're on the North Sea Sunday about
the same on BBC iPlayer six robbers have carried out an armed raid stealing
almost three tons of gold we are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023 if you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message please contact the
manufacturer if you're listening on web or mobile this service is available to
stream on BBC sounds watch on BBC iPlayer on 92 to 95 FM 198 long wave on