TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Morning at 11 on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 10 o'clock. The
government will introduce new legislation today that will deny any possibility
of asylum to migrants who use small boats to get to the UK. Campaigners say
thousands of genuine refugees will be treated like criminals, but ministers have
insisted the new rules are needed to stop people making the dangerous journey
across the Channel. Tim Laughton is a Conservative MP. Of course we need to
invest in the asylum system to speed up the whole process, but what is really
slowing down the whole process is people coming here with no legitimate claim
for safe haven in the United Kingdom, not escaping real danger, costing the
taxpayer a huge amount of money, and really costing genuine asylum seekers their
places in the queue. A spokesperson for the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock
has denied claims that he considered withholding funding from a disability
centre to pressure an MP not to rebel against coronavirus restrictions. WhatsApp
messages obtained by the Daily Telegraph suggest Mr Hancock spoke to an aide
about warning the Bury North MP James Daly that a new centre would be off the
table if he voted against the government. The former Conservative Chairman Sir
Jake Berry said Mr Hancock had been drunk on power. Talks are being held this
morning between health unions and the Health Secretary Steve Barclay, aimed at
averting further NHS strikes in England. Nurses, ambulance workers,
physiotherapists and midwives have all put industrial action on hold while the
discussions continue. Experts are to consider whether a controversial new
treatment for the skin condition vitiligo should be offered on the NHS.
Vitiligo, which causes a loss of pigment, affects all races but is more
noticeable in people with black or brown skin. A cream called ruxolitinib can
remove whitened patches but has potential side effects, including acne. The
charity Age UK is calling for anyone with a prepayment energy meter to be given
the opportunity to have it removed free of charge. It says half a million older
people have these meters, which are more expensive than paying for gas and
electricity via direct debit. Energy companies say the meters help ensure
customers don't fall into too much debt. BBC News. 200 children have gone
missing from hotels used by the Home Office to temporarily house lone asylum
seekers. Tonight, File on 4 will be investigating why so many have disappeared
and what's being done to find them. You can hear that tonight at 8 o'clock on
Radio 4. Now it's time for Women's Hour with Nuala McGovern. Good morning.
Welcome to Women's Hour. Good to have your company. You may have seen that Wayne
Cousins has been sentenced to 19 months in prison for exposing himself on three
occasions. One of those just days before he kidnapped, raped and murdered Sarah
Everhard. Former victims of Cousins indecent exposure berated the police for
their inaction, despite their coming forward with details that could have led to
charging Cousins. The Metropolitan Police has now apologised for not arresting
Cousins for that indecent exposure and some say it may have stopped him from
murdering Sarah Everhard. The new sentence, I should say, doesn't change
Cousins' existing whole life sentence for that murder. But I would like to know
whether this latest sentencing of Wayne Cousins for indecent exposure makes you
feel more confident perhaps if you were to report an incident of indecent
exposure to the police. You can get in touch on our texts. It's 84844 on social
media or at BBC Women's Hour or you can email us through our website. If it's a
WhatsApp message or a voice note you'd like to send, that number is 03700 100
444. We are going to explore a question also during the programme that maybe
you've asked yourself. How did men come to rule? My guest, Angela Saini, the
author of The Patriarchs, has taken a trip through history and also around the
globe to try and understand what happened to put the current structures in place
and also what would it take to dismantle them. So that conversation is coming up
and also are you a fan of Call the Midwife? Well, we have the much-loved series
writer Heidi Thomas, now OBE, I should say, with us and Heidi has adapted Alan
Bennett's play Alleluia for film. So it's a hospital drama. It's about the
plight of elderly patients and also about the plight of the NHS. It's so
thought-provoking. I'm looking forward to that discussion that will be coming up
during this hour and also today. If you see stories about mascara on TikTok and
you think it's about makeup, my guests will make you think again. It's a code
word to talk about sex as the word sex can be filtered out due to algorithms on
the social media platform. Now some feel though that perhaps using a code word
for issues and conversations around sex, which at times can include abuse or
violence, is not appropriate or helpful. Again, if you'd like to chime in on
that or any of our other stories, the text is 84844. But let me begin with Wayne
Cousins. He could have been stopped from murdering Sarah Everhard if reports of
his indecent exposure had been properly investigated. That is according to his
victims after the Met officer was sentenced to 19 months, as I mentioned, for
indecent exposure. That was between November 2020 and February 2021. The Met
police apologised. It was Deputy Assistant Commissioner Stuart Cundey who leads
the Met's Directorate of Professional Standards and he said like so many, I wish
he had been arrested for these offences before he went on to kidnap, rape and
murder Sarah Everhard and I am sorry that he was not. At yesterday's sentencing,
Mrs Justice May said the victims spoke about feeling like their freedom and
security had been taken away from them with one woman experiencing survivor's
guilt. To find out more, I spoke to Harriet Wistrich, who's a solicitor and
director of the Centre for Women's Justice and also Sonia Jessop, Home Affairs
Correspondent at BBC Radio London and I began by asking Sonia what had happened
in court. At the sentencing yesterday, I mean, obviously Wayne Cousins is
already serving a whole life sentence for murdering Sarah Everhard. He will
never be released but I think obviously what we saw yesterday was him sentenced
to 19 months over these three incidents, these three cases of indecent exposure
which he had pleaded guilty to prior to Sarah's murder. And what came across, I
think, was we heard the victim's statements, we heard the impact that indecent
exposure had had on them. I mean, one of them talked about the horror will
remain with me for the rest of my life, she says. She talked about, this was the
cyclist that he exposed himself to, she talked about not wanting to step outside
her home without fear anymore, a selfish, aggressive act which has had a serious
impact on her life. One of the victims he exposed himself to at McDonald's had
said, it shouldn't be up to me to take measures to keep myself safe, I should
not have to be in fear of somebody attacking me, I should be able to feel able
to walk home at night. So this was, you could hear the impact that it had on
them. The judge praised the resilience and courage of those women and also,
crucially, made clear, the judge said that the police failings to investigate
these incidents properly appeared to embolden cousins. And we know that it was,
in fact, that last incident, that final incident at McDonald's that was reported
that he pleaded guilty to, that four days later, despite the fact that staff
gave police his registration number of his car, despite the fact that police had
those details, four days later, he went on to murder Sarah Everard. As we know,
kidnap, rape and murder. Harriet, The Met has apologised, that has been seen
widely, for failure to act and we've heard, of course, from Sonia there, the
impact it had on the victims and may have, if he were arrested, people say have
prevented Sarah Everard from being killed. Do you think, however, this
sentencing and that apology, will it give women more confidence to come forward
reporting indecent exposure? Well, I think women's confidence in police is at an
all-time low at the moment. With all the revelations we've had over the last
couple of years with the murder of Sarah Everard and more recently, the
offending of David Carrick, and why should anyone even feel confident reporting
to a male officer at all? On the other hand, I think the decision to proceed
with the prosecution in these cases, when clearly it wasn't going to make any
difference to Cousin's ultimate sentence, hopefully sends out a signal that this
is a crime that can be investigated and can be prosecuted. And that may be a
message which will encourage more women to report indecent exposure, because I
think it is something that happens, we know it's something that happens to many
women. I mean, probably at least half your listeners will have experienced it at
least once as I have, and perhaps you have as well. It's a very prevalent crime,
which has been laughed off and in fact, wasn't even criminalized or regarded as
a sex crime before the 2003 Sexual Offences Act. So perhaps the prosecution and
sentencing in this case will send a signal that it is a crime that can be
treated seriously and that it is also an indicator of potentially of somebody
who is committing more serious crimes or may go on to commit more serious
crimes. So there is a pressure there, which I think we have to keep the momentum
up on the police to now understand that this isn't something that can just be
dismissed as some silly women's problem or something, but is something that
actually may help them stop serial offenders and escalating sexual offences and
put that data together as a sort of suspect focused investigation. I'd be
curious, Sanya, what you have been hearing from the women you've met? Yeah,
well, interesting. We spoke to a woman, BBC London had first spoken to a young
woman, Georgina, at the vigil following Sarah Everard's murder. You remember
when so many people came together on Clapham Common and she'd been at the vigil
and a man exposed himself to her at that vigil. Now, obviously, there were a lot
of police there, as we know, and she went over to some police. She told them
what had happened. She said that she felt very frightened and she asked them to
take action. And she says that they ignored her. She says she couldn't believe
it. She was saying, you know, he's right there. Can you stop him? Now, after she
talked to BBC London at the time, we reported on it, the police apologised. They
did investigate. An e-fit was put out, but no one was ever identified. No one
was arrested. And I'm told, the Met told me that the police, the local police,
had been given some extra training around this. But I spoke to her about,
obviously, this particular case, and I asked her whether, in the light of all
this, she would now feel comfortable, confident going to the police. And she
said, I don't think I would, because it feels quite humiliating to report it.
You know, it takes a lot to kind of come forward and you kind of think, well,
actually, if nothing's going to be done, is it worth it? Now, that's, you know,
speaking yesterday, when the Met basically gave their apology yesterday, they
made it very clear that they wanted, they did want victims to come forward. They
wanted, as Harriet says, for women to feel confident and to know that although
mistakes have been made in the past, that they do want women to feel that they
can come forward and they've promised to be better. But they sort of know that
they do need that kind of, for Londoners to have that trust and confidence. But
of course, you know, that is a challenge. And of course, that is one force
you're talking about, but there has been allegations of inaction by others as
well. What do you think, Harriet, if there was somebody who was worried about
coming forward and reporting an incident of indecent exposure? Well, I think if
anyone is concerned about it, they can obviously, you know, if they've got
somebody, a friend or a relative who can go with them to report it, if there's
a, sometimes there are support services, I know they're under a lot of pressure,
as it is, but can provide support. And if their allegation is not taken
seriously, then they can and should escalate that by making a complaint, a
formal police complaint, or alerting their MP or local councillor. And
basically, I think the only, you know, the only thing we have really, if the
police are not doing as they should do, is to try and escalate that. But, you
know, clearly, it's important if, for these men to be reported, where possible,
the emphasis has to be on police accountability, rather than on any
responsibility on any victim. And it was really heartbreaking to hear one of the
victims of cousins indecent exposure, experiencing survivor's guilt. Obviously,
it's not her guilt at all, it's the police's guilt. They're the ones that have
to hang their head in shame. She has done nothing. You know, she's done so much
the right thing, a courageous person. But, you know, this is a really terrible
state of affairs, which we see across the board, actually, with sexual offences,
that women are feeling guilty somehow, if their cases aren't taken forward. And
that has to change, the guilt has to be with the failures of investigators. I'm
also wondering, because we heard these victim statements, it got me to thinking
there must have been people who have reported previously, and perhaps that there
was inaction, of course, impossible to know, specifically what that might be. Do
you think this will have an impact, Harriet, on previous reports? We know the
figures are minuscule, really, of those that experience indecent exposure
reporting. And they're also pretty hopeless where they are reported, although
there is more opportunity now to capture offenders than previously, because of
the CCTV being everywhere. And often, we've seen reports of offenders being
identified in that respect. So I think just the fact of the sentencing exercise
that we've seen is a signal that this is a crime, that it is a crime that can be
prosecuted. And even though there was an abject failure by the Metropolitan
Police when he was reported originally, that we keep the pressure up now and
really try and shift things along so that indecent exposure is seen as a serious
sexual offence and as an indicator of more widespread offending and escalation
of offending. I think a lot of my listeners as well, when it comes to indecent
exposure or flashing, as it's also called, might be thinking about cyber
flashing. It's something we've talked about on the programme many times. I had
one guest, Emily Atack, who has been subjected to it numerous times, and she is
concerned about it being a precursor to something, some more serious action,
horrible as that is to experience. And there was research by Professor Jessica
Ringrose from 2020 that found 76% of girls aged 12 to 18 had been sent
unsolicited nude images of boys or men. Is cyber flashing treated differently to
flashing in person? Cyber flashing is a proposed new offence under the online
safety bill. I don't think it's as yet a criminal offence. I may be wrong on
that, but I understand it's still going through Parliament. So it isn't actually
something that can be treated more seriously because it's not actually a
criminal offence. Clearly, it's extremely widespread. And I think the
criminalisation of cyber flashing is a very important development because we
have to basically send these messages out to men who feel that this is perfectly
acceptable to say, not only is this not acceptable, but actually it is criminal
and you will face the consequences. I want to also turn, Sonia, to another
aspect because we're talking about confidence in the police, whether women would
be more confident coming forward to report indecent exposure. The other part of
yesterday was that WhatsApp messages were released. They were exchanges between
Wayne Cousins and six other metropolitan police officers. They were sent these
messages between March 2019 and October 2019 in a WhatsApp group. They were
investigated by police when Cousins' phone was seized after he was arrested for
Miss Everard's murder in March 2021. The investigations resulted in criminal
proceedings for two of the officers involved who were jailed for grossly
offensive messages in November. But I think these messages, as people read them,
will reveal a horrific part really of some of the culture for some of the
officers within those forces. What do you think we're learning from them? Well,
I think, interestingly, I mean, I was at the trial for the officers who,
Jonathan Cobham and Joel Borders, who were eventually jailed over their part in
the WhatsApp group. And I think we were listening to the detail of those
messages in court. And of course, a lot of them are too offensive to actually
broadcast. But in them, they made racist, homophobic remarks, misogynist
remarks. They insulted disabled people. They joked and discussed sexually
assaulting women. They made jokes about victims of domestic abuse and racist
remarks as well about specific areas of London, Hounslow and Feltham, for
example. And there was one awful message where they talked about domestic
violence victims enjoying being sexually assaulted and saying, well, that's why
they're repeat victims, or often as not. So really grossly offensive messages.
And four other officers in that group also faced gross misconduct proceedings
and were barred from policing. Now, I mean, I think what came across at the time
was, yeah, you know, what does this tell us about the mindset and the culture of
people in that group? And some people have questioned, I mean, excuse me, I've
been looking into kind of the rise in cases where social media and WhatsApp has
also been kind of part of either misconduct proceedings. And there has been a
rise in the number of incidents that have been investigated by police over the
last couple of years. Some have sort of suggested, you know, does this mean that
kind of that sort of canteen culture, perhaps things that people would have said
openly in canteens is actually moving online? Do officers, the IOPC, the police
watchdog, had said, you know, officers need to understand that, obviously not to
be sharing offensive things, but also that this is not some sort of private safe
space to express these disgusting views. But of course, that's also what the Met
has said we need to try to root out. So they've been talking about tackling
these issues. But you know, whether this whether that also, of course, again,
puts off people coming forward to police is very, very worrying. And I think
when you consider, you know, if you are, for example, one of these communities
in Hounslow and Feltham, how safe do you feel going to an officer if you've read
that that's what those officers in charge of those areas think about the people
that live there? Or if you're a domestic violence victim, how does that make you
feel? So the Met knows that there's a huge, a huge problem there. They've said
that they are obviously rooting out rogue officers. But this shows the scale of
the problem. Harriet, what confidence do you have that they will root out rogue
officers? I mean, the bit that I think struck me is how these people found one
another within a WhatsApp group or created a WhatsApp group, that they knew that
language would be acceptable within that group and within those people. What
we've what we've learned over the last couple of years about the level of
misogyny and racism and homophobia within police. I mean, we've known about
racism over the years, but the emergence of the kind of blatant misogyny, it's
something we've talked about, as you've described as canteen culture. Perhaps
the only optimistic thing we can say is that technology better is able to
capture offending, you know, so that if that kind of language and discussion is
captured on social media and WhatsApp, that puts the officers more bang to
rights. So if you in the past where you overheard sort of disgusting discussions
going on, it was harder. It does provide an opportunity to capture this type of
offending. But it's so widespread. And I think that is also a consequence of the
widespread availability of hardcore pornography across the internet, which is so
widely used by boys and men now. And it's just giving permission really, as
though this is sort of normalising this kind of language and attitude towards
women. So it's a huge, huge problem around culture more broadly. And it's
reflected in policing. And of course, police, like any institution, but perhaps
even more so in some ways attracts men who are drawn to being macho. And, you
know, that there will be within male police officers, some who are drawn to
policing, because it gives them a sense of power, that they can abuse other
people. Harriet Westrich there. Also, we had Sonia Jessop, you have been getting
in touch, I was asking at the beginning of the programme, do you feel more
confident after the sentencing of Wayne Cousins for indecent exposure? Let me
see, no name here, but they say, unfortunately, this doesn't make me feel more
confident to report indecent exposure. If Cousins had been arrested beforehand,
then sure, but it feels like a gesture for his other victims, because it's so
high profile. Another says when someone is caught speeding, they have to go on a
course to educate them. What happens to men who expose themselves? Do they get a
psychological assessment? Do they get any help? And another got in touch and
says, I was in a long term relationship when I was in my 20s with a man who
confessed to me he had been exposing himself. Of course, I was horrified. For
him, it was part of really low self esteem and self loathing. He didn't hate
women and didn't seem aware of the impact it might have on the women he exposed
himself to. He needed psychological help, which wasn't easy to find or access
back then, but did manage to get eventually. I hope it worked. This was 25 years
ago. I hope that men now can get help more easily. 844, tell me your stories. We
are here to hear them. I want to turn to my next guest, Heidi Thomas, who's in
studio with me, best known as the writer and creator of Call the Midwife. It has
just finished its 12th season on BBC One and it continues to go from strength to
strength, which is wonderful. Her newest project is a film adaptation of the
Alan Bennett play Alleluia. So it's set in a much loved geriatric hospital in
Yorkshire called The Beth, Bethlehem, but nicknamed The Beth. And it has been
earmarked for closure. It stars Jennifer Saunders as the formidable sister
Gilpin. Let's listen to a little. I don't know why your school have even sent
you here. You don't offer work experience in nursing. I shall have to attach you
to the porters. I asked careers for computing, but I applied too late. I've
brought him some theatre pants and an occupational therapist top half. That's
all I could find in a medium. What's this? Well, we endeavour to rise above the
leisure wear, Andy. Helps the old folks keep the bearings. I hope those trainers
are wiped clean. I'll be getting urine on them. Jennifer Saunders there. I was
watching it last night. What a character. So she's talking to the work
experience boy there about what is what. Welcome to the Woman's Hour studio,
Heidi. Great to have you with us. I know my listeners will have watched so much
of your work, whether it's Soldier, Soldier in the early 90s, Cranford, Call the
Midwife, as I mentioned, also been recommissioned. But this film, it's at the
other end of the age spectrum. So instead of little babies, we're talking about
people at the end of life. Absolutely. How did your involvement come about?
Well, it came about through a very ordinary route, which is I was approached by
the producers. Would I be interested in adapting an Alan Bennett play from the
stage to the screen? And that's an ordinary ordinary route from an extraordinary
request. I'm a huge Alan Bennett fan. I didn't have to be asked twice. But I
miss seeing the play in the theatre because ironically, I've been nursing my
mother through her final illness when it was on at the bridge in London. So I'd
had tickets and the night I should have gone, there was an empty space there. So
I caught up with the play by reading a copy of the script. And it was wonderful.
It made me laugh. And you don't think a drama about old age and mortality is
going to make you laugh. But Alan Bennett is a genius. And I could also see that
there was something I could bring to the story and that I could get my teeth
into. Because it was just a few months after I'd spent several weeks with my
mother at the end of her life on a palliative care ward, which very much had the
kind of atmosphere that's coming across in the Beth. The idea that the system,
the NHS is struggling, but the people who keep it going are absolutely
fantastic. And I saw it as an opportunity to bring to the screen a drama that's
about spirit in the elderly, spirit in the NHS and above all else, it's asked
the question, how do we care? Yes, it's very moving at parts and that you had
that personal experience makes total sense as I watch it now as well. Because
you were getting into the minds of people that were of an advanced age.
Obviously, you had your mother to draw on, maybe some of the other people that
you met in that palliative care ward. But what was that process like? Because I
think it's hard sometimes to imagine ourselves old. Oh, well, it's funny because
I'm 60 now. And I don't mind the physical ageing process because I look in the
mirror and I see people I love. I see who are no longer with us. I see my mum on
occasion, which is rather unsettling. And I also see my Auntie Lily, I even see
my grandma. And I'm getting, I would say I'm in robust middle age, but I can now
imagine old age in a way I couldn't when I was younger. And by younger, I mean
40. You think you aren't going to age and you think the people you love aren't
going to age and then you think, oh, my goodness, it's relentless, it's
inevitable. And yet there is a passion and a spirit that rises to the surface,
even if people are dissatisfied and grumbling and discontent with old age, there
is still sometimes it just comes across as righteous anger. But there is a
passion for living that I think is intensified towards the end of life. It's so
interesting that you say that, because I'm thinking that's from the inside out.
But then you have the outside in, which is how society treats older people. It
is very, excuse me, it is very striking. And I was when I was nursing my mother,
I was shocked by the extent to which people encountering her for the first time
as someone who was mortally ill, and becoming frailer by the day, they perhaps
missed the point that this was a deterioration in her, this was not her, this
was what was happening to her. And I loved any moment I could share with my
mother or with the people I met when she was on that rather special ward. I
cherish any moment that gave strangers that flash of who she really was. It's
like every morning I would get there and she would be lying in bed with a full
face of makeup. And you're talking a woman with two weeks to live. And she was
getting the care assistants, the healthcare assistants to put her lipstick on
for her. And the day she died, my brother got to the hospital first and he said,
she has no lippy on. I think it's the end. And you and you know, it was lovely.
Alan already had in his play scenes with women putting their makeup on, talking
about whitening the sepulcher. And it was lovely for me to pick up those threads
of the female personality and the female experience and build on them a little
bit. The characters are very distinct within Alleluia. Just for my listeners as
well, there's a host of stars, Judi Dench, Derek Jacoby, David Bradley, and
Judi's character Mary I found really interesting as a role within the hospital,
the observer. The observer. Observers are very potent individuals. I mean, as a
writer, I believe the writer belongs in liminal space, you should be watching. I
think if ever, as a writer, you're tempted to write a searing drama about a
writer, you've run out of ideas. I love the idea that Mary has always been a
librarian. She's quiet, she doesn't have a lot to say, but she has a lot to see.
And I think that was a lovely device for me to work with within the context of
the film. And Judi plays it magnificently. You never doubt for a moment,
although the role is initially small, you never doubt that Judi is absolutely
central to the story. I know she is an amazing actress, isn't it? Just a small
raise of an eyebrow and it can save volumes. I want to turn to another woman in
it, and that is, we heard, Jennifer Saunders. So her role, she's comical, she's
serious. She is the nurse that's in charge of the sister, should I say, of the
Beth. What were you trying to explore with Sister Gilpin's character? I think
Sister Gilpin was very much an enigma in the stage play and that delivers a
tremendous twist in the drama towards the end. I was keen to examine her and to
reflect the amount of care and expertise that goes into a 40-year nursing
career. I was fascinated by her professionalism. I was fascinated by the way in
which she seems to put up a carapace or a front, but underneath she is as moved
as anybody by the people she's dealing with. And I also saw her as a
personification of NHS staff fighting with the system. She's endlessly battling
for beds. And you can see it's driving her wild. There's one scene where
Jennifer is struggling to find beds in her hospital for patients incoming and
beds in the community for them to go out to. And Jennifer's performance is
marvellous and she eats a chocolate-covered tea cake in a really angry,
frustrated way. It's like rips into a shrug. I know. And I love that particular
moment in the screenplay because I felt Jennifer had really intuited what I was
trying to deliver with the script. The line she said that kind of stopped me in
my tracks was, she's in a car, chomping down on Chinese as the treat at this
moment, don't leave it too late to die. I know. What did that line mean for you
within the film? I have to say that line was originally in the stage play and it
was one I very much didn't want to lose. And I took a clue from it as to Alan's
intention, which is really about the terror and the pity of mortality. And I
think we see that carried out most by the lovely character Ambrose, played by
Derek Jacobi. He is in intense pain and that was something I looked at in some
detail, what it is like to live with severe ongoing pain where you're morphine
dependent. Ambrose is lonely. There's never been a Mrs Ambrose, I think one of
the ladies says, waiting for visitors who never come. And I think he did depict
a lot of the past with great tenderness, the experience that is old age for many
people. Within that context we also see people from other cultures or who have
devoted family visiting constantly or there's a woman who is nursed by her
daughter who gets more and more desperate as the situation unfolds. So I think
there's a variety of experiences at the end of life and whilst we mustn't lose
sight of the wit and the passion of Alan's characters and the characters that I
tried to develop, there is real sadness in there as well and we have to address
those things. Yes, it is sad. Tender is an appropriate word I feel, thinking
back on the film. So it is this examination as we're speaking about to survive
old age, but it's also Alan Bennett's love letter to the NHS. People would say
an unashamedly political piece as we see with some of the monologue towards the
end as well. How did it work with you and Alan? Well, Alan, one of the reasons I
took on the job was because I hoped to meet Alan Bennett and then lockdown
intervened so we only met over the phone. It was brilliant actually because the
play did need a certain amount of work to convert it to the screen. Everything
needs work when you convert it from one medium to another. So Alan said to me
over the phone, you must do what you think and imagine that I am dead. I thought
I can't think of anything worse than a world where Alan Bennett no longer
exists. So I found that quite traumatising. Anyway, we had a lovely chat, made
each other laugh and then at the end of the conversation he said, yes, you must
do what you think is right and I will tell you what I think of it. I thought, oh
crumbs, that's the reverse of being alive and kicking. So actually, you know, it
is a burden. He's a genius and you mess with genius at your peril. I also have a
very passionate view of the NHS. I have relatives, younger relatives who are
nurses and I felt I was able to bring that to my study of Valentine and his
anger towards the end of the film about how the NHS needs are supportive, it is
to survive. So that was something I was able to pick up and run with. And
overall, when I broadly finished work on the screenplay as we started to
approach production, Alan did read it and his response was very positive. He
said, normally I wince when people change things I've written, but I didn't
wince once. And that was just so brilliant to know that I hadn't offended him, I
suppose. And also he said he laughed out loud when he was reading it, but he
didn't always know if he was laughing at my lines or his. And that was even
better because I thought, you know, he's not angry with me and he seems to have
enjoyed it. But then of course, it's passed on to Richard Eyre, who's a
wonderful director and the ultimate author of any film is the director. Richard
didn't overwrite the script, but he shapes it, he colours it, he edits it, you
know, and ultimately Alan wrote a play, I wrote a screenplay and Richard made a
film. Wow. I just want to let our listeners know as well, that's Hallelujah,
that will be in cinemas from the 17th of March. I began seeing the posters all
over London town as well, which must be exciting to see. And I will also let
them know that the 12th series of Call the Midwife have finished airing on BBC
One, but the next three series, the next three have already been commissioned.
Just before I let you go, did you think it would have that sort of staying power
when you started in 2012? Oh, gosh, no, if I had, I would have slipped my
throat. The idea of doing it for 15 years, which it will be by the time we get
to the end of series 15, was unthinkable. But it's a labour of love. I will keep
coming back to it again and again, whatever else I do. Labour. Heidi Thomas,
thanks so much for joining us. Thank you, Nuala. Now, I want to turn to our next
topic, Patriarchies. Feminism isn't as modern as we might think, and the
patriarchies may be more fragile than they appear. It is the basis of a new book
by science journalist Angela Saini. In The Patriarchs, How Men Came to Rule,
Angela uncovers stories of female-led societies and the lessons that they might
teach us. Angela, welcome back to Woman's Hour. Thank you. Good to have you with
us. Okay, so how did men come to power? I mean, it's such a big fundamental
question. And actually, you know, when I tell people about the book, the instant
reaction is always, why isn't there a huge literature on this already? There
must be hundreds of books written on this topic. Where did patriarchy come from?
How did men come to have so much power? Actually, it's so thin, there's hardly
any books written on this topic at all. It was a big question in the 19th
century. And the reason it took that long to become a big question, at least in
the West, is because we naturalised it. We just assumed that male domination was
perhaps part of our makeup, that humans had always had this kind of system of
gendered oppression of some sort, that this is the oldest form of oppression.
And it was only, really, in the middle of the 19th century that people started
to ask, as they were fighting for more rights, as you got kind of women's rights
activists calling for emancipation, that people started to wonder, well,
actually, where does it come from? What are the roots of all of this? And there
were lots of answers. I think many of us have our own assumptions. If we don't
naturalise it, then perhaps one big theory is that we were all matriarchal once,
and there was this big catastrophic event in history. And then we all became
patriarchal. That was what Friedrich Engels said. Another view is that
agriculture or civilisation was the turning point, because then we get property,
and then men want to control the property, and that was the turning point. And
as I learned, through writing this, we have a lot more evidence now in
archaeology, anthropology, history. We just look at gender in history very
differently now. None of those are really true, or at least not fully. But the
true story, the fundamental story of how we came here, how we got to here, is
just utterly fascinating. And it's completely changed the way I think about the
world. Because it seems like it hasn't been one linear story, that there has
been this complex web of evolution in various societies over which male or
female might have the upper hand, for want of a better term, or domination. How
much do you think, if any, is down to biological differences, which comes up
pretty early? Well, we have to ask ourselves. You can rest this assumption on
biological differences. You could say, okay, on average, men have more upper
body strength, they're a little bit bigger, so maybe that was what gave them the
edge. But actually, when you go into prehistory, one of the places I traveled to
when I was writing this book was Çatalhöyük, which is very famous as being one
of the oldest settlements on the planet. It's 9,000 years old. So by thousands
of years, it predates the pyramids in Egypt, it predates Stonehenge by thousands
of years, it predates written language. And what you see there, at least this is
what the archaeologists who worked on this site in the 1990s told me, was that
all the measures that we have to gauge gender inequality show that men and women
lived pretty much the same way. They spent around the same amount of time
indoors and outdoors, that they ate the same food, they were buried in the same
way. We see lots of female figurines, so women by no means were invisible in
these societies. So we don't see a huge, very gendered way of living. Even if
there were other hierarchies, we don't see gender being a predominant one. And
certainly in other parts of the world, around the same time in the Neolithic,
for example, if you go to the Americas, there have been loads of excavations of
female hunters, female warriors. So we have to ask ourselves, if we don't see
that in prehistory, and if we know that even now we have matrilineal and
matrilocal societies in which power is divided in very different ways from
patriarchal ones, then if it is a biological rule, why is it not universal and
timeless? So that's what I wanted to put forward in this book, is that you can
believe it's biology, but at least let's give us some alternatives for thinking
about it. Let's see what else can explain the world as it is. What other
evidence do we have? Some of the issues I was interested in is how does, or how
do, patriarchies survive despite the constant resistance to that structure?
Well, I'm glad you used the phrase patriarchy rather than patriarchy, because I
think we imagine patriarchy as it's become this quite abstract term. It feels
monolithic, huge, as the world is, as though it's all pervasive. It impacts
every single aspect of your life, that however much we chip away at it, there'll
always be a little bit left. And what I wanted to do with this book is just say,
well, actually, what is it really? If we break it down into its constituent
parts, what does it actually look like? And what you see remarkably is that
there's a huge picture of variation, even in antiquity, in some of the most
sexist parts of human history, for example, in ancient Athens. You can still see
resistance. You can still see people pushing back and negotiating power and
things changing over time in pretty much the same way that we see now, that over
the last hundred years, that push and pull would have existed right throughout
history in every part of the world. And it's true that in Europe or in parts of
Europe, these patriarchal customs and these ideologies span thousands of years.
In other parts of the world, they are within living memory. Let's talk to some
that will be within living memory. And I love looking through the history as
well of patriarchies around the world. I was reading the Soviet Russia was the
first country in the world to legalise abortion. That was new to me. But how did
the Soviet Union change the gender power balance? And we can also talk, I
suppose, a little bit about recent times as well. You know, this is one of the
most fascinating things. And it still surprises me that when people read that
section of the book, it comes as a shock to them to hear this. But I've
travelled quite a bit in Eastern Europe. And I remember once I was in Prague
with my husband. We had a baby who had left with our grandparents. And we were
having lunch in Prague. And we were having lunch with some academics, some local
academics, and we were telling them complaining about childcare, you know, how
expensive it was, and saying that, you know, surely this is a universal problem,
how do you deal with it? And the women just looked at us and laughed and said,
actually, you know, over here, we have the opposite issue is that women want to
be traditional housewives. Because under socialist rule, under the Soviet Union,
we had the freedom to do whatever we wanted. And we were expected to work. And
that was the that was how society was organized. When the Soviet Union began,
like you say, it became the first country in the world to legalize abortion in
1920. It very quickly because it wanted to radically change the state and the
family. And I have to be clear here, I'm not in any way whitewashing the
brutality of the regimes, they were terrible. And it's clear to see why women
and men both turned on them. But at that time, this was in the 20th century,
perhaps, in modern times, the first attempt we'd ever seen to smash the
patriarchy, gender norms were changed within a generation. And you know, women
were expected to work, they were shunted into higher education, they were given
all the opportunities as men, and expected to do the same work as men. And that
legacy of changing gender norms survives even to this day. So among Eastern
Europeans, you can see much higher rates of women in science and engineering
careers. If you look at women chess champions, even you see much higher rates in
Russia, Eastern Europe and Central Europe. So it really had this really had a
profound effect on people. One of the people I interviewed for the book who grew
up in Budapest, she was saying that her parents both worked, she lived, they
lived in Hungary. And she never remembered her mom cooking, because they would
go to work, they would eat in the canteens, bring her food home from the
canteens, their linens would be sent to the public laundry, where it was super
cheap to have them done. And that was how they organize their lives. She was
shocked when she traveled to the US and saw women domesticated and having to
cook. So interesting. You also talk about Iran as well, everything from the 1979
revolution to also what's happening with women's freedoms in the country today.
We've been watching those protests. But I do wonder, when we see the structures,
we see the resistance, and also how gender norms can change so quickly, as you
describe. How fragile are patriarchies? Far more fragile than we imagine. I
really, I mean, the way I describe it in the book is that this is a grift. You
know, these are not some kind of monolithic, this isn't some big conspiracy.
These are ideas that have been slowly fed into all our different parts of life,
from legal frameworks, the way the state works, our religions over a very long
period of time, the existence of matrilineal societies today is proof that we
can live in different ways. But it's a, you know, the stretch of empires and
colonialism, not just European colonialism, but all the empires stretching back,
you know, well into antiquity, that have spread these very, you know, when we
think about it, really warped, rigid ways of thinking about what is appropriate
for men and women, how we should be living, that can feel like straitjackets to
many of us, even now, and still felt like straitjackets then, people always
pushed back against it. So when I was writing the Patriarchs, I really
desperately wanted people to see the alternatives, which is why one of the
opening chapters are based around the Haudenosaunee in North America. I live in
New York now, so this is their territory. And in the 19th century, women,
women's rights activists, American women's rights activists, were fighting for
the vote. And yet, they recognized that right among them were communities of
women who had always had authority, these clan mothers predated by hundreds of
years, the US founding fathers, they had agency, they were in charge of
agriculture, they had enormous power in their own societies. All these things
that women's rights activists, who believed themselves to be living in the most
modern and cutting edge, equal society on earth, actually in these societies
already existed. And that created this huge anxiety, people couldn't understand,
they couldn't square this circle, because, you know, these Americans really
believed, how do we then frame ourselves as being modern when there are these
societies that aren't, and the way they framed it, of course, was to say that
they were primitive. So this is often how matrilineal societies have been
consigned, is that they're primitive, they're kind of remnants of the past,
which is incredibly racist and derogatory way to think about living societies
that have just organized themselves differently. The matrilineal puzzle, as they
put it, which I know you don't like that term either. But so interesting as you
take a trip around the world. Angela Saini, her book is The Patriarchs, How Men
Came to Rule. Thank you so much. Thank you. I want to move on now instead, the
word mascara, familiar with it on TikTok. Here's the line. I don't know about
your best friend, but mine has never tried to steal my mascara. And if you do
think that's a quote about makeup, think again. The hashtag mascara has racked
up more than 100 million views on TikTok over the past month or so. And it's the
latest code word that has been developed to avoid censorship filters. But the
euphemism is causing confusion, and nobody can quite agree on whether using
coded language to talk about painful experiences is helpful, appropriate or not.
Sophia Smith-Gaylor has written a book called Losing It, Sex Education for the
21st Century and is a senior journalist at Vice World News. Welcome back to
Women's Hour, Sophia. Good to have you with us. Hello. We also have Esther Della
Ford, who's a sex and relationship educator and therapist. Welcome, Esther. Hi.
So, OK, Sophia, for lots of people, they're coming new to this. I know you've
been talking about it on TikTok. But explain what mascara really means. Really
important caveat here is that, of course, there are plenty of people who are
still talking about mascara and posting about it on TikTok, who very much are
talking about the cosmetic product, including myself. I made a video about it a
few weeks ago talking about the etymology of the word. However, back in January,
now we saw the first video where someone was using the word to talk about
something that wasn't, in fact, mascara. They were actually using mascara and
mascara wand as a code word for talking about a vibrator. And over the next
couple of weeks, this code word changed a bit. And you're right to highlight the
confusion. Some people chose to use mascara as a way to talk about sex without
using the word sex. Some specifically used it to talk about specifically sexual
abuse. And the fact that the word had quite broad meaning ranging between
positive and negative experiences of sex is why, till this day, you still have
search requests on TikTok of people saying, what does the mascara trend mean?
But while mascara is still causing a lot of confusion, there are many, many
words that lots of us on TikTok, you know, with me and my reporting and my book,
and when I try and share education or information around sexual reproductive
health rights in particular, we come against this all the time. If you use
certain words, you may find that your content could suffer a range of
consequences. This may be that it will, the video will be removed. That's
probably the most severe. You may find that comments are shadow banned, which is
if you chose to comment using a particular word, TikTok would remove the
comment. This actually once happened. Someone once asked me, what's the name of
your book? I said, losing it with a cherry emoji because I had a cherry on the
front cover. And that comment got removed by TikTok. Possibly the cherry emoji.
I've had other comments where I've posted them, and they've not been removed,
but they have been shadow banned. So I'm the only user who can see them. And a
lot of the time, you might change the spelling of sex to segs. That's something
I've done before. But it's infuriating because this work is about tackling
taboo. And we shouldn't feel the need to self censor around these very important
topics. Let me bring in Esther here. What do you think the conversations that
are taking place using the word mascara or other code words? I think it's really
important to allow people, especially victims of sexual violence to use whatever
language feels comfortable to them. And I think that there are issues with
certain words being censored. Anything that allows people to have a conversation
and feel that they can share their experience and be validated by other people's
experiences has to be a positive thing, even if there is a risk of potentially
some confusion. Yeah, I mean, I think that's it. Some people talking about the
confusion, some people also asking Esther whether it's trivializes, for example,
a topic like sexual assault, instead of being able to talk about it in a more
open way, you know, being able to be specific, even if that may have to be
graphic at times instead of using the word like mascara. I think it's really
important that we don't force people to use language they're maybe not ready to
use. Words have a lot of power and especially the words around sexual violence,
words like rape, sexual assault, they carry a lot of weight. And once you've
used those words to describe your experience, it's quite difficult to take them
back. There's lots of layers to this. There's the kind of being open about being
a sexual assault survivor online and using that language online. And then
there's kind of the personal internal experience once you've used that language.
I don't think that we can say to people this happened to you, so you need to use
these words to describe it because the healing process is so personal and the
layered process of taking back your power and acknowledging what happened to you
isn't something that happens overnight. Because I know you've had your own
experience of assault as well. And for you then, talking in this way, did that
help? Talking in... Like in a way, whether it's with code words or trying to
find language that you find palatable. I've always used the words that describe
what happened to me. I've always used rape. I've always used sexual assault,
sexual trauma, sexual violence. That was important to me. But it's also
important to me to advocate for other people's right to choose. And right to
choose expands to so many things when you've had the power to make the decisions
about what happens to your body taken away. I think it's really important that
you have the power to hold the narrative around the conversations about that
afterwards. So that is also within the community. But coming back to you,
Sophia, I think there might be people, maybe that are parents or guardians of
younger people that are using code words, stuff that they don't understand on
TikTok. And I don't know how parents can even decode some of the messages that
perhaps they see. I think it's, of course, it's really important that parents
take an active interest in these platforms. But it's also very important to not
always be reactive and to think, my goodness, I do not understand the words that
my child is using in this respect. Be proactive, be on TikTok, following
accounts yourself and try and keep an eye on news about the platform. For this
story in particular, it was a fantastic investigation that was done in 2022 by
the National Institute of Gender Equality and the German Public Broadcasters
that found words that are repeatedly flagged, they're internally flagged on
TikTok to be shadow banned. These include words, included words such as porn and
sex, which explains why creators have such a tough time talking about sex
education, which they shouldn't. But secondly, it also had words like gay and
homosexual. And imagine being a young person trying to talk openly about your
sexual orientation, for example, and then finding that TikTok as an app and as a
platform policy would shadow ban that content. So it's really important for you
to understand why young people may be resorting to having to use an anti-
language, a coded language to try and express very important information about
their identities. Just before I let you go, how quickly do the code words
change? Oh, rapidly. And sometimes they work, sometimes they don't work. But
there are some staple ones I would say. Corn, for example, is a byword for porn.
And unalived, we are seeing people instead of saying dead or killed, unalived
too. Those are some common ones. Sophia Smith-Gaylor, Esther Della Ford, thank
you so much. And we like to say that every day on this programme is
International Women's Day. But having said that, tomorrow, the 8th of March is.
I will be talking to Foreign Secretary James Cleverley MP as he travels to
Sierra Leone to launch the UK's new International Women and Girls Strategy. I
hope you'll join me tomorrow for more Woman's Hour. Woman's Hour was presented
by Nuala McGovern and produced by Lucinda Montefiore. The studio engineer was
Bob Nettles. Helen Lewis will be here with a new series of The Spark just after
the news. But first, Coluineers is at midday. Over now to Winifred Robinson for
all the details. Hi, Winifred. Hi, Ron. Thank you. Yes, we want to talk about
child care today. We're asking how is child care working for you? Ring 03700 100
444. Parents in the UK are paying more for their child care than parents in many
other countries. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC sounds. Please call us if you're working parents, if you work in
child care, or if you help look after someone else's children in your home.