TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 run in Wellington. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. It's two o'clock GMT. I'm Jackie Leonard. This is the
Newsroom from the BBC World Service. The Colombian government says that scores
of police officers and oil workers taken hostage by protesters in the south of
the country on Thursday have been released. The two runners-up in Nigeria's
election prepare to mount a legal challenge to the result. A prominent US lawyer
has been sentenced to life in prison for killing his wife and son to distract
from his financial crimes. He plans to appeal. I'm innocent. I would never under
any circumstances hurt my wife Maggie and I would never under any circumstances
hurt my son Popo. Also in the programme, a new disease in wild birds caused
solely by plastic pollution. It's something that doesn't occur when they ingest
sort of natural particles like rocks which they've been doing for millennia.
It's only the ingestion of plastic that causes this particular fibrotic disease.
All here on the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. BBC News. Hello, I'm Gareth
Barlow. The Colombian government says that a group of more than 80 people who
were taken hostage by protesters in the south of the country have been released.
Most were police officers who've been trying to clear roadblocks. The protesters
want an energy company exploring for oil in the region to fulfil its promises to
improve local roads. President Gustavo Pedro, who says he'll visit the area in
the next few days, said the events raised important questions. Today, thanks to
the work of the defence and the interior ministries, we were able to free all
the police officers and oil workers that were held by the rural people of San
Vicente del Caguán. This is an act that should lead us to rethink many topics
regarding how we treat the social conflict in Colombia. The head of the African
Union has congratulated the winner of Nigeria's presidential election, Bola
Tenubu, as his defeated rivals challenged the result. Musa Fakim Mohamed said
any post-election grievance should be pursued through the judicial system and
urged all parties to uphold peace. Bola Tenubu was named the winner after
getting 37% of the vote. A disgraced lawyer has been jailed for life for
murdering his wife and son in a case that has gripped the United States.
Prosecutors, said Alex Murdoch, carried out the killings to divert attention
from his theft of millions of dollars from clients to fund an expensive drug
habit. Murdoch was from a legal dynasty in South Carolina, as Gary O'Donoghue
reports. For decades, the Murdochs have held key prosecutor roles in several
counties and their private law firm was regarded as almost as powerful as law
enforcement itself. But two years ago, with financial pressures mounting and
criminal charges on the cards, Alec Murdoch brutally murdered his wife and son,
carefully attempting to construct an alibi as he did it. During sentencing,
Judge Clifton Newman strongly suggested he'd be imposing a death penalty if
prosecutors hadn't taken it off the table. The head of the United Nations
nuclear watchdog is preparing to meet senior leaders in Iran after his
inspectors detected uranium enriched to near weapons grade level in the country.
Rafael Grossi is expected to meet Iran's President Ebrahim Raisi on Saturday.
Bethany Bell has more details. Diplomats say Mr Grossi is trying once again to
get Iran to increase its cooperation with UN inspectors. The IAEA's latest
report said that uranium particles enriched to nearly 84% purity had been found
at Iran's underground Fordo nuclear plant. Weapons grade uranium is 90%. Tehran
says its nuclear programme is peaceful. Live from Broadcasting House in central
London, you're listening to the latest world news. The Roman Catholic Church in
Portugal has promised to take steps to deal with its history of child sex abuse
in response to a highly critical report last month. Bishops said there would be
a public gesture of contrition, but they also said that compensation should be
paid by individual abusers and not the church. One of the first black officers
in the US Army Special Forces has received the nation's highest military award,
the Medal of Honor, nearly 60 years after he was recommended for bravery in the
Vietnam War. Colonel Paris Davis disobeyed orders and risked his life to rescue
wounded troops back in 1965. The head of the European Union delegation to the
Palestinian territories has called for those behind a deadly rampage in the
occupied West Bank village of Huara to be brought to justice. Israeli settlers
set fire to Palestinian properties in the village after two Israeli brothers
were killed there. On a visit to Huara, Sven Kuhn of Ambergstorf said
accountability must be fully ensured. Researchers say that they believe they
found the earliest evidence of horse riding by humans dating back some 5,000
years. The findings are based on analysis of human skeletal remains that were
found in Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. With more details, the BBC's Paddy
Maguire has this report. The domestication of horses for their milk is widely
accepted to have begun around 5,000 years ago, but any equipment used by early
riders if they weren't going bareback is rarely preserved. Riding tacks
scientists say would have been made using perishable materials, but the human
skeleton can show the signs of change that come from riding a horse,
particularly stress-induced wear and tear to the vertebrae in the back.
Researchers examining five skeletons found in settlements of the ancient Yamnaya
people in Europe say such telltale changes could indicate they are the oldest
humans identified as riders to date. That's the latest BBC news. Hello, I'm
Jackie Leonard and you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service.
It's not unusual in Colombia to see rural communities staging protests against
mining companies trying to profit from their land. But things took a violent
turn on Thursday when clashes broke out between protesters and security forces
in the southern Caqueta province. Two people were killed and more than 80
people, most of them police officers, were taken hostage. Now they have been
freed in what's being seen as a success for the Colombian president Gustavo
Pietro. America's editor Leonardo Rocha was asked how their release was secured.
From the beginning the government of Gustavo Pietro made it clear that he wanted
a negotiated solution. There were calls for the deployment of troops. The
president indicated that he would deploy troops if necessary, but initially he
said he was going to send a government minister there to negotiate and
eventually two government ministers went to the region in the south of Colombia
to welcome the hostage. So I believe there were back, you know, negotiations to
have them freed quickly and without any harm. And just to step back for a
minute, just give us the background to this hostage taking. These protesters had
been in the area for three weeks outside some oil fields in the south of
Colombia, in the Amazon region of Colombia. What they were demanding was
improvements by this Chinese company that was operating the oil fields. These
companies normally they get contracts and they promise in the contract, they
sign an agreement to improve roads or conditions in the area and it hadn't been
done. But on Thursday the police launched this disastrous operation in which two
people were shot dead. So eventually after this operation, after the two
killings, these people were kept hostage in an area, not detained as such, not
in cells, but they would say we are not going to leave. In a way it's a
negotiating tool from community leaders and indigenous leaders. And what do they
really want, the community leaders? They want improvements. They were also
complaining about environmental damage to the areas. It happens quite often in
Colombia, in Ecuador, Peru, other areas where these oil companies or mining
companies, they operate in areas where indigenous people live by the river. They
need the land and the land is destroyed. What's different here is what the new
government has been in power for about six months, what they want to do.
President Gustavo Petro came to power promising to end this cycle of violence in
Colombia and said we are going to solve problems, engage everyone in peace
negotiations and resolve problems with dialogue. And the quick way in which this
was resolved is a big boost for his policies and his promise to visit the
region, Caquetá region, soon and talk to the leaders. Leonardo Rocha, the head
of the African Union has congratulated the winner of Nigeria's presidential
election, Bola Tinubu, and urged all sides to uphold peace. Mr Tinubu was
declared the winner with 37% of the vote, but his defeated rivals Atiku Abubakar
and Peter Obi dispute the result. And a court has given them permission to
access materials held by Nigeria's electoral commission, allowing them to
prepare for a possible legal challenge. Our reporter Simi Djolo's show told us
more. What they're looking for is anything that would prove that the election
was a sham, mainly, probably being that the electoral officials at the over
175,000 polling stations across the country, who were supposed to have quickly
uploaded results, the voting results from each polling unit onto an online
portal to prevent any manipulation. There's lots of accusations that many didn't
or many of the results took ages to be filed. So within this time frame, some of
the votes could have been changed. Then there's the accusation that lots of
people didn't even get the chance to vote, especially in key areas that could
have led to a win for either of the two opposition candidates. And I witnessed
it myself when I went to some polling units where officials either didn't show
up or they showed up really late. And at that point, a lot of potential voters
had gone home. So this court order pretty much only grants the two parties
access to materials held by the electoral commission so that they can move
forward with the challenge. But it isn't the formal legal challenge of the
outcome of the election itself. If a legal challenge does go ahead, will it
actually affect the election result and Bolotunabu's presidency? All legal
challenges of an election in Nigeria must be filed within 21 days. So they have
until the 31st of March to actually file the petition. But until then, they have
to gather enough evidence that proves what they're trying to say. This is going
to be a behemoth of a task to collect evidence from 176,000 polling stations and
more than 8,000 collation centres from across the country. And then again, the
two parties, the PDP and the Labour Party, they might file separately. So one
cannot really say whether the tribunal will reach a decision before the 29th of
May. And that's the date that Mr. Tinabu is due to be sworn in as president.
That was Simi Jolaosu. A judge in the US state of South Carolina has jailed a
prominent lawyer for life in a case that's gripped the country. Alex Murdoch was
found guilty of shooting his wife and son in June 2021. He's also facing
multiple charges for alleged financial crimes. This report from Gary O'Donoghue.
This is the fall of a dynasty, it's a fall from grace. I do believe that Alec
Murdoch would kill Paula Maggie. This gruesome family tragedy has already
spawned two separate television miniseries chronicling the disintegration of a
prominent family in the close-knit low country area of South Carolina. For
decades, the Murdochs have held key prosecutor roles in several counties and
their private law firm was regarded as almost as powerful as law enforcement
itself. But two years ago, with financial pressures mounting and criminal
charges on the cards, Alec Murdoch brutally murdered his wife and son on their
1,700-acre property, carefully attempting to construct an alibi as he did it.
During sentencing, Judge Clifton Newman strongly suggested he'd be imposing a
death penalty if prosecutors hadn't taken it off the table. Alec Murdoch
remained defiant. I respect this court, but I'm innocent. I would never, under
any circumstances, hurt my wife Maggie, and I would never, under any
circumstances, hurt my son Paul. The prosecution said Murdoch committed the
murders in an attempt to generate sympathy at a time when his life was falling
apart, with allegations that he'd stolen huge sums from clients, partly to feed
a drug habit. Three months after the murders, Murdoch also admitted to a botched
fake suicide attempt involving a $10 million insurance claim, charges for which
are still pending. Outside the court, after sentencing, his lawyers said he
would appeal. And character information is he's a thief, he's a liar. Then it
dictated this jury had to think he was a despicable human being and not to be
believed. What fatally undermined Murdoch's case was that he had to admit he'd
lied about the last time he'd seen his wife and son alive. That emerged in
dramatic fashion when a video from his dead son's phone, taken minutes before
the murders, was played to the court with Murdoch's voice clearly on it. Hey,
he's got a bird in his mouth! Bubba! Damn, Bubba. The fascination with the case
has captivated a nation already enthralled to the true crime genre. That has all
been infinitely magnified by televised court proceedings and the substantial
latitude for comment and discussion of ongoing criminal matters afforded by
American law. That was Gary O'Donoghue. This is the BBC World Service, a
reminder of our main news this hour. The Colombian government says that dozens
of police officers and oil workers who were taken hostage by protesters in the
south of the country have been released. President Joe Biden and the German
Chancellor Olaf Schultz have been holding talks in Washington. Mr Biden
reaffirmed America's strong relationship with Germany and discussed a number of
global issues, including, of course, the war in Ukraine. The US has just
announced another $400 million worth of military aid for Kiev, along with more
ammunition and equipment. Our North America correspondent Peter Bowes joins us
now. So, Peter, what else do we know about what was agreed at this meeting?
Well, the White House meeting was mostly about showing a united front,
reaffirming the solidarity of the West, indeed global solidarity with the people
of Ukraine and the ongoing efforts to provide aid in all of its forms,
humanitarian, economic, military, political. That said, the visit by the German
Chancellor was somewhat low-key. No post-meeting news conference, for example,
as sometimes happens when foreign leaders meet the president in the White House.
Mr Biden thanked Mr Schultz for his strong and steady leadership and support for
Ukraine. The Chancellor said it was important to demonstrate that the Allies
would back Kiev as long as it takes and as long as necessary. One thing that's
interesting is speaking before the meeting, US officials said the discussion
would include the state of the war and how to respond if China provided military
aid to Russia. Now, since the meeting, we've heard nothing on the China
question, which is an important one, given the United States' particularly
fractious relationship with Beijing. At the moment, Germany has a much less
hawkish attitude towards China than the US, although Mr Schultz did send a
strong warning to China earlier this week not to provide weapons to Moscow. And
one other story going on today, Peter. We've heard that President Biden had a
cancerous skin lesion removed from his chest last month. How serious do we know
that is? And is it likely to influence his decision to run for president again?
Well, based on the information that we have from the president's doctor, I'd say
very unlikely to influence that decision. The lesion has been confirmed to be
basal cell carcinoma, which is a form of cancer that doesn't normally spread
easily to other parts of the body. They've removed the cancer. He is, we're
told, healing nicely, doesn't require any more treatment. This is the most
common form of skin cancer, one of the most common forms of all cancers. In
fact, something that Mr Biden, before he was elected president, has dealt with
before. All the signs are, Jackie, that he plans to run for a second term as
president. Clearly at 80, the oldest serving president, there are questions
about his health, his ability to serve. But when he had his physical exam last
month, the bottom line from his doctor was that Mr Biden is indeed fit for duty.
Peter, thank you. That was Peter Bowes, our North America correspondent. There's
growing attention on Moldova's pro-Russia region of Transnistria, which broke
away in a civil war in 1992 as the country emerged from Soviet rule. The pro-
Western government has repeatedly spoken of the need to remove Russian troops
from the territory, and that rhetoric has increased after Russia's invasion of
Ukraine amid fears the war could spill over into neighbouring Moldova. One
village caught in the middle of the conflict is Molovata Nua, an enclave wedged
beside Transnistrian territory but separated from the rest of Moldova by a
river. Our correspondent Lucy Williamson spoke to civil war veterans in the
village. Once a year, these veterans make a pilgrimage from the Moldovan village
of Molovata Nua into Russian-controlled Transnistria, following a trail of
simple monuments, pale blue crosses made from metal poles that mark the places
their comrades fell, sharing wine from a plastic bottle and remembering young
men like Vasya. I was coming down this road with Vasya. We were both snipers. He
was hit in the neck with a shrapnel fragment. He fell to the ground and died in
my arms. But memories of the past here are now joined by fears for the future.
Moscow has been talking up the threat of a Ukrainian assault on Transnistria,
warning that any attack on its forces there will be seen as an attack on Russia
itself. Moldova's president has warned of a Russian plot to topple her pro-
Western government. As the veterans pass a local school, the pupils come out
with head teacher Tatiana Roska to greet them. There were big battles here in
1992 that left deep wounds. We're very afraid. We know what war means and we
don't wish it on anyone. One of her pupils tells me she's ready to take up arms,
as her father and grandfather did here 30 years ago. But the pull of Moldovan
identity is set against the pull of subsidised Russian gas from Transnistria.
There are those here who say that Transnistria looks after them, while Moldova's
government on the other side of the river Nista ignores them, and that President
Maya Sandu is provoking a war with Moscow by moving closer to the West. I'm
going to be honest. It's very difficult to convince people that life is better
in Moldova when they pay a fraction of the price for gas here. The mayor of
Molovatovo, Oleg Gazya, says divisions here have deepened since Moscow cut gas
supplies to Moldova last year. We can't talk about freedom and a better life,
and at the same time tell them to go across the river and pay 30 times more for
their bills. They'll say, are you crazy? But there's a hidden price. It buys
their support. In the village square, the veterans end their pilgrimage by
laying red carnations at a memorial to the frozen conflict. In the years since
they fought pro-Russian forces, their children have grown up alongside Russian
soldiers, Russian language and Russian economic support. We older men will still
form the heart of any resistance, Vlad tells me, even with the involvement of
younger men. Jammed up against Transnistrian territory and separated from the
rest of Moldova by the Dniester River, many in this tiny Moldovan enclave feel
vulnerable, wondering if they'll be asked to defend it again. Lucy Williamson
reporting from Molovatovo. Now it's thought that there are more than five
trillion pieces of plastic in the world's oceans. And now scientists from the UK
and Australia say they've discovered a new disease in wild birds caused solely
by plastic pollution. Termed plasticosis, it's caused by small pieces of plastic
inflaming the bird's digestive system, which ultimately affects their ability to
survive. Dr Alex Bond from the Natural History Museum in London co-authored the
study and explained why and where they carried out their research. So the where
is Lord Howe Island, which is an island off the coast of New South Wales,
Australia, about halfway between Australia and New Zealand. And the why is
because that's where we've been working to try and understand the effects of
plastic pollution for the last almost two decades now on flesh-footed
shearwaters, which are one of the most heavily impacted species of marine birds.
Our study is just on chicks. So these are birds that are underground, they live
in burrows, and they all emerge at about 90 days old. So the parents have been
off getting food for them, and in some cases plastic, in the Tasman Sea. And
they bring that back to the chicks for about three months. And when the chicks
emerge from the burrow, we can either flush their stomachs and then release them
and they're quite happy. Or in the case of the birds that we used in this study,
we find them dead on the beach the next morning, unfortunately. There's nothing
special about the plastic that the shearwaters in Australia ingest. There's
nothing special about the physiology of their stomach. And it's something that
doesn't occur when they ingest sort of natural particles like rocks or pumice
stones, which they've been doing for millennia. It's only the ingestion of
plastic that causes this particular fibrotic disease. That was Dr Alex Bond on a
new disease in wild birds caused by plastic pollution. Now let's get some sports
news. Here's Paul Sarris. The champions Manchester City welcome Newcastle United
to the Etihad Stadium in the first of the weekend's English Premier League
matches. The City boss Pep Guardiola has been impressed with the progress Eddie
Howe's side has made this season. What I've seen lately, even the final against
United and what they have done this season, one of the toughest opponents we
have until the end of the season for the quality. They can do everything, it's
brilliant. And the threats, the transitions, the set pieces, the best team in
the league and many, many things. That's why they are there for a long, long
time this season. Meanwhile, Howe says he isn't listening to the noise
surrounding the ownership of Newcastle United. Fresh questions have arisen this
week following documents in a US court case describing the Newcastle chairman
Yasser al-Rumayyan as a sitting minister of the Saudi government. The sale of
Newcastle was allowed to proceed in October 2021 after the English Premier
League received legally binding assurances that the Saudi state would not
control the club. To be honest, I've not given it too much time. I'm aware of
the headlines. I've seen the headlines, but I haven't really invested in the
details behind it. I've got Manchester City to prepare for and that genuinely
has taken all my attention. The league leaders Arsenal host Bournemouth at the
Emirates Stadium on Saturday afternoon. The Gunners have recorded three straight
wins since losing to Manchester City, but their manager, Mikkel Arteta, says
there is still plenty of room for improvement. We can do things much, much
better in many aspects of the game. We still have players with immense growth
potential, individually and collectively, and as a club as well. We have still a
lot of things that we can do much better and that's the end. We have to be
really seeking for that excellence and that perfectionism. The former England
cricket captain Michael Vaughan has denied allegations that he made racist
comments towards his former Yorkshire County teammate Azeem Rafiq. Vaughan gave
evidence to the Cricket Discipline Commission hearing in London on Friday. He
and six other former Yorkshire players are accused of using racially
discriminatory language. The seven-time Formula One world champion Lewis
Hamilton says his Mercedes team are well off the pace after Friday's practice
sessions ahead of the weekend's Bahrain Grand Prix. I kind of knew that a little
bit in the test, but it's a big gap. I'm trying everything I can out there, but
just it is what it is, and so we've just got to try and work at it. And in
tennis, Novak Djokovic's 20-match unbeaten start to the season is over. The
world number one was beaten by Daniil Medvedev in the semi-final of the Dubai
Tennis Championships. Medvedev will face Andrei Rublev in the final. Thanks,
Paul. That was Paul Serres with the sports news. Treasure has been found aboard
the wreck of a royal ship that sank more than 500 years ago. But it's not gold
or jewels that the archaeological scientists have discovered. Oh, no, it's
preserved spices, as Wendy Urquhart reports. The Gribsund or Griffin, as she's
also known, is a Danish warship that dates back to the late 1400s when she
belonged to King Hans of Denmark and Sweden. In 1495, the king sailed to Sweden
for talks with leaders there who were bent on gaining independence. The Griffin
caught fire while she was docked off the southern coast, and many of her
150-strong crew died when the ship sank. But the king wasn't on board at the
time. The shipwreck was first discovered by a local diving club more than 40
years ago, but those divers didn't tell archaeologists about their find until
the year 2000. Military artefacts, silver coins and a massive wooden figurehead
have since been recovered from the ship. But archaeological scientist Michael
Larsen from Lund University says this is a very different kind of treasure. To
find spices like this in one assemblage is quite remarkable. If we look at the
exotic spices, it's quite, it's very unique. Saffron, particularly. This is the
only archaeological context where we found saffron. So it's very unique and it's
very special. It's thought the spices were probably kept in storage bags that
disintegrated over the centuries, and the spices fell into pockets of sediment.
The Baltic Sea has low oxygen, low temperatures and low salinity, which means
such organic materials can be better preserved there than elsewhere in the world
ocean system. Archaeological scientist Brendan Foley from Lund University, who
led the excavation, says this find was a complete surprise. I've never seen
anything quite like the spices from Gribshunden and it sparked my imagination. I
thought if the Baltic is such a great preservative environment that we have
something as ephemeral as saffron in the sediments, what about the other
extraordinary places for archaeological preservation underwater? Now these
archaeological scientists are planning to explore the Caspian Sea and the Black
Sea for other shipwrecks that could also be harbouring such cargoes. Wendy
Urquhart reporting. And a reminder of our main news at the moment, the Colombian
government says that scores of police officers and oil workers who were taken
hostage by protesters in the south of the country have now been released. I'm
Jackie Leonard, you've been listening to the Newsroom from the BBC. This is the
BBC World Service remembering one of the world's most famous political activists
through music. I'm Jonah Matrading and this is a song I wrote for Nelson
Mandela. As the first democratically elected president of South Africa,
Mandela's remarkable journey to freedom was followed around the world. Music
inspired him and it was central to the cultures that made him. Closer music
informs its people of closer values. It can be organised, it can be spontaneous,
sung in a group and it can be about anything, work, play. In his own words, it
is music and dancing that makes me at peace with the world and at peace with
myself. Mandela, a legacy in music. At bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries
or wherever you get your podcasts. Coming up on Stumped with me, Eleanor
Aldroid. Australia have done it again. They are the women's T20 world champions
for the sixth time. South Africa may have lost in the final, but they won the
hearts of their fans. We'll hear from their star batter, Laura Wolfhardt. Plus,
we'll discuss one of the best finishes to a test match ever as New Zealand beat
England by a single run in Wellington. That's all on Stumped after the latest
from BBC News. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The Colombian government says more
than 80 people who were taken hostage by protesters in the south of the country
have been released. The police officers and oil workers were held following
deadly clashes near an oil field in Kakata. The head of the African Union has
congratulated the winner of Nigeria's presidential election. The Prime Minister
of Nigeria's presidential elections, Bolotunubi, as his defeated rivals, mount a
legal challenge to the result. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has
promised to take steps to deal with its history of child sex abuse. It follows a
highly critical report that found that nearly 5000 children have been abused by
clergy since 1950. The head of the United Nations, Nicola Watchdog, is preparing
to meet senior leaders in Iran after his inspectors detected uranium enriched to
near weapons-grade level in the country. Officials in the Indonesian capital
Jakarta say that at least 17 people are known to have died in a huge fire at a
state-run fuel depot on Friday. Trade unions in Sri Lanka are warning of further
strikes in response to the announcement of steep tax rises and public spending
cuts. The government says the measures are needed to secure a vital bailout loan
of nearly $3 billion from the IMF. One of the first black officers in the US
Army's special forces has received the nation's highest military award, nearly
60 years after he was recommended for bravery in the Vietnam War. Colonel Paris
Davis's nomination for the Medal of Honor was lost twice by the military at the
height of the civil rights movement. Researchers say that they found one of the
earliest evidences of horses riding by humans dating back some 5000 years. They
say that damage to the vertebrae of five skeletons from the ancient Yamnaya
people in Europe identify them as the oldest known riders that have been
discovered to date. There are of course plenty more stories on our website just
head to bbc.com slash news. From the BBC World Service in association with ABC
and All India Radio, this is Stumped. Hello and welcome to Stumped, your
intercontinental hit of news, features and debate from the quirky world of
cricket. I'm Eleanor Oldroyd in London where we woke up to another frosty
morning but the good news is it's March, the Northern Hemisphere spring is on
the horizon and with England finishing their test series against New Zealand.
What is out there is a summer of test cricket starting with Ireland at the
beginning of June for England and then it's the men's ashes, a world test
championship as well in between all of that but so much to look forward to. And
I had an interesting conversation last night guys which was all about the fact
that we had a really hot summer here in England last summer. We've had a really
cold winter and that means that when the blossom comes out on the trees it's
going to be an absolutely spectacular show. So that's my little bit of
positivity on a cold London morning. Jim Maxwell in Sydney. Oh Ellie, you're
fantastic. Gee I think you're swell, didn't someone say a few years ago? It's
nice to be talking to you again. My little friend just wandered in while I was
talking here and I'm going to have a brief self-indulgence to tell you that
Rusty who's an adolescent puppy at 14 months has been a bit naughty. I got a
brand new passport the other day in readiness for the excitement of going away
and within two days he'd managed to eat a good portion of it and I took this
rather doggy passport into the office and the chap said no, it looks all right
on the main pages but you'll have to get another one. And then he followed that
up by eating one of my blood thinners which meant that he had a little bit of a
hospitalisation with the vet. So it's been a very exciting week and apparently
there's been a few good cricket matches played and a close game was in New
Zealand but we'll talk about that. Yeah, absolutely. Rusty is clearly going to
be adolescent for some years to come. I think it's the classic excuse dog get my
passport. That's right. I honestly thought that happened just in the movies or
in the books. Dog eats passport but you know I hope you get your passport soon,
Jim. Hello, this is Charu Sharma for All India Radio in Bangalore once again.
Just another couple of days before I disappear into the Himalayas for a trek.
Nothing desperate. It's with old school mates of mine so everybody's sort of a
little oldish on the trek and nothing at all as difficult as trying to bat for
long on the pitches that India are offering for the India Australia series.
Well, good luck to both the teams but India, Jim by the way, has already
retained the border GalaScript trophy so there. Well, look, I'm very jealous of
your trek, Charu. That sounds absolutely fantastic and we're hoping for regular
updates on Stumped. But look, let's start by talking about the Women's T20 World
Cup. South Africa may not have won in the final but they were victorious in
plenty of other ways. They've undoubtedly inspired many women and young girls in
the country and their win over England in the semi-final will live long in the
memory. They captured the hearts of the South African people with a record
attendance for a women's match in the final at Newlands. South Africa star Laura
Wolfhardt has been speaking with the BBC's Isaac Fanin. It's been crazy. I think
making it into the semi-final is a bit unexpected after how we started the
tournament and then obviously making it all the way to the final was amazing for
our team and to have such a full house at Newlands the other night was really
special. So yeah, a lot has been happening the last few days. You lost that
first game to Sri Lanka. I remember watching the game. Of course, there's so
much pressure that comes with hosting a tournament but then to lose your opening
game just must have added to that pressure. Yeah, definitely. Not the way you
want to start the tournament and I think from then on we really just had to take
it game by game, not thinking too far ahead. We had to have a lot of things go
our way as well with other results to make it through so very fortunate to make
it all the way through. But yeah, I think we peaked at the right time at the end
there. Personally, you seem to sort of be the key kind of person to galvanise
the team. You finished the tournament as the highest run scorer. What was your
mindset going into the tournament? What was your mindset after that opening loss
and what confidence does it give you going forward now? I felt I had a very bad
start to the tournament. My first three games were not ideal at all. I didn't
play as well as I wanted to in that Australia game at all. Yeah, and I was
actually very disappointed with how my tournament started. Cricket is
frustrating sometimes because I didn't do too much different than as what I did
in the last three games where I did score runs. So yeah, I'm happy that it
turned around when it did and that I was able to still make it a memorable
tournament for me even after how I started. It looked as though there was like a
real sort of party atmosphere wherever you played and just like your squad there
was loads of diversity in the crowd. Did you feel that sort of support? Yeah, we
really felt the support throughout. The crowds were incredible. I think we
didn't expect crowds like that at all and to see how the game sort of helped to
unite everyone and everyone came together to support us which was really awesome
to see. We really felt all of the support on the field and off the field as well
with all of the messages and things like that that we were getting. Well, that
was Laura Volvart who got half century in that semi-final against England but
then it was the bowlers really that carried South Africa through I think really
terrific performance by Kakko, Tukfor and Ismail as well. But England, maybe
they just didn't turn up in the way that you would have expected them to do. I
think everyone was predicting that they would reach the final. I think they were
just so relieved to have avoided Australia in the semi-final that they really
didn't bring their A game on the day. But you can't take anything away from
South Africa because as Laura says, it feels like a game-changing moment
potentially for cricket in that country and to see the crowds that came in at an
iconic venue like Newlands to have a sellout as well for the final. But I mean,
I suppose Jim, the problem is that they came up against the most dominant team I
think potentially in any sport in the world in Australia. Well, so the strength
of any side that players like Australia's been playing is to have that
versatility and depth. So they're really back down to about nine. They've got
lots of options with the ball and they feel pretty well alongside that. And
despite, as I keep mentioning, the fickleness of T20 cricket, there's always a
game that you can lose and they're very nearly lost to India had it not been for
that run out where Kaur got a bat stuck, they probably would have lost. So
Australia's record, unbelievable really. Six of the last seven T20 World Cups,
something like 13 white ball wins in major competition. Interesting thing around
that is that they do not get the recognition globally that I think they deserve.
I mean, if you look at something like the Laureates Awards and the nominations,
not only for teams, but for players, the women's team in Australia do not
feature at all. Whereas historically, if you go back to the days when Australia
were winning a lot of test matches and Brett Lee, for instance, was one player
on the rise, he was nominated. The Australian cricket team was nominated, but
the women's crickets not considered obviously at this point to be as strong as
the men's game, because they deserve to be there. And people will argue, well,
you know, they've only got two or three teams that can take them on. That may be
the case, but I think they deserve better recognition for the extraordinary
continuity of dominance in a sport. And for that reason, they should be there,
but there it is. So they're quite happy to keep taking the trophies and enjoying
their lives as cricketers and even more professional cricketers now that they go
to the women's Premier League very shortly where they'll get the kind of reward
that they've been dreaming about for the last couple of months. Rusty is
agreeing with you every word there, Jim, isn't he? He's backing you up 100%. At
the same time, Charu, as Jim says, it was really close, wasn't it, in that semi-
final against India. Do you feel like the landscape is changing for women's
cricket in India as well, particularly with the WPL coming up? Without question.
Just like all of you have been mentioning that the landscape should be changing
for South Africa as well, which of course is a very sporting nation. But for
women in India, there are many other secondary problems which they have to
somehow get past and then take on to a sporting life. But just back to that
match, yes, you are right. I do think India were winning. Alissa Healey, I
think, did mention that it was a question of lazy running at that point of time.
But I would like to suggest that, as we all know quite famously, the bat did get
stuck in the soil just inches away from the line and almost her entire body was
over. So it wasn't quite lazy running. I think she is smart enough and is
experienced enough to know that the second was on and she took it. And if the
bat hadn't got stuck, she was in such great form at that point of time that
India would have won against Australia. And mind you, if Australia has lost in
the last dozen years or half a dozen years, it has been to India. So, well, you
never know. Things could be very different and the Indians could have actually
won their first ever ICC trophy, which is something that's obviously missing and
hurting. But despite that, I think the Indian girls have gotten over the
disappointment and there's so much more, as we all know, to look forward to now.
Well, it will be really interesting to see how the WPL unfolds. It gets underway
this weekend, as I say, and you'll be able to follow its progress right here on
Stamped. Well, if you've missed anything from Stamped, then why not download and
subscribe to the podcast via your usual podcast provider and check us out on
YouTube to head to the BBC World Service YouTube channel. On last week's show,
we were joined by Hadil Obed, the founder of Kello Cricket. What started as a
website covering men's grassroots cricket in Pakistan has turned into an
organisation which puts on tournaments for men and women across the country,
mainly taking place at night. We wanted to do something for those who love to
play cricket on a grassroots level. Now, whether it was that you wanted to be
the next Sarah Mir or the next Shahidar Freedy or whatever it is that you wanted
to do, whether it was to be part of the national team or to play as a weekend
outlet, we wanted to give you the opportunity and a platform to kind of have
your voice heard, have your statistics speak for themselves, highlight your key
moments and kind of celebrate the game itself and your love for cricket. From
the BBC World Service, this is Stamped on ABC and All India Radio. Well, next on
Stamped, we're going to talk about one of the greatest ever finishes to a Test
match. England began day five of the second Test against New Zealand in
Wellington, needing 210 runs to seal the series. Joe Roots, 95, put them in the
driving seat. But when Ben Foulkes lost his wicket for 35, it was left to
England's numbers 10 and 11, Jack Leach and Jimmy Anderson to try and get the
last seven runs. A single from Leach, a four from Anderson took England within
two of victory. But then Anderson edged a Neil Wagner delivery behind. It was
taken by Tom Blundell and New Zealand won by one run. Such a narrow margin of
victory has only happened once before in the history of Test cricket. That was
West Indies against Australia in 1993, which I'm guessing, Jim, you may well
remember yourself. But in terms of what happened at the Basin Reserve this week,
it was an amazing Test match over the five days. Well, if you want to look at
something, there's two one run margins. There's one two run margin that
Australia was involved in. You might remember at Hedgepaston. Now, all three of
them were down the leg side, caught behind. Craig McDermott from Courtney Walsh
with two needed to win, caught behind. Of course, Michael Kastrovich, did he
have his hand on the bat or not when he was caught down the leg side? Again,
there was no DRS. If there had been, it could have ruined one of the famous
finishes in Test history. But poor old Jimmy Anderson sent out there at 40 years
of age to try and win the game when he batsmen and failed so dismally. What I
loved about that afternoon of theatre was Neil Wagner. Neil Wagner, just
recently, has been a bit of a villain in New Zealand cricket because he keeps
bumping people out or trying to, but he got thumped by Harry Brooke and Root.
But on this occasion, when the game was on the up, he was able to produce some
bounces that got wickets. He got Stokes out, Root out. He took a couple of
catches himself down there at fine leg. And so he was the archetypal match
winner at the crunch, even though at times you were thinking, does he know there
are three stumps down there? He's allowed to bowl at them. And he kept banging
the thing in. Anyway, it was thrilling stuff. And it was great from New
Zealand's point of view with Kane Williamson's exemplary second inning century
alongside Blundell that they got back into the game when they looked like they
were going to go down by an innings after being asked to follow on. So great
finish. Wonderful, wonderful game of cricket. Yeah, I was talking about it on
the radio, on the BBC in the first couple of days and saying, well, this could
all be over in three days. England will have longer to spend on the golf course.
Ben Stokes likes a little bit of golf. But this is the great thing about Test
cricket. It can completely defy expectations and particularly when it comes to
this side led by Brendan McCullum and Ben Stokes. But there was so much drama. I
mean, going back to that last day, Charu, there was the run out of Harry Brooke
without facing a ball. England's new batting superstar. But Joe Root, it was
clearly his fault. Clearly, he's called. He got it completely wrong, stitched up
poor Harry Brooke. But then in the same way, somebody compared it in one of the
papers to Geoffrey Boycott running out Derek Randall at Trent Bridge in a famous
Test match. And then Boycott went on and made a century. And Joe Root fell just
short of the century. So there over a five day Test match, the fine margins come
to the fore, don't they? But I mean, what do you make of this England style?
Because I mean, if it had been in so many other contexts that have got
absolutely hammered for losing the game, they would have looked devastated to
lose the game. But actually, that didn't seem to be the case in that England
team. They said, OK, well, we're going to lose some playing like this. I must
confess, I'm all for it. Because England in the past, and I don't mean any major
disrespect here, world stayed in old fashioned in the cricket. And a lot of
people, well, I mean, then criticize it, perhaps that exemplified what Test
matches are all about. But they've done a 180. And this old baseball thing is
very exciting. And of course, they've won much more than they've lost. So at
this point of time, you'll have to say that it's working, not just for England.
And sure, they lost this by one run. But like I said, the fans are probably more
accepting and appreciative of the style of cricket and especially the new fans,
because they could use this kind of robust urgency in cricket. And I do think
that we're not giving the England bowlers enough appreciation here, because yes,
it's all about the batsmen trying to score quickly and racing towards win. But
ultimately, as we've all been saying for years in cricket, it's the bowlers who
win you Test matches by taking 20 wickets. So that's also a big feature for
England, because the bowlers are supporting the baseball style in terms of
batting. And I do think that what happened in this Test match and the way
England are playing their Test match cricket, it's not only good for England,
it's great for Test match cricket, because Test match cricket, as we all know,
could use a slightly higher level of excitement, particularly for the new fans
who must come into the game. I mean, England becoming only the second team in
history to lose after enforcing a follow on Jim. Four times it's happened that
the team enforcing the follow on loses. Three times it was Australia on the
wrong end of that. So, you know, you could probably, you were there and
witnessed and remember at least two of those, but probably not the first one.
No, the first one was in the 19th century and it was when it rained and they got
Bobby Peel under the cold shower after it had rained, because Australia only
needed a handful and he came out and recovering from a big night out and bowled
his little league of his own. He came out and bowled his little left arm
spinners and ran through Australia. That was an extraordinary game from all
accounts. I missed that one, but 1981, I remember well on the back of Botham's
Extraordinary Century at Headingley when Godfrey Evans, the bookie, put up 500
to 1 and somehow a couple of Australians had a bet on that and England won the
game, you might recall. And then there was the one at Eden Gardens with the
fellas we well know, Joe, driving a Laxman batting for a whole day and turning a
game around after being asked to follow on. The interesting thing about this
game was that I'm sure if it was an Ashes match, it wouldn't have been a follow
on. And I'll tell you one of the main reasons why there wouldn't have been a
follow on is because Broad and Anderson, as good as they are, are getting old.
And it showed in the second innings when they had to back up and bowl again on a
pitch that got a little bit easier to bat on. And New Zealand's batting was very
good, of course, but there just wasn't quite the edge in the bowling that there
might have been if they'd had their feet up for a couple of hours while England
batted again. So I doubt if it, despite the baseball attitude to taking the game
on and the rest of it, I doubt if it would happen in an Ashes match. But there
it is. Thanks. Thank goodness it did, because it produced one of the best
finishes you'd ever want to see. The revelation, apart from Joe Root's
extraordinary consistency, is Harry Brook. I mean, there's not no one in my
memory of watching cricket who's arrived in Test cricket and is scoring in every
innings a runner ball and putting the heavy JBs into every attack that's going
around. That aspect is going to be thrilling to watch if it continues in the
Ashes series. Yeah, no, I completely agree about, of course, these early days
for him, but it's been a spectacular start. And there were some stats related
to, I think, Sunil Gavaskar, who has the highest number of runs in a debut
series and so on and so forth. So Brooks is doing really well. And he's scoring
quickly too. So that really reminds us all about why India won quite a few Test
matches because of, say, Abhirendra Sehwag, who came in and got those quick runs
on day one. That sets up a match really quickly. I would love for England to
continue, even if they should, God forbid, go on and lose a few more matches in
this manner, because as McCallum said, if they're here to save Test match
cricket, they're doing a pretty good job of it. Well, I tell you what, it sets
up a mouthwatering summer of cricket here in the UK with the men's Ashes and the
women's Ashes to come as well. And you can hear all about it right here on
Stumped. Stumped on the BBC World Service. Finally on Stumped, take a moment to
think of sports stars from Spain. Your mind might go to Rafael Nadal in tennis,
Xavi and Iniesta in football or Fernando Alonso in Formula One. And cricket is
unlikely to come into your mind at all. But this week, Spain's cricket players
earned a place in the record books. They bowled the Isle of Man out for just 10
runs, the lowest total in a men's T20 match ever. And I'm delighted to say that
Spain's head coach, Corey Rutgers, joins us on Stumped now. Corey, as the
wickets were tumbling, what was going through your head? It got a little bit
crazy to be honest, I still can't really surmise it because obviously at this
associate level, you really compact your series. So we were playing two T20s a
day. And in the morning, I'll just go a little bit before that, in the morning,
they hit us for 134. We did chase it down and just a normal game of T20, chased
it down in about 14 overs. It gets into the afternoon session, we have a big
group meeting, we have some lunch. And I always like the stories before the
story, about an hour leading into the game, my two premium left arm seam bowlers
were exhausted. And they both said, Corey, please, I need rest. So I put my arm
around them, come on guys, push one more for cricketer Spania. We win the toss,
they say, okay, coach, I'm good to go. We win the toss and bowl first. It's a
nice sunny day, a bit of a breeze across the ground. The wickets been playing
well the whole tournament. It just happened so quickly. I think the very first
ball of the game, the glove down the leg side, it's a good take by the keeper,
one for none. The second over, one gets through the gate, really good in swing,
late swinging delivery. It's two for four. He's quick, he's still genuinely
quick. He gets three perfect yorkers right, gets himself an international hat
trick. And at this stage when it's five for five, okay, this is where you're
thinking, well, the game is probably already won, but I was just waiting. I was
waiting for the leg buys that will go for four or the edges or someone, I've
been in collapses myself as a player. You're always expecting one person to
click. And then I think in the fourth over, we picked up two more and at seven
for five, that's when it really started to hit home. Something completely out of
this world is happening. And then to their credit, I love men to their credit.
They suck it through a bit. I feel a little bit bad because they're not a bad
cricket team. This isn't like 36th in the world versus 80th in the world. I saw
the Sydney Thunder collapse. It's very similar to that two very evenly matched
teams. And it just went all wrong. They blocked out a few more overs. They got
through the openers who both took four for five and four for four respectively.
And then we brought on our leg spinner. He picks up the tail as we like to call
him the janitor. And before you know it, we're walking off and it's 10 for 10.
And I still can't fathom how it happened. Well, look, let's hear from the man
who top scored for the Isle of Man with four. His name's Joe Burrows. But
unfortunately, he was also the bowler when Spain hit two sixes in the first over
game over target chased. Spain in February is not as hot as you might imagine.
It was absolutely ball sick. None of us were out there long enough to get warm.
At the end of the game, someone said, I think we're a few runs short there boys.
And that kind of summed it up. What I didn't realize was Spain won by 10 wickets
going to 13 without loss when you were all out for 10. That was only, there's
only up two balls because the first ball that you bowled in their run chase was
a no ball. Yeah, yeah. Thanks for that. I can, I can tell you that I usually
bowl left arm over. I thought I'm going to have to try something a bit different
here. Left arm around that three slips. Just see if we could take one of them
with us. As you can see, didn't quite go to plan as I watched the ball sail over
my head a couple of times. Quickest I've ever been back off the field. Hopefully
we'll never have to repeat that again. Well, Joe, Joe reckons it was quite cold.
Sounds like he was keen to get back into the, into the dressing room and warm
up. But I mean, it sounds, listening to Joe talking to Mark Chapman there,
Corey, it sounds like they took it well. Yeah, they did take it well. Look,
they're a young team Isle of Man and it's just one of those days at the office.
We didn't even, I mean, we had a team huddle after the very first innings and we
said, look, show a bit of respect here. Don't over celebrate because we
understood the situation that this is an anomaly. I think that the 10 runs one
day will be beaten, but the chase in two balls that that's going to take some
beating. G'day Corey, Jim Maxwell here. Nice to be chatting to a familiar Aussie
voice. Just a bit more about cricket in Spain. Is it locals? Is it expats? Who's
in the team? You got a mixed bag. So our captain, Christian Munoz-Mills is a
Spaniard. He looks after the fellas really, really well. We've got a couple of
South African and Australians that hold passports and then we've obviously got a
Pakistani and Indian origin players that are in the Barcelona area that fill up
a lot of the team. I think the one nice thing about this Spanish side, we've got
everyone speaks Spanish besides myself. I know I like on my staff, so I've got
to keep learning a little bit more to catch up. But yeah, a little bit you'll
find in that associate level, you'll always have a little bit of here, there and
everywhere to create a good squad of 20 players. So it's growing quick and we've
found a lot of good talent in the last 14 months. But Spanish cricket at the
moment is this untapped resource of facilities, sun and I think the ICC have
recognised this now and it is really starting to go upwards because we are now
inviting teams all around the world to come and play on Spanish soil and to play
on turf wickets. You sold it brilliantly to us, Corey. We're all going to come
and watch some cricket in Spain. I think maybe when Jim's over in the summer for
the Ashes, he might just kind of pop down and pay you a call. I hope it goes
really well for you, Corey, in the future. And thank you so much for joining us
on Stamped. Yeah, thank you so much, guys. Love all the things you do and best
of luck for the future. Well, that was Corey Rutgers, the head coach of the
Spanish national team. And that just brings us to an end here on Stamped. Charu,
Jim, fantastic to see you as always. And thank you so much for your time and for
your company. Join us again next time on Stamped Live for Now. Assignment at
bbcworldservice.com slash assignment. In 50 minutes, witness history. The
political assassination that rocked Serbia. We're going back to the 12th of
March 2003, when the country's Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic was shot dead
outside government headquarters in Belgrade. So who died?