TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 that's become synonymous with our era of angry debate. Woke the journey of a
word at 1.45. BBC News at 11 o'clock. King Charles has marked the first
anniversary of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In a message posted on social
media in the last hour, His Majesty said the people of Ukraine had suffered
unimaginably from the unprovoked full-scale attack. He went on to praise their
truly remarkable courage. In Ukraine, ceremonies are being held across the
country. In the capital Kiev, President Zelensky addressed troops and presented
awards to military personnel and families of those killed. He said that Ukraine
would do everything to achieve victory this year and would not stop until those
he called Russian murderers had faced punishment. Our Ukraine correspondent
James Waterhouse was watching the ceremony. It is clearly a day Ukraine wants to
mark, but it is a very bittersweet anniversary. While it is a story of survival,
Ukraine is still fighting in essence for its very existence and Moscow is
certainly showing no signs of letting up. It seems to have already started its
spring offensive. So it is a loaded day for so many reasons. In Russia, the
country's former president, Dmitry Medvedev, who retains a senior security role,
has said victory would be achieved and Ukrainian forces should be pushed back to
the Polish border. In other news, a fourth man has been arrested in connection
with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition after Wednesday's
attack. Nominations close in the next hour. In the contest to succeed Nicholas
Sturgeon as SNP leader and First Minister, three MSPs, Kate Forbes, Hamza Yusuf
and Ash Regan, have said they will stand. The winner will be announced next
month. Parts of usually sunny Southern California are under their first blizzard
warning since 1989. Forecasters are predicting record snowfall of up to eight
feet in mountains to the east of Los Angeles by Saturday. BBC News. This is
Radio 4 Now. Is psychiatry working? It was a difficult time, but fascinating. My
experiences of psychiatry were mixed. I knew the clinicians wanted to help, but
I felt our encounters were not long enough or deep enough. The subjects of this
program, healing and recovery, were barely addressed. I'm a great fan of the
good psychiatry can do and the benefits of the right dose of the right
medication. But my experience, like that of many patients and former patients,
led me to ask serious questions about how psychiatry understands and treats
people in distress and how they can recover. My name is Horatio Clare. I'm an
author and journalist. Together with the renowned psychiatrist Femi Oyabode, we
are asking, is psychiatry working? This is Episode 6, Healing and Recovery. You
have to stabilize the actual symptoms, in my view, and then you've got a chance
to repair all the other things that have gone wrong. When I first attempted to
take my own life, I actually went to a police station before being taken to
hospital. I was arrested and made to be a criminal. I think we have these two
opposite poles. We have excessive coercion at one end and we have exclusion at
the other. We live in a world that's absolutely obsessed with scans and blood
tests. Diagnosis isn't scientific. It's people making a judgment about other
people's behavior. What's key to this work is love and kindness, an arm round
the shoulder, a hug in the morning. These programs are following the stages of a
breakdown from crisis to diagnosis, medication and recovery. There is great hope
and light here, but some of these stories are not easy listening. Do look after
yourself as we go in search of recovery. Femi, how does psychiatry view the
concept of recovery and has that view changed over time? I think it'd be helpful
if I said something about how doctors in general think of recovery and that's
exactly how psychiatrists also think of recovery. So doctors think of the
symptoms that the patient presented with and see whether at the end of
treatment, whether those symptoms are totally resolved or not. And then given
what they know about the natural history of that condition, by which I mean the
long term outcome of that condition, they have some sense of whether the person
is likely to have recurrences or not. Therefore, there's a muted sense of what
it means to say somebody's recovered because at the back of your mind, you've
got this notion if they haven't really had all the symptoms resolved, you do not
want to say that they've recovered. And I think the change that's occurred is
that patient groups have appropriated the term recovery to mean that even though
the symptoms are not resolved, yet they feel that they can re-engage with life.
So this transfers the power from the doctors to the patients so that the
patients become active agents in their own life, active agents in describing
what their outcomes are, and then they can embrace the residue if there are
residual symptoms or not. And they can find ways to live in such a way that
they're fulfilled within their lives, irrespective of whether the doctors think
that all the symptoms have resolved. Do you think a wider cultural shift towards
a more hopeful perception of what can happen after a crisis would help people
recover faster and more strongly? I think so. I mean, but of course, you know,
that cultural shifts are not things that happen overnight. But in theory,
conceptually, I agree with you that if we were to live in a culture where it's
expected that people, even though they've had a psychiatric disorder, an episode
of illness, or even several episodes of illness, that does not mean that they're
incapable, does not mean that they are not able to function, doesn't mean that
they're unable to live with family, doesn't mean that they are unable to partake
in society in the usual way. So expectation makes a lot of difference to how
people see themselves, and also how they expect their lives to go. And you've
talked to me about international and different cultural examples. For example,
you said in Nigeria, a single episode of psychosis is much more common with a
recovery behind it. Yes, I mean, we know from the International Pilot Study on
Schizophrenia, which has done all that all those years ago in 1972, you know,
it's reported in 1972, that the outcome of schizophrenia in the third world,
that a single episode of what we call schizophrenia is much more likely to have
a better outcome. And the search has been on for the last 50 years to try to
understand what it is that underlies the better outcome in the developing world,
because you'd expect for there to be worse outcome, given that the modern
psychiatric treatments are probably worse. And one of the possibilities, it's
not the only possible answer to this question, but one of the possibilities is
that it is the expectation within wider society that underlies the better
outcome for schizophrenia in these cultures. At the University of Birmingham, we
found a striking example of recovery in action, better than well. Luke Treynor
is one of its service leaders. He has seen peer support make a huge difference
to many lives, including his own. Luke has found that having a purpose larger
than oneself is key to recovery. I am the program manager of Better Than Well
Collegiate Recovery Program here. That's a addictions recovery peer support
service for students in recovery from addiction and for other mental health
conditions that are kind of impulse-based quite often. When you look at the kind
of root causes of addiction, there is a kind of malady, which I identify with,
which underlies addiction. And I suppose that the kind of simplest way of
putting that across is that I try to fix what's going on internally with
external things. How do you go about helping people recover? Are these
essentially 12-step programs based on the Alcoholics Anonymous program? No,
they're not. And there's always a danger if you've got a kind of homogenous
recovery that kind of dominates any program. So we are very much of the mind
that there are many ways to recover. There isn't just one way. I come from a
12-step recovery background, so I can support students who are more inclined
towards that spiritual direction of things, I suppose. But we have SMART
Recovery here, which is an evidence-based CBT-type recovery. We have meditation-
based recovery, which isn't necessarily spiritual at all. It's more your
mindfulness kind of thing. So there are a lot of options. In terms of how
students recover, I suppose what unites all of those recovery types is peer
support and connection, the connection, the therapeutic value of students
recovering together. That is the thread through all of these recovery kind of
ideologies. Can I ask, in your case, are you clear about what took you down that
road? I am. There was an early life trauma for me, which I think was probably
the catalyst for it. So alongside my recreational use of HASHISH LSD, the more
experimental stuff, for me, I was coping with feelings and thoughts that I
couldn't handle without telling the people that I experimented or was taking
recreationally with. So I would be very much, we're talking about the early 90s,
the rave scene, but most of the other people there that I know were just doing
that, and then they were getting on, going to school, getting on with their
lives, having steady relationships or whatever. I was taking benzodiazepines on
a daily basis. I was drinking from early in the morning and I was taking
amphetamines just so I could stay on my feet with that cocktail of things in me.
So yeah, for me, I very much identify with the fact that drugs felt like a
solution to the problem that was me for quite a long time in my life. That's
beautifully put. And then it turns out that the solution to the problem that the
drugs made is you becoming, in a sense, a healer. I wonder if you could talk
about the role that your work plays in your ongoing recovery and strength. Yes,
it is a huge part of it. The recovery kind of world that I come from, we have a
phrase which is kind of get out of self and help others. That's quite a lot to
unpick, but there is a feeling that I can identify with and a lot of people can
identify with that things start to become darker when we're too isolated in our
own head, in our own thoughts, not running our thoughts by others or not
reaching out and having connection with other people. So as much as it is a
joyous thing, I would advise it for anyone to be of service to your community. I
think that's good for all people. For addicts of my variety, it's an absolute
necessity. I need to do that. I need to do that on a daily basis. In the
morning, I orient myself in that direction. How can I be of most use to the
people around me? And that just works. Pragmatically, it just works. And I see
the same for the other people I support. So I'm now in a position where I have
supported people who support people who support people who support people. And
this is the wonderful thing. This is a gift for me in my life today to see this.
Pfizer is another one of the students who have benefited from this service. The
one I go to on a Friday is called Recovery Celebration. So I quite like that
because it wasn't like therapy. It was, you know, we're celebrating people in
recovery. I think my first ever session, it was quite overwhelming just because
I wasn't sure if I should have been there. But then when other people were
talking about their experiences, even though it wasn't something that I'd
suffered with in terms of like an addiction, but I related to their thoughts.
And that was overwhelming for me because I was like, wow, there are other people
who are kind of dealing with the same thoughts as me. And it felt like a little
bit less lonely. That must be very powerful. Could you talk about what kinds of
thoughts that you were dealing with? Yeah. So since about the age of 12, I've
suffered with an eating disorder. The thoughts are very similar to an addiction
mindset in terms of secrecy, guilt, shame, and using something like a behavior,
for example, I used to exercise compulsively and frequently. And it came to a
point at one point in my life where I was completely hiding everything I was
doing, which as you can imagine, led to me being hospitalized in the children's
hospital. And I've had a spell of many, many months in inpatient facilities. So
you can imagine it was getting quite boring, quite tiring and quite repetitive.
And I realized that I really don't want to live in and out of hospitals. And
I've had my fair share of therapy techniques. So one of them was making like a
little placemat to kind of sit under your food when you eat. So you can kind of
look at things while you eat in the hospital. Right. And you'd kind of write
motivations or maybe pictures of your family. And one of the big things on my
placemat was one was cricket because I play a lot of cricket. And two was
university. I really wanted the university experience. And it was something I
was really, really aiming for. At that point, I was in GCSE stage. So, you know,
it was a long way to go. But I think it was good because having an actual
achievable goal of university and now to sit in the University of Birmingham is
quite surreal. And that I I know that since I've gotten here, well, I can set
another achievable goal. And I find that quite helpful to set these goals, but
in a healthy way. You describe you wanted to get better. You didn't want to be
in hospital and you wanted education and you had a dream that you made come
true. So all of those things come from inside you. Was there external help that
helped you get to where you are? I mean, my biggest, biggest support is my mum
because she really stood by me in terms of my medical teams and other support.
There was very intense support, but they do try to gradually decline it because
it's not sustainable to live your whole life in services. So yeah, my mum was
always is still always here. But I think although I right now I'm not in a stage
where I'm physically or mentally unwell, I think that this group is the exact
support that I need because it's my choice to be here. All of the therapy that
I've had in the past, it's not my choice. Like I was sectioned under the Mental
Health Act numerous times, taken to hospital against my will, forcefully. So
it's a big thing for me to be in control. So the fact that I am here, but it's
for a positive thing, and I have the option, if I want to leave, I can. Also the
fact that all my therapy before was very based just on me. It was like five to
one kind of ratio that my mum, my doctor, my psychologist, everyone all saying,
you need to do this. Whereas this is like, there's like maybe five, six people
who turn up to a whole group. And like, there's Luke, but I mean, he's not
really giving us like, you have to do this. Like, it's like a safe space to just
talk openly, knowing that if anything gets out of hand, then you're in good
hands. I mean, what's the relationship between dependency and mental health
disorders and distress? Very complex relationship, very complex indeed. We know,
for example, that in the early phases of a major illness like schizophrenia, for
whatever reason, and we don't understand it entirely, something to do with
attentional difficulties and something to do with weird and unusual experiences,
a lot of people self-medicate with substances primarily with cannabis. So that's
one possible relationship. Another way of thinking of it is to say that if
you're thinking of alcohol abuse, a lot of people who misuse alcohol, who become
dependent on alcohol, have, the men, have social anxiety. So that they start to
drink in order to control their social anxiety, and then they discover that they
become dependent on alcohol. So that's another root of the relationship. It
seems worth putting a question mark against that idea that cannabis is used as
self-medicatory, when there's nothing to suggest. Cannabis specialists believe
that, in fact, cannabis can cause the schizophrenic breakdown. Oh, of course,
yes, yes. So we're not saying that cannabis is innocuous. Sadly, cannabis itself
can induce an acute onset of illness. And part of the huge psychological benefit
of this group was clearly peer support. Why does peer support work? For all
sorts of reasons. And the first simple straightforward answer is that we're
social animals. And given that we're social animals, I mean, the benefit of
being involved with other human beings is inestimable. So that's a very simple,
straightforward way of thinking of it. The second thing is to say something
about the benefits of being in groups. So this idea that we're in a group, you
get a fellow feeling because you're in a situation where you're with other
people who are similar. The second thing is the idea that the other people have
difficulties, and you can help them given your own experiences. And then they
can help you too, given their experiences. And then you might see people who are
further down the journey, and they're starting to come out of their
difficulties. And that gives you hope. So that idea of the installation of hope,
it gives you hope that, you know, that the arc is bending towards recovery,
which is also very, very important. Let's look more closely at the elements of
recovery and healing. Mike Slade is Professor of Recovery and Social Inclusion
at the University of Nottingham. One of the influential understandings that
we've developed is the CHIME framework. So CHIME is five processes that people
with their own experiences of mental health problems identify as important for
their own recovery. And CHIME stands for connectedness, hope, identity, meaning,
and empowerment. And of course, interestingly, missing from that list is no
symptoms. So I think the old understanding of recovery that has emerged from
psychiatry and mental health systems, really isn't the modern understanding,
which is about supporting people to get on with their life, despite any life
challenges relating to mental health or other things that they might have. Does
your considerable work on recovery, a lifetime of work on recovery, give you an
impression of what somebody who's going to have the best chances of recovery,
how they need to act and think and do? I can answer that at two levels. One at
individual and one at collective, because I think blaming an individual for, you
know, not recovering and seeing it is all about their own efforts is not really
aligned with the best empirical evidence that suggests recovery is partly a
social endeavour. So for example, one route to recovery for many people is
getting a job. But if because of stigma and discrimination, no jobs are
available to someone with mental health issues, it's not really fair to locate
the responsibility for change at the individual level. Now, that said, I think
there are a number of things that we could really do better in our approaches to
supporting people. So the first is not to be communicating indirectly or
directly that we want you to be a good patient. One of the challenges is from
the traditional mental health system view, the job of the individual with mental
health experiences is to take their treatment as prescribed. That is actually
counterproductive because what that does is increase dependency and reduce any
sense of agency or ability to make change. The second thing that individuals can
do is to deliberately seek out credible role models of recovery. Now, that might
be through online mutual peer support forums, or that might be what the mental
health system is starting to do of introducing mental health peer support
workers, people with their own lived experience. But finding people that can
provide them with some hope, some possibility of a good future is a really
central starting point. And the third thing, I guess, is about identifying and
really being in touch with and working towards dreams and passions. I mean, a
mental health clinician will call these goals, but that may not always be the
most useful term that individuals use. But just, you know, what would make life
worth getting up for? And there it speaks to societal opportunities to
contribute. It speaks to individuals having some level of choice and agency in
the life that they're leading. So if I can find my tribe, if I can find hope, if
I can identify goals and pursue them with agency, does your work show that I can
recover? Well, people are very different, so it's not possible to give invariant
answers. But broadly, that's a better approach than just taking treatment. And
indeed, what we find with recent research that's just been published, in fact,
is that there is a much higher rate of personal recovery, this idea of living as
well as possible, than of clinical recovery. And for some people, they go
together, that people get on with their life, they, of course, get better, have
no symptoms and have a life worth living. But many people live with mental
health issues and also find a positive way forward in their life. Now, that
sounds a kind of small academic distinction, but it's a huge difference, for
example, in what the job of the mental health system is. Can I ask you, the
question this series is asking is, is psychiatry working? Do you think it is? I
think psychiatry is working for some people, some of the time. And the challenge
is that psychiatry acts as if it is working for all people all of the time. So
choice and genuine choice is at the heart of the transformation that's needed in
the mental health system, I would suggest. So it's not that we want to or need
to or indeed should get rid of psychiatry and all its associated expertise, but
rather that should become one part of the options available to individuals
looking to recover. Femi, we started this series with a question about a crisis
in psychiatry, and I asked you if it was and you said it was and for the reasons
that you gave. And six episodes later, here we are, presumably you wouldn't do
it, you wouldn't become a psychiatrist and give it your life if you didn't think
it was working and capable of working better. Yes, it's been a most worthwhile
career, over 45 years of it. And the people who work, if I specify the
psychiatrists, the people in psychiatry, the vast majority of them are
dedicated, committed, enthusiastic, and totally devoted to the work for all
sorts of reasons, but primarily because it's a human subject and the purpose of
it is to somehow relieve human suffering. Lots of patients of psychiatry feel
for one reason or another that they are subject to stigma. I suggest to you that
psychiatrists too feel stigmatised. Oh, no doubt about that at all. So there's
as much, I don't want to put it that way, but it is true, there's as much stigma
against the psychiatrist from within the medical profession as there's stigma
against patients from the wider society. Why? Some of it is to do with the fact
that the conditions that we encounter remain mysterious. And most of medicine
deals with things which are clear cut. And therefore, this aspect of the mystery
of the disorders that we encounter makes us different from the rest of medicine.
So that's one aspect of it. The second aspect of it is that it's a contested
territory. And because it's contested, that makes it very difficult for people
to want to work in it. So some people come when they're fourth or final year in
medicine, and because they see the contestation in the field, they are appalled
and disenchanted because they assume that they would work in a field where there
will be some degree of appreciation of their efforts. But that's not necessarily
true in psychiatry, whereas it's true, for example, in paediatrics and in
obstetrics. If psychiatry is waiting for its next evolution, does that
necessarily or solely come from a development of a new drug? Or are there other
things that psychiatry is pursuing in terms of knowledge and practice that
you're excited about? I don't think it's true to say, or it's certainly not kind
to say that psychiatrists are preoccupied with drugs. I may just want to remind
people that psychoanalysis was introduced by psychiatrists, that cognitive
behavioral therapy was introduced by psychiatrists. So psychiatrists are all
psychiatrists are always looking for other things aside from drugs to aid and
assist the people that we see. And so there will come other forms of talk
therapies. And I'm also sure that there will be new social therapies that will
be aiming not at talking, but at altering, re-engineering social fabric of
society. And that may also make a lot of difference. But no doubt, we will also
get new forms of treatment, which will be medical in nature, and which will be
of immense help to others. For my own purposes, I was reading Emil Kraepelin's
book, which published in 1919, and his description of the patients that he was
seeing in his hospital. And totally unrecognizable if you were practicing, if
you're practicing psychiatry today, because people are not that ill, or if
they're that ill, they're that ill for a very, very short period of time.
Whereas in his day, in the early part of the 20th century, people would have
been ill, consistently ill, and be in hospital for years, not for months or
days. So there's been incredible, incredible change, which is not as recognized
as it ought to be. But we have a long way to go to do as much good as all of us
wish. This journey through how psychiatry treats people in trouble has been
hugely heartening in many ways. The system brims with professionals of enormous
expertise and compassion, who are devoted to helping people towards happier,
healthier lives. At the same time, there is no doubt that psychiatry faces
enormous challenges. The lack of progress in drug development and prescription,
the lack of access to medical care, the lack of access to medical care, the lack
of access to medical care, the lack of access to medical care, the lack of
oversight and contact with patients, the wish to treat people as nuanced
individuals, but the lack of tools and time to do so, the dire need for more
inpatient services, delivered in wards which should all be well-staffed, well-
run, caring and healing places, but which too often are not. Psychiatrists and
psychotherapists know that every kind of suffering, from the most mild to the
most severe, can be helped. The knowledge, the treatments and the therapies do
exist. Recovery is everyone's right, but not everyone's experience. I wonder
whether psychiatry is doing enough to demand and deliver the changes that
clinicians know their patients need. All of us who are in recovery know how
lucky we are and all of us know that luck alone is not enough. We need
psychiatry working and we need it working better. If you need support with
mental health or feelings of despair, a list of organisations that can help is
available at bbc.co.uk slash action line or you can call for free to hear
recorded information on 0800 066 066. Is psychiatry working? was presented by
Horatio, Claire and Femi Oyobodi. Hello, this is Sharon Horgan and because this
is radio you can't see me, obviously, but if you could you'd probably be
wondering why I'm sat in a wheelbarrow from Monty Don's Garden wearing Graham
Norton's jacket holding a winner's trophy from Pointless. Well, there's a good
reason, because these are just some of the iconic BBC items that you could win
this year as part of Red Nose Day. Oy, we haven't finished with the wheelbarrow
yet. To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief go to bbc.co.uk forward
slash Red Nose Day. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You
must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th of
March 2023. Good luck. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab says crime reoffending
rates in England and Wales have fallen significantly since the Conservatives
came to power. In today's more or less we'll ask whether that's right. Also, are
13 million women in the UK really menopausal? And a debate that sparked much
consternation should the word data be treated as singular or plural, more or
less at half past four. Now, recorded live at the Drill Hall in London in 2018,
Mrs Hudson's Radio Show, the second comedy special by Bob and the Much Miss
Barry Cryer. Episode two, Wild Geese, starring Patricia Hodge, Miriam Margulies
and Barry Cryer. Come with me as we once again take a stroll down Baker Street.
Go on, force yourselves. Ladies and gentlemen, it's Mrs Hudson's Radio Show.
Episode two, Wild Geese. Again, we begin our tale in the rather well-worn Baker
Street kitchen of our eponymous landlady, Mrs Hudson. Once more, we find her
talking to her late husband. Oh, Arthur, another Christmas approaches without
you, my dear. You gave me this silver angel on our wedding anniversary. I always
did wonder whether you stole it from your mother's Christmas tree. But she
doesn't talk to her late husband just to chastise him. She likes to chastise
other people too, mainly her tenants. Well, I only put up with them because
their payments are so princely. Mr Sherlock Holmes must be the very worst tenant
in London. And although Dr Watson seems trustworthy, I cannot say the same for
his bull terrier pup who has inflicted a succession of amorous overtures on our
cat, which has since gone missing. When I suggested to Dr Watson that he might
have to put his dog down, he replied, I'm a physician, not a vet. Let's leave
Mrs Hudson decorating her tree and move outdoors to where her good friend and
neighbor, Mrs Braley, is looking for the aforementioned missing cat. Here,
kitty, kitty, kitty, kitty. Oh, good morning, Mrs Braley. I want to ask what
brings you out this early? I'm looking for Mr Disraeli. Have you seen him?
Westminster's that way. Very droll, Inspector Lestrade. I am, of course,
referring to Mrs Hudson's cat. He got out the other night and hasn't returned.
Well, that is a shame. I'm afraid Scotland Yard can't help you there. Happy
Christmas to you. Now, all first, I might ask you why are you out at this hour
looking so saucy with that goose rammed under your arm? Well, this, oh no, this
goose isn't mine. In fact, it's quite the funniest thing. Two nights ago, I was
returning from a small jollification. Does Mrs Lestrade know, you tricky devil?
Most assuredly. Has God as your witness? Him too. I was walking along Great
Titchfield Street when a row broke out between an old man with a goose and a
little knot of ruffs. When I approached, they all fled and all that remained
lying in the middle of the street was a rather battered hat and a most
unimpeachable Christmas goose with a label reading Mr Henry Baker. And you've
been carrying that bird around for two days? I don't know about unimpeachable,
Inspector. Surely it must be a little ripe by now. Oh, no, no, no, no, no. That
first goose is now being readied for our Christmas table by the aforementioned
Mrs Lestrade. Well, we didn't want it to go to waste, did we? What I have here
is a replacement goose that was requested in order to lure this Mr Henry Baker
out of the shadows. Well, there must be plenty of Henry Bakers in London,
Inspector. And may I ask who requested this new goose? Oh, typically nosy, Mrs
B. It was a man by the name of Sherlock Holmes. Mr Holmes? You mean Mrs Hudson's
new tenant? I'm off to see him now. Are you heading that way? Eventually. It's
Mr Disraeli that preoccupies me at present. I have a few more nooks and crannies
to search. Good morning, Inspector. Good morning, Mrs B. As Mrs Braley and the
Inspector go their separate ways on Baker Street, it's time for me to pay my
usual visit to Mrs Hudson at the back door of 221. Mrs Hudson, do you remember
the time when the Duke of Avondale was up in court for shooting a golden eagle?
No, but I'm sure you're going to tell me. I bet you are. He was on the stand in
front of the judge and he said, I had no intention of shooting that golden
eagle. I was shooting a pheasant and in a split second the eagle flew into my
sights. Complete accident. And the judge said to him, what did you do with it?
And he said, I ate it. And he said, you ate it? What did it taste like? He said,
rather like swan. Oh, you had to be there, I think. I don't get it. I can see
that. You're not allowed to eat swan. Why are you telling me this? All this talk
of geese, haven't you heard? No, I'm more concerned about my cat. My larder's
infested with mice. That's not the mice, is it? That's my new tenant's attempt
at a hobby. The detective? He's been playing that violin all morning. You'd
think he'd have got the hang of it by now. Morning, Mrs Hudson. Morning, Martha.
Did you get the mouse poisoned? Yes, Mrs Hudson, I did. If he carries on playing
that violin, I'll be asking for some. Morning, Harry. Let me take that bucket
from you, Martha. Where would you like it, Mrs H? Oh, just in the yard there,
Harry. Thank you. Ta-ra, ladies. Ta-ra, Harry. Bye. Those little mousy blighters
have already been at my scones. I do so wish Mr Disraeli would come back home. I
loved that cat. Love? That cat, Martha, love? We've not lost faith yet. Thank
goodness for that. Now we can get on with making lunch in peace. Mrs Hudson! Mrs
Braley, come in, come in. Have you seen our blinking cat anywhere? I'm afraid
not. Oh, the poor thing. But I have just seen Dr Watson in the street. He was
carrying a plaster cast in the shape of a human head. Whatever is going on, Mrs
H? Was he being followed by a frisky bull terrier puppy? I wouldn't say
followed. It was more attached to his leg. It seems that my new tenants are
turning out to be a bit of a handful, Mrs B. All that stamping around.
Apparently Mr Holmes does it to help himself think. How? By stopping everyone
else? I've already worked out that he only does this when they're discussing a
case. They? Who's they? Dr Watson's out. Mr Holmes, an inspector at Estrade. Mr
Holmes doesn't tend to stamp about so much when he's talking to the doctor.
Because it excites the puppy. Precisely. I've not seen Dr Watson doing much
doctoring since he's been here. He spent the better part of yesterday afternoon
helping Mr Holmes make a dummy of himself out of wet plaster. That explains him
carrying that head down the street. That explains my moist anti-macassas. I
think they're dancing a polka. Whatever it is, they've stopped. Thank goodness
for that. Oh, that reminds me. I've managed to secure tickets to the Tivoli
tonight. Will you join? I'll be especially delighted as Bella Lomax will be
performing. I'm surrounded by amateurs. The inspector is not happy. He's rarely
happy. Always in this kitchen having a moon about something or other. What else
are kitchens for? Oh, now we all know that sound. That means tea. Would you
mind, Martha? Of course not. Oh, wait on. Sorry, he wants coffee. Oh, wait on.
Sorry, he wants cocaine. Surely not more cocaine. We're nearly out. Shall I
order some more on my way back from the butchers? If you could. There's a good
girl. Get down, James, please. And for the love of God, put that away. The
doctor has returned. You might want to pour some cold water on that puppy on
your way out. Yes, ma'am. Mrs. H, once the doctor's put that dog safely away in
its kennel, what say we go and listen in on their conversation? I've heard that
Mr. Holmes has quite an incredible mind. I couldn't possibly spy on one of my
own lodgers. Wouldn't be the first time. As the two landladies chalky for
position on the stairs outside apartment B, inside, Holmes is filling Watson in
on the day's events. Inspector Lestrade was just here. Was he seeking help with
a case that he will eventually take credit for? Not this time, Watson. This was
not so much a case as an intellectual problem. I'm not sure intellectual
problems pay the rent, Holmes. He's brought you a goose, though, I see. That's a
very seasonal gift. Two geese, to be precise. Though the first goose is now back
at Lestrade's house, roasting in front of his fire. The replacement goose is the
one you spy on the sideboard there. Well then, if I may, the game must be afoot.
The geese are not strictly game, Watson. Look at this hat. You mean, havaganda?
No. What do you make of it, Watson? Yes, I think I have the form by now. You
would like me to put forward some basic analysis of the hat's properties, which
you will then render obsolete by offering some lucidly brilliant deduction of
your own? Correct. Your analysis, please. Well, I make very little of it,
Holmes. It is a rather battered billycock hat. A battered billycock that arrived
here with a goose two mornings ago. A billycock and a goose, eh? And I see on
the table there is also a roasted woodcock. Quite the aviary, judging by the
size of that puny woodcock. I'm rather pleased that neither of the geese came
from Mrs. Hudson's larder. The cheeky rat-belly. Thank you, Mrs. Hudson. We'll
dine at seven. Either leave any remaining dropped eaves exactly where you found
them, or just come in and join us. I'm sorry to interrupt your work, gentlemen.
I was just rather concerned with the state of these runners, and I thought that
I'd listen in to your conversation. Continue if you wouldn't mind, Watson.
Perhaps these ladies can act as arbiters of our deduction. Let me see. There's
no maker's name, but the initials HB are scrawled upon one side. It is pierced
in the brim for a hat securer. Ah, the elastic is missing. It is cracked, dusty,
spotted in several places. Ah, and there is some ink here. So, there you have
it. I see nothing. On the contrary, Watson, you see everything. You fail,
however, to reason from what you see. Give the hat to me! This bloke's got a
massive head, I'll tell you that for free. I suppose he might even be a
professor with so large a brain. Oh, I like a man with a large brain. He must
have something good knocking round inside of it. Indeed, Mrs Braley, well
concluded. Now, if I may have the hat. Here, Mrs H, what do you think? Me? Are
you sure? Oh, now let me see. I would spot this kind of dust on a hat anywhere.
It is not street dust, but there's sort of fluffy brown dust I often find
covering my cornice in if I had a penny for every inch I've removed over the
years. Well, I wouldn't bother with a cornice in for a start. It shows that this
hat has been hung up indoors for most of the time. Thank you, ladies, that'll be
all. It's also extremely unlikely that this man has gas in his house. Why do you
say that, Mrs B? Look, there are no less than five wax stains here. I think this
man with his massive head walks upstairs at night with his massive hat in one
hand and some sort of massive candle in the other. It seems your methods are
quite contagious, Holmes. Ladies, this is most enlightening, but I'll wager you
can't tell me the gentleman's name. That's simple. His name is Henry Baker.
Goodness, Mrs Braley, you are correct. Mrs B, how the devil have you deduced
this from a huge, great, waxy, billycock hat? You can keep your hat. Inspector
Lestrade told me that Henry Baker was written on a label attached to the goose's
leg. How much was the wager, Mr Holmes? That's cheating. Mrs Hudson, come
quickly. Oh, what is it now? Inspector Lestrade has just returned. Inspector?
Mrs Hudson, Mrs Braley, Mr Holmes, Dr Watson. Inspector, this is not a census.
Spit it out. The goose, Mr Holmes. See what my wife has found in its neck. By
Jove! I don't suppose you know what you've got there. Um, it's a diamond. No,
child, it is a gemstone. What's the difference? I've no idea. It is more than a
gemstone, it is THE gemstone. Well, not THE gemstone. Yes, THE gemstone. What
bloody gemstone? It's not the missing blue carbuncle. Precisely, edaculated
Watson. It's a carbuncle now. I thought it was a gemstone. It's a diamond. Taken
from the Cosmopolitan Hotel just five days ago. Its owner has been most
distressed. I thought it was that plumber what stole it, sir. Mr Horner, wasn't
it? He's stolen before, so the evening news said. It is indeed a convincing case
against him, but don't believe everything you read in the papers. You are aware
that the reward offered is £1,000. £1,000? Great Lord have mercy. Not within a
twentieth part of its market value, Inspector. However, we can all say that the
judgment will not be incommensurate and an erroneous verdict will be a
conspicuously trenchant injustice. Not all of us can say that. We need to return
the carbuncle to the Countess of Morkar by midnight tonight. The hotel informs
me that she leaves for Germany tomorrow and unless she receives her gem, my
fear, she may press charges against our poor unfortunate plumber. The Countess
of Morkar, you say? Do you know her? The Countess of Morkar will be performing
at the Tivoli this evening using her maiden name, Bella Lomax. Good heavens!
Then how does she come to be the Countess of Morkar? The late Count was an
admirer until his heart attack. Yes, I read about this. A riding accident?
Something like that. Mrs Braley and I have tickets for tonight and could deliver
the carbuncle if you wish. It would certainly allow us to continue our
inquiries. Here is the stone. No, no, no, no. You can't send amateurs. It
doesn't stop Scotland Yard, does it, Inspector? Well, all right, but with all
these separate identities, you'll need to be absolutely sure we've identified
the right person. Scotland Yard will have to prove she is exactly who she says
she is. Then you must accompany them, Inspector. If this is the same Bella Lomax
as you say... Fetch me that scrap of baking parchment from the top of the
dresser, please, Martha. And that stick of charcoal there. Here you are, Mr
Holmes. Allow me to sketch. You will need to identify this rather crude
illustration of a very distinctive tattoo belonging to the Countess. And this is
where it is situated on her body. Here's where it is situated on her body. Good
Lord! Are those... Yes. And are they... Yes. And is it on her... Yes! And I
recognise the man on a horseback with the big moustache. It's surely man the
Magnificent. Indeed, isn't he magnificent? How ever did you learn of this
tattoo, Holmes? I heard it from the Prince of Wales. He is also an admirer of
Miss Lomax. Now, just a moment. Who's getting this reward? You three can share
it. As befits the season, no? Oh, I don't know what to say. I do. Shall we get
going? Can I have another look at the illustration? I don't know exactly how
we're going to do this, but I've got an idea. We go now to the Tivoli Theatre on
the Strand at the start of the second half, just as world-famous tumbler Archie
Kempton goes into his first position, supported from beneath by the fire-
breathing lefiathan Hector Roca from Buenos Aires, better known to his fans as
the Human Tinderbox. Have you ever seen anything like it, ladies and gentlemen?
Surely this is impossible. It is my weight. It's nothing to this man. See how he
lifts me up like a rag doll. Oh, Hector, be careful with my cover-up. See how he
can pass a cigar and a bottle of brandy from my foot to his... Oh, don't bother.
Oh, bloody hell, Archie's on fire. Get the stagehands. Yes. Ladies and
gentlemen, the Human Tinderbox and Archie Kempton there. And now to our next
artiste. It takes many years to make a great singer. Unfortunately, 1845 wasn't
one of them. She's a woman who sang, Put Your Feather in My Tip-Fur, and Johnny
gave me his apenny, so I gave him a bun. It is the one, the only, the
inimitable, the unsurpassable, Bella Lomax. Have you ever noticed when you're by
the sea The things that you can do there with impunity If we did the same things
when we're up in town More old Mrs Grundy on her face would wear a frown Father,
mother, all the family Travel down to her little paddle in the sea Mother takes
her stockings off upon the sandy shore And shows a lot of... that she's never
shown before We join our three carbuncle carriers backstage at the Tivoli now As
they track down Bella Lomax, the enigmatic Countess of Morcar. Oh, please, may I
beg of your forgiveness, Miss Lomax, but we've got some urgent news for you. I
knew this day would come. It was only a matter of time before King Otto of
Bavaria went public. No. Crown Prince Rudolf of Austria. No. Monsignor Francisco
Tardelli. No. The brass quintet of the band of the Coldstream Guards. No, no,
no. That's not why we're here. No, these two ladies have a rather pleasant
surprise for you. Could it be that we have your carbuncle, Lady Morcar? I am
indeed indebted to you ladies, but how can this be? I thought it was that
plumber what done it. The one who was responsible. The papers said so. Yes, my
associate, Mr Sherlock Holmes, is at this precise moment busy identifying the
suspect. Thank you, ladies. Thank you, Inspector. From the very bottom of my
heart. Yes, you wouldn't mind returning the carbuncle to me. I have an adoring
public waiting for me at the stage door. Before I do, I really am such a fan of
yours and I realise that this may seem quite forward, but I wondered if you
wouldn't mind showing me that can-can move you did at the Easter gala. You mean
this move? Oh, yes, that's the one. Oh, I'm sorry. Now I appear to have dropped
the carbuncle, Mrs B. That's a tattoo. Don't worry, I'll get it, ma'am. Although
I do appear to have got caught up in your... Oh! Mrs Braley, please. Nearly
there, nearly there. Get off me, you mug! My apologies. I'm afraid I have to
leave you now. Oh, my God. My apologies. Carbuncle safely retrieved. Here you
are, ma'am. Oh, hold your horses. There is a reward for its return, you know.
Most asturedly. My valet, Carnaby, will furnish you with the necessary
paperwork. It is to be found in me dressing room. Quite often, I'm told. Now my
public awaits. Well, Mrs B, it's a lot bigger than I expected. But that is
definitely Suleiman the Magnificent. As a long day draws to a close, our
intrepid party returns to Baker Street to find Dr Watson taking his puppy for
another walk. Dr Watson, your puppy seems a little more obedient this evening. A
touch of gin in his water, Mrs Hudson. Works wonders. Poor thing. He looks ever
so disappointing. Are you pleased to learn that Holmes tracked down the real
thief? An attendant at the hotel. I trust you got the carbuncle safely to the
countess? With not so much as a penny in return, Bella Lomax fled into the
night. Come, come, Inspector. Because we gave the carbuncle back, we've gone and
freed a plumber. The solving of the crime is its own reward. No, I think an
actual reward is its own reward. You grumpy sod. Inspector, it looks like you
could use a cup of hot punch. In fact, why don't you all come and join me for a
Christmas jolly at 197? Oh, that would be splendid. Well, I'm sure Mrs Lestrade
wouldn't mind. She's invited too? Yes, yes, of course she is. And Martha and Mr
Holmes? I'll let them know. Thank you, Mrs B. I just have a few things to attend
to here first. We'll follow on after. Come on, gentlemen. Don't leave me
waiting. Martha? I'm back. Yes, ma'am. Did our tenants finish the roasted
woodcock? I thought I might take some to Mrs Braley's tonight. You're invited.
Mrs Hudson, I've spent the better part of the day placing mouse poison all
around the house. I'm exhausted. Where is Mr Holmes? I haven't seen him all
evening. Oh, wait a minute. I must have missed that one. That might be the
biggest mouse yet. Ah, Mrs Hudson, Martha. I thought you'd both gone to bed. How
long have you been in the habit of conducting your violin practice in Melada?
Ever since Watson's puppy found my music, um, stimulating. Mrs H., there's a
dead mouse on the jelly mold. Might I also ask what that is doing there? Very
little at present. Death resulted from apnea due to paralysis of the respiratory
muscles. Meow! Whereas this fellow is faring much better. Hello, boy. How ever
did you find Mr Disraeli? Are you familiar with the essentials of Materia Medica
and therapeutics? I can't say that I am, no. I found Mr Disraeli comatose here
and surmised he must have been rendered so on account of the number of poisoned
mice he'd ingested. I felt it best to remedy his trauma by giving him a pinch of
a vegetable alkaloid. What's a vegetable alkaloid? A cocaine. You gave Maykette
cocaine? LAUGHTER No harm done and a happy ending to boot. Even if not for the
mouse. LAUGHTER And with that, I wish you both a happy Christmas. Cagery and hot
coffee in the morning, if you'd be so kind, Mrs Hudson. A happy Christmas to you
too, Mr Holmes. Well, huzzah for that. Mrs Hudson, we must celebrate immediately
at Mrs Braley's gathering. You run ahead, Martha. I'll follow on shortly. Thank
you, Mrs Hudson. Happy Christmas. Now, where did I put that present for Mrs B?
Arthur, you'd know. You were always so good at finding needles in haystacks. How
you managed to find a bottle of cooking sherry in a Methodist meeting hall, I'll
never know. LAUGHTER Mrs Hudson! Mrs Hudson! Are you coming, Mrs Hudson? The
party games have already started. Hurry, Mrs Braley. Just give me one moment.
MEOW Oh, you've found Mr Disraeli, I see. Where was he? He was in the larder. I
think he was looking for Arthur. Well, he was looking in the wrong place. If
there was a Christmas party going on down the street, Arthur would already be
there, totally sozzled and leading a sing-song, as well you know. And that's
where you should be, Mrs H. You're quite right. The revellers await. Excellent.
All together now! ALL SING God bless you, merry gentlemen, let nothing you
dismay. APPLAUSE You have been listening to Mrs Hudson's radio show by Bob and
Barry Pryor, starring Patricia Hodge, Miriam Margulies, Barry Pryor, Orlando
Wells, Stephen Critchlow, Ruth Bratt, Jeremy Lim and Bob Pryor. The producers
were Ned Shire and Ben Walker for The Waters Company for BBC Radio 4. CHEERING
On BBC Radio 4... We are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences
and knowledge...the poet Lem Sissay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like
applause, is utterly unique every time it happens. Reflecting on the occasions
he's stood out. In a room full of graduates, people without degrees can
sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and only. He'll
like an oar. Starting next Friday morning, hit the BuzzFeed Reporter button with
Facebook Live Vision, we're live from the Bubble at Brighton糊 outputs.참
computationally challenging啥