TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 of Meet David Sedaris starts this evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
BBC News at 11 o'clock. Police in Northern Ireland say the investigation into
the shooting of one of their officers in County Tyrone is focusing on a
dissident Republican group, the New IRA. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
was attacked outside a sports complex in Oma last night. He's in a critical
condition in hospital. Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page says the gunman
confronted Mr Caldwell as he left the venue. He'd been coaching football at this
sports complex last night. He'd been putting footballs into his car, in fact
with his young son, and two gunmen approached and opened fire. The detective ran
a short distance, he fell on the ground, and the gunman continued to shoot him.
So he was taken to hospital in Londonderry. His condition is described as
critical but stable. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, says his party wants
to give Britain its confidence back. In a speech in Manchester, Sir Keir is
setting out Labour's five missions for government, which include making the UK
the highest growth economy in the G7. Doctors at a hospital in London have
published guidance on how to treat the severe side effects of inhaling nitrous
oxide after a surge in people admitted with symptoms over the past year. They
are warning that the drug, also known as laughing gas, can cause permanent
damage to nerves in the spinal cord. The number of asylum seekers waiting for a
decision on their case in the UK has risen to record levels, with around 166,000
people in the backlog. Almost 110,000 have been waiting for longer than six
months. The government has announced plans for the first independent regulator
of men's football in England. The body will be able to stop teams joining
breakaway leagues that it thinks could damage the domestic game. The football
commentator John Motsen has died at the age of 77. Known to fans as Motti, he
covered 10 World Cups and European Championships as well as 29 FA Cup finals
during a 50-year career with the BBC. BBC News. In half an hour here on Radio 4,
we continue our series of reflections from actors across the world who've all
played the same part. Today, the magical role of Peter Pan. But is there a dark
side to playing the boy who never grows up? Roleplay is at half past 11. But
first, it's time for From Our Own Correspondent, presented by Kate Adie. Good
morning. Today, we look back at events last February, as Western capitals eyed a
Russian troop build-up on Ukraine's border. Our Russia editor reflects on what
followed. One and a half million Ukrainian refugees flooded across the border to
Poland after Russia's invasion. What does life look like now for those that
left? Amid heavy preparations for a trip by US President Joe Biden to Europe
this week, we hear how American reporters were wrong-footed by his surprise
emergence in Kiev. And we hear from a Ukrainian journalist about how a phone
call turned his world, and those of his friends and family, upside down. First,
we're in the Donbass region, where, nearly 10 years ago, conflict began with
Russia's annexation of Crimea. During that war, Russian proxy forces captured
more than a third of Ukraine's east, claiming more than 14,000 lives. Vladimir
Putin's invasion of Ukraine in the early hours of the 24th of February last year
served as a dramatic escalation, targeting the capital city, Kiev, and
unleashing havoc on cities across Ukraine. A few months into the war, the
Russian president set his sights on the more limited declared aim of liberating
the Donbass, bombarding cities in eastern Ukraine. The battle there rages on.
Oleg Yarin was in Donbass at the start of the 2022 invasion, and says the terror
of those early days has become a way of life for people in the east. The sound
of an explosion shook me from my sleep. It was just after five in the morning on
the 24th of February last year. I was in eastern Ukraine, in a quirky hotel
called the Europa, which had a different European flag hanging outside each
room. I heard the thunder of feet as fellow journalists headed for the door,
some charging off to film, others trying to get away to safety. Then, as now, no
one could be sure where that might be. By two that afternoon, Victor had signed
up to defend his country, thinking the war would be over by summer. The 39-year-
old husband and father, who has a wispy beard, used to run an online shoe
business. Now he's part of a mortar team. We met recently in a bunker on the
outskirts of the embattled eastern city of Bahmut, where the enemy is close and
the cold bone deep. Since the invasion, he hasn't been able to visit his wife
and two sons. The youngest was just six months old when he left. He was so
little when I went to war, Victor tells me. Now when I make a video call home,
he sees my face and doesn't know who I am. Victor believes this war won't end
with Vladimir Putin. With or without him, Russia will keep coming here, trying
to take our land, he says. We have to finish this now so that our sons and
daughters don't have to fight in the future. And there's another reason why he's
staying in the line of fire. For the brothers in arms he has lost. He doesn't
give numbers but says there are many, very many. Grief too cuts to the bone,
just ask any Ukrainian. My Facebook is like a cemetery, our local producer told
me. I have lost six friends in the past year. Like him, they were young men.
Ukraine has legions who will never grow old. A few hours drive from Bapmut, I
met the commander of a tank unit. Over a platter of cheese sandwiches, he
rattled through the latest developments on the battlefield. But his armour
cracked when I asked how difficult it was to fight for so long. It's hard, he
told me, when a 152 calibre shell explodes 10 metres away from you. It's hard
when you are pressed against the wall by the blast wave. It's hard when you take
a soldier to the hospital picking up his severed arms and legs. The horrors here
extend well beyond the battlefield. Anastasia used to be a mother of two. Last
September, Russia made her a mother of one. She was in the local park with her
twin boys, Ruslan and Denise. They were nine then, energetic, outdoorsy and
always side by side. Suddenly as they played, there was shelling and a wave of
shrapnel. Denise was hit. At the hospital, Ruslan fell on the floor, Anastasia
says, and started kissing the doctor's feet. He said, I beg you, save my
brother, there is no one like him. Who will I go for walks with? Who will I
celebrate my birthday with? But Denise did not survive. Anastasia weeps
endlessly as she tells me about that day. Ruslan stands nearby in silence, dry-
eyed. His grief is locked inside. That piece of Russian shrapnel will follow him
through life. When I came back to the East this month, I checked into a hotel in
the town of Druzhkivka. A few nights after I arrived, three Russian missiles
came slamming to earth about half a mile away, with the kind of impact that
reverberates in your body. I listened for any reaction in the hotel. No one ran
for the door. One year on, terror is the new normal here. Among Ukrainians there
is unity and determination, but some have annoying fear. I don't think we are
even in the middle of this war, a Ukrainian journalist told me, fresh from the
front line. They have a lot more men, and even if their weapons are not
sophisticated, they still kill. Oleg Erin. On Tuesday, Vladimir Putin took to
the stage to make his annual State of the Nation address in Moscow, a speech in
which he blamed the West for escalating the war, and accused the US and its
allies of seeking limitless power. In an escalation of his own, he then
announced the suspension of a nuclear arms treaty. The move raises the stakes
once more, in a conflict which has frequently put NATO powers on alert. What's
hard to anticipate is how far Vladimir Putin is willing to go to win the war,
and that's been the problem from the outset, says Steve Rosenberg. I admit it, I
was wrong. Up until the 24th of February last year, I had believed, or perhaps
I'd wanted to believe, that despite all of its problems, post-Soviet Russia had
undergone an irreversible transformation, one that would rule out a future
conflict with the West. Walk around Moscow, and what did you see? American
coffee shops, British retail chains, Swedish furniture stores. As long as
Russians were flocking to Ikea and hanging out at Starbucks, surely world peace
was guaranteed. And then there were the holidays, Paris, Rome, Barcelona. Post-
communism, Europe was a popular destination for Russian travelers, and the
continent of choice for oligarchs and officials selecting schools for their
kids. Surely, over time, that would help cement Western values in Russian
society. True, there were worrying signs. An increasingly authoritarian Kremlin,
Russia's annexation of Crimea from Ukraine, and anti-Western rhetoric was on the
rise. But as long as Russians could access the internet and alternative sources
of information, surely, I thought, they would distinguish between reality and
propaganda, and realize that, despite what their leaders were telling them,
Russia was not a besieged fortress, and that the West was not plotting to
destroy their country. Well, one year after Russia launched its full-scale
invasion of Ukraine, the American coffee shops have gone, the Ikea stores have
shut. Yes, the internet's still working here. And although many websites, like
the BBC's, have been blocked, it is still possible to access alternative voices
online if you're prepared to search for them. Truth is, most Russians are not.
For many here, state media suffices. Which brings me to what has shocked me most
about Russia the last 12 months. The first thing is the ease with which so many
Russians accept the propaganda on state TV, and then repeat it, almost word for
word. Many people here have said to me, Russia didn't invade Ukraine. The West
started this. Russia never starts wars. It only ends them. In Belgorod, near the
Ukrainian border, Olga, who runs a church choir, recently told me this. Russians
are peace-loving and generous. A Russian will give you the shirt off his back.
He will never attack you. He will protect you. After the death and destruction
Russia has wrought, I'm sure the people of Ukraine would disagree with Olga.
Then there's the aggression. On the same trip to Belgorod, a market seller told
me that Ukrainians need to be re-educated, re-made, to force them to like
Russia. But the comment that shocked me most was from a Muscovite called Vera. I
interviewed her last September at a pro-Putin rally near the Kremlin. I'd rather
my son was killed fighting in Ukraine, said Vera, than see him getting up to
mischief at home. Look how many young men here have no job and spend their time
getting drunk. A few weeks later, President Putin himself echoed that sentiment
when he spoke to the mother of a pro-Russia fighter killed in the Donbass. We
all have to die sometime, the president said. What's important is how you spent
your life. Some people die from vodka and their lives pass unnoticed, but your
son really lived. Is that the choice now for Russian men? Die from alcohol or
die on the battlefield? What does that say about the state of Russia after 23
years of Putin in power? It was after speaking to Vera that I realized how naive
I'd been. Most Russians couldn't care less about hopping off to Paris or London.
They're too busy struggling to survive in Barones or Penza and dealing with
alcohol abuse, domestic violence that are so widespread here. For some of them,
Vladimir Putin's special military operation has proved a financial boost. Last
November, President Putin ordered a one-off payment of 195,000 rubles, that's
just over $3,000, for mobilized troops and contract soldiers. Others here see
war as a path to gaining respect from their peers and from their state. I will
never forget what a woman called Valya told me about her husband, a convicted
killer. In prison, he had been recruited to fight in Ukraine by the private
military company Wagner. He had told Valya the motherland needs defending. From
whom, Valya had replied, no one's attacked us. Her husband explained, now I'm a
prisoner, but I will return a hero. Steve Rosenberg. The decision by US
President Joe Biden to visit Kiev early this week was a high-risk maneuver aimed
at showing unity with Western allies. Sirens wailed as President Biden and his
Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelensky, appeared in public together at St.
Michael's Cathedral in the center of the capital. After the visit, Washington
announced more than $450 million worth of security and emergency assistance for
the country. But although President Biden pledged to back Ukraine for as long as
it takes in the conflict, there are signs on the fringes of Congress that
support is beginning to waver back home, says Sarah Smith. Annoy a bunch of
journalists, and they will always make their feelings known, probably pretty
loudly. And nothing annoys journalists more than missing a big story. So it was
a very disgruntled bunch of hacks I met at Andrews Air Base just outside
Washington to fly to Warsaw on Monday evening, and that was many hours after
President Biden had already made his surprise visit to Kiev. Everyone was
complaining about being left out and misled by the White House officials who had
been telling us for days there were no plans for POTUS, the President of the
United States, to enter Ukraine. They had succeeded in keeping his visit a
secret, despite much speculation among the press corps about whether the
President would set foot in Ukraine during his visit to Poland. So the first I
knew about it was when I woke up in Washington on Monday morning, by which point
he was already in Kiev. Only two reporters had been sworn to secrecy and allowed
to travel with the President on a small C-32 aircraft and then a 10-hour train
ride. Of course, the surprise nature of the visit did add enormously to the
impact it had. Many other world leaders have made the trip to Kiev, but it is
almost unheard of for a US President to appear in a war zone in a country that
doesn't have a strong American military presence there to provide security. The
optics, as they call them in America, were clearly designed to send the message
that Mr Biden is totally committed to supporting Ukraine for the long term. And
that message was aimed at an American audience at home just as much as it was
meant for the people of Ukraine. Because whilst the President insists he will
back Ukraine for as long as it takes, some politicians on the far right and left
of American politics have started to question how much longer the US can afford
to keep sending weaponry. And opinion polls suggest public support is slipping
too. The last time Presidents Biden and Zelensky met was on another surprise
visit to Washington just before Christmas. On that occasion, Mr Zelensky
received a rapturous welcome when he addressed both houses of Congress. He was
dressed in his familiar khaki fatigues and surrounded by elected representatives
dressed in the blue and yellow colours of the Ukrainian flag. There were many
lengthy standing ovations, but it was noticeable that some of the more Trump-
aligned representatives stayed in their seats and over half of the House
Republicans didn't turn up at all. Donald Trump Jr clearly thought he was
reflecting the mood of the MAGA, or Make America Great Again crowd, when he
tweeted back then that Zelensky is basically an ungrateful welfare queen. This
week his father, the former President, has repeated his claim that Putin would
never, ever have gone into Ukraine if he was still in office. The hard-right
Republican representative from Georgia, Marjorie Taylor Greene, has said not a
penny more of American money should be spent on Ukraine. She argues the cash
would be much better used trying to stop immigration and drug imports at the US-
Mexican border, but claims the only border the Democrats care about is
Ukraine's. Now, these kind of views are currently aired only by a small minority
of elected US politicians, and there aren't nearly enough votes in Congress yet
to prevent President Biden sending more money to Ukraine, or even fighter jets
if he decides to. But there are doubts growing on the left as well, where
activists complain that they don't see any attempts to broker a diplomatic
solution. Congressional leaders do still support President Biden on Ukraine,
even if they don't agree with him on anything else. When the top Republican in
the Senate, Mitch McConnell, posted a picture of himself with President
Zelensky, he proclaimed, supporting Ukraine is morally right and a direct
investment in cold, hard American interests. So the President need not worry too
much yet about domestic dissent, and he certainly doesn't care about the
complaints from grumbling journalists here that Moscow was informed of his
immediate visit to Kiev hours before we were told about it. Now, the plane, by
the way, that special 747 that usually carries the President, is not known as
Air Force One when he's not on board. So I travelled to Warsaw on a flight that
was designated Special Air Mission 28, which does still sound quite cool, I
suppose. Sarah Smith. Images from station platforms in Ukraine a year ago showed
vast throngs of people fleeing the Russian invasion, confused and chaotic scenes
as women and children boarded trains, often to an unknown destination, forced to
say goodbye to husbands and fathers who were required to stay behind. Poland
welcomed the largest number of refugees, and the continues to host almost a
million, though many went on to countries across Europe, including Germany and
the UK. In the early days of the war, Sarah Rainsford was in eastern Ukraine,
where she saw people fleeing in terror. This month she's been in eastern Poland,
where refugees are still arriving, but the mood has changed. When the evening
train from Kiev arrived, the passengers were surprised to see the number of
refugees. They were surprised to see the number of refugees. When the evening
train from Kiev pulls into eastern Poland, it can be hard to spot the refugees
now. Among the passengers stepping onto the platform are young Ukrainians with a
connecting train to Prague. They're mostly smart women with wheelie bags who
could be from anywhere, until you ask them, and they tell you they've come for a
few days break from all the air raids. But other than that, I met Olga and
Alexander at an abandoned Tesco supermarket that's been turned into a transit
hub for Ukrainians arriving in Poland. They'd just been registered and allocated
camp beds in a corner near a family with a French bulldog. The couple's story
was one of occupation and separation, injury and death. It's the kind I've heard
hundreds of times this past year, and the kind I never imagined I'd hear before
last February the 24th. When Russian soldiers surrounded Olga's village, her
husband was in Kiev and they ended up apart for many weeks. She had no power
from day one and no running water. But when I asked how the Russians had treated
people there, Olga told me it wasn't like Butcher, the Kiev suburb that's now
associated with torture and murder by the invading troops. She sounded
apologetic, as if she'd got off lightly. But under occupation, her elderly
mother died of gangrene without proper medical help. Olga had to wrap her body
in a blanket because there were no coffins, and drag her to the cemetery on a
sledge. Her eyes fill with tears, but she blinks them back. She wants to talk,
and when she does, she remembers her husband. She remembers his face. She
remembers his face, and it's a picture that she remembers. She remembers his
face, and it's a picture that she remembers. It's a picture of his face, and
it's a picture of his face, and it's a picture of his face. All of this was back
in March. In May, Ukrainian forces managed to free Olga's village, and she and
Alexander were reunited. So I asked the couple why they were leaving Ukraine
now, and they said they were scared that Vladimir Putin was planning something
even more wretched to mark the first anniversary of his invasion. The lady next
to them in the shelter told me the same. She'd also brought her son out of
Ukraine, because he was about to turn 18, and she couldn't bear to see him
called up to fight. All the best, most handsome lads in our town have been
taken, she told me, and she meant killed. Her name was Olga, too. We spoke in
Russian, because that's her first language. Another reminder that when President
Putin says he's invading Ukraine to save Russian speakers from persecution, in
reality, they're fleeing his shelling and his bombs. At the start of the war, we
were reporting from near the Donbas region in the east. The goodbyes on the
station platform there were heartbreaking. I remember fathers with their hands
pressed to the glass of the evacuation trains, women and children mouthing
silent words on the other side, grown men turning away quickly to hide their
tears. Today, the panic and shock I saw then have been replaced by depression, a
weary realisation that life inside Ukraine won't get much better any time soon.
That's why Olga and Alexander, and the other Olga and her children, have got
out, and from Poland, they all had tickets for a free train further west to
Germany. These days, the evacuation is organised by volunteers. Among them, I
met an exuberant Frenchman called Sébastien, who was once in the Foreign Legion
and is now in a tabard doing crowd control. His family made him leave his
passport at home so there'd be no risk of him slipping across the border into
Ukraine to join the fight. The volunteers help the crowds to board, along with
Arnold the Bulldog and a lot of pet cats in cages. Other small bundles of
belongings are squeezed into the cabins and the windows steam up. The doors
slam, Sébastien waves and cheers, and the train begins to slide from the
station, carrying the refugees towards safety, but further from home. And a full
year into this war, none of them can be sure when they're coming back. Sarah
Rainsford. For so many people in Ukraine, it's hard to remember some cities as
they once were, like Mariupol and Bakhmut. Mariupol, a city once celebrated for
its culture with museum festivals, concerts and a theatre, is now associated
with ravaged buildings and a profound sense of loss following the siege of the
Azov steelworks and the bombing of the maternity hospital. Bakhmut is now the
site of a protracted artillery battle, with little evidence of the community it
once housed. For each Ukrainian, coming to terms with the present reality poses
huge challenges, from rebuilding damaged infrastructure to damaged homes and
communities. Vitaly Shevchenko looks back on a year of huge destruction in his
homeland, and the extraordinary spirit shown through adversity. It has begun. I
can hear explosions. The whole house is shaking, my mother told me over the
phone from Zaporizhia, through her tears. It was early in the morning, and the
Russian invasion had just begun. I tried to calm her down the best I could, then
I switched on my computer to check the news, and I saw Vladimir Putin announcing
the start of his special military operation. He sounded confident and relaxed,
but behind this facade it was easy to see the unspeakable devastation that was
about to be wreaked upon the innocent. Yet the senseless cruelty, murder,
torture, rape and destruction that followed went beyond even what I had feared,
brutal actions which I thought had been relegated to Europe's dark and distant
past. I grew up in Ukraine, and that's where I lived until 2009. Together with
most people in Russia and the rest of the former Soviet Union, we read the same
books, watched the same films and listened to the same songs. Some of my closest
friends married Russians. So how then can people have such close links do such
horrible things to each other? One year after the war started, I still don't
know the answer. War brings out the worst in people, but also the best. For
years after he was elected, President Zelensky wasn't really taken seriously by
many. A comedian by profession, we thought he was in it only for the laughs. But
after the invasion of 2021, he found his inner warrior and is now widely
regarded as a resolute fighter for democracy. I was fortunate enough to be able
to evacuate my parents from Eastern Ukraine, and they were made to feel welcome
back in England. But I'm painfully aware that others can't leave their homes or
don't want to. Take my friends from Zaporizhia. Yuri, a keen photographer and a
Depeche Mode fan. When we last had tea in his kitchen with his white cat hiding
under the table, little did we know that Yuri would have to leave all that
behind to defend his city. Or my schoolmate Natalia. When we went boating on the
River Dnieper one summer evening, we had no idea that next year she would be
cowering in her tiny flat, listening to the sound of explosions. Or Vyacheslav,
a historian and member of the Zaporizhia City Council, who I first interviewed
shortly after Russia invaded in 2014. He spoke to me from a hospital bed after
being wounded while defending Donetsk airport. Eight years later, he volunteered
again and was killed fighting. Now there's a street named after him in
Zaporizhia. It used to be named after Mikhail Lermontov, the famous Russian
poet. Or take my friends from Russia, whose lives have been turned upside down
by the turmoil. One, a university worker, left Moscow for Turkey together with
her son. Her husband left Moscow for a village, fearing mobilisation into the
army. So where are we one year into the special military operation? Ukraine's
infrastructure has taken a battering, and so has Russia's standing in the world.
But Ukraine and its culture are becoming more popular. I've heard from an
American truck driver learning Ukrainian while on the move. In a sleepy English
village, I've seen a poster explaining the significance of Sonia Shnik, or
sunflower, a symbol of Ukraine. President Putin said he wanted to protect
Russian speakers in Ukraine, thousands of whom are now switching to speaking
Ukrainian instead, refusing to watch Russian films or listen to Russian music.
He said he wanted to protect Russia's legacy. Russian monuments are now being
torn down in Ukraine. He said he wanted to demilitarise Ukraine. It is now full
of cutting-edge Western weaponry. I last visited Ukraine 10 days before war
broke out. People in the southern three-wheeling port city of Odessa seemed
determined to make the most of their lives, despite the persistent warnings of
an imminent offensive. Launching it, President Putin said he was ready for
anything. But I can't help thinking he was not prepared for the courage and
resolve shown by Ukrainians in the face of a ruthless invader. Vitaly
Shevchenko. And that's all for today. We'll be back again on Saturday morning.
Do join us. Do join us. From our own correspondent was presented by Kate Ady,
the producer was Serena Tarling. Exclusive performances by much-loved artists.
Together with the BBC Concert Orchestra. From classic tracks to brand new
covers. This time the girl is gonna stay for more than just a day. Radio 2's
Piano. Watch on iPlayer, listen on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, we continue our
new arts documentary series. Each week we're hearing stories from actors across
the world who've all played the same part. In today's episode, it's Peter Pan.
This is Roleplay. So we are in the dressing room. We're in the adults dressing
room at St George's Theatre in Great Yarmouth and I have just laid out my
costume to have a look at. We have got some lovely Splitsoul Jazz shoes that
I've been given. They're amazing. They're great for jumping around. I've got a
very nice sort of Robin Hood-esque hat with a nice feather in it, sort of green
trim on that. And I guess the best piece that I've got is this pretty amazing
vest I've got here from Norwich Theatre Royal and it is kind of embroidered with
these amazing leaves all the way around it and they're different colours. You've
got your reds, your oranges, your greens, your browns and it just shows that
connection to nature and this kind of almost wild boy feeling that Peter Pan
has. Where do you live? Second to the right and then straight until morning.
What a funny address. No it isn't. You know there's only one child that can stay
young forever and that's Peter Pan. Good or bad? One of the thrilling things
about playing Peter Pan is stepping back into one's own childhood. And it's
brilliant for an actor to play because it's all about being in the moment. I
think Peter Pan actually saved my life. Every one of us has a little bit of
Peter Pan in us. I mean I think I've got quite a lot of it really. I'm Peter
Pan, enemy to pirates, prince of the seas, king of the skies, the most
incredible, unbeatable and majestical boy in all of Neverland. Neverland? That's
where I come from, me and all the lost boys. Hello my name's Charlie Randall.
I'm playing Peter Pan at St George's Theatre in Great Yarmouth. I love doing
panto. If I could do pantomime every year for the rest of my life I probably
would. It's a lot of people's first experience of theatre, especially children,
and it is just magic. When you look out at those tiny little young people who
are watching this show and they've got this look of awe and happiness on their
face, nothing beats it for me. I would say the best thing about playing Peter
Pan is it is such a well-known character and it is such an almost archetypal
character. This boy who never grows up, it is literally all about putting as
much energy into it as possible, but it's quite useful as an actor because
you've got stuff to go on already when you take on the role. There is so many
versions of this story that can really help you. The whole thing is magical and
it's very difficult to put your finger on why it is such a wonderful experience
to play Peter Pan. He's ageless, he's a boy, but he's not completely. He's on
the brink of leaving childhood, a childhood for all of us, even if we've had
very, very unhappy, difficult childhoods. There are magical things about being a
child. My next guest made her first movie at the age of 12, was signed up by
Walt Disney and became a world star in those dear departed days when child stars
wore pigtails and radiated innocence. Today she's matured into a splendid
actress. Ladies and gentlemen, Hayley Mills. My name is Hayley Mills and I
played Peter Pan in 1966 at the New Victoria Cinema in London. After having been
under contract for Walt Disney for six movies, which was a marvellous
experience, and wanting very much to go on the stage, playing Peter Pan really
launched me into working in the theatre in a wonderful way and it was very
liberating. And I think it was a really good choice because it was a part that I
could really identify with. You know, J.M. Barrie loved children. Children
responded to his marvellous imagination. You just feel very connected to him as
well when you play Peter Pan. Sir James Matthew Barrie was the man who wrote
Peter Pan. He was also, by the turn of the century, one of the most prolific,
rich and fashionable of all British dramatists. Peter Pan appears only very
briefly in The White Bird, which was an early novel of Barrie's. And then, it's
around about the time that he befriended the Llewelyn Davies family and they'd
play games and the idea emerged for Peter Pan, the boy who wouldn't grow up, and
then he went on to write it in a novel form again, Peter Pan and Wendy. But
around Barrie the man, there still hangs a kind of mystery. We know that he was
unhappily married, that he was childless and that in his middle years he
virtually adopted five young boys. They were the Llewelyn Davies brothers. The
boys were, he claimed, the inspiration for Peter Pan and for much of his other
work. My name's Tristan Thurrock. I played Peter Pan at the Bristol Old Vic in
2012. When we were doing the show, the Queen came. Then I was asked if I could
be in the dressing room and have a chat with her. And it was bizarre because I
was in this little tiny room with the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh and some
security guards outside. And then I said, Your Majesty, is it true that J. M.
Barrie used to read to you when you were young? He said, oh yes, yes, he used
to. He came down to London but he also came to Balmoral and he would read to us,
I think I was about seven at the time, and I said, that's incredible. And I
said, what was he like? And she said, he was an angry little man. And she kind
of, had a kind of a twinkle, but she was, again, her demeanour changed and she
said, he was an angry little man. The part of Peter Pan seems to be to actresses
what Hamlet is to actors. They all want to play it. And yet it can't be an easy
role for not only do they have to portray a boy, but a boy with a touch of
magic. And a boy, moreover, who is so riddled with whimsy that he confuses
kisses with thimbles and thimbles with kisses. The first Peter was Nina
Boussico. She created Peter and she did it a number of times. You would ask him
what he meant by such and such a passage. And he generally gave you a most
quizzical answer. One that you couldn't really reproduce, such as when I asked
him what was Peter Pan and he told me that he was a bird and a day old. That
wasn't a very big thing to go on, but oh, it was so laughable. Jean Forbes
Robertson also played Peter many times. She liked to greet her guests when they
came to see her sitting on the mantelpiece. And she had the mantelpiece extended
and made bigger so it was more like a big shelf. She could sit there. It's such
a wonderful image. Is it true? I don't know. Well, now we've got boys playing
him as well, which, you know, why not? But at the same time, it's not the Peter
Pan that Barry imagined. To play Peter Pan is a recognition, an accolade in
anyone's career. And in any case, what actress could resist a part where her
first entrance is to come flying in through a window? Peter Pan begins with the
Darling family getting ready, the children to go to bed and the parents to go
out to dinner in the evening for his job. And Nana the dog is watching them. And
there's a sense of foreboding from Mrs. Darling. And she says, Dear nightlight
that protects my sleeping children, burn clear and steadfast tonight. She's a
little bit afraid that something's going to happen. So the children fall asleep
and Tinker Bell slips through the window. She turns off all the nightlights and
all of a sudden you hear, the windows open, and Peter just flies through the air
and the kids go, The flying is actually one of the most exciting aspects of
Peter Pan. Gets me every time, you know, and I know how it's done. When I did
it, to get your wire attached, you would have to back into the wings and stand
looking unconcerned while someone fiddled around hooking you up. And then you
would walk back and you'd find the right spot. And then a Kirby flying guy would
jump off the ladder, whoop, and up you'd go. The first few times, I was kind of
terrified, but like that sort of terrified when you're on a roller coaster and
you're like, Oh my God, I'm going to die. In our productions, instead of fairy
dust, we said, I'm just going to put my fairy strings on. So you declare it,
which is sort of true to the spirit of what Barry was doing when he first
performed those plays. And when it's declared and so obvious and seen, I think
it becomes magical. I think every child wants to fly, but, and I'm not quite
sure what it is, except that it's just like, they want to go too. I've had some
really, really good experiences with children. I've had some really great
moments with children. We were at our theater. We've had like the Make-A-Wish
Foundation bring children in to fly. And we had one little girl that was in a
wheelchair and I was in Peter Pan costume and she was very sick, you could tell,
but she wanted to fly. That was her wish to fly. So we put her in a harness that
goes over your shoulders and through your legs. And as I look at her, she, I
thought she looked like she was going to cry. And I thought, honey, you don't
have to do this. I said, are you okay? She goes. So I said, think lovely,
wonderful thoughts. And I threw the fairy dust on her and she started to ascend
very slowly, but, and carefully. And as she got up and started going from one
side to the other of the proscenium hall, she said, look at me, mommy, I'm
finally free. My name is Kathy Rigby McCoy and I have played Peter Pan over 3000
times. Peter Pan is about a mythical little boy who has all the characteristics
of any child, but he goes to this magical place, Neverland, where he can have
everything that he wants and he can fly and he can fight the bad guys and always
win. He can come and go as he pleases. And the only thing he doesn't have is the
love of a family, friends that actually stay with him. So he continually uses
his imagination to recreate his life. And he learns to shut down emotionally,
but he always has fun. And, um, you know, there's only one child that can stay
young forever and that's Peter Pan. Good or bad. I competed in gymnastics from
the age of 10 till I was 20. I made my first Olympics in Mexico city at 15.
Gymnastics was not a big sport in the United States at that point. And I think
being the first American to place as high as I did in the 68 Olympics was very
unusual. And I was only 15. So there was a story there. You know, I went on to
compete in the Munich Olympics in 1972. And then at the ripe old age of 19, I
retired from the sport and had to figure out what I wanted to do the rest of my
life. The greatest musical adventure of all 1999 Tony award nominee. I think
Peter Pan actually, after I retired from gymnastics saved my life. It was one of
those roles that, you know, demands spontaneity and creativity in a way that I
had not experienced in my childhood, because I was very disciplined and very,
you know, focused on what I had to do and not emotional. I first played Peter
Pan in 1974 in an arena version of the show. And the last time I played it, I
was 59 years old. I'd worked with Sally Cookson, the director of Peter Pan at
Bristol on a production of Treasure Island. And she then approached me and said,
look, we're thinking of doing Peter Pan. And I immediately thought, oh, great,
Captain Hook. And then she found me back a few days later and said, so so yeah,
so we'd love you to sort of look at Peter. I was 40 and thinking, oh, okay,
fantastic, brilliant. Sally was very interested. We were all interested in the
darkness that surrounds somebody who doesn't grow up. I did the musical Peter
Pan, always, but I always felt like it was a play with music. And the more I
read the James Berry novels and all the books, there were so many wonderful
moments that I could draw from. And to this day, one of my favorite quotes from
Peter Pan is when Mrs. Darling watches her daughter in a garden, and Wendy picks
up a flower and gives it to her mother. And Mrs. Darling says, oh, if only they
could remain like this forever. And having watched my children grow up, now have
grandchildren, I sometimes think, oh, God, if only they could remain like this
forever. The key moments for me that I remember of that production was there's a
nightmare scene where, where he has these dreams of his life before and that
sense of abandonment by his mother, where he goes away and he comes back and the
window was barred. And there's a such a deep sort of tragedy in that. The very
core of him is this, is this rejection, and so therefore, he will never grow up.
Peter Pan is classic, real classic tragic hero, because he's cursed by the fact
that he can't grow up. And it's brilliant for an actor to play because on the
stage, it's all about being in the moment. As a clown, for instance, you are in
a state of innocence where you're continually forgetting what's gone before and
what's in the future, you're literally living in the present. And that is the
state that Peter is consistently in. If anything goes wrong, it's a gift. And
that's fantastic. And you can use it. And it's, it's a continual adventure. So
there's so many parallels, there's so many things that tie in with the state of
that play for a performer. I just want always to be a little boy and to have
fun. Now then no fuss, no blubbering. I hope you will like your mother's. Are
you ready, Tink? Then lead the way. I was an ice skater back in the day when I
was short and flexible. And I was in the Scaniatlas figure skating club in
upstate New York. And the club every year put on a big ice show. And they needed
a very small child who could also do a camel spin, which is the thing where you
sort of make a spiral out of your body and spin. And I was the smallest kid who
could do it. So I got to be Tinkerbell. My name is Allison Cavey. I'm a
professor of history at City University of New York, John Jay College and the
Graduate Center. And I co-edited Second Star to the Right, Peter Pan in the
Popular Imagination with Les Friedman. My name is Les Friedman. I'm the emeritus
professor and former chair of the Media and Society Program at Hobart and
William Smith Colleges and was the co-author of this book. I found something
quite different. I'm quite sure all of you know the story of Peter Pan and Wendy
very well indeed. Walt Disney has made a cartoon film of it, which is on general
release now. And in the piece that we're going to show you... Bobby Driscoll was
the voice of Peter Pan in Disney's 1953 version. And that was perhaps, along
with Treasure Island, his most famous role. And ironically, he wasn't seen. The
second star to the right shines in the night for you. Bobby Driscoll was the
voice of Peter Pan in the movie when he was 16 years old. Went through an
incredible change that's unfortunately not particularly aberrational in
Hollywood with child stars. By the time he was nine years old, he was a movie
star. But I want to thank everybody that had to do with me getting this award. I
want to thank God for giving me such a wonderful mother and father. Thank you.
He actually won a juvenile Oscar when he was 12 years old. He was the voice of
Peter Pan when he was 16 years old. And he was dead by the time he was 31 years
old. Best guest being as a heroin overdose. So my interest in Bobby Driscoll is,
I think, in his I think in his body as one that was ruined by adolescence for
film and therefore was deemed unacceptable to put on camera. And then he lost
his career and lost his way as a result. If he could have stayed a child, he
probably would have had a career. But instead, he became an adult, a teenager
with an incredibly bad case of acne that they could not somehow cover enough for
him to be able to make the transition, if he could, into adult roles. Of course,
he turned to the Never Never Land of heroin, which allowed him to participate in
the real world as opposed to the Hollywood world. The fact that children found
his dead body after he overdosed and died is perhaps the most compelling
narrative arc of a real story I've ever seen, because a lost boy who became a
lost man was found by children playing in a lost space. Right. This was an
abandoned house where his dead body was found. He was indigent by that point. No
one knew who he was. He was buried in Potter's Field, which is the graveyard of
paupers. A person whose body and voice were made immortal by the Disney film and
whose movements were associated with eternal youth, with eternal lightness, with
a flippancy and joy, then became nothing but a corpse, the leftovers of an adult
person. It reflects for me the very dark potential or the flip side of all that
lightness and joy. There is this moment in the play when Tinkerbell, who adores
Peter Pan and is with him all the time, and in the play, she's depicted as a
light. And the pirates, Captain Hook, tries to poison Peter, and she drinks it
to stop him drinking it. It was poisoned, and you drank it to save my life.
Tink! Dear Tink, are you dying? She goes back to her little house, and she's
lying on her little bed, and her little light is getting smaller and smaller and
smaller. Her light's growing faint. If it goes out, that means she's dead. Her
voice is so low I can scarcely tell what she's saying. And Peter's desperate,
and he turns to the children in the audience. She says she thinks she could get
well again if children believed in fairies. He says, if you believe in fairies
and you clap your hands, this will give Tinkerbell great strength, and she will
come back to life. Children everywhere say that you believe. If you believe,
clap your hands. So when the clapping starts in the audience, the applause grows
to an absolute roar. And the little light starts to get bigger and bigger and
bigger. Oh, thank you, thank you. Gosh, you know, it's really emotional, and I
think about it now, and I'm feeling quite emotional. I think my mother told me
about Peter Pan when I was younger, and I'm sure as a kid, like I had watched
the cartoon somewhere, the Disney one. And the concept of this boy who didn't
want to go gold was, I mean, Peter Pan was always quite a big part of my
childhood when I was younger. But then I didn't know the history of it until I
came here to England. It's a dreadful irony that Peter Pan's first audience
included a lot of boys who didn't grow up, because of course they were killed in
the First World War, like one of the Llewelyn Davies boys himself. Barry lived
through that, and he must at times have felt in a sense the play had been
prophesying that. Peter Pan was performed every year through the war. The
theatre filled not with children, but with soldiers home from the trenches. The
line, to die will be an awfully big adventure, was left out for the duration.
That really like struck a chord, because I was born like in 85, and during that
time there was like a civil war that was going on in Sri Lanka too. My name is
Hirana Vesekar. I'm from Sri Lanka. I came over to England in 2008. It was the
first time that I was on a plane, when I came for auditions. I graduated from
RADA, and then I did Peter Pan at Regent's Park Open Air Theatre in 2015. And it
was awesome. Most of, you know, my childhood, there was always like this major
thing happening at the background. And during like news broadcast, like it after
like the weather report, it would always end with like the body count, which is,
which is like such a weird way to grow up really. But I related to the lost
boys, because there were quite a few of my friends who later on joined the army
as well. And I kind of understood it, you know, how they are lost when they get
back. There's like a sort of vacant look in their eyes. So the theatre itself is
the heart of Regent's Park. It's surrounded by huge trees, it's open air. And I
think it sits about like 1000 people, maybe even a little bit more. And around
when the sun goes down, and the lights come on, it's like the most magical place
really to like do theatre. Tim Shida and Liam Steele were the directors and they
focused a lot on World War One. We had a group of East 15 boys, who were the
soldiers. And they were there all throughout the play in different parts of the
play, and sort of set the scene really. And at the end of the play, I remember
the boys sort of walk into the sort of sun sunset and one of Wendy's brothers
walks with them. And that's quite heartbreaking every time. I mean, it's what I
mean, how many people were lost during that time and all these boys who were who
were promised adventure, and they were kids who hadn't even like left the
country. And suddenly they would, can you imagine? Of course they were lost. To
be honest with you, having watched all the films recently, and then coming to do
this pantomime, I'd kind of forgotten the end. Because you think of it all
ending happily, because I had remembered that Wendy and her brothers end up back
home. But you kind of forget that Peter Pan is almost left. On his own left back
in Neverland. Yeah, it's kind of quite sad that he's the only one who doesn't
really get to go back with his parents. So that's been quite an interesting
thing to play as well. But bearing in mind is a pantomime. We kind of putting a
positive spin on that. Yeah. Good night, Peter. Good night, Wendy. Peter, you
won't forget me, will you? I decided to stop playing Peter Pan, because I
thought it was a bit of a good amount. I would have every memory I could
possibly have of the show. And also, it was me being Wendy saying, I have to let
this part go. At 59, I would meet children after the show and I found myself
kind of going, and I had a little boy who said, I really like you. You're really
good as Peter Pan. And I love how you're playing Peter Pan. And I was like, I'm
going to go to bed. I really like you. You're really good as Peter Pan. And I
love how you fly and this and that. And then he came up closest. But as I get up
close, I see you have wrinkles. And I just leave it to a child to kind of tell
you when to get out. I don't want to lose the sense of humor or the spontaneity.
I don't want to lose Peter Pan. I don't want to lose that part of myself. But I
don't need to play the part to still keep him in my heart. In this year's Lent
Talks, six people reflect on the words of this prayer. Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. Lent Talks on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. Begins next Wednesday.