TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 First we'll hear dispatches from our correspondents around the world. This is
BBC Radio 4. BBC News at 11 o'clock. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock
has described as a massive betrayal the leaking of thousands of his WhatsApp
messages from the height of the Covid pandemic. The journalist who revealed the
messages, Isabelle Oakeshott, said she'd acted in the public interest. The
latest revelations in the Daily Telegraph detail arguments within government
about keeping schools in England open during the pandemic. They contain
disparaging remarks about teaching unions made in messages between Mr Hancock
and the Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson. Geoff Barton from the
Association of School and College Leaders says the comments don't chime with
what they were being told at the time. We were being seen as people who were
representing who were the guardians of the nation's children and young people.
We were being seen as the people who would bring those young people back in and
for those very people who put their head above the parapet did the right thing
for the nation's children and young people to be sneered at in those terms, well
frankly shame on them. The third and final report from the public inquiry into
the Manchester arena bombing in 2017 in which 22 people were killed is released
this afternoon. It'll focus on the role of the security services and will try to
establish whether the attack could have been prevented. A post-mortem
examination is to be carried out on a baby whose body was discovered near
Brighton by officers searching for the child of Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon. The couple, who'd been missing for 53 days, have been questioned on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The retailer WH Smith has said it's
been targeted in a cyber attack. The company said hackers had accessed data
including information about current and former employees. The BBC has announced
that the children's story writing competition 500 words is to return in
September after a three-year layoff. The winner will be announced on World Book
Day next year. And four Aboriginal spears that were taken by the explorer James
Cook and his party when they first arrived in Australia in 1770 are to be
returned. The decision by Trinity College in Cambridge follows a 20-year
campaign by indigenous Australians. BBC News. And now it's time for From Our Own
Correspondent, presented by Kay Dady. Good morning. Today we're in southeastern
Turkey, where we hear from members of the Afghan community, who once again have
to rebuild their lives after the quake. A train derailment in Ohio led to a
spillage of toxic chemicals in a small town. We hear from some of the people
having to live with the damage. In South Africa, wine tours in Stellenbosch are
a savoured fixture on the tourist trail. But there's a darker tale of past
segregation beyond the manicured lawns. And we're in Sweden's far north, where a
hike in the snow off the beaten track leads to an unexpected destination. First,
we've all heard plenty in recent months about the impact the war in Ukraine is
having on international gas supplies and prices. You might think that, given
their own huge reserves of natural gas and their polite, if wary, relationship
with Russia, the post-Soviet republics of Central Asia have had no such worries.
But Uzbekistan has also suffered a domestic fuel crisis, with many people
struggling to keep warm in the coldest winter in decades. In January, the
Russian and Uzbek governments even discussed reversing the flow of a major
pipeline to remedy the shortages. The pipe normally moves gas produced in
Turkmenistan to Russia, but the need for heat and light in Tashkent was so
urgent that they agreed to switching its direction to get the gas flowing back
from Russia to Uzbekistan. Keeping the home fires burning through these bitter
days has been a challenge, says Ibrat Safo. I get out of bed. I'm already
wearing tracksuit bottoms over thermal long johns I brought from London, as well
as two jumpers and a bobble hat. I'm renting a flat on the Presidential Avenue,
one of the most prestigious roads in Tashkent. I feel the radiator. It should be
red hot at this time of year. Instead, it's just lukewarm. This has been the
coldest winter on record in Uzbekistan since 1969. And to cap it all off,
there's almost no gas. The temperatures outside have been below minus 20 for
weeks. I look outside to see if any snow has melted. It still glows like
crystals in the beautiful but powerless Tashkent sunshine. Birds peck at a bare
tree branch. In the distance, a local Soviet-era power station puffs out clouds
of white smoke. But it isn't enough. Uzbekistan, one of the largest gas
producers in the world, is in the throes of a full-blown energy crisis. In past
years, it was the towns and villages that complained of fuel shortages. This
year, it's Tashkent. The capital used to be where other Uzbeks sought refuge in
cold winters, in the well-heated apartments of family and friends. Now they
joke, come to the villages, at least we've got log burners. No one can really
explain why the country has been hit so badly by a gas shortage now. But
something has clearly gone very wrong. People are angry. Why don't we have gas
in a country that's so rich in it, they are asking. A friend who lives in a
multi-story block nearby has posted a picture of her neighbors cooking outside
on a makeshift stove in a snowy children's playground. Gas pressure is so low in
some flats, it takes almost an hour to boil water for a pot of tea, much longer
to cook a meal. Some people heat bricks in their kitchen ovens to warm their
flats, because the bricks stay warmer for longer than their central heating.
There have been queues at gas and petrol stations stretching along the roads.
Electricity is affected too. 85% of Uzbekistan's electricity is generated by gas
and it's being turned off throughout the city. One day one apartment block
plunges into darkness, while a neighboring block is kept lit. The next day, in a
sort of a chess move, it's reversed. Lights out in one, back on in the other.
It's done, I'm told, to conserve energy and spread the burden. But in a country
where people are wary of even using the word protest, there are reports of
people gathering, demanding electricity and heating from their local officials.
And in one town near Tashkent, a desperate mother shocked the country by holding
a gas worker hostage with a knife. President Shabgat Mirzoyev has been holding
emergency meetings. Various officials, including the head of the national
electricity grid and the mayor of Tashkent have been sacked. The mayor is a
powerful and a controversial figure, but his removal won't solve the crisis.
Uzbekistan's energy infrastructure hasn't been modernized for years. Some of it
dates back to the 60s, when Uzbekistan was still part of the Soviet Union. Yes,
the country is rich in gas, but for over a decade the government has preferred
to sell it abroad for a higher price than it would get on the domestic market.
Much has gone to China. In December, as the crisis grew, the government
announced foreign sales had stopped. But the numbers from China tell a different
story. And then there's Russia. There are rumors of deals with Russian energy
giants. The story goes the Uzbek government owes them millions. It's even been
announced that this gas-rich country is now going to buy gas from Russia. The
government won't reveal the details, of course. Nothing is transparent here.
There's a knock on the door of my flat. A policeman stands on the landing.
Brother, he says, I'm making sure elderly people living alone have all they
need. Would you take my picture in your neighbor's flat, please? I need it for
my report. Inside the flat is an old lady and a yappy little dog in a tiny
kitchen. Do you have bread, grandma? Asks the policeman. I have plenty of bread,
she replies, but I'm freezing. Okay, but you have bread, don't you? The
policeman asks again, ignoring her complaints about the sad state of the
heating. It'll take more than a local policeman with a camera to solve
Uzbekistan's energy crisis. Ibrat Safo, the small village of Ovacan in
southeastern Hatay province of Turkey, is a melting pot of Afghan culture when
it comes to dress, food and religion. It's known there as Little Afghanistan,
and after the catastrophic earthquake last month, the similarities between the
two places have become even more pronounced, a community displaced, with many
trying to pick up the pieces after so much upheaval. It now resembles a war
zone. The old and poorly built houses have collapsed. The only medical clinic is
no longer treating patients. The graveyard was suddenly full and the central
mosque was badly damaged. And yet, somehow, rituals like Friday prayers in the
village square continue. Majuba Mnaroozi met people in the village near the
epicentre of the quake who are coping with further displacement. Shortly after
the earthquake, I visited Ovacan near the Syrian border. The village was
polluted with rubbish, dust, dirt and smoke. Bearded old men dressed in
traditional Afghan clothes and turbans were walking around the village square,
chatting in Uzbek and Turkmen, while a few women in brightly coloured outfits
were stirring pots of food by the newly erected tents. Teenagers warmed their
hands over the fire in below freezing temperatures. We first stopped at the
village hall, still standing, where plastic chairs had been arranged in a circle
to say prayers for the dead. 70 adults and 85 children died here in the quake,
and many more are still under the rubble, said Imamuddin Oghchan, an official in
the village. The village is known as Little Afghanistan, he explained. Around
200 Afghan Uzbeks and Turks were flown into the village in 1982 from refugee
camps in Pakistan during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. Once they had
resettled in Ovacan all those years ago, thousands of friends and relatives
followed, he said. Records show a total of 4,163 people were transported from
there to Adana by the United Nations in August 1982. After the Taliban takeover
in August 2021, hundreds of newcomers came from different parts of Afghanistan
with different ethnicities to join them. But not all are warmly welcomed. One
man claimed to be the black sheep because of his Tajik ethnicity. He felt
rejected. He volunteered to be my guide but was too scared to give his name, so
I'll call him Ali. Like many other Afghans fleeing the Taliban, Ali embarked on
a treacherous journey of thousands of miles, crossing deserts, steep mountains,
rivers, armed checkpoints, barbed wire and meters-high concrete walls to reach
here. When he arrived, he had no legal status, no job and no freedom. He picked
vegetables and fruits for a living. We walked towards the graveyard that after
the earthquake was suddenly full with many unnamed graves. Some families are
buried in mass graves. The children could not be identified and were buried
together with the bodies we found in the same rubble, said Ali. Every other
house we passed had completely collapsed or was partly damaged. I saw a man
weeping and pushing a wheelbarrow piled with pillows and mattresses. He was too
distraught to talk. I met another man who pulled the bodies of his sister-in-law
and niece from the rubble of her house two days after the earthquake. Nobody
came to help us. We had to do it ourselves with our own hands. A team of
rescuers came from Uzbekistan only three days after the quake, he said. Roads
were damaged after the earthquake, which hampered the relief effort and search
and rescue teams struggled to reach some villages for the first few days. The
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan admitted shortcomings in the initial
response and promised to rebuild the affected areas within a year. Some
villagers who had lost their homes or were too scared to live in their quick-
damaged houses had camped in the village square. Haji Jorah sat cross-legged on
an Afghan traditional silk rag. His three-story house had crumbled to nothing.
I'm originally from Kunduz province of Afghanistan. I worked for many years to
build a house here in this village, but God took it away from me, said Haji
Jorah. But Haji Jorah tries to be positive. I'm grateful to Allah for saving us.
Many people lost their lives, but my children and grandchildren are alive, he
said. Afghan migrants of Turkish origin, like Haji Jorah, who were granted
resettlement and Turkish citizenship, seemed content in their little
Afghanistan, even in the aftermath of the earthquake, and had no plan to go
anywhere. For people like Ali, who have recently left their homes in
Afghanistan, the destructive impact of the earthquake means they have little to
hope for. Majuba Nawruzi In the small US town of East Palestine, Ohio, the
derailment of a train carrying toxic chemicals a few weeks ago has left many
locals fearful of the long-term health effects. Several residents were initially
evacuated from the town northwest of Pittsburgh amid fears of a potential
explosion. They've since been allowed home after air samples indicated there was
no dangerous level of toxins. However, the accident and the government's
response have now become a highly contentious political issue. Residents of the
town gathered over recent days to demand more answers from the government about
why people continue to feel ill in the wake of the derailment. After the
accident, Bernd De Boosman Jr. traveled to the town to speak to people about
their fears for the future. Bernd De Boosman Jr. As we approached the train
tracks, the stench hit me. It was the smell of chemicals and sulfur. It was
overpowering. Even with a mask on, my eyes were watering, my head hurt, and my
throat was itchy and uncomfortable. It felt unhealthy, and I wanted to get out
of here, quickly. The man next to me, John Hamner, had been dealing with these
symptoms for weeks. A gruff and animated man in his mid-50s, his eyes were
swollen and red, his hands blackened by soot. His words are often interrupted by
a phlegmy, guttural cough. He's tired, and it shows. Last month, the toxin-laden
train derailed just meters from his garbage truck business in this tiny corner
of Ohio, with a population of nearly 5,000. Fearful of an explosion, authorities
released a highly flammable chemical called vinyl chloride into the air, sending
a black plume of smoke over the town. Health authorities have warned that
exposure to the chemical can cause headaches and nausea. Prolonged exposure can
raise the risk of conditions like liver cancer. From a distance, John and his
wife Lisa saw the flames in the night sky and ran to their business, fearing
that their trucks were on fire. The good news was that they weren't, Lisa told
me. The bad news was that a train full of chemicals had derailed right in front
of us. The edges of their property are now taken over by cleanup crews, who mill
around the tracks onto scullered gravel next to a trench filled with oily,
polluted-looking water. They stood watching vehicles move the charred remains of
several railcars. Like many people in the U.S. town of East Palestine, John and
Lisa are worried about their health and the health of their 23-year-old son
Shane, who works alongside them. Soon after the accident, state health and
environmental officials insisted the air and water wasn't toxic to humans. But
thousands of fish and wildlife were dying, and people were still feeling sick.
On top of that, they're dealing with stress. Their business is losing customers
as some local residents move away from the affected area. They can barely sleep
from the anxiety. They want to know exactly why this happened, what it will mean
for their health, and how long the cleanup of toxins on their property will
take. John didn't strike me as a man prone to emotion, but as we talked, he
choked back tears. At one point, he was so overcome with emotion, he walked
away. They're far from alone. Across the town, residents are frustrated and
angry. They're angry with the rail firm that operated the train, Norfolk
Southern, and they're angry with the response since. Our government isn't doing
their job, Lisa told me, puffing her cigarette. It's sad. It breaks my heart
that this happens to people who are just living the American dream. And in the
first days after the crash, many said they felt ignored. The town of East
Palestine, after all, is small, and it's quiet. People work hard and don't
complain. Lisa described it to me as the type of place where people spend their
Friday nights watching high school football. Now, this town has found itself at
the center of a messy political brawl, with politicians from both sides of the
partisan divide exploiting the incident to score points with voters. Among those
who've tapped into the angst is former President Donald Trump, who recently
visited the town and handed out branded water bottles. In a short speech, Trump
painted a picture of neglect and indifference from federal officials, before
quickly pivoting to pointed criticism of the White House. Joe Biden and his
cabinet, on the other hand, have accused the Republicans of toning down safety
regulations meant to stop accidents like this from happening. There will now be
a lengthy investigation from the National Transportation Safety Board. There
will also be a rare public hearing in which witnesses will be called. But that
will all come too late for people like John and Lisa, whose business and
livelihood is suffering. They plan to relocate to another town. As I speak to
John and Lisa, several trains roll by, honking their horns loudly over the
heavy, metallic sound of the rail. Every day, Lisa tells me, trains pass by
towns like theirs all over the U.S. Locals rarely have any idea what's on them,
or how safe or unsafe they are. The fact that the train derailed in an
industrial area on the edge of town meant that the city's downtown core and
people's homes were spared. But with so many trains passing through, she says
that something needs to change. The next town may not be so lucky. Bernd de
Boosman, Jr. South Africa is continuing to battle rising inflation and
unemployment. More than 40 percent of 25 to 34-year-olds are out of work and a
deepening energy crisis. In 2021, the country saw its worst social unrest since
the end of apartheid, as hundreds of shops, malls and businesses were destroyed
in a frenzy of arson, looting and murder in Durban and Johannesburg. On the
other side of the country, in the picturesque vineyards that surround Cape Town,
it's easy to forget the extent of South Africa's problems, says Charlotte
Ashton. Stellenbosch is a veritable treasure chest for tourists. Wine tastings,
long lunches, bike rides through vineyards, all set against breathtaking
mountain landscapes, dappled in sunlight. Stellenbosch is a bubble too for its
wealthy residents, who include some of South Africa's most powerful businessmen,
mostly white Afrikaans speakers. After three days, I was longing to explore
beyond the manicured lawns, so I contacted the local tourist board, who
recommended a community walk through Ida's Valley Nature Reserve. The
neighbourhood on the other side of the tracks, Ida's Valley was created under
the brutal 1950 apartheid law called the Group Areas Act, which forced black,
white and mixed race people to live and work in separate areas. People from the
mixed race community in central Stellenbosch were forced out of their homes,
churches, schools and businesses to this rural scrubland at the foot of the
Simonsberg Mountain. At the entrance to the Nature Reserve, behind the township,
I meet 28-year-old Eon Hendrickser, my guide for the morning. Across the valley,
the granite peaks of the Junkershoek Mountains glisten in the morning sun. Below
us, the grittier reality of life in Ida's Valley, the unemployment, crime,
poverty and overcrowding is too far away to see. Eon, smartly dressed in khaki
shorts and polo shirt, greets me with a friendly handshake. We set off on our
hike and Eon tells me his story. He was born in Ida's Valley, 30 years after his
grandparents had been forced out of their home, shop and cafe. At primary
school, a teacher spotted Eon's potential and helped him get a bursary to
Stellenbosch's elite Paul Reuss High School. He went on to read law at
Stellenbosch University. But then, he tells me, gangsterism got hold of me. The
gang made money selling stolen bikes, alcohol and prescription drugs. But for me
it wasn't about the money, Eon explains. I wanted the sense of belonging, of
power. The gang protected our community, kept the worst gangs out. He points to
a scar on his eyebrow, then another on his hand, then his leg. I remember I was
knifed. I nearly died. I dropped out of university. We round the corner, through
a forest of pine trees and stop to admire the view. Ida's Valley is literally in
a hole. From the university in town, you look straight up at the vineyards. We
are invisible. Our stories don't get out. But tourism is a tool to tell our
history, to change the negative perceptions people have of us. And this nature
reserve is such a beautiful place to visit. I want it to become a bridge. Eon
and I continue on our walk. The older generation don't talk about the
relocation, Eon says. You can see the trauma on their faces. And they still have
to face it every day, because they work in the very part of town they were moved
out of, cleaning rooms in the student residences, sweeping the streets. In 2018,
Stellenbosch University issued a restitution statement apologising unreservedly
to the communities and individuals who were excluded from the historical
privileges which its students and staff have enjoyed. The building that used to
be Lukov High, a popular, successful school before the relocation, is now home
to the university's Social Impact Division, whose job it is to turn fine words
into action. Eon explains how, after recovering from his injuries, he got a job
working for a landscape gardener. One of his clients turned out to be a leading
lawyer and professor at Stellenbosch. She encouraged Eon to finish his degree.
And so he was set to cross the bridge again, back to university, a month before
Covid shut everything down. He still hasn't finished his final year, but he has
led the revival of the nature reserve. Two years ago, he co-founded Eiders
Valley Community Trails and is now a fully-fledged community leader. His vision
is that the new trails will connect Stellenbosch with neighbouring vineyards,
allowing local businesses to sell directly to passing tourists, to create
desperately needed jobs. Let's talk honest, Eon's voice drops. It's a race
against time. If the angry radical politicians indoctrinate us with their hate,
these fences will come down. So let's work together before they come. Are you
angry? I ask him. I have an atomic bomb inside me, it's true. Eon takes a deep
breath. That's why I'm so into nature. If I climb this hill, I've achieved
something. And that gives me hope, Eon says. I have a lot of hope. Charlotte
Ashton. The visibility of the northern lights this week, far beyond the Nordic
north, has been the focus of much interest. The display was seen as far south as
Kent and Cornwall. It's believed to have been the result of a strong solar flare
on the sun's surface, causing the charged particles to travel further afield
than usual. Meanwhile, back in Sweden's north, near the Norwegian border, where
the lights are more commonly viewed, Mathilde Willeen embarked on a journey of
her own, off the beaten track. She recounts another increasingly rare experience
of unlimited access to the natural world. It's like I'm inside a black and white
film. Everything is in greyscale. The cloudy sky, the white slopes around me,
the windswept stunted birch trees poking through the two metres of snow covering
the ground. No, not everything. There, emerging through the milky white air, is
a bright red wooden cross on a metal pole. I see it, I yell to my mum and
brother. It's the next trail sign. We set off towards it. My family and I are on
our almost yearly pilgrimage to the mountains in the north of my home country,
Sweden, and to the most elusive of Swedish locations, the väglöst land, the land
with no roads. Today we have left our hotel at the end of the mountain road and
travelled up onto the slopes above the treeline on sturdy backcountry skis that
can plough through untrailed snow. But the weather has taken a turn for the
worse and my mum is worried. She wanted us to turn back earlier but my brother
and I are more adventurous and we convinced her to press on. Only now we can't
find the mountain station that is supposed to give us some lunchtime shelter and
it has started to snow. We stare into the hazy grey world around us. I think of
all the stories I have read about tourists dying in the cold after being too
optimistic, too underprepared, too naive. Finally the building emerges through
the sleet. We stumble in and remove our ski boots. Do you serve hot chocolate? I
ask the woman in the bar. Yes we do, she says. Yes. The mountain station is a
small slice of civilisation in the road less wild. We are over 3000 feet above
sea level and seven miles from the nearest road. But there is still wifi,
flashing toilets, hotel rooms, a sauna and a restaurant. Signs in the bathrooms
ask visitors not to use too many hand towels for all refuse has to be flown off
the mountain by a helicopter. The staff aim to transport material up on the snow
in winter and store it for use around the year. Outside snow buries the winter
in the snow. The snow carries the windowsills so we can barely see out. But
inside it is warm and safe. A few hours further north the massive Sarek
wilderness begins. There, there are no red crosses showing the way and no
buildings either. Visitors pass through on foot or on skis, bringing tents and
food with them and taking everything away as they leave. These surroundings are
a place of peace and quiet. I am lucky to be here. Around the world nature is
now perceived as something of a luxury. In Sweden the right to roam on others
land is protected by law. But in some countries private land ownership rules
mean that people can't visit forests, lakes and hills, spreading out just metres
away from them on the other side of a fence. And urban rural relations are a
problem. The Sami, the indigenous people of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia,
have lived through centuries of abuse from southerners here, who have taken
their land, forced them to learn Swedish and measured their skulls. Sami people
and tourists co-exist quite happily these days, in my experience. I have used
their companies to travel by boat across small mountain lakes, to eat local
meat, and I've even eaten in a local family's burger hut along the trail, an
establishment named Lapp Donald's, as a flirt with an old, these days quite
derogatory, Swedish name for a Sami person, Lapp. But the Sami continue to
battle threats of mining developments in many of their reindeer herding lands.
The use of these natural areas seems to be dictated by the Sami, and I'm not
sure if it's a good thing. My mum, brother and I stay in a mountain station
until the wind outside has died down. Then we make our way back, zigzagging
through a stark, empty valley. Dusk is falling, but the snow is bright. After a
while, the skiing tracks become more clearly marked, and heavy fir trees appear
around us, shielding us from the wind. The river is about an hour left. We head
inside to warm up. It feels safe. The road less wild can be a scary place, but I
am so glad I get to experience it. I wish more people could. Matilda Verlien,
and that's all for today. We'll be back again on Saturday morning. Do join us.
From our own correspondent, was presented by Kate Adie, the producer was Serena
Tarling. There are over one and a half million postcodes in the UK. The Patch,
on BBC Radio 4. We randomly pick one out. So which one do I press? Clear the
random postcodes? And uncover a story there you probably wouldn't have heard
about. They can't get the staff to put them here, let alone a new prison with
700 more staff. He said we know exactly what's up there. We're looking for
something that shouldn't be up there. The Patch, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. When
the police lock these people up, who looks after them? Well, that's prison
officers and it's all done unseen. Starts next Wednesday morning at nine. Now,
Radio 4, we conclude Role Play. Each week, we've been hearing stories of people
from across the world who've all played the same dramatic parts. And this week,
it's the turn of the two tramps from Waiting for Godot, Vladimir and Estragon.
Hi, so I'm Tweedy, currently stood in the auditorium of the Everyman Theatre.
It's a huge stage for Waiting for Godot. We present Waiting for Godot by Samuel
Beckett. One of the things mainly I remember is standing behind the curtain
waiting for it to go up, because I've never been in that situation. And me being
behind the curtain, sorting my big boots out and waiting for Godot. The scene, a
country road, a tree. Beneath it, Estragon, dressed as a tramp, is trying to
take off his boot. The entire play takes place on the side of a road. There is a
tree in a very specific spot, upstage and I think it's to the right, and
downstage and to the left is a stone. We had a real tree at our case, taken from
some corner of the highlands. It got bent over by the wind. Waiting for Godot,
you know, who is the Godot? For each of us, there is a Godot waiting. Will he
come? We don't know. Waiting for Godot is a very simple play. And the first line
that is spoken states the theme boldly and clearly. Nothing to be done. The two
characters, when the curtain rises, are on stage. Gogo is sitting on the stone.
Vladimir is standing upstage looking at the sky. We eventually discover, not too
long into the play, that they are waiting for somebody called Godot. We don't
know who. We just discover we don't know why. And they are tramps. That's really
as much as we know. They may or they may not have been there for a million
years. They may be there for the first time. I'm Marty Ray. I played Vladimir in
Waiting for Godot with Aaron Monaghan. I'm Aaron Monaghan and I played Estragon,
or Gogo, opposite Marty's Vladimir in Waiting for Godot, with Druid Theatre
Company, which is based on the west of Ireland. Let's go. We can't. Why not?
We're waiting for Godot. Ah, yes. At its first performance in Paris on the 5th
of January 1953, it created something of a scandal. After all, many in the first
night audience thought a play is supposed to have a plot. Beckett wrote it in
French first. He was part of the French resistance. He was down with his wife in
the south of France waiting. He rewrote it in English. But to our ears, he wrote
it in a very Hiberno English, that I think he would have heard a lot in Ireland.
In Ireland, one of the first lines that Vladimir says is, so there you are
again. You could read so many existential ways into it, but it's also a very
Irish thing to say. There you are again. Let's have a closer look at the
characters of Estragon and Vladimir. They call each other D.D. and Gogo.
Essentially, Vladimir is the optimist, always trying to find a reason for hope.
And Estragon is the pessimist, who constantly brings him back down to the
reality of just how desperately alone they are. Another day done with? Not yet.
For me, it's over and done with, no matter what happens. I think we both felt we
were in the right roles because I am somewhat squat, and I kind of tend to hunch
over and get a bit grumpy and angry. And Marty can be thinking all the time. And
too loud and self-important. I mean, they were like a married couple. They were
like siblings. They were like enemies. From the very first performance, and
clearly with Samuel Beckett's approval, they were made to look like the somewhat
seedy, down-and-out characters of silent film comedy, dressed in worn suits,
wearing battered bowler hats, and large boots with holes in the soles. Vladimir
and Estragon, I feel they were clowns from, say, music hall, possibly a double
act, that had fallen on bad times, the world had turned against them. I could
really see Laurel and Hardy playing them. They're kind of my biggest heroes. I'm
Tweedy. My real name is Alan Digweed, but most people call me Tweedy because I'm
a clown, and it's become a nickname. I grew up in Aberdeen, and as a kid,
because I was small, I got away with a lot. So I was always kind of clowning,
but I didn't really realise what it was until later. I managed to get a few
addresses, circuses and things, and wrote to them saying, how do you become a
clown? And one wrote back saying, the best way to learn is on the road. For
quite some time now, I've been with Gifford Circus, and then in the winter, I've
been here where we are now, at the Everyman Theatre in Cheltenham. They all love
kind of the pantomime, put everything into it. This is the Tweedy that audiences
are used to, clowning around with trademark rednecks. Clowning around with
trademark red quills. There's a whole thing with clowning in that it's used as a
bad word, and it's frustrating, and politicians are described as clowns
frequently, which to me is really annoying because clown is about bringing joy,
it's about having empathy. So I've been clowning for about 20, over 20 years,
when I decided I wanted to kind of explore different sides of performing, and
Godot seemed like a great way to do it. All I'm asking you to do is to
disappear. Where? The tree, the tree. Basically, the Everyman Theatre put this
play on because I wanted to do it. I played Estragon. I think he's kind of
slightly lower status, and he felt closer to what my clown is naturally. And I
don't know if it was to prove that I could do it to myself, or to prove to
audiences that I'm not just a clown. I think it was more to say that clowning is
everywhere. We embraced. We were happy. What do we do now that we're happy?
Waiting for Godot is not two old guys just leaning against a bench, chattering.
It's full-on physical. It's singing in the rain without the rain. I'm Bill
Patterson. I played the part of Estragon in the production of Waiting for Godot
at the Royal Lyceum Theatre in Edinburgh with Brian Cox as Vladimir. Well,
essentially, both of the men have issues as any men of a certain age have.
Estragon has problems with his feet. Vladimir's has a prostate issue and
incontinence. I didn't get up in the night, not once. You see, you piss better
when I'm not there. And that gives me a vulnerability that makes it rather
appealing. In terms of the use of humor in the play of Waiting for Godot, it's
really kind of inherent, the vaudevillian. And so we really immersed ourselves
in that, watched a lot of vaudeville, but not only that, watched a lot of black
vaudeville. I never forget watching a video and a guy was doing a crutches
routine. He had one leg, he was bouncing and doing all this great stuff. And us
as black people have always been have always kind of needed humor, used humor as
a means to not lose our minds. And so, you know, having that angle was kind of
really the waters on which the play floated. Hello and good afternoon from New
Orleans, one of the world's most famous and vibrant cities, now a scene of
devastation and human tragedy. Just a week ago, Hurricane Katrina... I'm J. Kyle
Manze. I was one of the founding members of the Classical Theater of Harlem. And
as a member there, I played Estragon Gogo in Waiting for Godot alongside of
Wendell Pierce. I do think there's these plays that people say that are
brilliant because other people said they were brilliant and I didn't understand
it. And when I started to dive into it quite literally, because the first
version we did was in a 16,000 gallon swimming pool, it just really had much,
much, much different meaning. A year ago, the city filled with water. Thousands
were cut off and rescue came too late. Nearly 1,500 people died. It was right
after Katrina. Wendell Pierce is from Katrina, so he really was wanting to
express himself to bring awareness to it. The first incarnation was at the
theater in Harlem. They brought in a literal 16,000 gallon swimming pool and
then they put a house in it to make it look like the house was filled up. We had
that run and then after that, an artist by the name of Paul Chan saw the
production, was really taken by it. He had the idea of doing this in New
Orleans. When we went down to rehearse, we actually went around to people, we
heard their stories. We were in the lower ninth, the lower ninth was completely
decimated. It looked like it was going back to green space. There was one
gentleman and he had his special needs cousin with him who didn't speak. And
they kinda, for us, almost represented Dee Dee and Go-Go. This guy had saw his
mother, his grandson, and one other family member float away and die. And so he
was very close to it. And this mission that we were there for really gave him
purpose. Last weekend, Go-Go got the big easy treatment when it was performed
outdoors in New Orleans' lower ninth ward. The performance was free to the
public and in classic New Orleans fashion, theater goers were treated to bowls
of gumbo before the curtain rose. Then a marching band led the crowd two blocks
away to a vacant lot where the play was staged. So the theme of waiting for
Godot to people meant a lot of different things, but the most apparent was, you
know, waiting for FEMA, the, you know, the Federal Relief Agency. They didn't
know what every moment meant, but they knew the representation of them waiting
and then them needing to occupy their time to keep their sanity, to have a
spiritual hope. We are no longer alone waiting for the night waiting for Godot.
Waiting. Somebody may say, yeah, man, FEMA never came. Some of them, yeah, man,
I had to just work. A diversion comes along and what do we do? We let it go to
waste. Let us get to work. People hugged us, people cried. We cried together. It
was quite an honor to have that. I can talk about how it starts. We had this
image of us hanging on the telephone, waiting to hear from the Beckett Estate.
Thank you for calling the Beckett Estate. Your call is important to us. Please
continue to wait and an operator will be with you shortly. When the lights come
up, the set looks like what one would expect from a set for Waiting for Godot.
And then we are on this telephone, like one of those ones that's in a box by the
side of the road, waiting and waiting and waiting as one does in Waiting for
Godot. Samuel Beckett consistently resisted alterations to his plays. This
includes a blanket ban on all women versions of Godot. Beckett declaring women
don't have prostates, but he's also written some of the most original and
challenging pieces of theatre, specifically for the female voice. I'm Josie. My
pronouns are she, her. I'm Cordelia. My pronouns are she, her. I'm Jack. My
pronouns are they, them. And we are Silent Faces Theatre. We met when we did a
clown course. I remember thinking, oh, they're idiots. And I'm also an idiot.
Godot as a woman came from a genuine desire for us as a company to perform
Waiting for Godot. And sitting in one of our living rooms in early 2019, talking
about a game plan and thinking, okay, we're going to ask for the rights to do
Waiting for Godot. And then it came up that as a company of women and non-binary
people, we were most likely not going to get the rights. There was a situation
where actually two women did win the right to do it, but the ruling said that
they had to play the roles as men. These roles are your everyman character. They
are in a show that is entirely about, you know, being a part of the human race.
And then you're saying, but only this percentage of the population is allowed to
perform that. In this meeting, we sat and we said, okay, the game plan is to
apply for the rights. And then if we don't get the rights to do Waiting for
Waiting for Godot, which we then realised was a much funnier idea. We sort of
threw the idea of Waiting for Godot out the window and said, actually, it's much
more interesting to discuss the gender roles in Waiting for Godot through the
lens of women and non-binary people who aren't allowed to perform those roles.
The trouble is when a playwright dies, suddenly their opinions are frozen. They
are trapped in amber. And so our argument is, can we really be certain that this
is what Samuel Beckett would want in 2020? One of the moments in the show that
we love performing is a feminist timeline since Samuel Beckett died in 1989, set
to a track from each year that something significant happened. ♪ I'm busy
thinking about what, what, what, what, what, what ♪ I know that he wanted four
men to play it. And I know he brought a famous court case, which he lost, but
there was a production in the Netherlands about four women. But I think he wrote
them the way he wrote them and he wanted them performed that way. Do the estate,
do they kind of follow that religiously? I don't know why, but I guess they're
kind of fulfilling his wishes. I wouldn't necessarily agree with that. I think
they're the most interpretive plays. He gives you such an open, empty stage. Oh,
yes. All the dead bushes. They make a noise like wings. Like leaves. Like sand.
Like leaves. We really studied the gender roles and the way that they're
perceived. We really studied the rhythm that Beckett writes, which is always
really beautiful in this work. And we tried to emulate that. So a lot of the
rhythm of the way we talk to each other in Godot as a woman is very similar to
the way that Vladimir and Estragon talk to each other in Waiting for Godot. The
dialogue is staccato. It's also very repetitive. And there are recurring motifs
throughout the play of the same bits of dialogue. Let's go. We can't. Why not?
We're waiting for Godot. Ah, yes. And it is incredibly easy to lose track of
which particular let's go. We can't. Why not? We're waiting. Waiting. You can
easily slip into the next section. While they're waiting for Godot, two other
characters arrive. One is called Pozzo, who I suppose is this big, gregarious
character, I guess. And attached to the end of a rope, which he is holding, is a
noose, which is around the neck of another character called Lucky. And they have
a conversation. After they leave, the moon comes up, and it becomes night. And
Gogo falls asleep. A boy comes in, and he seems to be a messenger from Godot,
and tells Vladimir that Godot won't come tonight, but he'll surely come
tomorrow. And then we have an interval. The characters say, let's go, and they
don't leave. Nobody comes, nobody goes. Everything is terrible. That line is
still in my head. My name is Velibor Topic. I'm from Bosnia-Herzegovina, and I
happened to be, during the war, between 1992 and 1994, in Bosnia-Herzegovina in
Sarajevo. And happened to be a lucky man to work on the play called Waiting for
Godot, directed by Susan Sontag. In 1993, one of the world's most renowned
intellectuals, the writer and director Susan Sontag, came to Sarajevo to stage
Beckett's modern masterpiece. I had spent two weeks there in April, and had come
to care intensely about the battered city and what it stands for. Bosnia and its
capital, Sarajevo in particular, had symbolized the spirit of Yugoslavia, a
place where Muslims, Serbs, and Croats lived side by side, none ruled alone. But
with the old Yugoslav federation disintegrating around it, the Bosnian
government at the end of February held a referendum on independence. The Muslim
and Croat communities voted in favor, but most of the Serbs boycotted the
ballot. It was a recipe for disaster. We've been in Bosnia-Herzegovina for the
last three years, and we've been in Bosnia-Herzegovina for the last three years.
We were all waiting for something and waiting for Bill Clinton to help us. One
day, I had to move out from my student flat, and I had to stay with this
people's house in which that night it was bombarded by the big rockets and
shells. And this is how a war becomes part of your life. Sleeping in three coats
and going to toilet on a piece of paper because there was no running water. And
I ate rice, and if I was lucky, a good grass around the trees. The main
obstacle, apart from the siege lighting, was the fatigue of the malnourished
actors. Several had to walk two hours to get to the theater, and of course would
have to follow the same dangerous route at the end of the day. Almost every
morning, she would bring and put nicely and neatly on the table a lines for each
of us, a packet of cigarettes, a candle, a torch, a battery, and a lighter.
Something which is very, very important to us, you know. Beckett's play, written
over 40 years ago, seems written for and about Sarajevo. We did the play in kind
of smallish theater. It's called the Theater of Youth. It's exactly what we
needed. A couple of chairs, a little stage, and that was it. You know, it wasn't
difficult to act that. You are doing the play about expectation, and yet you
hear outside screaming and snipers and the theater shakes, but nobody reacts,
because you're in that moment part of the theater, part of the play, and part of
the audience. Oh, that's enough. I'm tired. And you'd rather just be stuck there
doing nothing? Yes. Well, please yourself. Let's go. We can't. Why not? We're
waiting for God, though. Ah. We all kind of know that this play can be done, and
it always will be popular in every time of suffering time, or something which we
don't know what is going to happen, something that we are waiting for, that the
Godot never really comes. Who is a Godot? You know, for me, it was Blink Linton.
For me, it was a packet of cigarettes and a sandwich. So for me, that was a
Godot. Today, Ukrainians will do the same, maybe. It was August the 3rd, 1955.
The time was 7.30 in the evening, and the action or actions took place in the
Little Arts Theater in Great Newport Street. When I first saw it, it was in the
60s. So you're only talking about 10 years after its first production, both in
London and in Paris a year or two before. So it was as fresh as paint then. It
still remains incredibly timeless. The theater was crowded, and it was a hot
summer night. Halfway through the entertainment, there were numerous gaps in the
auditorium. Less claustrophobic for the audience, but alarming for the
performers who were feeling the draught the other side of the footlights. I
know, because I was one of them. You can feel audiences getting pissed off at
us. You know, because you can't really tell what's going on. You know, because
if you go and see a play called Waiting for Godot that you've never seen before,
maybe you're not a complete idiot to want to see Godot. So when he doesn't turn
up, you can feel him going, what is the point of this play? Many of the lines
were simply asking for trouble. Nothing happens. Nobody comes. Nobody goes. It's
awful. Here, here. It was a great actor, Robert Maudley, who did sort of West
End action and film action. He woke up in the morning and said, the end of
theatre as we know it has happened since he had seen Godot. The Sunday Times and
the Observer went smartly into bat for the play. All this sort of game had an
immediate effect on both the box office and the reactions of the audience. The
customers arrived, not only looking for a message with a capital M, but getting
it or them. The thing that Beckett, I think, is doing all the time is he's
trying to understand this thing called life that we all go through and the thing
about life is there's only two real certainties about it, which is we're born
and then we die and we're all heading there and if we don't fill the time up
while we're waiting for that to happen, it's going to be unbearable. Am I going
to sit in the house thinking about that and panicking or am I going to go out in
the road with my friend who's also a tramp and wait for this guy that I think we
were told about? So it's strange. The more he kind of kept it simple, the more
immense it becomes and more and more and more people, I think, get stuff out of
us. Okay. Sorry, some technical problems. Okay, nice to meet you. Glad to see
you. Me too. Welcome from Ukraine, from Uzhgorod. I am Alexey and I play as an
actor in Seatte Uzhik. Ah, Seatte Uzhik, a refugee Seatte Uzhik. And you are
Vladimir. Yeah, Vladimir. Yeah, and I'm Sofia, I'm an estragon, as an actress in
our performance. Ah, oh my god, the light is... Light is over in Uzhgorod. In
Uzhgorod is bad situation with light. When I first read this play, I told my
producer, I don't like to play this because I don't understand anything. But
then I began to understand that this is very deep and very fantastic
psychological theatre product. We are waiting something all time. We are waiting
for next day, we are waiting for next week, next year, next month. This story is
very actual now for many people in Ukraine. And it's reason why our Vyacheslav
choose this play for us. Some people cried during our play and some people
laughed. During the war, during the difficulties, people have to make some
positive emotion, have to relax, have to think about something except in war.
Maybe art, this is also the front, also the battle, but not battle with weapons.
This is the battle for souls. We can support our people in this hard times and I
suppose this is our role today. Everybody, it's Sonia's idea, everybody battles
in his own front. Yeah. The next day, the same time, the same place. The second
act is sort of not quite, but almost a repeat of the previous act. They wait for
Godot again. They wait for Godot again. They wait for Godot again. The two
characters, Potts and Lucky, they come through. It's a bit more madcap, I think.
Night falls again. And towards the end of the second act, Gogol falls asleep.
Didi then starts to, I mean, it goes haywire. I used to hear this every night,
like Marty delivered that line, I can't go on. I can't go on. And you can feel
the audience kind of going, yeah, I can't go on. You can feel the audience kind
of going, yeah. The boy comes in again and says, Mr. Godot won't come again
today, but he will surely come tomorrow. He won't come this evening. No, sir.
But he'll come tomorrow. He ends the play really beautifully. It's beautifully
talking about hanging themselves. We'll hang ourselves tomorrow. Unless Godot
comes. And if he comes, we'll be saved. Wadimir says, well, shall we go? Shall
we go? Yes. Let's go. They do not move. Lights go down. And I still have the
memory of the audience going, yeah, yeah. You could interpret it, whatever you
like to think what that waiting is for. And you just add that into this position
that we're essentially wondering when it comes to an end, was there any point?
And that's why I suppose the play will be around for a very long time, because
it doesn't come up with an answer. I have a very dear friend who, I'm sorry to
say, he passed away a year or two during the COVID time. And he came to see the
production with his wife. A year later, he said to me, Billy, that play, did you
know what that was about? So I said, well, take it from me, George, that I'm not
dead sure. And that's the best beginning and ending I can think of. Roleplay was
produced by Sam Grist and Camilia Sinclair. It was a BBC Audio Bristol
production for Radio 4. Hi, so I'm Tweedy, currently stood in the auditorium of
the Everyman Theatre. It's a huge stage for Waiting for Godot. We present
Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett. One of the things mainly I remember is
standing behind the curtain, waiting for it to go up, because I've never been in
that situation. And me being behind the curtain, sorting my big boots out and
waiting for Godot. The scene, a country road, a tree. Beneath it, Estragon,
dressed as a tramp, is trying to take off his boot. The entire play takes place
on the side of a road.