TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 life hacks for leftovers and asking whether peas belong in a fish pie. Tomorrow
morning at half past ten. BBC News at four o'clock. Ceremonies have been held in
towns and cities across Ukraine to mark one year since the Russian invasion. In
the capital Kiev, President Zelensky pledged to do everything to achieve victory
in the year ahead and said his country would not rest until all its territory
had been liberated. At a meeting of the United Nations Security Council, the
organisation's Secretary-General Antonio Guterres reflected on his warning at
the start of the conflict. One year ago, I sat in this council and urged, and I
quote, in the name of humanity do not allow to start in Europe what could be the
worst war since the beginning of the century. I said then that we must give
peace a chance, but peace has had no chance. War has ruled the day. There has
been no comment on the anniversary from Russia's President Putin. His
predecessor, Dmitry Medvedev, said on social media that his country should push
Ukrainian forces all the way back to the Polish border. One of the smaller
unions involved in the long-running rail dispute has voted to accept a
settlement deal with trade companies. The TSSA said its 3,000 members had
accepted an offer including a 9 per cent pay deal over two years. The RMT and
Aslev unions are still in dispute. Northern Ireland's main political leaders
have met the chief constable, Simon Byrne, to send a message of unity after the
attempted murder of a senior police officer. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell remains in a critical condition in hospital following Wednesday's
shooting in Oma. Four men have been arrested. Investigators say they're treating
the incident as terror-related and that their primary line of inquiry is
dissident Republican group The New IRA. Sir Bernard Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's
press secretary for all but a few months of her premiership, has died. He was
90. After leaving Whitehall, he continued to commentate on the political
landscape of Britain, writing columns for a variety of newspapers. BBC News.
This is Radio 4 and now it's Last Word with Kirsty Lange. On Last Word this
week. Good afternoon and a very warm welcome to World of Sport, which today
offers you a very entertaining blend of top-level action with classic horse
racing, world championship motorcycling, Tour de France cycling and
international athletics. The much-loved sports presenter Dickey Davis, whose
trademark look and embrace of fringe sports on ITV, gained him a cult-like
following in the 70s and 80s. One of the greatest air and nautical engineers of
the 20th century, Ralph Hooper, who invented a plane that doesn't need a runway,
the Harrier Jump Jet. And Raquel Welsh, the Hollywood actress who became a 60s
sex symbol after playing a prehistoric cavewoman in a fur-lined bikini. But
first, Dorothy Pittman Hughes, who brought black issues to the feminist movement
in the 1970s. Born in the racially segregated South, Dorothy moved to New York
after leaving school to pursue a career as a nightclub singer. But it was
becoming a single mother which got her involved in grassroots politics, and she
would later convince the newly formed feminist movement to confront issues of
poverty and racism. But Pittman Hughes is probably best remembered for an iconic
photograph taken in 1971, which showed her standing side by side with the white
feminist leader Gloria Steinem. It was an image that inspired her biographer,
the American historian Laura L. Lovett, to write a book about Dorothy's
extraordinary life. There are two women in turtlenecks with their fists raised
in the black power fist salute. But one of the things that I noticed, and this
was true when they remade the photograph almost 70 years later, is that Dorothy
has her hand clenched in such a way in which the thumb is outside the fist
because she is used to sort of the black power movement, right? She's used to
sort of throwing that fist in the air. Steinem has never done so, and so her
finger is on the outside. If Steinem had actually thrown her fist, she would
have broken her. Dorothy never let me forget that I didn't know how to make a
fist, that I had my thumb out instead of in. We did a version of the same
photograph as old ladies, and she was still telling me how to make a fist. There
were a number of images, but this one spoke to a kind of biracial vision for the
women's movement. Most of the women in the world are not white. A tiny
proportion of us are white. So it just seemed natural to look at women as a
group. And when I was with a group of women that didn't look like the country,
to say why. And that's interesting, though, isn't it? Because we tend to
associate 60s and 70s second-wave feminism in the US with white women. But
actually, there were quite a few black women involved right from the start,
including Dorothy Pittman Hughes, who were critical, weren't they? Well,
absolutely. So even the organization, the National Organization for Women, is
named by Polly Murray, an African-American lawyer who cannot get employment. In
fact, she was the one who came up with the model for the National Organization
for Women as the lobbying organization. Dorothy, in the same way, was a pivotal
figure. And at the time, Dorothy is the much better-known feminist. And at the
time that they meet, Steinem is a journalist who's much more comfortable writing
something than speaking in public. And it's literally Dorothy Pittman Hughes who
talks Gloria Steinem into speaking in public. She taught me that I didn't die if
I got up in front of an audience. This was crucial. She taught me that actually
the whole point was to speak the way we do in everyday life, the way we do to
each other, the way we do in the street, not in an artificial way. Let's talk
about Dorothy Pittman Hughes' early life. She grew up in the southern state of
Georgia at a time when there were Jim Crow laws that mandated racial
segregation. And she experienced violent white racism from an early age, didn't
she? She tells a story of her grandmother who wound up working as a cook where
she would hear about Ku Klux Klan meetings. Her father at one point was
threatened. He was an independent contractor. He had his own lumber truck. And
that gave him some sense of autonomy outside of the mill structure, but he was
often sort of endangered because of that. And even her own experience, right?
The fact that she had such a different experience from Gloria in terms of access
to education, yet in terms of resources for herself in terms of schooling, were
determined by those racist dynamics. My name is Dorothy Pittman Hughes and I
have three children, three children that I love deeply. And the one thing I have
noticed is that too many women are being forced to leave their children home
alone while they work to feed their families. We need childcare and we need it
now. Janelle Monae in the film, The Glorious, playing Dorothy Pittman Hughes.
Her feminism was rooted in the everyday struggles of working class mothers and
women of color. And in 1966, she founded the West 80th Street Daycare Center in
Manhattan to help working parents in her community. She was a nightclub singer.
She was at home during the day and she saw children on her street who were
sometimes being taken care of by young older siblings. And so she was also, she
became a single mother. And so she used her own experience to then create
initially a community center. And then during the war on poverty in the 1960s,
she could get some funding to create a larger resource center for the Office of
Economic Opportunity under John F. Kennedy. She was always organizing
demonstrations to protest the conditions in welfare hotels, for instance. I
mean, just massive, massive demonstrations. You recognize discrimination in one
form, you're more likely to recognize it in another, but black women have always
been in the leadership of the women's movement. I actually think she probably
created one of the first domestic violence shelters in New York City. We don't
have domestic violence shelters set up in the United States until the very end
of the 1970s and early 1980s. And this would have been in the 60s. She was
amazing. She was nurturing. She was fierce. She was clear. The problem as a
historian is that she was not somebody who kept her notes. What do you think is
Dorothy Pittman Hughes's greatest legacy? She put childcare into the issue from
the very beginning. That reconsideration of how we can understand the push for
change, right? That changed everything about our lives in terms of the way we
think about ourselves, we think about our families, we think about work, we
think about opportunity. I think it was it was in part her legacy. I knew that
Dorothy was absolutely fearless. It was always clear that if she was running the
revolution, you wanted to go to it. Gloria Steinem and the historian and
biographer Laura L. Lovett on Dorothy Pittman Hughes, who's died aged 84. But
now we go back to a time which may or may not have existed. Introducing the
fabulous Raquel Welch, the sensational star discovery of this or any other year
in one million years BC. Raquel Welch in her breakthrough role, a cavewoman. She
only had three lines in the film, but the publicity poster of her dressed in a
very small animal skin bikini shot her to global stardom. One million years BC
was directed by Don Chaffee, who came out of the British Hammer horror films,
but he wasn't responsible for Welch's revealing outfit. So you would never give
me anything to do. You need sort of say, well, just run from rock A to rock B,
Raquel. Don't make a big meal out of it, you know, and try to make any
intellectual thing. So I would just get frustrated. And I decided no one was
paying attention to anything in this thing. Anyway, I just sort of thought that
maybe, you know, took out my little manicure scissors and just snipped a little,
very small, little teeny bits off this costume, but sort of was amusing, you
know, and it kind of got sexier and sexier. I figured it was one way to survive
a dinosaur movie. You know, what could I do? And no dialogue or anything, sort
of grunts and groans. And then all of a sudden in the middle of the production,
we got a telegram from the sensor in London because we were out in the Canary
Islands. He said, the strangest thing is happening. Can it be the Miss Welch's
costume is getting smaller and smaller with each batch of rushes that arrives in
London. Raquel Welch was born Joe Raquel Tejada in Chicago to a Bolivian Air and
North School engineer. When the family moved to California, young Raquel joined
a youth theatre group, but her father was very strict when it came to her
appearance. My dad always said, you know, that I should be very neat in
appearance and I wasn't allowed to wear ruffles or bright colours or have my
hair in curls like a lot of girls. So I never really thought of myself as
pretty, pretty, but when I got a little bit older and the equipment arrived,
the... Well, then I thought, gee, this is pretty terrific. We've got to try it
out a little. She got a scholarship to study theatre arts at college, but
dropped out after a year to marry her childhood sweetheart, James Welsh. They
had two children by the time she was 20. I was just a baby. I was just a
teenager. I had married my high school sweetheart. I had two children, you know,
bim bam, just like that. And, you know, we just couldn't make it last. Her break
came when the Bond producer Cubby Broccoli spotted her photograph in Life
magazine. She screen tested for Thunderbolt, but ended up in the sci-fi
submarine saga Fantastic Voyage. Raquel Welsh spent much of her career arguing
with directors who wanted her to take her clothes off, while at the same time
accepting her status as a sex symbol with good humour. In her later role, she
showed an attitude for comedy, winning the Golden Globe for Best Actress in the
humorous swashbuckling adventure film The Three Musketeers. In 1970, she took on
her most infamous role, Myra Breckenridge, Goulvedale's story of a transgender
film critic who aspires to be a Hollywood sex symbol. I am Myra Breckenridge,
whom no man will ever possess. The new woman whose astonishing history started
with a surgeon scalpel. I thought the book was absolutely hysterical. I mean, it
was so funny and I thought it was very innovative. So I was interested in how
they were going to do this movie. And then I heard through the trades that Annie
Bancroft had turned it down. So I thought, hmm, I wonder what they're going for.
And a little bird told me I should call Dick Sanic. So I called Dick Sanic, who
I was under contract to Fox. I said, look, I don't know exactly what kind of
actress you're looking for in this role. But I was thinking if a guy was going
to change his sex and wanted to be like a movie star type of girl, don't you
think he might want to look like me? Voted by critics as one of the worst films
of all time, Myra Breckenridge bombed at the box office. Raquel Welsh's co-star
in the film was the legendary Mae West. But the relationship between the two
actresses was by all accounts quite spiky. She came out and she had a long
panoir on and she had a very, very blonde wig on, lots of eyelashes. Oh, you're
a pretty young thing. What did you say your name was? She sort of extended her
hand to me and I went to kiss the ring. And with that one false fingernail
painted silver fell to the floor. And I looked at the hand and I thought, I
think she's a man. I mean, that is one of the persistent rumours about Mae. And
about me too. Raquel Welsh starred in more than 30 films and made countless
appearances on television, including The Muppet Show. Raquel Welsh, 30 seconds
to curtain, Miss Welsh. The quality of mercy is not strained. It droppeth as a
gentle rain upon the players beneath. Oh, changing your image, huh? Yes, well, I
was toying with the idea. Well, you do what you want, Miss Welsh. On this show,
you don't have to dress up in any of those scanty revealing costumes. Oh, thank
you, Scooter. Well, not unless you really want to. Well. Oh, please, walk to
him. What about growing old? Do you ever worry about that? Well, I don't like
the idea much. No. Because I think that when you grow older, I think you're a
little bit closer to checking out. And I don't like the idea of checking out
because I have a pretty good life. I don't know, life is a funny way of
compensating for all those things. At least I hope when I get there that it
will. The Hollywood actress Raquel Welsh has died aged 82. Now, stand by for a
vertical take-off. The sound of a Harrier John jet, one of two iconic aeroplanes
designed by the late Ralph Hooper. The Harrier, named after a bird of prey, is a
VTOL aircraft. That means it can take off and land vertically without needing a
runway. His other claim to fame is the RAF's Hawk used by the Red Arrows display
team. Ralph Spencer Hooper was born next to an RAF aerodrome in Hornchurch in
East London in 1926. He was the son of Herbert, a senior civil servant, and his
mother was Sheila Spencer, whose forebears included the 16th century poet Edmund
Spencer. So Colin Chandler was a close colleague and a former divisional
managing director of British Aerospace. From a very early age, he was fascinated
by flight. Anything that flew fascinated Ralph. And in his spare time he learned
to fly. He was determined to understand what he might have to design. So he was
absolutely absorbed in flight. It really got him. Apparently he showed early
promise as an engineer using his Meccano construction set to link his long clock
to his bedroom light. Was he naturally inventive? Oh very. Yes he was. Yes he
was. Very much so. He was such a remarkable man. Very self-effacing. John
Fielding, emeritus professor of aircraft design at Cranfield University, where
Ralph Hooper was one of the first aeronautic design students when the department
opened soon after the Second World War. He was fascinated by the problems of
aircraft design and he was innovative in how he solved those problems. And
that's one of the wonderful things about him. But he was inspirational for some
of my students. I took them to London to meet him about five years ago. He was
very elderly then. And he gave him a masterclass on aircraft design and they
were fascinated. What will Ralph Hooper be remembered for most in the field of
aeronautical design? Most of all for the Harrier. There was a lot of uncertainty
in the industry in the sort of fifties. And he was in future projects at Hawker
City Aviation at Kingston. He began to think that V-style would be a game
changer for military aircraft. You know, either vertical short takeoff and
landing. He thought that would make a difference. I was thoroughly bored with
what I was supposed to be doing and started to sketch and see if we could make a
useful aeroplane outfit in the original form. So I think we had three attempts
which failed. And he got in touch with the engine company and they were fiddling
around with engines with more than one nozzle. Normally they've only got one.
And they were looking at one, two, three. He kept working at it and came up with
a concept for nozzles from the engine. Of course, that gives equilibrium to the
aircraft if they're spread about. He got that idea going, managed to get some
funding from the company and others, NATO even and the US government. Eventually
that led to proving the concept with a sort of prototype type aeroplane called
the Kestrel. That was the birth of the Harrier. Every other country with an
aircraft industry tried to get a V-style aircraft failed. Only we had one.
That's because we had Ralph Uppen. The Harrier can pack a mighty punch with its
small arsenal of strike equipment delivered with the agility of a helicopter and
the speed of a supersonic fighter. It was born really in the Cold War and a lot
of our fighters and bombers were relied on very long runways which are very
vulnerable to attack. So his idea, similar to a helicopter, well, can we take
off vertically and land vertically? So in fact, Harriers could sometimes be
operated from middle of woods where they could not be seen. And then they took
off vertically and then at a certain point they then transitioned to a
horizontal flight and then became a very agile jet fighter. The aircraft has
been flown at speeds in excess of Mach 1. Powered by Bristol Siddeley Pegasus
Engine and its range is comparable with conventional aircraft. But it has the
plus of being able to operate from very restricted forward strike areas with
speed and surprise. Some believe that the Harrier was key to Britain's victory
in the Falklands War, don't they? I think that's true. The Sea Harriers are
slightly different aircrafts than the Royal Air Force. If you were in full
flight and swivel the engines down, it stopped. It stopped in the air but with
full power still going. So an enemy conventional aircraft went past and the
pilot then quickly got the engines into reverse again, got behind the enemy
aircraft and the pilot missed off. Squadron leader Martin Pert, Red 1, bringing
the Red Arrows up the mile. Always a huge favourite with the crowds here. You
can hear them. Cheers. The Red Arrows flying team has become synonymous with big
events like the Jubilee wowing the crowds with their perfect formations and all
that coloured smoke and it was Ralph who led the design team in 1968. It was a
competition and Hawkers won it with a very superior airplane. And it first flew
in 1974 and it went on and on and on. Over a thousand were built, 307 were sold
to the United States Navy. The Navy of the country, the most powerful aerospace
industry in the world, bought a conventional British jet trainer because it was
so good. It was a superior design. And one of the ideas that Ralph came up with
was we should offer guarantees of reliability and maintainability to the Royal
Air Force. But we did and we got bonuses for achieving it. You seem to be saying
that not only was he a brilliant aircraft designer, he was also a good manager,
a good team leader. Very much so. He was a very rounded person. He wasn't a sort
of reclusive author. Later on when we were nationalised, the big division was
formed. I was a managing director and he was a technical director. We had to
work with another design department from the north of England, Braff in fact,
the old blackboard company where he started. And he made all that work. He was a
good manager, a good team leader. Do you understand he was a good ballroom
dancer as well? Yes. We used to celebrate contracts. We had a party at a local
restaurant down the front upstairs, got him on the dance floor and he was
clearly a very good dancer. The secretaries of dancing went in whenever they
were doing it. I just don't know why. He never got married. He never answered
that question. Where would you put him in the pantheon of British aircraft
designers? Well, I think the same as Frederick Page with the Canberra, the same
as Mitchell with the Spitfire, so Sidney Kam with the Hunter. Ralph is up there
among them. But if you said that to him, he wouldn't know how to answer.
Aircraft designer Ralph Hooper, who has died aged 96. This week last words also
go to Hugh Hudson who went from directing glossy TV adverts to making movies.
His debut feature was the low budget British sporting drama Chariots of Fire,
which won four Oscars in 1982 and became a global box office success. And Hilary
Alexander, the eccentric, ebullient and much loved telegraph fashion editor, who
was one of Fleet Street's first fashion reporters and is said to have coined the
term supermodel. The familiar sound of Saturday afternoon sports on ITV. Dickey
Davis was the face of World of Sport for almost 20 years until the mid 80s. With
his snazzy suits, sideburns, moustache and trademark stripe of white hair, he
became one of Britain's best loved sports presenters, inspiring comedy sketches
and a satirical song, Dickey Davis Eyes. The sports presenter Jim Rosenthal was
a friend and colleague. Whenever you saw Dickey at the start of World of Sport,
it was come on in, come and join me, we're going to have a wonderful time with
that little smile and twinkle and you felt warm and you felt comfortable and you
felt when Dickey was there, the world was a decent place. England clinching the
title they shared last season with 100% record. Scotland at the moment in second
place having played their three games. Northern Ireland in third place with
those two points. Dickey's deadpan introductions to the more esoteric sporting
events was a source of joy to comedians like Benny Hill. We've got sailing from
hailing, we've got sledding from reading, shooting from shooting and carting
from... Dickey was born Richard John Davis in Wallacy on the Wirral and went to
Oldershall Grammar School. After doing national service he did a variety of jobs
including spending ten years at sea working on cruise ships where amongst other
duties he would read out bingo numbers. It wasn't a traditional route to sports
journalism. He used to serve behind the bar in a pub, he worked in butlins as a
sort of red coat welcoming people and he worked on the Queen Mary as a purser as
well. And he had a distinctive look about him didn't he? He did indeed and I
think that probably developed over the years really in that Jimmy Hill advised
him to change his name from Richard Davis to Dickey Davis because it rolled off
the tongue and he also dressed very well and very fashionably in those times
although you look back at some of the jackets and ties and you raise a quizzical
eyebrow these days and they had the distinctive white bit at the front of his
hair as well that nobody really knew whether the white was natural or and the
dark stuff wasn't or vice versa. The greatest has a few words for us too. I'm
glad my fans in London can see me in my last days as you see I'm getting old now
you're as well as the man in one round. And we take off with a human fly. Dickey
Davis will probably be best remembered for presenting ITV's World of Sport for
20 years from 1965 to 1985. What did he bring to that particular role? Because
it wasn't an Ichi one was it? Because he was up against grand standing and then
in those days the BBC used to buy up all the rights to major sporting events
leaving ITV to cover what one might politely call more sort of fringe or
minority sports. Fringe or minority sports at best really. Yes the BBC ruled the
roost and ITV had to find something different, had to find alternative sports
and had to find someone that the viewers would like and would go along the ride
with and from 12 15 until five o'clock ITV sort of ambushed the BBC and did very
very well to the extent that when the wrestling which the BBC wouldn't touch
with the longest barge pole you could see came on at four o'clock upwards of 10
million people watched. My left hand in the blue corner, the six foot 11, the 30
stone, the giant resistance. If you watched television at all regularly between
1955 and 1988 you just couldn't avoid the wrestling. It was water cooler TV
before that invented water coolers. The referee inside the ring, referee inside
the ring, Craig Green. I was probably perceived as the next presenter in a bit
of a threat if you like. Didn't stop Dickie helping me as much as he could and
we went we were going through the running order for World of Sports and we came
to the wrestling at four o'clock and in the typical sort of smart ass way I went
oh well that would be the highlight of my broadcasting career linking to that
and Dickie grabbed me by the arm and said look Rosie whatever you do do not diss
the wrestling. ITV start at four o'clock build their audience there upwards of
10 million and it goes all the way through to Saturday night. That wrestling
pays your wages. And presumably for those people who didn't watch ITV on a
Saturday afternoon back in the 70s and 80s I'll remember Dickie from things like
FA Cup Finals and he did several Olympic Games didn't he as well? Oh sure yes I
mean Dickie was it did his homework. He was multi skilled. He was an effortless
magnificent all rounder really and but beneath it all there was a hard worker
too. There was someone who was never unprepared. He was a friend of yours as
well as a colleague. I mean what was he like as a friend? What you saw that was
what you got. You would always say good morning to everybody in the office by
name. He wasn't struck by his own stardom at all. You'd never see Dickie Davis
saying don't you know who I am not a chance. He was a very unassuming man. He
was a huge star in that time as well. And and I think the outpouring of
affection from Dickie since his death was announced has been just unbelievable
and millions of views on Twitter alone that coverage across the media has been
huge. And I haven't seen a single negative word about Dickie Davis and that is
absolutely remarkable and it's a testimony to the way he lived his life. A real
gent. A true gent. He didn't make many mistakes but he made one horrendous
mistake but he was coming to the end of world of sport and he said of course
tomorrow great lineup on ITV we've got some cup soccer for you and it came out
of something completely different and it was a long standing joke. He said what
did he say what did he say work it out it's quite easy and so that little
mistake stuck with Dickie but he laughed at it along with all of us. The sports
presenter Dickie Davis has died aged 94 and next week we'll feature the life of
another sporting giant football commentator John Watson. But this week's last
words went to aeronautical engineer Ralph Hooper, Hollywood actress Raquel Welsh
and the women's rights activist Dorothy Pitman Hughes. Don't forget to search
out the last word podcast on BBC sounds. What a theme tune. Last word was
presented by Kirsty Lange produced by Neil George. Friday evening on Radio 4
stretches ahead of us with Add to Playlist and The Joys of the Keyboard at
7.15pm. Any questions is live from Somerset at 8pm and to kick things off with a
smile at 6.30pm. Hello I'm Andy Zoltan and on this week's News Quiz I'm joined
by Holly Walsh, Andy Parsons, Ian Smith and Kate Andrews. On this week's show we
talk the Labour Mission, Rishi Sunak's Protocol Proposition and Vladimir Putin's
Lack of Contrition. That's the News Quiz tonight at 6.30pm on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. The Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is expected to use his budget on the 15th of
March to introduce measures to encourage people over 50 to return to work. So
what might it take to achieve that? Well we'll discuss that in this weekend's
Money Box tomorrow at lunchtime at midday or any time afterwards on BBC Sounds.
And talking of figures, here's Tim Harford. Hello and welcome to more or less
the grammatical stickler of the statistical world. This week our inbox was
overflowing with suggested corregenda and not just about the datum's thing,
although mostly about that, we invite a computational linguist to bring the data
about data and we have a corregendum about nurses pay. We'll also be asking how
much money you might raise if you tax rich Welsh people. And are there really 13
million menopausal women in the UK? But first our next story begins as do all
good stories with Justice Secretary Dominic Raab sending a tweet. Reoffending
rates have fallen by over two percentage points since the same period last year
to 23.1%, down from almost 31% in 2009-10. This shows that our investment in
drug rehab, training in prisons and offender employment is working and helping
make our streets safer. That was in October and the rate now is very slightly
higher. But overall reoffending rates are down from around 30% 10 years ago into
the low 20s today. This all sounds like good news, but it's also a bit
surprising. Historically reoffending rates don't tend to move very much. To get
a deeper understanding of what this all means, we spoke to Danny Shaw, now an
independent policing and crime commentator, but for many years before that, a
home affairs correspondent at the BBC. The reoffending rate isn't really the
reoffending rate. The reoffending rate is really the proportion of people who
have been released from prison or who are sentenced at court to a community
order or given a fine, who within 12 months of that event commit another offence
for which they are convicted or given a caution within that 12 months or a six
month follow-up period. So, as an example, if you're released from prison and
not convicted of a crime, cautioned or given a police warning within 18 months,
then you count as someone who is a reoffending success. Of course, that doesn't
mean all these people are back on the straighter narrow. Some may be back to
their criminal ways, but just haven't been caught. So, it's not really
reoffending, it's really reconviction or re-cautioning? Really? So, I think if
the government called it the reconviction rate, I'm not sure they would be
bragging that it was falling. Well, that's exactly my point. So, a six
percentage point drop would be significant if it was really a drop in
reoffending, but it's actually a drop in reconvictions and re-cautioning. I
accept that as a matter of definition, what we are measuring is re-cautions and
re-convictions, but I mean, do we know that that is because the police and the
courts are being less effective at getting convictions or delivering cautions
rather than because fewer crimes are being committed? Well, I think the first
thing to say is that the government hasn't presented any evidence, any cause and
effect evidence to say that the fall in reoffending rates is because of
something that they are doing in terms of rehabilitation or better schemes in
prison or on probation. That's the first thing. The second thing is if you look
at some separate data from the home office, which show the outcomes of offenses.
So, what happens to a crime after it's reported and recorded by the police in
England and Wales? What those figures show is that charge rates, the proportion
of crimes that result in a suspect being charged or summons to appear in court,
have plummeted. They have gone down by 10 percentage points from 2014-15, which
was a year when the figures started to be calculated in a different way, to the
latest set of figures, which for the 12 months ending in September 2022. So, 10
percentage point fall from 15.5% to 5.5% crimes resulting in a charge. I mean,
that's a huge fall. It's a huge fall and you can't have a conviction without
someone being charged. So, the conviction rate is going to be even lower. We've
also seen a significant fall in the proportion of crimes which result in a
caution, a simple caution, which has gone from 4.6% down to 1% since 2014-15.
So, that's a 3.6 percentage point drop. So, if the proportion of crimes that are
leading to cautions and convictions is falling, then surely that must be having
an impact on the proportion of offenders who are re-cautioned and re-convicted.
I mean, just to rephrase those numbers, you've got a situation of eight years
ago, out of every seven offences committed, one would result in a charge and now
it's out of every 20 offences committed, one would result in a charge. I mean,
that's just an apocalyptic fall. It's a huge fall and it's a real worry. The
well-regarded Crime Survey of England and Wales suggests that crime overall is
falling, as the Ministry of Justice pointed out to us when we approached them
for comment. But this doesn't change the fact that the number of charges and
cautions has fallen dramatically, dragging down the charge rate. So why is this
happening? I think you have to look at the long-term trends and I think what
we're seeing firstly is that there is a changing mix of offences and so we're
actually seeing a record number of sexual offences and sexual offences are more
complex in many cases to investigate and to solve, they take longer. I think one
of the key reasons is that the number of police officers fell dramatically from
2010 when it stood at almost 144,000 across England and Wales to 2019, there was
a drop of around 21,000 police officers and that has clearly had an impact on
the police services capacity and capability to deal with these volume of
offences and a mix of more complex offences that take longer to investigate and
solve. It's always been the case that some people will get away with it and it's
always been the case that, you know, there are probably some crimes that are
just impossible to solve or you're just not going to get the resources in place
to solve every shoplifting or every minor fraud. But to have a charge rate that
has fallen to 5.5% and a cautioning rate that's down to 1% really just suggests
that criminals have a licence to get away with it. Our thanks to Danny Shaw. We
put his points to the Ministry of Justice. They did draw our attention to an
increase in police officers. Our 20,000 extra police officers, expansion of
electronic tags and work to get offenders off drugs, off the streets and into
jobs will help cut reoffending further. Now you may remember Danny Shaw said the
number of police officers had fallen by 21,000 so you might wonder how these
figures can both be true. The 21,000 fall was a fall in full-time equivalent
police officers between 2010 and 2019. That actually happened. The 20,000 extra
police officers was a manifesto pledge in 2019 and it hasn't actually happened
yet. In the most recent figures from January, the government has so far managed
to recruit an extra 16,700 police officers. But the Ministry of Justice didn't
engage with Danny Shaw's argument that falling reoffending rates may be a
reflection of the police bringing fewer charges and issuing fewer cautions.
You're listening to more or less. In mid-January, Radio 4's Any Questions came
from Newport in Wales. One of the panellists was Vaughan Gething, Minister for
the Economy of Wales, and he was asked about whether the Welsh government would
consider raising taxes to give extra funding to the health service in Wales. You
talk about 10 years of austerity. Of course the Welsh government does have tax-
raising powers it could use to raise more money for the NHS. Is that something
you're considering? Vaughan Gething responded, The challenge is that we don't
think we can raise enough, fairly enough, to have a long-term funding settlement
for the service. And some of this is about the pay context. Now that is both
about how would we do that. The tax base for higher earnings in Wales is
actually really small. There are 9,000 higher rate taxpayers. You'd have to ask
basic tax rate payers virtually everyone to pay lots more. Phil Jones from North
Wales was listening and was surprised to hear only 9,000 people in Wales pay the
higher tax rate. He asked us, can this be true? Well we asked Nathan Gower, more
or less reporter and a man whose name sounds Welsh even if he actually isn't. Hi
Tim, I should say that I do have a Welsh auntie though. Hello Auntie Bev. Focus
Nathan, focus. What is going on here? OK, prologue. The income tax bans in Wales
are the same as in England. First the basic rate. That goes from £12,500 up to
£50,000 at a rate of 20%. Then there's the higher rate which goes from £50,000
to £150,000 at a rate of 40%. Then finally there's the additional rate of tax
which is the top rate of tax for those earning £150,000 and above at 45%. That's
fairly new, it was introduced in 2010 and before that the higher rate actually
was the highest rate. The Welsh government has the power to raise whichever of
these different rates it wants. It could put the basic rate up to 21% for
example or the higher rate up to 41. But unlike Scotland it can't choose the
income levels at which the different tax rates kick in giving it less
flexibility when raising tax revenue. OK, that all makes sense but what about
this claim that there are only 9,000 higher rate taxpayers? That sounds very
low. Yes, that figure is wrong. Vaughan Gething misspoke. He should have said
there were 9,000 additional rate taxpayers. OK, well, sounds like an honest
mistake. These things happen, especially since the higher rate isn't actually
the top rate of tax anymore so it's a bit of a silly name. But it makes me
wonder Nathan, how many of these 40p rate or higher rate taxpayers are there in
Wales? There are 166,000 higher rate taxpayers in Wales. Now I know what you're
going to ask, is that a big number? Well not really. There are 1.5 million
people who pay income tax in Wales so that means only 11% of Welsh income
taxpayers earn enough to pay the higher rate. But if you look at England then by
comparison 16% of income taxpayers are in the higher rate tax bracket. And what
about the additional rate? Again, Wales has a much smaller proportion. Only 0.6%
of Welsh taxpayers are in the additional rate bracket while in England that
proportion is over three times as large, it's 2%. Wales has proportionately less
income to tax than England. What this means is that, as Vaughan Gethings said,
in order to raise a substantial sum of extra money for the health service, or
anything else, you'd need to increase tax for those basic rate taxpayers. In
fact, we can put numbers on this. Well, I think we should, we tend to be quite
pro numbers in this programme on balance. And there's actually quite a cool
website. It's from the Welsh Senate, the Welsh Parliament. You can actually play
around with the Welsh tax numbers and see what happens if you raise tax rates.
Oh, Nathan, with your big beard and your interactive Welsh tax websites. I knew
you were a rebel from the moment you walked into the BBC. What can I say? I'm
here to shake things up, Tim. So for example, if you theoretically increased the
additional rate of tax, that top rate paid by people earning over £150,000, if
you increased it by 1p in the pound from 45 to 46p, you'd only raise an extra
£8m in revenue. And it's a similar story for the higher rate tax band. Adding 1p
in the pound only raises £37m. Right. And how much is the budget for the NHS in
Wales? About £10m a year. Which is £10,000m. So £8m here and £37m there. It's
not really going to touch the sides. That's right. Any substantial increase from
income tax would have to come from increasing the basic rate of tax. If you
raised the basic rate by 1p, you'd bring in an extra £219m. These figures for
extra revenue are best case scenarios, assuming people don't change their
behaviour in response to the higher tax. Of course, whether you're in Wales,
England or Scotland, the same broad point applies. If you want to raise a lot of
money, you've usually got to put up the rate with the most taxpayers. Well,
thank you Nathan. And thanks to Harry Thompson from the Institute of Welsh
Affairs for interrupting his holiday to help with this item. Oh no, the more or
less mistake siren. And here comes the editor with a piece of paper. What have
we got here? Seems it's about last week's Nurse's Pay item. In that item, we
interviewed Mark Pearson of the OECD about how Nurse's Pay compares with other
European countries and with average pay in the UK. Nurses in Europe, on average,
earn about 20% more than their national average wage, whereas in the UK, they
get pretty much exactly the average. Now that's all true, but we still think it
was a mistake to broadcast that claim, which we did last Wednesday, because the
OECD were comparing means. This practice when comparing salaries is to use the
median, that's the middle value. And that's because the mean can be and usually
is skewed by the very high paid. According to the Office for National
Statistics, median nurses pay in the UK is £37,000, that's 13% above the median
wage in the UK, which is £33,000. So why don't the OECD use the median for their
analysis? Well, they use the mean because that's what countries agreed to share
internationally. The OECD don't have comparable data about medians. We received
an email recently from a loyal listener who'd noticed a suspicious looking
number about how many menopausal women there are in the UK. It's one that's
reported all over the place. For example, this headline in The Guardian. Let's
talk menopause, because we are failing 13 million women. And it's not just in
the media. The number's also on an NHS England webpage about menopause in the
workplace. It is estimated that there are around 13 million people who are
currently peri or menopausal in the UK. According to the Office for National
Statistics, the female population of the UK is around 34 million. So that would
mean that the menopause is affecting over a third of all females. Josephine
Cassley has been looking into this. Hello, Jo. Hello. Hello, I'm Jo. I'm a woman
and that figure is indeed used a lot. The NHS website does include a reference
to Wellbeing for Women. That's a charity that works on women's health. But when
I contacted them, they said that they'd never heard of this figure. But I worked
out if you go back to the previous census from 2011 and just count up all the
female population over 45, you get a bit over 13 million. 13 million, the same
as the number. So the number does seem plausible at least, but do all women over
45 count as menopausal? Not really, but the definition of menopausal actually is
quite unclear. Let's start with the definition of the menopause. I know you like
your classics and it comes from Ancient Greek, so maybe you can tell me. An
Ancient Greek test, lovely. So meno must be to do with the monthly cycle, that
is periods. Pause must be... don't tell me, don't tell me. Does it mean pause?
Pause. Only a true classicist would have been able to figure that one out.
Correct. So it's a woman's last period, but you won't know it's your final
period until after it's happened. So I spoke to Professor Mary Ann Lumsden to
help me understand some of these definitions. She's CEO of the International
Federation of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. It is a curious definition being
retrospective. And it is one year after the last menstrual period. And so it is
not possible to be quite certain about menopause until one year has elapsed. The
menopause then is technically a point in time rather than an interval of time.
So what's menopausal? Well, I spoke to several experts in this field and there
was a feeling that the term menopausal is vague and often ill-defined. Once
you've had the menopause, you become post-menopausal. In this phase, there might
still be health implications from having gone through the menopause. The acute
symptoms like hot flushing will usually resolve, but there will be other issues
that arise from the menopause. Okay, so this number of 13 million refers to the
female population over 45, and that includes post-menopausal women. So we're
starting to count at 45. 45. Is that a good age to start? Good question. Let's
start with the average age of the menopause. The mean age of the menopause is 51
in the UK, US, Europe. And that means that women will go through the menopause
between the age of 45 and middle to late 50s. But before the menopause, you have
the perimenopause, which is the period leading up to the menopause. One of the
cardinal signs of the perimenopause, of course, the changes in menstrual
regularity. And these start prior to the menopause setting in when the cycle
length often gets less, and then it begins to lengthen. And then this will
prolong such that you get very marked irregularity in menses. Different studies
have different estimates for how long the perimenopause lasts, and it depends a
bit on how you define it, but around four to eight years seems to be average.
But symptoms such as hot flushing can go on past the menopause itself and into
the post-menopausal period. One of the big studies that's looked at this in the
US is called the SWAN study. That looked at how long women reported hot flushes
and night sweats for, and found that they occurred for an average of 7.4 years
in total. Gosh, seven and a half years. It's a long time. It is, and other
studies have found that to be lower, for example, five years. One reason that
this study came up with a higher duration of symptoms could be that they had a
diverse sample. Around a third of the women they studied were African American,
and they found that African American women reported the longest period of hot
flushes and night sweats, a median of 10 years. So is there any way of working
out from all of that? How many women in the UK might be experiencing these sorts
of symptoms? Well, there's not a good estimate out there for this, but we can do
some rough calculations using the ONS's population estimates. If we assume that
women are perimenopausal for about four years, there could be around 1.9 million
women experiencing this. If we go for seven years of symptoms, you get around
3.3 million women. Well, either way, that's well short of 13 million. Exactly,
but this is pretty rough, and all these numbers are averages. Some women
experience symptoms for much longer, even over a decade, and some women don't
have any problems at all. Their periods just stop. Thank you, both to Josephine
Casley and also to Professor Mary Ann Lumsden. When I finish an episode of More
or Less, I get on the train out of London, exchanging the city life of Mus
Urbarnus for the rural habits of Mus Rusticus, so to speak. But last week, as I
sat contemplating sunset over the meadows as carefree as Cincinnatus at his
plough, the More or Less team brought me grave news. There was unfinished
business, and reluctantly, I returned to restore order to the suddenly chaotic
world of data. That's right. Our discussion last week on the Latin roots of the
word data has thrown the More or Less audience into a frenzy. Should data be
treated as a plural or a singular word? Is it data are or data is? We had many,
many impassioned emails sent to More or Less at bbc.co.uk, so many that we felt
we simply had to revisit the topic. Here's just a little taste of our inbox over
the last week. Has the BBC told you to change style? Don't. Why should ignorance
triumph? I'm afraid it often does. Language changes. Get over it. It hit a nerve
with me, largely because I was taught Latin by a master who obviously regretted
his choice of career. Perhaps you could think of processed data as mashed
potato. Potatoes are countable. Mashed potato isn't. Keep up the good work and
stick to your guns. The FT should be setting a good example, not to basing our
language. I still cling to criterion and bacterium. But one listener in
particular raised a striking point. Well, it just struck me as strange that a
segment on More or Less wouldn't actually have any data on how the noun data is
being used in contemporary English. Sorry. That's Dr Beth Mallory, a corpus
linguist at the Survey of English Usage at University College London. I spoke to
her to get an expert opinion on modern trends of usage for the word data. First
of all, a bit of a grammar lesson. If we distinguish between data when it's used
as a count noun and data when it's used as a mass noun, count nouns are words
like bean and fact, which have singular and plural forms. So beans, bean, fact,
facts, whereas mass nouns are words like information, energy, air, things like
that. So, Tim, you said that you think of data as a count noun. So it's the
plural of datum. So it would take a plural verb like are or show. But I think
what made me get in touch was that I think that for most people, data is a mass
noun. So it's always used with a singular. So it's like what, like sand? Yeah.
Well, you could say sands if you were... Yeah, exactly. If you were in the
middle of the poem Ozymandias, but generally you would say sand. Exactly. So
yeah, and I think something like energy or air would be a good analogy for it.
So that's the grammar. What about the data? Okay, so I'm a corpus linguist.
Corpus linguistics is a methodology that uses large electronic collections of
what we call naturally occurring language data. We call them corpora. So the
singular is corpus, the plural is corpora, which is slightly ironic. Another
obscure Latinate plural for you there. We'll let it pass. And we use these
corpora to conduct empirical analyses so that we can draw conclusions about how
language is actually being used in reality. So you've just got a massive sample
of text, probably from the internet, right? Or maybe from books, although
they're merging together these days, aren't they? Yeah, I mean, mostly. So the
kind of really big modern corpora tend to be running into the billions. So the
really big ones that we can use do tend to be from the web. Yeah. And you can
figure out how often people say data is versus how often people say data are. I
suppose I should grip my teeth and get you to tell me. What did you find? Yeah.
So I mean, across the different corpora that I looked at, it's around 80 percent
data is versus 20 percent data are. And that seems to be replicated across
different verbs as well. So things like data shows versus data show. So 80
percent are taking the trendy view that the Financial Times has just taken. Yes.
And 20 percent are stuck in the mud like me. Interesting. So I did also have a
look at some specialized corpora and data does definitely take a plural verb
much more often in genres like academia. So in research and in journalistic
English, I did find some data on this from the 1990s. And there does seem to
have been a change since then. So the data I found said that in academic
writing, it was 93 percent plural in the 1990s, whereas now it seems to be more
like 50 50. What does it tell us that the academic corpora has a very different
view to the Web in general, if anything? I think it tells us that this is
becoming quite an elite form. So people with a kind of traditional classical
education and an understanding of Latin are much more likely to use the plural
verb with with data. And that makes it an elite form. Speaking of the elite, the
very best of the very best are loyal listeners have been in touch. We have a new
corpora to analyze the more or less inbox. They do not see it as normal people
do. So two thirds of people who expressed a preference in our inbox voted for
data are and only one third went for data is. Of course, this is an unusual
group, and not only is it loyal listeners, but it's loyal listeners who felt
that this was the most important thing they could do with their time. What do
you make of that? Yeah, I mean, I think there are several things going on. So,
yes, these are people who have been exercised by this segment enough to make
note that their preferred usage is the one that's declining. It's not
necessarily a representative sample of what's going on in the real world, I
don't think. Yes, I did love one. Listen, email, not everyone studied Latin to
know that the Romans used an A for the plural of many words ending in arm
bacteria, strata, data, etc. It's time for etymologists to stick those
irrelevant ancient usages up their bar. That's brilliant. Our thanks to Dr. Beth
Mallory from University College London. And thanks to all the AUS cultatores for
Delas, that's loyal listeners, of course, who sent in their ideas. And that's
all we have time for this week. But please keep those questions and comments
coming in, even if they're about numbers rather than grammar. They're all
welcome via more or less at bbc.co.uk. We will be back next week. And until
then, goodbye. More or less was presented by Tim Harford, the producer was John
Bithrie. A couple of highlights to mention before PM. In Archive On 4 on
Saturday evening, Michael Simmons Roberts selects radio dramas from the past
hundred years that reflect the many features of the genre that help distinguish
it from other narrative forms. That's tomorrow evening at 8pm. Now, we've heard
a fair bit about artificial intelligence recently. Machines can now write
novels, create works of arts, compose songs. The technology could be used in all
sorts of different functions. So how should business respond to the rapid
evolution of AI? The bottom line with Evan Davis takes a look at the issues on
Monday morning at 11.30. Stealing it was just the start. We're looking for six
robbers and three tons of gold. Every ring, every watch. If you're looking for
the gold, it's all around you. The Gold Watch on BBC iPlayer. This is BBC Radio
4.