TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 are hitting our night skies and speaking to the preeminent Aurora watcher of
the country. You're listening to Today. It's seven o'clock on Monday, the 27th
of February. The headlines this morning, Rishi Sunak is meeting the President of
the European Commission later in the clearest sign yet that a new Brexit deal on
Northern Ireland is about to be sealed. An Australian company has bought the
battery maker British Volt, which collapsed last month, and safety investigators
are warning that long delays in emergency care in England are harming NHS staff.
The BBC News is read this morning by Vijay Alis. Rishi Sunak is to meet the
President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire this
afternoon to try to finalise a new deal on trading arrangements for Northern
Ireland. The protocol, which was signed as part of the Brexit agreement, has
long been a source of friction, especially for unionists in Northern Ireland,
because it includes checks on goods entering from elsewhere in the UK. Our
political correspondent Ian Watson has the details. After hundreds of hours of
discussions, Downing Street is hopeful that these will be the final talks before
an agreement is reached. The Cabinet is expected to meet immediately after the
Prime Minister and the Commission President conclude their discussions. And such
is the confidence that a deal will be struck. Plans have been put in place for a
joint press conference, followed by a statement to Parliament from the Prime
Minister. This would allow MPs to express their initial views on any deal,
though there won't be a vote. An agreement with the EU would ease trade between
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, but it wouldn't in itself restore power-
sharing government at Stormont. That would only happen if the largest unionist
party, the DUP, agreed. Its MPs are unlikely to deliver a verdict on any deal
until they see the detail. So today may well be a landmark moment in the EU and
UK's post-Brexit relations, but a rockier road to solving Northern Ireland's
political problems could lie ahead. With his assessment of what's at stake,
here's our political editor Chris Mason. These negotiations between the
government and Brussels, the government and Conservative backbenchers, and the
government and Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionist Party have resembled
diplomatic Jenga. Wobbly bricks here, there and everywhere. One element has been
all but done for a while, and we expect will be sorted today, the deal between
London and Brussels. The others will then be tested. Downing Street will
emphasise what it sees as the immediate positives of the deal, a better
arrangement for Northern Ireland and resetting relations with the EU. Re-
establishing devolved government in Northern Ireland, they hope, might follow,
but that is far from certain. The DUP, having sounded rather sceptical, have now
gone rather quiet. Then there are Tory backbenchers, among them one Boris
Johnson. It's why a diplomatic breakthrough for Rishi Sunak is also a moment of
political jeopardy. An Australian company has bought the collapsed battery maker
British Volt. The start-up business had been planning a £4 billion factory in
Northumberland before it went into administration last month, with a loss of 300
jobs. Our business editor Simon Jack reports. British Volt's downfall was blamed
on a lack of battery experience, unproven technology, and no customers or
revenue. The new owner looks similar in some ways. Recharge Industries is owned
and run by a New York-based investment fund with no automotive background. Its
Australian chief executive, David Collard, explained why it was different. We're
bringing validated technology. US Defence has also validated the technology.
It's actually already supplied to the UK Navy through a subcontractor over here.
We've put forward our case and we've been nothing but successful in everything
we've set out to do so far. The new owners will keep the British Volt brand name
but have very different plans for the future. The company intends to start by
focusing on batteries for energy storage and hopes to have those products ready
by the end of 2025. It then intends to produce batteries for high-performance
sports cars. The prospect of a much-needed plant that can produce batteries for
high-volume car makers in the UK still looks many years off. Safety
investigators say that doctors, ambulance dispatchers and other NHS staff in
England have faced significant distress and harm over the past year as a result
of long delays in emergency care. The Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch
said many staff broke down in tears when asked about their working environment.
Our health reporter Jim Reid has more details. Safety investigators who took
evidence from staff across urgent and emergency care said many were crying in
interviews. Ambulance dispatchers said it was common to worry how many are we
going to kill today because of their frustration at not being able to reach
patients quickly. Nurses and doctors talked of making challenging decisions
about which patients to treat first. The watchdog said there was likely to be an
impact on patient safety and NHS England says it takes staff well-being very
seriously and has a range of support available. The government said the number
of ambulances and hospital beds was being increased. The energy regulator Ofgem
will give its latest decision on the quarterly price cap for England, Wales and
Scotland later this morning. The typical family energy bill is likely to rise
from two and a half thousand pounds a year to three thousand. Although domestic
gas and electricity bills are protected by a government guarantee, Ofgem's
announcement is likely to reopen debate about the level of support being
offered. Here's our Cost of Living correspondent Kevin Peachy. Domestic energy
bills will rise in April under current plans. A less generous government price
guarantee and the end of a winter discount mean a typical household annual bill
will in effect go up to three thousand pounds. Ofgem's price cap will show that
without this support bills would have been higher. Forecasts suggest about three
hundred pounds a year more. But it will also confirm that the cost to the
government of providing this help is likely to be less than initially expected
because of a fall in wholesale energy costs. Campaigners say that with a budget
imminent the Chancellor Jeremy Hunt has the opportunity to offer more short-term
help to cushion the blow for bill payers and prevent more falling into fuel
poverty. But Mr Hunt recently told the BBC the government was unlikely to have
the money for a major new initiative. Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank
have set fire to Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles. A Palestinian man was
shot dead. Earlier two Jewish brothers were killed in the same area near Nablus.
A BBC Panorama investigation has uncovered evidence that women are being misled
and manipulated by some crisis pregnancy advice centres across the UK. The
centres which operate outside the NHS offer walk-in services or phone lines.
Divya Talwar reports. We contacted 57 crisis pregnancy advice centres posing as
pregnant women seeking advice on our options including abortion. 21 of the
centres, more than a third, gave advice described by the British Association for
Counselling and Psychotherapy as manipulative and unethical. Several incorrectly
claimed abortion could increase the risk of breast cancer and infertility. The
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists said the findings showed
evidence of coercive and scaremongering tactics. Two centres wouldn't speak to
us. The remaining 34 directed us to NHS services. Panorama is on BBC One this
evening at 8.30. The government is creating job centre league tables with staff
being given cash bonuses for getting people off benefits and into work. 60 job
centres where the schemes being piloted are to be ranked by performance with
staff in the leading ones being awarded £250 each. The PCS civil service union
has dismissed it as gimmicky and insulting but the government said it was right
to reward staff when they help get people into jobs. From today the age at which
you can get married in England and Wales rises from 16 to 18. The change has
been introduced to stop children being forced to marry. Under the new rules,
adults who facilitate the marriage of anyone under 18 could face up to seven
years in jail and a fine. Our political correspondent Rajdeep Sandhu has more.
Nearly a year after being signed into law, the Marriage and Civil Partnership
Act is coming into force. It makes it an offence to enable a child to marry or
enter into a civil partnership under the age of 18 in any circumstances,
removing the need to prove the child was forced or coerced into it and also
ending parental consent for 16 and 17 year olds. The change also applies to
religious or cultural marriage ceremonies that aren't legally recognised.
Campaigners hope this new law will act as a deterrent to forced marriage of
children. Cricket on the fourth day of the second test in Wellington, New
Zealand's men were balled out for 483 in their second innings, setting England a
target of 258 runs for victory. At close of play, England had reached 48 for
one. They lead the two-match series 1-0. Vijji, thank you very much. The time is
now nine minutes past seven. We are set for a big day in the ongoing process of
getting Brexit done. The European Commission president is expected the cabinet
will be briefed by the Prime Minister on what he's negotiated in a new version
of the Northern Ireland Protocol. The King may be involved in what may be seen
as a royal nod to the idea of compromise, working things out and ultimately
getting a Northern Ireland government back to work. Teresa Villers joins us. She
was Secretary of State for Northern Ireland at the time of the Brexit referendum
and voted leave. Good morning. Good morning. What will you be looking for when
you see that text? What we need is text that addresses two things, the frictions
and checks and paperwork which are impeding trading goods and food between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. But also we need something that addresses the
problem at the moment. People in Northern Ireland are subject to thousands of
single market laws over which they have no say and no vote. So I hope the Prime
Minister is going to bring us a deal which addresses those. Okay. So the trade
issue and the democracy issue, if you like. Let me ask you then or put to you
what John Major said to Carolyn Quinn in the edition of the Westminster Hour
that was broadcast last night, that if we get, the UK gets the trade changes we
need, the easier access for trade in Northern Ireland, then the fact that
there'll be a minute occasional involvement of the ECJ really ought not to stop
an agreement being made. I feel that ECJ involvement is the symptom, it's the
consequence of this democratic deficit problem. I mean, if we can ensure that we
do something about single market laws applying in Northern Ireland, then the ECJ
issue becomes easier to grapple with. I know, on all sides, people accept there
needs to be a degree of compromise, but we can't tolerate a continuation of
Northern Ireland being subject to the full panoply of single market rules, not
least because there inevitably will be divergence. Even if we don't start
altering our laws, the EU is already altering theirs. So that there's going to
be significant divergence in the future and that makes it even more important
for us to address this problem that we must enable people in Northern Ireland to
have a say over the laws that govern them. But the reason that there is that
special status is because of the history and the geography with which we're all
well acquainted. Are you saying that it will be the DUP and their position that
ultimately leads your position on the text, or might you be prepared to support
it on its merits and on your judgment, even if the DUP does not? I'll take a
decision on whether to support the deal dependent on what it contains. Of
course, I'll be talking to constituents, talking to colleagues and talking to
the DUP because I want to see a deal which delivers a return to power sharing in
Northern Ireland. That is crucial. It is intolerable that we have this, we have
the protocol undermining political stability in Northern Ireland. That is
extremely worrying. And I hope the European Union recognises that it needs to
move its position if it is going to make good on the promises it said throughout
all these years of negotiations that its primary focus was maintaining peace and
political stability in Northern Ireland. How important is it to you that MPs get
not just a chance to have their say in a debate, but a vote on what the
government has signed up to? I do think it is crucial that Parliament has a
vote. I can't conceive of circumstances where something as significant as this
could be finally agreed and implemented without MPs voting on it in Parliament.
Although it is based on an existing protocol and the government does have treaty
making powers, that's one of its prerogatives. But as you pointed out at the
start of your interview, this is a very important step in terms of, I hope,
finally delivering Brexit in full. And that means that there is a vital need for
Parliament to have its say and to have a vote on this. Theresa Villers, thank
you. It is 13 minutes past seven. What is happening to energy prices? The
question, of course, of massive importance, particularly for poorer households,
but also more widely for our politics. And we get the new energy price cap
today, probably a confirmation too that the cost of providing support to
households has not been as much as feared. We'll hear in a moment from Sir Ed
Davey, the Lib Dem leader. But first let's turn to Robert Buckley, who's from
Cornwall Insight, which is an independent energy research analytics group. Good
morning to you. Good morning. What are you expecting today? We're expecting that
the cap will come in somewhere around about £3,300. That's about £900 lower than
it is currently, about £4,200. But as you've implied, I think, the energy price
guarantee and the energy bill support scheme mean bills are around £2,100 for
the current quarter. And in the next quarter, what difference are you expecting,
given what is happening to that scheme, to take place? Well, as things stand
now, the energy price guarantee will rise to the equivalent of £3,000 a year and
the £400 from the energy bill support scheme will stop. So if you're looking at
it on a like-for-like basis, we're going to go from £2,100 with the two support
schemes up to £3,000. Right. So a considerable increase in what people will have
to pay? Absolutely. Absolutely. Though the weather hopefully should be milder.
And when you look ahead, I introduce you as being from an analytics company,
when you look ahead, as far as it is possible to look ahead, do you have a sense
of what's going to happen to the wholesale price and thus to the overall price
of energy? Yeah. If the market stays the same, and remembering Dermot Nolan's
comments earlier, if the market stays the same, the cap will come down to
somewhere around about £2,100 and stay there for a year or so. I think if
there's a question for the regulator and the politicians, it's how to get a
functioning market back that might bring those prices forward and fixed to be
offered to consumers. And just a final thought, put that in the context of
previous years before Covid and Russia and all the rest of it, how much more is
that? That would be about double. Okay. Well, look, that's really helpful,
Robert Buckley. Thank you. Let's turn to Sir Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader who is
listening to that. Good morning to you. Good morning. What do you think should
happen now? Well, I think the government should not be raising the energy price
guarantee and should be continuing to support people. As you heard from Robert
from Cornwall Insight just then, some people could see their bills going up by
as much as £900. Millions of families and pensioners are finding it so hard out
there, Justin. In my own constituency, people can't pay their food bills, they
can't pay their rent. We're seeing huge numbers of increased people coming to
food banks. This is a crisis. I think we're facing a cost of living cliff edge
in April. Things have been getting worse, not better. And for the Conservatives
to want to increase energy bills at this time shows just how out of touch they
are. They have the cash to not just freeze the energy price guarantee, but cut
it. And that's what Liberal Democrats are arguing for. But why cut it for people
who can perfectly well afford it as well? Well, I think millions are struggling.
But millions aren't. I mean, as you know, but plenty of wealthy people not only
can afford it, they don't want to, but they can afford to pay. But also there is
no incentive for them to use less energy because they're getting this money from
the government. Well, two things. First of all, there's been a consensus across
the political parties that if you try to target help on energy prices, you will
miss out millions of people. And even the Conservatives agree that that would be
the wrong approach. So our approach follows what the consensus is that this is
the best way to help people with energy bills. And if you look at the figures
from the IMF and others, our approach actually is worth far more to the least
well-off. And our package that I'm announcing today not only would cut the
energy price guarantee by £500, but we'd target more money on the least well-off
households by increasing the warm home discount and the winter fuel allowance.
So you're right, we do need to make sure the least well-off in society get the
most help. But actually, whether it's ordinary households or in fact, businesses
who are struggling and can't afford these higher energy bills that the
government are putting forward, we do need some serious help. And he made a
longer term point, Robert Buckley, didn't he? Which is interesting. Over to the
politicians, he said, when it comes to how we work out how we pay for energy and
how individuals pay for energy in the longer term, given that, as he said, the
prices are pretty much double what they used to be. What is the role of
government and where does the role of government end? What's your thinking on
that? Well, in the longer term, when we hope that the war in Ukraine finishes
and we may see more stability in global markets, then that will make it easier.
But the really best way to cut people's bills is through moving to renewable
power, which is far cheaper than dirty power, and also insulating people's
homes. And that's part of the Liberal Democrat programme as well, to shift to
cheaper forms of power and to make sure people don't have to waste so much. And
the real tragedy of the Conservatives' term in power is they have failed to
build on the success of Liberal Democrats when we were running things, when we
quadrupled Britain's renewable power, made us the world leader in offshore wind.
That's right, David. Thank you. Well, from energy to water now with Sean. Yes,
Michelle, Thames Water this morning announcing a huge investment in its network
after quite a bit of controversy. There's been a demand from the Environment
Secretary, Therese Coffey, to improve water quality, asking to see what action
water companies will take. So Thames Water this morning, England's largest water
company, unveiling £1.6 billion of investments in treatment works and sewers
over the next two years. I've got the Chief Executive, Sarah Bentley, with me
now. Morning to you. Good morning, Sean. Going to get onto this new investment
in a moment, but can you explain what has gone wrong that has meant you've been
pumping so much into our waterways, billions of litres of untreated sewage into
the River Thames? Well, firstly, I just want to be clear that I believe the
discharge of untreated sewage is absolutely unacceptable, which is why this
investment, this doubling of the rate of investment to £1.6 billion is so
important. And when you ask why, I think there are largely two reasons. Firstly,
the poor record that we have on sewage is symptomatic of the broader failings of
Thames, which was why I was brought in two years ago to lead a turnaround. When
we look back, we've got decades of underinvestment, which has led to cost
cutting and some poor decisions, leaving the business in a really debilitated
state. And we have been working tirelessly over the last two years to rebuild
the business, recruiting hundreds of people, senior, senior project engineers
that can deploy hundreds of millions of pounds in these big projects to improve
the health of our rivers and improve service for customers. On the state of
Thames water beforehand, I mean, is it now fair to say, do you think that your
predecessors were focusing too much on shareholders' returns, giving billions
back to investors right around the world, and not enough on keeping
infrastructure fit for purpose? Well, when we look at Thames, actually, the
underinvestment goes back decades. And we are trying to, through this turnaround
plan that we've created, ensure that that investment goes back into the assets,
the treatment works, the pipes, the Victorian infrastructure that needs it. The
dividends go back decades, though, don't they? Well, the current investors
haven't taken a dividend in five and a half years. And we are focused on
ensuring that money is coming into the business, not going out of the business.
So you say untreated sewage into waterways, absolutely acceptable. So will this
investment reduce it to zero? Well, what this investment is going to do is
upgrade 135 of our 354 sewage treatment works and put half a billion pounds into
our 68,000 miles of sewer network. That's enough to go around the world almost
three times. So we're going to make big progress. What we've said that we'll do
is reduce discharges by half, by 50% by the end of this decade, and actually
prioritise on sensitive watercourses, where we'll be reducing the discharges by
80% by 2030. It's a remarkable length of time that you're overseeing something
that you see as being absolutely unacceptable. Well, it is. And there is nobody
who wants to go faster than I do. I've got thousands of people working
tirelessly round the clock to address this problem. But it is a really big and
really complicated problem. And unfortunately, there's a time lag between
getting those spades in the ground, upgrading the treatment works, finding how
this rain is getting into our sewage network. And the problem just keeps getting
worse when we look at population growth and climate change. So actually, even
when we fix Thames's problem, a broader systemic reform of how we think about
water and wastewater in this country is urgently needed. You say shareholders at
the moment aren't getting a dividend. Last year, your pay was £2 million,
including bonuses. Is it right that you should be receiving bonuses when the
company's record is so poor? Well, I absolutely understand the anger at high
levels of executive pay combined with poor performance. The board benchmarked my
pay against other large utilities here in the south-east of England. And what
I'm focused on and the board is focused on is making sure that we are all
focused on turning around the business and improving the performance, which is
why we've built this turnaround plan. Will you accept your bonus this year?
Well, the decisions about bonus are down to the board, which will come up later
on in the year. But you could reject it. You could see, couldn't you? I mean,
customers have got 7.5% increase in their bills this year. You could say, it's
not suitable for me to take this. Well, I agree with you that the issue around
customer bills is absolutely important. We've been focused on trying to improve
what we do around our social tariffs. We've been investing £110 million to
increase the level of support we give to those customers who are struggling to
pay in this time. So it is important that we're focused on supporting customers
who most need it, but also important that we're focused on making this big
investment that is needed to improve and upgrade the infrastructure that our
customers and the environment so desperately need. Sarah, thank you. Sarah
Bentley, Chief Executive of Thameswater. Sean, thank you. 24 minutes past seven,
just after a rare set of talks between Israeli and Palestinian officials
yesterday with a pledge to reduce the level of violence. It's been a grim
picture since the start of the year in terms of deaths, including civilians.
Well, this morning there is news from the occupied West Bank of serious
disturbances and indeed more deaths. Tom Bateman, our Middle East correspondent,
is in Jerusalem. Take us through what we know, Tom. Well, last night, three
villages and a town in the northern part of the West Bank with a really
appalling destruction carried out by Israeli sassolation. Tom, we're going to
try and... Tom, your line is a bit intermittent and so we're going to come back
to you in a moment, try and get to the sport first and then try and improve your
line and come back. With Jonathan Ledger who is here at 24 minutes past seven.
Morning again. So much for an England victory inside four days in the second
test in New Zealand. The hosts hit back in their second innings, all out for
483. Kane Williamson out to Harry Brooke for 132. England leading 258 to win,
closed on 48 for one. We'll have more on the cricket in an hour. Well done to
Australia, winning the Women's T20 World Cup for the sixth time in seven
tournaments. They beat the host South Africa. Back home, the waiting is over for
a certain football team playing in red. All of these Manchester United
supporters waiting for the moment when silverware is returned into the hands of
Manchester United. It's been a long time for them. There's the build-up at any
moment now. Harry Maguire and Bruno Fernandes together will raise the Carabao
Cup. This will bring us confidence, but it's not business as usual. You have to
fight for it. You have to take effort. So invest in it. You have to sacrifice.
You have to suffer. And if we do that, then it's possible that we will be
successful. Eric Ten Haag making clear to his Manchester United players that
their 2-0 victory over Newcastle United in the AFL Cup final or Carabao Cup
final, if you like, at Wembley yesterday needs to be a platform for more
silverware. Correspondent John Murray was commentating at Wembley. Morning,
John. Morning, Jonathan. So having waited so long to win a trophy, tell us how
he almost lost it within an hour. Yes, when Eric Ten Haag walked into his post-
match media conference, he was carrying the trophy with its red and white
ribbons on it, placed it on the desk in front of him. But when he'd answered all
of the questions, to general amusement, he got up and walked off without the
trophy, left it behind. He did quickly realise, though, and then quick as a
flash joked that he'd already turned his thoughts to winning the next one. Ah,
very good. One Man United official told me last night, didn't want to come on
the radio, that winning the first one was the key. Others, as in trophies, will
follow quickly. What's different then about Ten Haag than predecessors like Jose
Mourinho and Louis van Gaal? Well, I think in the 10 years since Sir Alex
Ferguson retired, they've gone through those two, Mourinho, van Gaal, David
Moyes, of course, have you gone to Solskjaer, they had the interim, Ralph rang
Nick last season. And it's a little bit as like is occasionally discussed here
on the Today programme, conservatives yearning for what they had under Margaret
Thatcher. And Manchester United fans want what they had under Sir Alex Ferguson.
And it is very early days. But the signs are that Eric Ten Haag is providing the
elusive combination of strong leadership and success and early days, only nine
months in the job. But as the newspaper headline says this morning, that's not
that's not that's a start of a 10. You know, that's not a bad start, winning the
first available trophy. And they're still in three competitions, FA Cup, Premier
League and Europa League. How likely can he add one of those before the season's
end? Well, straight on to the FA Cup on Wednesday night against West Ham. But
what I think reflects very well is that Manchester United won the final
yesterday, just three days after the significant high of knocking the Spanish
league leaders Barcelona out of Europe. And the next challenge in the league is
the little matter of Liverpool at Anfield on Sunday, which is a fixture
Manchester United will approach with a good deal more confidence than they have
for a little while. John Murray, thank you very much indeed. Elsewhere, Celtic
be Rangers 2-1 to win the Scottish League Cup. Another Premier League defeat for
Chelsea yesterday. 2-0 at Tottenham will do nothing for manager Graham Potter's
job security. But Chelsea did knock out Arsenal in the Women's FA Cup. And only
Ireland can now land a Six Nations Grand Slam after Scotland's 32-21 defeat by
France in a mighty encounter in Paris yesterday. And a notable overnight success
for Britain's Cameron Norrie in tennis. He's beaten the world number two Carlos
Alcaraz to win the Rio Open, his fifth ATP singles title. We'll finish with two
selections for you. One at Plumpton, 335, number two Blue Bikini, and Air, 350,
number three Glenn Truon. Jonathan, thank you. We can go back now to Tom Bateman
in Jerusalem, hopefully on a more stable line to tell us, Tom, about what's been
happening in the last few hours in the West Bank. Well, the pictures, Michelle,
we've seen coming out of the town of Huara and about three surrounding villages
in the north of the West Bank this morning are showing really appalling levels
of damage and destruction. Ash cloaked, burnt out cars, blackened homes. And
this was after a rampage by Israeli settlers who were torching buildings and
cars and left at least one man dead. He was shot, another man with a fractured
skull, it seems, from a rock that was thrown at him. Now this mob rampage by
Israeli settlers had followed the shooting dead of two Israeli settlers in a car
in Huara earlier in the day, two young men in their 20s shot dead there. And it
had been after that event that surrounding settlements where very ideological
settlers live, most or many of them armed, had said that they would carry out a
march to avenge their deaths. So this march had taken place. Now one significant
issue is about what protection or otherwise these Palestinian civilians have,
because in that part of the West Bank they don't have their own security forces.
The only people they can call are the Israeli army and the Israeli police. Now
one Israeli journalist was following in the footsteps of the settler that it
seemed that jeeps were not acting, that the Israeli army and police were around,
but the sense was that the reaction or the attempt to protect the Palestinians
was extremely slow and seems to have been woefully lacking. This is the latest
in a picture that, as I said earlier, has been really grim, particularly since
the start of this year. How much of that is to do with the new Israeli
government coming to power? Well, there has been a continuity of violence really
that has ramped up since last spring. Now that's when we had a different Israeli
coalition of quite a different formation. I think what we've seen in the last
couple of months though are when the Israeli army has carried out search and
arrest raids to arrest Palestinian militants in the northern West Bank, in Jenin
and Nablus. We've seen an extremely high death toll, including of civilians. 10
people were killed in Jenin last month and then in Nablus just last week, 11
people killed, including civilians by Israeli security forces. So that has
really ramped up the sense of volatility, of tension. And then you have
Palestinian militant groups who said that there would be reprisal. We had the
deaths yesterday of those two Israeli settlers and now further violence from
Israeli settlers. And all of this when a summit was taking place in Jordan, led
by or brokered by the US, between the Israelis and Palestinians, that's really
significant. We haven't really had talks like that at that level of contact for
many, many years. That was calling for calm and for de-escalation and to end
unilateral measures. And as that was happening, we saw this huge upsurge of
violence in the West Bank. Tom Bateman in Jerusalem. Thank you. It is 28 minutes
past eight. We have a word now from our friends at Comet Relief. This year, as
part of Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How about Pat
Butch's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe a House of
Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's 10 score paddle from Strictly?
Not that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items that could be
yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone! To enter, find out more
or donate to Comet Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose Day. We'll
find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to
enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th of March 2023. Good
luck. To the weather, largely cloudy today, few light showers in the east,
brighter in the northwest. And to something that is coming up in the next hour.
One of the things he most famously said was, I wanted to show the world that
homosexuals aren't cowards and can be as brave as anyone, which seems to us
obvious, but back then wasn't obvious at all. Stephen Fry will be telling us
about the film he's made about the forgotten heroes of the Dutch resistance. But
now let's turn to Vijay Alis with the news. The Prime Minister will meet the
President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire this
afternoon to try to finalise a deal to ease friction around post-Brexit trade in
Northern Ireland. If an agreement is reached, it will be announced at a joint
news conference after the Cabinet has been updated. If a deal fails to get the
backing of the Democratic Unionists, it could mean the party continues to block
the restoration of devolved government in Northern Ireland. The collapsed
battery maker, British Volt, which went into administration last month, has been
bought by an Australian company. The new owners will keep the British Volt brand
name, but will focus initially on batteries for energy storage rather than
electric vehicles. Safety investigators have warned of the significant stress on
doctors, ambulance dispatchers and other NHS staff in England, caused by long
delays in emergency care. They said many staff interviewed broke down in tears
when they were asked about their working environment. NHS England says it takes
staff wellbeing very seriously, while the government said the number of
ambulances and hospital beds was being increased. The energy regulator Ofgem
will give its latest decision on the quarterly price cap for England, Wales and
Scotland later this morning. Although domestic gas and electricity bills are
protected by a government guarantee, Ofgem's announcement is likely to reopen
debate about the level of support being offered. The government is creating
Jobcentre League tables, with staff being given cash bonuses for getting people
off benefits and into work. Sixty jobcentres where the schemes being piloted are
to be ranked by performance, with staff in the leading ones being awarded £250
each. Anyone under 18 will no longer be able to get married in England and
Wales. The previous legal age was 16. The change is designed to protect
vulnerable children. Under the new rules, adults who allow or arrange the
marriage of anyone under 18 could face up to seven years in jail and a fine.
Thanks, Vijay. 25 to eight now. The wooden boat that fell apart at sea as it
made its way towards Italy, drowning 60 people, including 12 children. One of
them was a baby. The boat was travelling not from Libya, as is often the case,
but from Turkey. And many of those on board were from Afghanistan. Some managed
to swim to shore, but bodies have been washing up on beaches in Calabria. Jan
Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council, the aid
organisation is with us, as is Emanuele Nannini, who's on board the vessel Life
Support, elsewhere in the Mediterranean, not off the coast of Calabria, but off
the coast of Sicily, I believe. Emanuele, tell us, first of all, was there an
effort to help this boat at sea? So this particular route is not usually covered
by the civil fleet, the search and rescue vessel run by NGO, but usually more by
the Italian coast guard. There was an effort, the authorities say that the front
deck's flight spotted the case, and some coast guard vessel tried to reach it,
but due to bad weather condition, they could not. But I think it's still too
early to define what really happened. Is it unusual for boats to approach
Calabria from Turkey? Not unusual, it's definitely a less busy route compared to
the North African one, but it's a route that exists since years, and due to the
policy in the Greek migration scheme, these ships now try to reach Calabria
instead of stopping in Greece. So this policy makes the route journey much more
dangerous and long. And isn't there also supposed to be a Turkey-EU deal that
stops people leaving the shores of Turkey in this way? So that's the problem.
The deal is made to have repatriation from Greece to Turkey. So that's why the
migrants try to skip and jump over the Greek island and come directly to Italy,
since the deal is not including migrants repatriating from Italy to Turkey. So
these exact policies making the journey more dangerous and more difficult.
Understood. Jan Egeland, what do you think we should take away from this
terrible tragedy at sea? We should take away that Europe is having an hemorrhage
of human lives at our doorstep, and we're doing very little to stop it. And
there are two ways to stop it. One is to provide hope for these desperate
people, many of them are children, where they are. There is too little
investment in education and livelihoods, in protection for civilians. And then
there should be legal pathways to get to Europe. It's desperation that are
pushing people into the Mediterranean, where they are dying in the thousands.
Isn't now that this route, this business is well established, isn't it hard to
imagine that even if we have more of those two different things that you are
calling for, that we will really see any significant change in the numbers of
people willing to do this? No, I think the reason we have it now, the last 10
years, the 20,000 dead in the Mediterranean is that the desperation is
increasing and the gap between our welfare protection, peace, hope, and their
desperation is, the gap is widening. It's not a policing, more police or sniffer
dogs or barbed wire or chasing smugglers. There will be more and more people
that are willing to die. Particularly more people from Afghanistan, because it
does seem a lot of those who are on board this boat and including many of those
who died were Afghans. And I know you've recently been there trying to get the
Taliban to change their mind on some of the recent positions they've taken.
Indeed, I mean, it is unbelievable the free fall for the civilian population in
Afghanistan, 40 million people left behind by the NATO countries when they went
for the door one and a half years ago. There is little engagement with the de
facto authorities, which are the Taliban. There is too little humanitarian and
developmental investment and young people are leaving in the droves and they
have one idea. It's to get something out of my life and it's not here in
Afghanistan. So that's why they are coming towards us and they will continue
coming towards us until it gets better in Afghanistan. And do you think,
Emanuele, that they will increasingly use this particular route, the Turkey-
Italy route, bypassing Greece for the reason that you set out, in increasing
numbers despite this tragedy? I think it's difficult to say, but historical
immigration is a very fluid and dynamic process. So definitely they will find a
way and they will find a way that allow them to arrive where they are dreaming
to arrive. The Libya route is becoming more difficult for several reasons, for
the situation in Libya. So probably what is called the Eastern route might be
more used, but it's more expensive as far as we know for migrants. So we might
have some still some balance on the Libyan way. Emanuele Nannini and Jan
Egeland, thank you both. The time, 19 minutes to eight. Look at the papers and
some of the inside pages reporting that Camilla may officially be known as
Queen, as the Times puts it. Buckingham Palace considering officially describing
Camilla as Queen rather than Queen Consort after the King's coronation in May.
The landmark change, the Times says, could be reflected on the court circular,
the official register of royal engagements and would take effect after King
Charles is crowned as monarch. In the Financial Times, there's a long piece
about how pharmaceutical companies are firing the opening shots in a battle with
the NHS over a de facto drugs tax they pay the government. They are warning that
Britain could miss out on £6 billion of research and development. The trade body
for leading drug makers says the excessive levy paid by them meant that Britain
stood to lose more than £5 billion in research and development investment over
the next five years. It is a voluntary scheme for branded medicines pricing and
access to the UK in agreement between the Department of Health and the
pharmaceutical industry. And it means that companies must pay a percentage of
their British revenues to the government if the NHS drugs bill rises by more
than 2% annually. But drug makers strongly object that this year they'll be
paying 26.5% of their UK sales to the government. And they say Britain has one
of the most punitive clawback regimes in the world. Ian Birrell in the eye has a
good old go at Tony Blair. The former Prime Minister dredged up, he says, the
memory that after Putin had given up on reform, he told the Russian president
that it was Kiev's decision whether to join NATO. He was writing an article
recently in the Daily Telegraph entitled, One thing is clear, Vladimir Putin
cannot be allowed to win. Speaking rightly on that regard, says Ian Birrell, but
past the sick bag, he says, for this was an intervention of puke-inducing
hypocrisy. There's a politician who demonstrates the duplicity of some
democratic leaders in effectively aiding and abetting Putin's war crimes, as he
puts it, brushing aside Moscow's atrocities, parroting Kremlin propaganda, even
after the annexation of Crimea, and of course, playing a central role in the
Iraq war. And the Times reports on how there is some perhaps surprising
legitimacy for CHAT-GPT from International Baccalaureate IB, that's the global
qualification body for that particular type of exam, which has said that
children will be allowed to quote from work generated by the AI chatbot in their
essays as long as they give it credit and don't plagiarise. The parallel they're
drawing is just as we've all learned to use calculators, spell checkers and
translation apps. The same principle should be applied to this. We should not
think of this extraordinary new technology as a threat. We must accept that it's
going to become part of our everyday lives. 16 minutes to eight is the time. The
northern lights, the wonderful green and sometimes crimson lighting up of the
sky. You get to see it in Shetland, don't you, sometimes. But this year there's
a good view from as far south as Somerset and a very good view from parts of
Scotland where you don't normally see it either. Mark Carrington could see the
lights last night from his home in Applecross. Really, really bright. It just
seemed to go on all night. Your surroundings don't even bother you. It was minus
one outside and it was just absolutely stunning. I could have stood there all
night. Reds, greens dancing in the sky. I've never seen them so bright ever in
my life. The colours, the magic, the darkness. It was just, yeah, special. I've
never seen anything like the way I've seen them tonight. I just walked out my
driveway and even with all the light pollution around, I was able to see the
incredible green colours just dancing in the sky just with my naked eye. And
after five or ten minutes, you could see the red as well. And it's a proper
pleasure to see them tonight. That was Gilbert Pellegrom at the end there,
living in Elgin, Moray. Let us turn to Professor Jim Wild, space scientist at
Lancaster University. Good morning to you, Professor. Morning. What's going on?
Well, what happened last night was a large amount of material that had been
blown off the surface of the sun on Friday had travelled through space, crossing
150 million kilometres of space, and it arrived at the Earth. And when this
material, this sort of packet of the solar atmosphere, arrived at the Earth, it
interacted with the Earth's own magnetic fields. And basically, it enabled the
Earth's magnetic field to start accelerating material from the space environment
around us into the upper atmosphere. So electrically charged particles like
electrons raining down into the upper atmosphere, causing the sky to glow. And
you'd normally see that at the edge of the Arctic Circle. That's where you
expect to see the Northern Lights sort of many nights of the year. But because
this large amount of material is shot across space, it's energised the whole of
the Northern Lights system, and they expanded a bit further south. So instead of
being sat somewhere off the coast of Scandinavia, the Northern Lights moved
further south and were probably somewhere just off the north coast of Scotland,
somewhere around there. Very annoying if you pay for a trip to somewhere north
to go and see them, and then you find you can see them at Quantox even. That's
right. I mean, I was looking at social media. I mean, we talk a lot about how
toxic social media can be. On occasions like this, social media is your friend.
And you can look out, and I was looking at the Aurora hashtag last night, and I
could see the Northern Lights photos coming in from across Scotland, in Northern
Ireland, North Wales. And then there were some fantastic pictures. There was a
great one just down the road from me on the Lancashire coast, on the Fylde
coast. I could see some from Harrogate. And then they started popping in from
Essex, Somerset, and Kent. So really, really far south last night. So that's
quite unusual. And a brief thought tonight as well? Well, actually, normally on
this occasion, I say we've probably missed it. But actually, there was a pair of
these explosions of solar material. One left the sun on Friday, one left on
Saturday. And the one that left on Saturday is still heading towards us. So if
it arrives sometime this afternoon, early evening, then perhaps again tonight,
we'll have to wait and see. But if you've got a view of the dark northern sky,
I'd get out and have a look. Professor Jim Wild, thank you. Let's turn to
Thought for the Day. And our speaker this morning is the Right Reverend Dr David
Walker, Bishop of Manchester. Morning, Bishop. Good morning. Turnip or tomato?
Which will grace your lunchtime today? Those images of empty supermarket
shelves, bereft of their expected colourful abundance, have gone viral over
these last few days. Meanwhile, when a senior government minister extolled as an
acceptable alternative, the virtues of the humble British root vegetable, public
reaction was both immediate and intense. I'm personally fond of turnips. With a
little protein, and alongside their country cousins, the carrot, parsnip and
swede, they can form the basis of many a warming winter stew. Yet the turnip
suffers from an image problem. Long used as a term of insult, it hit the
headlines in 1992, when the England men's football team crashed out of the
European Championships, in a result immortalised by one national newspaper with
the headline, Swedes 2, Turnips 1, alongside a picture of the vegetable with the
face of the England team manager superimposed. In at least one nation of the
United Kingdom, the turnip remains, 30 years on, a symbol of failure. When we're
told to eat turnips, however on is the intention. What some of us hear is not
that there's been a failure in supermarket sourcing and distribution, or the
smooth flow of imports from the European mainland, but that we ourselves are
failures. Last week my wife and I enjoyed our Shrove Tuesday pancakes.
Traditionally consumed as a way of eating up meat-based fats and other animal
products, they remain a tangible and tasty symbol of the start of Lent. It's a
time when Christians are encouraged to reflect upon their own failures and
weaknesses. Our personal shortcomings may not be plastered over newspaper-backed
pages, nor accompanied by vicious vegetable-based insults, but Christians
believe none of them are hidden from the eyes of God. Yet it's also a season
when our faith directs us towards one of the greatest symbols of failure of all,
the cross on which Jesus was executed, and through which we believe our sins are
forgiven. That too will be symbolised in My Family Buy Food, as we add hot cross
buns to our weekly supermarket delivery. In turn it will lead to Easter,
bringing the chocolate eggs our grandchildren eagerly await, symbols of the new
life Christians find in the rising of Jesus from the dead. Food can stand for
victory just as much as failure. Hence the centrality of food, to feasts and
fasts, to rites and rituals across many religions. It stands as a bulwark
against any separation of body and soul. We are physical beings, and yet at the
same time our food is not simply to keep us alive. It can be deeply spiritually
symbolic. So whatever this week throws at you, be it triumph or disaster,
tomatoes or turnips, bon appétit. Dr David Walker, Bishop of Manchester, with
Thought for the Day at 10 to 8. Here's what the Independent Institute for
Government says about Labour's plan for growth. The plan, much heralded by Keir
Starmer a few days ago, it is, they say, extremely ambitious, slightly ill-
defined. It implies doing something in our economy that the UK has rarely
achieved, if ever, in the past four decades. Well, there is more detail coming
today from the Labour leader himself, who's holding a round table with business
leaders, and from Rachel Reeves, the Shadow Chancellor, who joins us now. Good
morning to you. Good morning. Can I put to you some specifics? Keir Starmer
today is going to mention planning, and you've mentioned planning before,
speeding up the planning rules, allowing things to happen that can't happen at
the moment. What in detail will that mean? Will it, for instance, mean that when
a company wants to open lab space or warehouse space, it will be much easier for
them to overrule those local objectors who are trying to stop them? Let me give
you a couple of examples. First of all, let's take onshore wind. There's been an
effective moratorium on onshore wind ever since the Conservatives came into
office, even though it's the cheapest form of electricity. And so we would get
rid of that moratorium. Second, take offshore wind. At the moment, it takes
around, well, more than 10 years often between the conception of a new offshore
wind farm and getting that new electricity onto the grid. I don't know any other
country where it takes that long. And we want to speed up that process of both
getting planning consent, but then also getting that grid connection so we can
boost our energy security, bring down prices and also bring to the UK the good
jobs in those green industries of the future. And of course, the people often
objecting to those grid connections and objecting in some cases to onshore wind
would in those circumstances be overruled. That's right, is it? Well, often it's
not objections. Often it's infrastructure problems, it's inertia in the
planning. But it often is objections, isn't it? And where there are objections,
you're just making it clear this morning, those objections would be overruled.
For instance, again, on warehouse space and on lab space around Oxford and
Cambridge, there are local objections. You would overrule them, would you? We
want to get things done quicker and we want to reduce some of those barriers in
the system. Now, if you take power, for example, one thing that I'm really keen
to look at is how if you host infrastructure in your community, onshore wind,
for example, you may be able to benefit from cheaper electricity because you're
hosting key, crucial national infrastructure. So I think there's a way that
these things can be done that gets that local consent and approval, but whilst
also making sure we crack on in delivering the infrastructure that we need.
Would you, for instance, in the south around Oxford and Cambridge, where there's
a huge demand for housing and there's a huge demand for space as well, lab
space, warehouse space, are you saying there will be a splurge, a great amount
of building of those things if Labour's elected? We want to get the shovels in
the ground, but you've spoken about Oxford and Cambridge in the south of
England. As part of our ambition, the mission that we're setting out today is to
have that highest sustained growth in the G7, but with good jobs and
productivity growth in all parts of the country. Yes, but what a lot of
companies know, but you will know a lot of companies, I'm going to say a lot of
companies, a lot of high tech companies in particular, a lot of people in the
chemicals industry, a lot of people saying we need that lab space where it's
useful to us around Oxford and Cambridge. So I'm just wondering whether they're
going to get what they want. Well, this is just not about, not just about Oxford
and Cambridge. This is about good jobs and productivity in all parts of the
country. You know, frankly, if you could get growth by just concentrating on a
few industries in a few parts of the country, we would have got there by now. So
will they get their labs or not? We need all parts of the country. We want
growth in Oxford and Cambridge, but let's not obsess with Oxford and Cambridge.
I represent Leeds in Yorkshire. I wasn't obsessing, I was just asking about it.
Well, no, I think it is too narrow a conception with all respect, Justin, of how
you get growth, because if it's growth that's just in some parts of the country,
that vast swathes of the country don't benefit from, that's not good enough. And
actually the opportunities in green hydrogen, green steel, carbon capture and
storage, those jobs and those opportunities are going to be felt in former
industrialised parts of the country and coastal communities that desperately
need those jobs and investment. So we have specifically said in our mission,
good jobs and productivity growth in all parts of the country, because we
haven't experienced that in the last decade or so. You want to improve
relationship with the EU, and that plainly would lead to higher economic growth
than we have at the moment. Most economists would agree with that. But how? In
what terms? Well, it's clear that the deal that the government secured isn't
good enough. And we're seeing that today play out with the Northern Ireland
protocol. But there are plenty of other ways in which the deal is not working
well enough for British jobs. What would you do then? Well, for example, we've
said that we want a veterinary agreement. New Zealand has a veterinary agreement
with the European Union and they're on the other side of the world and don't
have the same standards that we have. That would improve the flows of food
products in particular. And obviously, we've got shortages on our shelves at the
moment. But also, we are the second biggest exporter of services anywhere in the
world. And our services sector was short changed during the Brexit negotiations.
One thing we would look to achieve is the mutual recognition of professional
qualifications. So our professionals in industries from law to accountancy to
architecture can practice throughout the European Union. And we want to help our
cultural industries, a great British success story, by reducing some of the
bureaucracy that is now needed, that wasn't needed before to tour around the
European Union. Those are some of the practical things that we would look to
achieve, as well as ensuring Britain's full participation in the Horizon
Research Programme to help our fantastic innovators and universities. But not
membership of the single market, Keir Starmer's made that clear. But what hasn't
been made clear is why not? Is that a political decision because it's just not
achievable in the current political context? Or do you genuinely believe that it
wouldn't make us better off? I'd say two things. First of all, people did vote
almost seven years ago now to leave the European Union and that ship has now
sailed, that is now a settled position. But not the single market? Well, look, I
think that if you're going to leave the European Union, the single market and
the customs union free movement are integral to those. But that's not what Keir
Starmer used to say. He used to say we should remain members of the single
market and the customs union and that we could do having left the EU. Well,
look, I think that ship has sailed now. But the second thing that businesses say
to us is that they want certainty. No business I speak to says that they want to
reopen the whole negotiations and have years more of uncertainty. There are
things that we could do practically to get growth going now that doesn't involve
reopening the single market and customs union, but does mean helping British
businesses to be able to trade more easily with our nearest neighbours and
trading partners. And that's why I set out practical things that could make a
difference within the first term of a Labour government to get our economy
growing, to secure those good jobs and productivity growth in all parts of the
country, working in partnership with business to achieve just that. What about a
practical thing like this, the shortage occupation list, this list that brings
in, helps firms fill job vacancies from Europe when they can't be recruited
locally. The British retail consortium say have a bigger list, jobs at all skill
levels. Is that something you'd look at? The most important thing in terms of
increasing the number of people available for work is to deal with the fact that
more than half a million people have left the labour market here in Britain
since the pandemic. We've got a lot of people who are waiting for operations
with mental health problems who have left the labour market who aren't getting
the support through our NHS that they need. Seven million people on the waiting
list. Let's get them into work before we look at just bringing in more workers.
Voters have projected that is not the answer. We've overrun our allotted time.
So Rachel Reeves, thank you very much. Yes, let's get to Ben, otherwise he gets
angry. Well, I've got 54 seconds. That's just about enough because high pressure
is in charge of the scene this week. That means there's going to be a lot of dry
weather around. There'll be some spells of sunshine, some patchy cloud as well,
and just one or two showers. We have actually got some showers out there right
now across parts of England and Wales. In fact, a little bit of sleet and snow
in some of those showers across southern parts of England into parts of Wales as
well. The showers will continue on and off through the day, but for the most
part, it's largely dry, a mix of patchy cloud and sunny spells. Northern
Ireland, southern and eastern Scotland, again, some quite large areas of cloud
at times, some spells of sunshine. It should be mainly dry here. Northern and
north-western parts of Scotland, that's where we're going to see some of the
best of the sunshine today. Temperatures about where they should be for the time
of year, six to nine degrees. Overnight, some areas of cloud, some clear spells,
a touch of frost for some. And that is your forecast. Perfectly formed, Ben.
Thank you very much. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick
Fletcher.