TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight This is Charles Carroll President Biden has promised to
back Ukraine for as long as it takes on a surprise visit to Kiev. Lancashire
police have confirmed that the body found in a river is that of Nikola Buly, who
went missing more than three weeks ago. An inquest jury has accused police of a
catastrophic failure to protect the five people shot dead in Plymouth by a man
who was allowed to keep a shotgun. Doctors have voted to go on strike in England
in a dispute about pay. Anglican leaders representing three-quarters of the
global faithful say they are splitting from the Church of England because of its
decision to bless same-sex partnerships. Also tonight, a potential breakthrough
in the treatment of stroke patients, and why fruit and veg are missing from
supermarket shelves. President Biden has pledged his unwavering support for
Ukraine on a surprise visit to Kiev just days before the anniversary of Russia's
invasion. He arrived in the capital this morning after a ten-hour train journey
from Poland. President Zelensky then accompanied him on a walk through the
city's streets before a joint press conference, where Mr Biden announced more
military, political and financial support for Ukraine and tougher sanctions
against Moscow. Russia's former president, Dmitry Medvedev, said that the visit
could only have happened because his country provided safety guarantees to
President Biden. Our international editor Jeremy Bowen has sent this report from
Kiev. The sirens wailed as the two presidents walked out into Kiev's bright
winter sun under the blue walls and golden domes of St Michael's Church. The
timing felt too precise for the alarm to be a coincidence, though there was some
Russian air activity far away in Belarus. The two men stayed in the open air to
lay wreaths at Ukraine's memorial for war dead. A point was being made. Ukraine
was still under attack, and the leader of the world's most powerful country, the
United States, had come to an active war zone to show support for his ally,
President Volodymyr Zelensky. President Biden arrived here by train, like all
the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans warned the Russians at the
weekend that the visit was happening, but tried to keep it secret at home.
Before they were driven to St Michael's, President Zelensky welcomed his guest
at a brief ceremony at his official residence. Thank you very much for coming,
Mr President. It's a huge moment for supporting Ukraine. And what can I say? He
said President Biden was visiting at the most difficult time for Ukraine.
President Biden responded with strong words of support. You and all Ukrainians
remind the world every single day what the meaning of the word courage is.
Remind us that freedom is priceless. It's worth fighting for, for as long as it
takes. And that's how long we're going to be with you, Mr President, for as long
as it takes. With the spring fighting season in sight, the war is delicately
balanced. In eastern Ukraine, Russia has started a new offensive, and President
Vladimir Putin is due to make his own big speech about the war tomorrow. Russia
has mobilised several hundred thousand new conscripts, and despite heavy
casualties and huge losses of equipment, the Russian war effort grinds on. The
hard reality of Russian aggression has forced NATO leaders, especially Joe
Biden, to make some tough decisions. The biggest so far might come soon. Ukraine
is pushing the Americans and other Western allies for more powerful weapons,
including modern warplanes, as well as continuing shipments to replace the huge
amounts of shells and rockets it's expended. It wants to win, to drive Russia
out, not just hold its own in a long war of attrition. The Ukrainians want a
decisive upgrade as soon as possible. Time might not be their friend. President
Putin seems to believe that Russia can tough it out longer than the West.
President Zelensky wants to be able to act before voices in NATO calling for
negotiation and a peace deal that hands Russia territory get any louder. As
President Biden visited Kiev, fierce fighting was continuing on the front lines
in the east of Ukraine. Russian forces are stepping up their assault on Bakhmut,
which they've been trying to capture for more than six months and where they've
made advances in recent days. Our senior international correspondent, Orla
Girin, sent this report from the outskirts of the city. The battle for Bakhmut
is now at close quarters, inside the city and on the outskirts. Ukrainian troops
are still defending every inch, but the enemy is closing in. It's hellish,
according to President Zelensky, who says Bakhmut must be defended, but not at
any cost. We joined a Ukrainian mortar team on the outskirts, keeping the
Russians at bay on their section of the front line. A soldier called Victor
tells us Russia will always be a problem. He says the troops are fighting, so
their children won't have to. My eldest son will have to finish what we don't,
he says. I don't want this. None of the soldiers who have sons and daughters
want this. We want to end the war here and now. The Ukrainian troops are still
defending the outskirts of Bakhmut. We want to end the war here and now. But
with Russian forces gaining more ground, Ukraine may have to give up the fight
in Bakhmut, to save lives and resources for battles elsewhere. President Biden's
trip was cloaked in secrecy. Only a handful of his closest advisors in the US
knew it was happening. As our Washington correspondent Noumia Iqbal explains.
For weeks, White House officials had been saying a trip to Kyiv was not on the
cards. President Biden's security advisor even denied the possibility over the
weekend. But there had always been an expectation he would make an appearance.
He and his Democratic Party want this to be seen as a great presidential moment
of global leadership and strength. His visit does not change the US's policy of
supporting Ukraine's freedom, but does demonstrate his commitment to see that
policy succeed. It's a trip that sends a strong message to Moscow, but also to
China, which has been accused of supporting Putin. Mr Biden's words that the
United States will stand with Ukraine for as long as it takes continue to be
fully in line with public opinion here. But there is some resistance among
Republican politicians who are increasingly opposing continued aid to Ukraine.
Our World Affairs Editor John Simpson is in Kyiv. He assesses the timing of Mr
Biden's visit and the message it sends to Moscow. As a move on the geopolitical
chessboard, the visit comes at a highly critical moment. Vladimir Putin is to
make a major statement tomorrow about the future of the war. And China's top
diplomat has just arrived in Moscow at a time when the Americans are warning
that China's thinking of supplying Russia with weapons. For his part, Ukraine's
President Zelensky is in an optimistic mood. He told me the other day that
Ukraine just had to hold on until it could launch its own counter-offensive. But
the EU's Foreign Affairs Chief Josep Borrell gave a stark warning yesterday that
unless Europe supplied Ukraine with more weapons, the war would be lost. So
President Biden's appearance in Kyiv couldn't have happened at a more dramatic
time. It was a rallying cry to the West, a warning to Russia and China, and
above all, a binding assurance to Ukraine that the US wouldn't let it be
defeated. Diplomats with long memories are already comparing it to President
Kennedy's speech at the Berlin Wall in 1961. Liz Truss and Boris Johnson have
added to the pressure on Rishi Sunak to help Ukraine by sending fighter jets.
The two conservative former Prime Ministers made the plea as they spoke at
length in the House of Commons during a general debate on Ukraine. It was Ms
Truss's first contribution as a backbench MP since 2012 when she became a
minister. Lancashire police have confirmed that a body found on a stretch of the
River Wyre yesterday is that of Nicola Bully. The 45-year-old went missing more
than three weeks ago while walking her dog in the village of St Michael's-on-
Wyre. In a statement, Ms Bully's family said they would never be able to
comprehend what she had gone through in her final moments. Nick Garnett reports
from Preston. The news nobody wanted to hear. The body found in the River Wyre,
less than a mile from where she was last seen, was Nicola Bully. Lancashire
Police's Assistant Chief Constable Peter Lawson spoke to reporters outside the
force's headquarters in Preston. Sadly, we are now able to confirm that
yesterday we recovered Nicola Bully from the River Wyre. Nicola's family have
been informed and are of course devastated. Our thoughts are with them at this
time as well as with all her loved ones and the wider community. Detective
Superintendent Pauline Stables read a statement on behalf of Ms Bully's partner,
Paul Ansell, and their daughters. We will never be able to comprehend what Nicky
had gone through in her last moments and that will never leave us. We will never
forget Nicky. How could we? She was the centre of our world. She was the one who
made our lives so special and nothing will cast a shadow over that. Last week,
police revealed that Klasmers Bully is a high-risk missing person. They
highlighted alcohol as a factor as well as medical information about her. That
information was released with the knowledge of the family and in an effort to
explain the specific vulnerabilities police were referring to. But the actions
were condemned as victim-blaming. An internal investigation into the decision is
being carried out. The Home Secretary, Soheila Breverman, raised concerns with
the Chief Constable about the release of those details. Today she said she
hadn't been wholly satisfied by his reply. Lancashire Police have said
throughout they had two priorities for this investigation, to provide answers
for the family of Nicola Bully and to bring her home to her loved ones. The
family have asked for their privacy to be respected. An inquest jury has said
there was a catastrophic failure in the firearms licensing unit at Devon and
Cornwall Police before the gunman, Jake Davison, unlawfully killed four adults
and a child in Plymouth in August 2021. Davison, who was 22, shot them with a
legally-owned gun in the Keom area of the city before killing himself. The
families of the victims said today that the decision to allow him to own a
shotgun, despite a history of mental health issues and violence, meant that he
had been granted a licence to kill. Our West of England correspondent Jenny
Kumar reports from the inquest. Jake Davison killed his mother at their home on
August 12, 2021, after a row. He went on to fatally shoot four people at random,
including a three-year-old girl. The jury concluded that there were serious
failings by police and they should not have granted the gunman a licence in 2018
because of a lack of medical information, his self-declared autism and his
history of violence. They also found there was an unsafe culture in the firearms
licensing unit and staff weren't adequately trained. A decision to return the
gun and licence after police removed it in 2020 because Davison had assaulted
two children was described as fundamentally flawed. The fatal shootings happened
weeks after police gave the gun back in July 2021. Patrick Maguire, the
solicitor representing the families, gave a statement outside court. The system
has hopelessly failed us. In particular, the Devon and Cornwall police force has
failed us. They have failed to protect our loved ones. Warning signs were
ignored and a licence to kill was granted. The chief constable of Devon and
Cornwall police, Will Kerr, said lessons will be learned. On behalf of Devon and
Cornwall police, I am deeply sorry for the loss of those families and for the
failings in my force that led to Jake Davison having a gun where he shouldn't
have. The families of those who died say they want to see seismic changes in the
licensing system so no one else has to endure the torment they have. Junior
doctors in England have voted overwhelmingly to go on strike over pay. The
British Medical Association, the union that represents them, says almost
everyone who cast a ballot agreed to industrial action. The union is now
planning a three-day walkout next month. The health secretary, Steve Barclay,
said the announcement, on the day thousands of ambulance staff went on strike
again in England and Wales, was deeply disappointing. Here's our health
correspondent, Sophie Hutchinson. This is a significant escalation in the
industrial action in the NHS. So-called junior doctors make up just over 40% of
all doctors in England, in fact most medics below the level of consultant.
47,000 were balloted to strike and the majority agreed. Their union, the British
Medical Association, is now planning a three-day walkout, the longest single
strike in their history. It's likely to hit the NHS hard, heaping pressure on
the government. The doctors now join nurses who've staged six individual strikes
and ambulance crews who walked out again today in some parts of England and
Wales. All are calling for above inflation pay increases. The doctors say they
want to restore pay in real terms to 2008 levels, which would mean a 26% pay
rise. The BMA has accused the government of recklessness, saying ministers have
refused to enter meaningful negotiations. The government says it's met the BMA
to discuss pay and conditions, but that pay in line with inflation is
unaffordable and that the industrial action will be a more cancelled appointment
for patients. A group of conservative Anglican church leaders from around the
world have said that they will refuse to recognise the Archbishop of Canterbury
as the head of the Global Anglican Communion. The announcement follows the
Church of England's decision to allow prayers of blessing for same-sex couples.
Harry Farley reports. This is the first time that the Archbishop of Canterbury's
leadership has been rejected by such a large group of senior Anglicans. The
statement is signed by the heads of 10 out of 42 provinces in the worldwide
Anglican Communion. They say they no longer consider Justin Welby to be leader
of the Global Communion and they have disqualified the Church of England from
being their mother church. Archbishop Welby said earlier this month he would not
cling to his role as head of the Communion after he led the Church of England to
allowing prayers of blessing for same-sex couples. A statement from Lambeth
Palace said any formal change would need to be agreed by the other bodies that
lead the Communion. Unlike the Catholic Church, as head of the Communion, Justin
Welby doesn't have any formal authority over other Anglicans around the world.
So this rejection by conservative archbishops is largely symbolic of the
divisions that already exist within the Global Anglican Church. Two further
earthquakes have hit southeastern Turkey near the border with Syria. Officials
said the larger of the tremors near the city of Antakya had a magnitude of 6.4.
At least three people were killed and more than 200 injured. The earthquakes
earlier this month killed more than 46,000 people. Reporting from Antakya, our
correspondent Laura Bicker. There is fear, some panic and the small aftershocks
keep coming. Lines of ambulances and rescue crews are trying to get to some of
the worst affected areas where the walls of badly damaged buildings have
collapsed. A number of structures that were left standing after the tremor on
February the 6th have now crumbled, including a bridge. The Hatay mayor has said
that there are people trapped under the rubble. Many cracks in roads have become
deep scars, making it more difficult for the emergency services to get where
they may be needed. Researchers in the United States say they've partially
restored movement in the arms and hands of two people who've had a stroke. One
volunteer was able to cut and eat a steak by herself for the first time in nine
years. However, more research is still needed to develop the technology and to
determine exactly who will benefit. Here's our health and science correspondent,
James Gallagher. Strokes disrupt the blood supply in the brain and lead to cells
dying. People can still have the desire and intent to move, but the damage means
the instructions from the brain can become so weak that nothing happens. Heather
Rendelick from Pittsburgh had a stroke when she was still in her 20s. She
learned how to walk again, but for nine years she was unable to open or close
her left hand. In the experiment, she had electrodes implanted in her neck to
stimulate and excite the nerves. Now they could respond to even the weak
instructions from the brain that were still getting through. As soon as the
device was switched on, Heather noticed the difference. So the very first day I
came into the lab and they turned the stimulation on for the first time, I
actually was able to open my hand for the first time in nine years and my family
and I were in tears of just overwhelming joy and happiness and it was an amazing
experience. Heather was one of two people to take part in the experiments which
have been published in Nature Medicine. Dr Marco Capagrosso from the University
of Pittsburgh says the results show there is the potential to have a huge impact
on people's lives. Our patients recover but they don't become completely normal,
so now they can actually use their arm even if not perfectly. That means that
they can recover a lot of independence and a lot of quality of life just because
they can use their arm and hand now, even though they probably cannot play the
piano. The team believe the field could advance quickly as they're using
technologies that are already approved for managing severe pain, but for now it
will take more clinical trials to work out who benefits and how to move the
equipment from the laboratory to the home. The British Retail Consortium has
explained why some fruit and vegetables have disappeared from supermarket
shelves. A spell of poor weather in parts of Europe and North Africa has
disrupted supplies, especially of tomatoes. Here's our business correspondent
Theo Leggett. Pictures of empty shelves in supermarkets and complaints about
shortages of some products, especially tomatoes, have been circulating on social
media for several days. Now the British Retail Consortium has admitted that
harvests have been affected by what it calls difficult weather conditions.
During the winter months a large proportion of the produce we consume is grown
in southern Spain and Morocco. Both regions have been affected by poor weather
in recent weeks, including storms and a cold snap. This has affected crop yields
and growing times, making it more difficult for wholesalers and retailers to get
hold of the supplies they need. Along with tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers are
understood to be in short supply. The BRC says supermarkets are working with
farmers to ensure customers are able to access a wide range of fresh produce.
Rishi Sunak has condemned the rewriting of Roald Dahl's books, saying that they
should not be airbrushed. Dahl's works, which include the BFG and Charlie and
the Chocolate Factory, have had references to things like characters' appearance
and weight changed. The Roald Dahl Story Company and the publisher Puffin Books
said that they had been updated to be more suitable for modern audiences. Our
media and arts correspondent David Silito takes up the story. Charlie and the
Chocolate Factory, a much-loved children's story. Millions have read about
Augustus Gloop, who was in the book a nine-year-old boy who was so enormously
fat he looked as though he'd been blown up with a powerful pump. However, in the
latest version he's so enormous he looked as though he'd been blown up with a
powerful pump. The word fat has gone. In Fantastic Mr Fox, the tractor's colour
black has been removed. They're now just murderous, brutal-looking monsters. And
these are just a few of the changes that have been made to Roald Dahl's books to
make them less judgemental. The author Salman Rushdie says it's absurd
censorship, a view shared by the philosopher Kathleen Stock. We don't seem to
think children can cope with words like fat anymore. We need to teach them the
words don't have to hurt them rather than telling them that they do hurt them
and we're going to protect them from them. The Roald Dahl Story Company said
today it's not unusual to review the language of books and said they had
maintained the irreverence and sharp-edged spirit of the original text. This
isn't the first time children's writers have been updated. Roald Dahl did it
himself. Corrine Lesnick-Obistein, Professor of Children's Literature from the
University of Reading. Even back in the 1970s there were already discussions
around his texts and for instance the Oompa Loompas which were originally from
Africa were already changed much earlier and I was interested that the
discussion has mostly been about the changes that are taking place currently.
And while this has provoked a degree of fury, it's also worth noting the Dahl
estate has just done a huge deal with Netflix. Adding a bit of extra sensitivity
to the books can be very helpful business-wise. Scotland's Finance Secretary
Kate Forbes has become the third candidate to take over the leadership of the
SNP after Nicola Sturgeon's surprise resignation announcement last week. Ms
Forbes joins Abzu Yousaf, the Health Secretary, and Ash Regan, a former
minister, in the contest which is likely to be dominated by the issue of
independence and a row over trans rights. Here's our Scotland correspondent
James Shaw. These three candidates represent a generational shift for the SNP.
All are under 50 and have forged their careers while the party has been in power
in Scotland. Kate Forbes, the 32-year-old Finance Secretary, is promising
competent leadership and a broadly based campaign to deliver independence. On
gender recognition reform, Ms Forbes, who's a member of the socially
conservative Free Church of Scotland, says she would not have voted for the bill
but isn't against reform as such. She says the concerns raised by the UK
government about its impact on equality law need to be dealt with. I have never
been averse to reform of the Gender Recognition Act and so I think we do need to
reform it to make it less onerous but in so doing we need to look at the
amendments that would make it compatible. The candidate most likely to be seen
as continuing Nicola Sturgeon's policy agenda is the Health Secretary Humza
Yousaf. Mr Yousaf, who's 37, has more ministerial experience but opposition
parties have criticised his handling of Covid recovery and winter pressures in
the health service. He said he is not as firmly committed as Nicola Sturgeon to
the idea of using the next general election as, in effect, a referendum on
independence. Mr Yousaf suggests the SNP needs to build support for independence
before seeking another vote. Let's be realistic, let's achieve this independence
by making sure it's a settled will of the Scottish people. If it becomes a
settled will then it becomes impossible for politicians in Westminster to
ignore. Ash Regan resigned as a minister in the Scottish Government because of
her opposition to gender recognition reform. She has suggested she supports the
idea of campaigning for the next election as an independence referendum. The
former head of the Government's National Food Strategy has welcomed plans by the
Mayor of London to give all primary school children free meals. Henry Dimbleby
said the scheme, which is funded for one year from September, should be extended
across England. Here's our education reporter, Vanessa Clark. It's estimated
there are 800,000 children across England living in poverty who don't receive
free school meals. Only children in their first three years of primary school,
as well as those in families earning less than £7,400 are eligible. But in
London, from September, every primary school child will receive a free school
meal, a plan which its Mayor, Sadiq Khan, says is vital. It leads to a situation
where you haven't got parents skipping meals so their kids can eat. Some of the
stories I've heard are heartbreaking, of children without a packed lunch not
receiving free school meals, pretending to have lunch, so they're not
embarrassed in front of other children. Mr Khan, who is up for re-election next
year, says he is able to fund this scheme because of higher than expected
council tax and business rate returns. But there are concerns that it's only for
a year and it excludes secondary school pupils. In Wales, all primary school
children will be given free lunches by 2024. The former head of the government's
national food strategy, Henry Dimbleby, told the Today programme the scheme
should be extended across England. There are a lot of people who just don't like
the idea of universal benefit, even though these are proven to work not just on
an ideological basis, but most for those children who are already on free school
meals. So it's ideology that's stopping this and what's great about this is that
it should make the case irrefutable to roll this out. The Department for
Education says more than a third of pupils in England now receive free school
meals. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day up 10 points at 8,014. On
Wall Street, the Dow Jones was closed today for a public holiday. On the
currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.3 and against the euro, sterling
is at 1.12.6, which makes a euro worth 88.8 pence. Now a first look at the
morning papers. A number of the front pages this morning feature Nicola Bulley
after police confirmed that her body has been found. The headlines in The Sun,
the Daily Express and the Daily Mail quote her family's statement saying that
she can rest now. According to The Times, Rishi Sunak has been told that some
members of his government are prepared to resign if a deal he's trying to reach
with the EU risks Northern Ireland's place within the UK. The paper says the
Prime Minister spent several hours yesterday meeting Eurosceptic Conservative
MPs trying to address their concerns about a new agreement on post-Brexit trade
arrangements. And several papers lead on President Biden's surprise trip to
Kiev. The Guardian's correspondent describes the visit as arguably the most
consequential made by a US president to a European country since the end of the
Cold War. A vast collection of precious artefacts stolen from Cambodia decades
ago have been returned to the country after surfacing in London. The crowns,
necklaces, amulets and other treasures from the Angkor period are many centuries
old. Asia-Pacific editor Celia Hatton has been following the story. Young
Cambodian archaeologists have been in London marvelling over the collection. The
77 items, including crowns, earrings and a large bowl that's thought to be solid
gold, can be matched to stone carvings on the walls of the Angkor Wat temple
complex that dates to the 12th century. They were in the possession of a known
antiquities smuggler, a British man named Douglas Latchford. He died while
awaiting trial in the US in 2020. The Latchford family had promised to return
his stolen collection to Cambodia, but the authorities didn't know what they'd
receive. As the head of the country's antiquities investigations team, Brad
Gordon, explains, they certainly didn't expect it to be abruptly handed over in
a car park last summer. There was a vehicle, the door was open and inside were
four boxes of Cambodia's greatest treasures. I felt like crying. I just thought,
wow, the crown jewels of the Cambodian ancient civilisation had ended up here in
the UK and it was all packed up in four boxes in the back of a car. The return
of the looted jewellery will be portrayed as a victory for Cambodia's
authoritarian leader, Khun Sen, ahead of parliamentary elections this summer.
Politics aside, this unexpected event is being celebrated in Phnom Penh. After
decades hidden in a London warehouse, these treasures will soon go on display,
ready to shine once again. Our main headline again. President Biden has promised
to back Ukraine for as long as it takes on a surprise visit to Kiev. BBC News.
Read tonight by Charles Carroll. Now for a look at the weather, here's Louise
Lear. Good morning. We started Monday on a windy note with gales across the
country but closed the afternoon on a mild note. In fact, temperatures across
East Anglia, 17 Celsius by the middle of the afternoon, way above where they
should be for this time of year. This mild theme is set to continue for today
but we will start to see and feel a change as we move into Wednesday. But let's
take a look at Tuesday's weather in a little more detail. A cloudy grey start
first thing in the morning. A very mild start. The cloud thick enough out
towards west-facing coast for a little bit of light patchy rain and drizzle. And
there'll be more nuisance rain moving across the Western Isles, drifting north
into the Northern Isles as we go through the morning. Not as windy here as
Monday but nevertheless still quite a blustery start to the day. We keep the
cloud for most of the afternoon but generally across the country there will be a
few holes in the cloud. Eastern Scotland, Eastern England favoured spots for
that to happen and therefore temperatures will start to climb 13 or 14 Celsius,
not out of the question. So not a bad day on Tuesday but the change will come
through Wednesday. There's a cold front that's going to sink its way south from
the northwest and it's going to introduce slightly cooler, fresher conditions as
it does so. So as we go into the early hours of Wednesday morning we'll start to
see some showery rain moving in from the northwest. That'll be across the
Midlands first thing in the morning, sinking southeast towards the London area
as we head towards the latter stages of Wednesday morning. Behind it though
quite a clearance, sunny spires coming through, a few scattered showers driven
on by some fresh northwesterly winds and some of the showers in the far north of
Scotland across the mountains could turn a little more wintry. So top
temperatures by the time we get to Wednesday of 6 to 8 Celsius in Scotland and
Northern Ireland, 8 to 11 Celsius across England and Wales. That's it, enjoy
your Tuesday. Now on Radio 4 it's time for our book of the week. Blake Ritson
reads Super Infinite, the transformations of John Donne by Katherine Rundell.
The power of John Donne's words nearly killed a man. It was the late spring of
1623 on the morning of Ascension Day and Donne had finally secured for himself
celebrity, fortune and a captive audience. He had been appointed the Dean of St
Paul's Cathedral two years before. He was 51, slim and amply bearded and his
preaching was famous across the whole of London. His congregation, merchants,
aristocrats, actors in elaborate ruffs, the whole sweep of the city came to his
sermons carrying paper and ink, wrote down his finest passages and took them
home to dissect and relish, pontificate and argue over. He often wept in the
pulpit, in joy and in sorrow, and his audience would weep with him. That morning
he was preaching at Lincoln's Inn. Word went out and people came flocking to
hear him speak. That morning too many people. There was a great concourse of
noblemen and gentlemen, and in among the extreme press and thronging as they
pushed closer to hear his words, men in the crowd were shoved to the ground and
trampled. Two or three were endangered and taken up dead for the time. There's
no record of Donne halting his sermon, so it's likely that he kept going in his
rich, authoritative voice as the bruised men were carried off and out of sight.
A quarter of a century before John Donne's death, the same man, then about
twenty-three years old, sat for a portrait. He wore a hat big enough to sail a
cat in, a big lace collar, an exquisite moustache. Here was the author of some
of the most celebratory and most lavishly sexed poetry ever written in English,
shared among an intimate and loyal group of hyper-educated friends. Licence my
roving hands, and let them go Behind, before, above, between, below. O my
America, my new-found land, My kingdom, Safeliest when with one man manned.
Sometime religious outsider and social disaster, sometime celebrity preacher and
establishment darling, John Donne was incapable of being just one thing. He
reimagined and reinvented himself over and over. He was a poet, lover, essayist,
lawyer, pirate, recusant, preacher, satirist, politician, courtier, chaplain to
the king, dean of the finest cathedral in London. There are few writers of his
time who faced greater horror. Donne's family history was one of blood and fire.
A great-uncle was arrested in an anti-Catholic raid and executed. Another was
locked inside the Tower of London, where, as a small schoolboy, Donne visited
him, venturing fearfully in among the men convicted to death. As a student, a
young priest whom his brother had tried to shelter was captured, hanged, drawn,
and quartered. His brother was taken by the priest-hunters at the same time,
tortured, and locked in a plague-ridden jail. At sea, Donne watched in horror
and fascination as dozens of sailors burnt to death. He married a young woman,
Anne Moore, clandestine, and hurried by love, and as a result found himself
thrown in prison. Once married, they were often poor and at the mercy of richer
friends and relations. He knew what it was to be jealous and thwarted and
bitter. He was wracked by life-threatening illnesses with dozens of bouts of
fever. At least three times it was believed he was dying. He lost, over the
course of his life, six children. He lost Anne at the age of thirty-three, her
body destroyed by bearing twelve children. He thought often of sin and miserable
failure and suicide. He believed us unique in our capacity to ruin ourselves. He
wrote, Nothing but man, of all envenomed things, Doth work upon itself with
inborn sting. He was a man who walked so often in darkness that it became for
him a daily commute. But there are also few writers of his time who insisted so
doggedly and determinedly on awe. His poetry is wildly delighted and captivated
by the body, though broken, though doomed to decay, and by the ways in which
thinking fast and hard were a sensual joy akin to sex. He kicked aside the
Petrarchan traditions of idealised, sanitised desire. He joyfully brought the
body to collide with the soul. In his sermons he reckoned us a disaster, but the
most spectacular disaster that has ever been. As he got older he grew richer,
harsher, sterner, and drier, yet he still asserted, It is too little to call man
a little world. Except God, man is a diminutive to nothing. Man consists of more
pieces, more parts, than the world doth, nay, than the world is. Joy and
squalor. Both Dunn's life and work tell that it is fundamentally impossible to
have one without taking up the other. Dunn saw, analysed, lived alongside, even
saluted corruption and death. He was often hopeless, often despairing, and yet
still he insisted at the very end, It is an astonishment to be alive, and it
behoves you to be astonished. You cannot claim a man is an alchemist and fail to
lay out the gold. This, then, is an undated poem, probably written for Anne
Moore, sometime in his twenties, known as Love's Growth. I scarce believe my
love to be so pure as I had thought it was, because it doth in dure vicissitude
and season as the grass. Methinks I lied all winter when I swore My love was
infinite, if spring make it more. But if this medicine, love, which cures all
sorrow With more, not only be no quintessence, but mixed of all stuffs, paining
soul or sense, And of the sun is working vigour borrow, Love's not so pure and
abstract as they used to say, Which have no mistress but their muse, But, as all
else being elemented too, Love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do. Read
the opening stanza, and all the oxygen in a five-mile radius rushes to greet
you. It's a poem with gleeful tricks and puns in it. But if this medicine, love,
which cures all sorrow with more, is a small, private gift for Anne Moore, No
matter how many millions of other people have read it since, the poem was
different for her. Love, he writes, is a mixture of elemental things, as all
else being elemented too, And so love sometimes would contemplate, sometimes do.
Dunn is more daring than he sounds. The thirteenth-century theologian Thomas
Aquinas' ideal was the mixed life, one of contemplation and action. Dunn hijacks
the Aquinian ideal for his own erotic purpose. The do is sex. It's the same
impulse as in another poem, The Ecstasy, where bodies must join as well as
minds, Else a great prince in prison lies. True sex, he insists, is soul played
out in flesh. Love's growth hangs on the idea of apparently infinite love made
more, Which, once you have read all that he wrote, is wholly unsurprising. John
Dunn was an infinity merchant. The word is everywhere in his work. More than
infinity. Super-infinity. In a sermon he wrote of how he would one day be with
God in an infinite, a super-infinite, An unimaginable space, millions of
millions of unimaginable spaces in which he would be. Millions of unimaginable
spaces in heaven. He loved to coin formations with the super-prefix. Super-
edifications, super-exaltations, super-dying, super-universal, super-miraculous.
It was part of his bid to invent a language that would reach beyond language,
because infinite Wasn't enough. Both in heaven, but also here and now on earth,
Dunn wanted to know something larger Than infinity. That version of Dunn,
excessive, hungry, longing, is everywhere in the love poetry. Sometimes it was
worn lightly. Who has yet written about nudity with more glee, more jokes? In To
His Mistress Going to Bed, written in his twenties, the speaker attempts to coax
his lover Out of her clothes. Full nakedness, all joys are due to thee, As souls
unbodied, bodies unclothed Must be to taste whole joys. The poem could be seen
as one of domineering masculinity, Except that at the end of it there's a joke.
Only the man stands naked. Then there is the wilder, defiantly odd Dunn,
typified by the poem for which most people know Him, The Flea. The speaker
watches a flea crawl over the body of the woman he desires. Mark but this flea,
and mark in this How little that which thou deniest me is. Me it sucked first,
and now sucks thee, And in this flea are two bloods mingled be. When the poem
was first printed in 1633, the typographers used the long S, a letter that looks
almost identical to an F for the words sucked and suck, which offers readers of
the third line another more extravagant rendering. Dunn does not in his love
poetry insist on sweetness. He does not play the My Lady is a perfect dove game
beloved by those who came before him. What good is perfection to humans? It's a
dead thing. The urgent, the bold, the witty, the sharp, all better than
perfection. He took his galvanising imagination and brought it to bear on
everything he wrote, his sermons, his meditations, his religious verse. In the
twenty-first century, Dunn's imagination offers us a form of body armour. His
work is protection against the slipshod and the half-baked, against anti-
intellectualism, against those who try to sell you their money-ridden vision of
sex and love. He is protection against those who would tell you to narrow
yourself, to follow fashion in your mode of thought. It's not that he was a
rebel, it's that he was a pure original. They do us a service, the true,
uncompromising originals. They show us what is possible. To tell the story of
Dunn's life is to ask a question. How did he, possessed of a strange and
labyrinthical mind, navigate the corresponding social and political labyrinths
of Renaissance England? What did his imagination look like when he was young,
and how was it battered and burnished as he grew older? Did it protect him from
sorrow and fury and resentment, to spoil the suspense? It did not. Did it allow
him to write out the human problem in a way that we, following on four hundred
years later, can still find urgent truth in? It did. Dark texts, he wrote to a
friend, need notes. And it is possible to see his whole body of work as offering
us a note on ourselves. How John Dunn saw us with such clarity and how he set
down what he knew with such precision and flair that we can seize hold of it and
carry it with us. He knew about dread, and it is therefore that we can trust him
when he tells us of its opposite, of ravishments and of love. And now, the
shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast
Guard Agency at 0015 on Tuesday 21st February. There are warnings of gales in
Viking Northotsera, Southotsera, Fisher, Bailey, Faroes and South East Iceland.
The general synopsis at 1800. Atlantic low 1000, expected South East Iceland 980
by 1800 Tuesday. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking Northotsera,
Southotsera. Northwesterly 7 or gale 8, becoming variable 2 to 4, then
southeasterly 5 to 7 later. Rain, fog patches later in Viking. Moderate or good,
occasionally very poor later in Viking. Forties Chromity, West becoming
cyclonic, then South or Southwest later 4 to 6. Rain, fog patches in Forties.
Moderate or good, occasionally very poor in Forties. Fourth Tyne Dogger, West
backing South later 3 to 5, occasionally 6 at first. Rain, moderate or good.
Fisher, West or Northwest 6 to gale 8, becoming South 3 to 5 later. Drizzle, fog
patches. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. German Bight, Humber Thames,
West backing South later 3 to 5. Drizzle, fog patches in German Bight. Moderate
or good, occasionally very poor in German Bight. Dover White, West becoming
variable 2 to 4, fair, good. Portland Plymouth, variable 2 to 4, fog patches.
Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Biscay, cyclonic, becoming West later
3 to 5. Thundery showers, fog patches. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor.
Trafalgar, northerly or northeasterly 3 to 5, but easterly 4 to 6 at first in
South East. Thundery showers, good, occasionally poor. Fitzroy Sol, cyclonic 3
to 5, becoming Northwest 4 to 6 later. Thundery showers, good, occasionally
poor. Lundy-Fastnet, Irish Sea. Southwest 3 to 5, veering Northwest 4 to 6
later. Drizzle, moderate or good. Shannon-Rockall-Mallin, Southwest 4 to 6,
veering North or Northwest 5 to 7 later. Rain, good, occasionally poor.
Hebrides-Bailey, cyclonic, becoming West or Northwest later 5 to 7, occasionally
Gale 8 in Bailey. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Fair Isle, Northwest, backing
South later 4 to 6. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Faroes-South East Iceland.
Variable 2 to 4, becoming cyclonic, mainly West, 6 to Gale 8, perhaps severe
Gale 9 later in South East Iceland. Rain, snow near Iceland. Good, occasionally
poor, but very poor near Iceland. Now the weather reports from Coastal Stations
42300. Tyree Automatic. Southwest by West 4, slight drizzle. 1.5 miles, 1012,
falling slowly. Stornoway, South-Southwest 3, slight rain. 5 miles, 1011,
falling slowly. Lowick, West by North 5, 9 miles, 1006, rising. Wick Automatic,
West by North 3, 8 miles, 1010, now falling. Aberdeen, South-East by East 1, 16
miles, 1012, rising slowly. Lucas, North 2, 27 miles, 1012, rising slowly.
Boomer, West by South 4, 1014, now rising. Bridlington, South by West 3, 1016,
falling slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. West-Southwest 5, 2 miles,
1021. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic. 5 miles, 1023. St Catharines Point
Automatic. West-Southwest 4, 1022, falling slowly. Jersey, North-East 1 missed,
1300 metres, 1023, falling slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. 1023. Silly
Automatic. South-West 1, 16 miles, 1022, falling more slowly. Milford Haven,
South-West by West 2, 7 miles, 1021, falling slowly. Aberporth, South-West by
South 3, 32 miles, 1021, falling slowly. Valley, South-Southwest 4, recent fog,
3 miles, 1019, falling slowly. Liverpool Crosby, South 2, 7 miles, 1019, now
rising. Valencia, South-Southwest 3, slight showers, 4 miles, 1019, falling
slowly. Ronalds Way, South-West by West 3, 1017, falling slowly. Mallinhead,
South-West 4 missed, 2 miles, 1014, falling slowly. McRahanish Automatic, South-
West by West 4, moderate drizzle, 1 mile, 1014, falling more slowly. Now the
weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
valid for the following 24 hours. The general situation. High pressure over
France will build a ridge north over the British Isles, with the winds easing
off for a time over southern coastal waters. A band of rain will move east or
southeast over the UK through Tuesday and Wednesday, with strong winds expected
over northern and western areas. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head, including Orkney.
West, backing South-East 3 to 5, then veering South or South-West 5 to 6 later.
Occasional rain, good, occasionally poor. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed.
South or South-West 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later. Rain at times, good,
occasionally poor. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. West or South-West 3 to 5, rain
at first in north, good, occasionally moderate at first in north. Whitby to
Gibraltar Point. South or South-West 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first. Mainly
fair, mainly good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Southerly or South-Westerly
3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first. Mainly fair, mainly good. North Forland to
Celsey Bill. Westerly or South-Westerly, becoming variable 2 to 4. Mainly fair,
mainly good. Celsey Bill to Lyme Regis. Variable 3 or less. Mainly fair, mainly
good. Lyme Regis to Lansend, including the Isles of Scilly. Variable, becoming
South-West later, 2 to 4. Mainly fair, mainly good. Lansend to St David's Head,
including the Bristol Channel. South or South-West 2 to 4, increasing 3 to 5
later. Mainly fair, mainly good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St
George's Channel. South-West 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later. Occasional drizzle,
good, occasionally moderate. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. South or
South-West 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later. Occasional drizzle, good, occasionally
moderate. Isle of Man. South or South-West 3 to 5, occasionally 6 later.
Occasional drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch.
South or South-West 3 to 5, veering North or North-West 4 to 6 later. Rain or
drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre,
including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Southerly or South-West 3 to 5,
veering Northerly or North-West 4 to 6 later. Rain or drizzle, good,
occasionally moderate. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenhamircom Point. South-West 4 to
6, veering North-West 5 to 7 later. Rain or drizzle, good, occasionally poor.
Ardenhamircom Point to Cape Wrath. South or South-West 3 to 5, increasing 5 to
7, veering West or North-West 4 to 6 later. Rain or drizzle, moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Shetland Isles. West or North-West 5 to 7, becoming variable
2 to 4, then South or South-West 4 to 6 later. Showers then rain, moderate or
good, occasionally poor. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. That brings
us to the end of another day here on BBC Radio 4. In a moment we'll be joining
the World Service. I'm Amanda Litherland here at Broadcasting House in London. I
hope that you have a very peaceful night wherever you are. Thank you for
listening. Evie, good night. Good night.