TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 the wintry umber hills, Northern Scotland may see some more persistent rain for
a time. It's ten o'clock, good evening, welcome to the World Tonight with James
Kimarasamy. Two of the biggest health unions have called off strikes in England
and Wales next week. We hear why one union hasn't. These are unreasonable
preconditions to set, these are not genuine negotiations. It's the government
tying the unions hands before we even walk in. MPs say Boris Johnson may have
misled Parliament multiple times over Partygate. He disagrees. I believe that
what we were doing was within the rules and that's why I said what I said to
Parliament and I believe that what we were doing was in conformity with the
Covid regulations. Also in the programme, attempts to clear up what has been
called a complete mess in the housing market, funded at taxpayers' expense.
Virtually anybody can set up and provide this exempt accommodation and what the
word exempt means, they are exempt from any cap on the housing benefits that are
paid. So it is a licence to print money. And we hear from the wife of a
Ukrainian man who was arrested in a Russian occupied city and is now in a Moscow
jail. In his last letters he wrote to me that he can't get letters from me, he's
not getting any replies but he hopes that Ukraine hasn't forgotten about him and
his fellow prisoners. That's all after the BBC News, read tonight by Charles
Carroll. Two of the biggest health unions have called off ambulance strikes
planned for next week in England and Wales after the government agreed to fresh
pay talks. Unison and the GMB said there had been a huge shift in the government
position. But the Unite union, which represents 4,000 ambulance workers, has
refused to join the negotiations. Here's our health correspondent, Dominic
Hughes. The main unions that represent health workers, including the GMB and
Unison, as well as the Royal Colleges of Nursing and Midwives, have spent much
of the day consulting their members and each other on whether to accept an offer
of fresh negotiations. What are described as intensive talks will start early
next week on the understanding there will be an offer of fresh money for this
year's pay award as well as new money for next year. Strikes by GMB and Unison
ambulance and other health workers scheduled for next week, as well as action
planned by members of the Charter Society of Physiotherapy, have now been
paused. Unite, the smallest of the three ambulance unions, said its strike on
March 6th would still go ahead as planned, describing government preconditions
for talks as unreasonable. And a teaching union has called off planned strike
action after receiving a new pay offer from the Scottish government. The
Educational Institute of Scotland will now hold a ballot on the deal and is
urging its members to accept it. An interim report by the Parliamentary
Committee investigating whether Boris Johnson misled MPs about government
lockdown parties has indicated that he did so on a number of occasions. The
Cross-Party Privileges Committee said it had seen evidence that strongly
suggested Covid rule breaches would have been obvious to the former Prime
Minister. Mr Johnson has insisted he'll be cleared by the committee, as our
political correspondent Ian Watson explains. Boris Johnson declared that the
Privileges Committee had found absolutely no evidence that he'd misled
Parliament, despite it sifting through innumerable WhatsApps and messages. But
that's not quite what the committee's update says. In fact, it suggests that
there is evidence that Mr Johnson may have misled MPs on a number of occasions,
including failing to tell the House of Commons about his own knowledge of the
gatherings at the heart of government during the pandemic. The former Prime
Minister also suggested it would be surreal for the committee to rely on
evidence from Sue Gray, the former senior civil servant who carried out the
Partigate probe and who has now been offered the job of Chief of Staff to the
Labour leader. The committee denied its report would be based on Ms Gray's
findings and would rely instead on documents, photographs and witness
statements. The Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is expected to extend the government's
energy price guarantee scheme for another three months. The average annual
household bill had been due to rise to £3,000 from April, but the new proposals
would keep it at £2,500 a year. Kevin Pichie reports. Officially, the level of
government support remains under review before the budgets later this month.
Practically, suppliers have been told to prepare bills for April with a dual
possibility of the guarantee changing or staying the same. Realistically, it's
become even more likely that the government will maintain support as it is now.
Even so, a £400 discount on everyone's bills this winter will come to an end and
there are questions whether the £3 billion it would cost to extend the guarantee
for three months could be better spent if targeted at those struggling the most
to pay their bills. There's been international condemnation of a 10-year prison
sentence handed down in Belarus to the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Alias
Biljanski. He was arrested during a pro-democracy demonstration. The head of the
Norwegian Nobel Prize committee called it a tragedy. An EU spokesman described
the trial as a sham. The White House has revealed that President Biden had a
cancerous skin lesion successfully removed from his chest last month. His
doctors say that no further treatment is needed. Here's our Washington
correspondent, Nomia Iqbal. When the president had his regular physical check-up
last month, his doctor, Kevin O'Connor, removed what he called a small lesion on
Mr Biden's chest. The tissue was sent for a biopsy the same day. The results
confirmed that it was basal cell cancer, which does not tend to spread as other
more serious skin cancers do. Dr O'Connor said it had healed well and the
80-year-old president would continue to be monitored as part of his ongoing
health care. In January, the first lady, Jill Biden, had surgery to remove two
cancerous skin lesions. The prominent lawyer in the United States has been given
two life sentences for the murder of his wife and son in a case that attracted
huge media attention across America. During the hearing in South Carolina, Alex
Murdoch continued to insist that he was innocent. His sentence was handed down
by the presiding judge, Clifton Newman. In the murder of your wife, Maggie
Murdoch, I sentence you for the term of the rest of your natural life, for the
murder of Paul Murdoch, whom you probably love so much, I sentence you to prison
for murdering him for the rest of your natural life. Those sentences will run
consecutive. The reality TV star Stephen Bear has been jailed for 21 months for
sharing an intimate private video of his ex-girlfriend. Bear, who won Celebrity
Big Brother in 2016, put the video on his OnlyFans website in 2020. Georgia
Harrison, who's appeared on Love Island, didn't know she was being filmed. She
spoke outside Chelmsford Crown Court. I'm happy and relieved that this matter is
finally over. Today's sentence is a vindication of what I've been put through
and sends a clear message that the police and the courts take this matter very
seriously. I want to let all other victims of this crime know that I stand in
solidarity with them. And the Formula One driver Lewis Hamilton has been given a
special medical exemption, allowing him to wear a nose stud during competitive
races. Hamilton said he'd worn the stud for many years and taking it out caused
an infection. Charles, thanks very much. You're listening to The World Tonight
with James Kimarasami. A week that began with Rishi Sunak unveiling a deal with
the European Union has ended with movement on one of the Prime Minister's main
domestic challenges. Three unions have said that they will call off next week's
planned national ambulance strikes in England and Wales after the Health
Secretary, Steve Barclay, agreed to discuss a one-off cost of living payment for
the current financial year, as well as next year's pay settlement. It follows
last week's decision by the Royal College of Nursing, the RCN, to suspend its
industrial action and enter into intensive negotiations with the government.
Rachel Harrison is General Secretary of the GMB Union, one of those that has
postponed its strike action. She told the PM programme why her union had decided
to do that next week. We received some reassuring messages that make us feel
potentially there are going to be constructive pay negotiations. So at this
time, we're expecting to suspend the current action scheduled for next week, but
we are ready to immediately reinstate notices for further industrial action if
we believe the pay negotiations are not constructive or meaningful. We've
requested from the start a significant increase in pay. We've talked about a
retention package that looks to restore a decade of lost earnings and a wide
variety of other workforce conditions and terms. So that is what we will be
entering that room hoping to achieve. We will not put a number on what is
acceptable and what isn't, because that will be the decision of GMB members.
Rachel Harrison, GMB General Secretary. One union though, Unite, which
represents 4,000 ambulance workers, has backed the trend. It's pushing ahead
with next week's strikes in England. Oneh Kasab is Unite's national lead
officer. He's been taking part in talks with the government. So why hasn't his
union, like the others today, postponed its strike action? We've decided to
continue with the strike action because the government has offered talks that
are not really talks. There are heavy preconditions. They include not just that
we suspend the strike action, but also that we agree to discuss productivity and
efficiency. And that's not what this dispute is about. The government also is
not willing to discuss a permanent pay rise. It's made clear that we'll only
discuss a non-consolidated lump sum, which is going to do nothing for
recruitment and retention as far as 2022 pay is concerned. And just to rub salt
into the wound, it's also said that whatever's agreed at the talks must then be
recommended by the trade unions. These are unreasonable preconditions to set
before negotiations. They imply, they more than imply, that these are not
genuine negotiations. It's the government tying the union's hands before we even
walk in. You know, of course, you're outliers now. The GMB's national secretary,
Rachel Harrison, said, quote, this is a huge shift from the government. You
clearly don't agree with that. No, it's up to other unions what stance they wish
to take. Are you disappointed that they have taken the decision to call off the
strikes? That's their decision to take. That's their decision to take. But it
does leave you isolated, doesn't it? I disagree. I think... Well, it's a factual
issue, isn't it? You are now the only union going ahead with the strikes next
week. Even your own Welsh branch has called them off. Ah, but you make an
excellent point, because what's happened in Wales is that talks have progressed.
That shows that we're actually willing to sit down and negotiate and compromise
when the other side is genuine. Unfortunately, that's not happening in England.
And I think our members and our reps have made absolutely the correct decision.
These are not genuine negotiations. You can't start negotiations if you're
genuine about it by putting these types of preconditions. But the point that the
GMB has made is that this is the first time that the government has decided to
negotiate on pay. And that is a shift, isn't it? Even if you're unhappy with the
preconditions, you have to acknowledge that there is a shift from the
government. Yes, they've decided to negotiate on pay, but not permanent pay.
It's a one-off, non-consolidated lump sum. The dispute has been about making
sure that we pay people enough so that they can come and work in the NHS.
133,000 vacancies in England. A one-off lump sum is not going to do anything to
resolve that. Can I just establish what is so bad about discussing productivity
and efficiency? I think if productivity and efficiency was about looking at the
fact that the NHS spends something like 4.5 billion over the last five years on
fees to agencies instead of investing in permanent staff, we'd be happy to
engage in that type of discussion. But that's not on the agenda here. We've been
told productivity and efficiency. That implies it's about getting our members to
work even harder. And that's absolutely ridiculous. That's an absolute nonsense.
And just coming back to this question of what the other unions are doing, I know
you say that every union makes its own decision, but clearly the RCN decided to
suspend strike action initially. Now we have three other unions and just leaving
Unite out there on your own. Is this a deliberate policy, do you think? Is it
something that you feel is a strategy from the government to divide and rule? I
would hope not. I would hope not. Certainly our response when we heard about the
RCN discussions is, our problem isn't with the RCN, our problem was about the
possibility of the government attempting some kind of divide and rule. That
would be unfortunate. That's not going to resolve the matter. We're looking for
a resolution. And that was Oneh Kassab, the national lead officer for the Unite
union, the only one that is pushing ahead with next week's ambulance workers'
strikes in England. Now you wait for a Boris Johnson intervention for ages and
then two come in quick succession after yesterday's speech in which he
questioned Rishi Sunak's Northern Ireland deal with the EU. The former prime
minister today gave his reaction to an interim assessment by the Parliamentary
Privileges Committee which is looking into whether he misled MPs over lockdown
parties at number 10. The committee, which is due to question Mr Johnson later
this month, said it had seen evidence that, quote, strongly suggests Covid rule
breaches would have been obvious to him. He maintained he never knowingly or
recklessly misled MPs about lockdown gatherings in Downing Street and said he
was confident that he would be cleared. He also cast doubt on Sue Gray, the
senior civil servant who led an investigation into the parties and who's now
been tapped up to be Sir Keir Starmer's chief of staff. I do think it is a
peculiarity, let me put it that way, that the person who conducted the inquiry
into what went on in number 10 and the Cabinet Office, who was presented to me
as a person of complete political impartiality with absolutely no political axe
to grind, ever, has just been appointed the chief of staff of the leader of the
Labour Party. I mean, I make no comment about it except to say I'm sure people
may want to draw their own conclusions about the confidence they can place in
her motives behind her, the way she conducted her inquiry and into her report. I
think if you told me at the time I commissioned Sue Gray to do the inquiry, if
you told me all the stuff that I now know, I think I might have cross-examined
her more closely about her independence and I might have thought about whether
she was, I might have asked, I might have invited her to reflect on whether she
was really the right person to do it. The Privileges Committee said its
investigation was not based on the Sue Gray report and of course there were
police fines issued for some of the number 10 parties as well. At Sakhir,
Starmer was asked whether his move to appoint Sue Gray risked undermining the
findings of her report. I think Boris Johnson needs to confront the evidence
that's there in front of him and everybody can see that evidence, which he soon
needs to acknowledge that he actually sat on his hands through this process. I,
for my part, was very clear that for the sake of everybody who was obeying the
rules, we need to hold the government to account for what they were doing at the
time. But as we look forward, I hope we can change from this failure of the last
13 years to an incoming Labour government and in that I'm delighted that really
strong, professional, respected individuals are now wanting to be part of that
future. Well, we're joined now by Christopher Hope, the Daily Telegraph's
Associate Editor and Editor of the Choppers Politics podcast. He'll be moving to
GB News later on in the year. Hi there, Chris. Hi, guys. So look, Boris Johnson
implying pretty heavily that Sue Gray's report may have been affected by Labour
Party sympathies, but of course that doesn't make the Privileges Committee
investigation go away, does it? No, not at all. I think the inquiry, the summary
report that they put out today from the Privileges Committee does show problems
for Boris Johnson. They think he may have known about the rule breaking and he
didn't know what the rules were because he had brought them in, imposed them on
all our lives, James. And that's the big concern, I think. And that's the worry
for Boris Johnson going forward about where it takes and where it goes. The
waters are muddied by Keir Starmer's appointment of Sue Gray to his office. And
clearly that to me is clever politics because it shows to voters, look, I am
different, we are different to the last lot. You know, we have got a party
finder in chief in my office. There'll be no sleaze here. That's the message.
I'm not sure it affects very well on Sue Gray, nor really on the civil service,
because when you're a minister or even Boris Johnson, when you're going to the
Cabinet Office and you give all your secrets away to them and they then weigh
them up and say, that's fine, you've got to trust them that they will be safe
with them. But if one of your key players is going to have to work for Labour,
that's a worry. That's different, I suppose, though, to some of the things that,
for example, Nadine Dorris said on World at One, suggesting that Sue Gray had
been lined up while she was compiling her report. We just don't know that, do
we? We don't. I think Nadine Dorris is onto something there. I think this
weekend's newspapers will be full of when was the first meeting. Now, if Sue
Gray had met with Labour going back into last year, that's a real, real worry
and it will undermine, I think, Sue Gray, her report. Her report's out now. And
Keir, I suppose we should say, I mean, Keir Starmer was asked about this. He
would not be drawn on the timing of this today. No, and why would he? I mean,
he's caused havoc, really, to the Tory party. I mean, he completely
disinbobulated them, I think, by doing this and they're now attacking Sue Gray.
And if Sue Gray last year was this paragon of virtue, why is she suddenly the
enemy for lots of Tories? It's quite confusing for people looking into politics,
wondering what's going on. This time last year, Sue Gray had the judgement of
Solomon and now she seemed to be as tainted as someone who isn't Solomon. I
mean, that's the problem here. The Tories are trying to change their target to a
person who they supported a year ago. And I suppose the question is, will this
cut through? Will this remain a Westminster story? It is for now, I think. I
mean, I think that the issue of the trial of Boris Johnson starts about 10 days'
time when he'll have to deny that he knew a lot about parties or anything about
parties when he made those statements to the House of Commons. It's a relief to
him, I think, that we're getting underway because it was really dragging him
down probably in the sense that he didn't know what his future would be like.
Well, just remind us what the implications could be for him. Well, just huge. If
he's suspended for more than 10 days, I think it is, he faces a recall by-
election, which would be the biggest by-election, well, I can think, in the past
three or four decades in terms of its importance, because all of human life will
go to Uxbridge and South Ryder and try and see if they can depose the Prime
Minister if that happens. Ex-Prime Minister. Forgive me, the ex-Prime Minister,
but somebody who could come back as Prime Minister in the summer, given the way
the polls are for Rishi Sunak, that's the worry. It might go, but that's only if
he's found guilty. And that's a big call to be made by the Speaker, Lindsay
Hoyle. But it could go that way. If not, he's out the woods, he's cleared, and
he can take on Rishi Sunak after what could be very difficult May local
elections. This is the beginning, I think, of a whole narrative this year.
Right. Christopher Hope, many, many thanks. Quick reminder, if you want to
listen back to any of this programme or to previous ones, you can go to BBC
Sounds, where you can also download the podcast. The headlines so far on The
World Tonight, the two biggest unions representing ambulance staff in England
and Wales have called off planned strikes next week and will hold fresh pay
talks with the government. A committee of MPs has said that Boris Johnson may
have misled Parliament multiple times over Partygate, but the former Prime
Minister insists that he'll be cleared by their final report. And you may have
heard that the American dictionary Merriam-Webster has asked people whose first
language isn't English to come up with words in their native tongue that don't
have an Anglophone equivalent. Well, we have been compiling our own collection
of untranslatables with the help of some of our multilingual colleagues. Chhaka.
It's a Bengali word, mostly spoken in Bangladesh in urban areas. So the literal
meaning is when somebody touches a really hot pot, boiling water or, or a curry,
that sensation you get, that's chhaka. But in colloquial terms, it's used by
people, mostly young people, when their hearts are broken, when they get dumped
by their partners, or it's the end of the romantic relationship. The word is
dharma in the language Sanskrit. And it means that if you protect your dharma,
then it will protect you. So it could mean more widely duty or responsibility.
All that is good in the world. So if you take care of the environment, it will
take care of you. If you take care of truth, then it will take care of you. So
the translation could be a whole page long just for this particular word. In
Romanian, there is this word that has been deemed untranslatable in English,
dor. And I suppose the closest you can go in English would be to long for
someone. Because when we say in Romanian that we miss someone or we are longing
for someone, we actually mean it wholeheartedly. We don't just say it casually
in a very nonchalant way. It kind of denotes sympathy and being bittersweet
about seeing someone. A few untranslatable words. And for what it's worth, and
with a nod to my family, I'm nominating the Dutch word gezellig, which
technically means cosy, but it's so much more than that. It's gezellig to light
candles in your front room, gezellig to hang out with old friends and definitely
gezellig to spend your evenings listening to the world tonight, we hope. Now
exempt accommodation is the name for shared housing that is exempt from housing
benefit restrictions because the landlord is responsible for providing support,
supervision or care for the vulnerable tenants. They could be victims of
domestic violence, drug users or people who have recently been released from
prison. But it is a system that has been abused. Landlords have pocketed the
extra cash without providing adequate support. The parliamentary committee
that's looked into it concluded that the system was a complete mess. Well,
today, a private members' bill designed to address the problem passed a key
legislative stage. We'll be hearing from the chair of the housing committee in
just a moment. First though, for an idea of the problem, I've been speaking to
Carmen Railton. She worked as a support worker for Vinyard, a company that ran
exempt accommodation in Hull, and she blew the whistle on some of the practices
she witnessed. She told me about the lives of the people that she was trying to
help. It's a chaotic, quite high level needs of support. They usually come out
of prison, they go into over-supported housing, but because their needs are
quite high and complex, it was quite a difficult job to try and support them.
They might be taking drugs, alcohol, mental health support, and obviously things
like maybe opening a bank account, most everyday things, but the majority of the
service users, there wasn't really engagement in that way. It was just more
about the drugs and alcohol. And your role was to what? To get them support, to
get them help, to make sure that they could come off them? Yes, I suppose in
some way, try and rehabilitate them. We'd find out what their needs were, what
we could do to help them. So it could be that they were engaging with the local
services that do the alcohol and drugs, obviously replacing them on different
medications and things like that, which we didn't do, but would refer on to
mental health services that could then support them. So we try and find what
needs they had or what they want to talk about, what they want help with, and
then we would then signpost them. And were there vulnerable tenants in amongst
potentially more of a threat to those other tenants? Absolutely, yeah. There was
one person, he was vulnerable because he was in a proper seat with somebody that
was very chaotic and aggressive. He kind of fell on hard times and was moved in
with him and I raised concerns several times about that and it just got
dismissed. What were your fears then for that situation? Obviously him being
hurt, he's just this vulnerable young boy and he just wanted to have a quiet
life and he was living with a drunk man that was a domestic violence perpetrator
and he called me up, locked inside his bedroom, to ring the police for him. So I
had to do that and obviously keep texting him to make sure he was okay until the
police arrived and arrested him. I mean, did you feel qualified to do what you
were doing? Did you feel you were in a position to help the people, to deal with
the people that you came across? No, so I felt like I did have experience with
working with vulnerable people because I did that in a different capacity but
for these people I was working with, you know, for how chaotic they was, there
was nothing that I could do to help them. So when did you start feeling that
something was wrong, things weren't happening as they should be? At the time,
I'd only been in there a month or so but probably once I got to kind of know
what the council, what their expectations was. I suppose just kind of little
things like repairs not being done, service users being left without gas and
electric and there was one particular service user, their meter did something
dodgy to it so the electric wouldn't run out, which is obviously a fire risk and
I took that back to the manager and she just kind of dismissed it and said, well
at least we're not having to pay for electric but yeah, you know, there could be
a fire. And what about behaviour of the tenants? As you say, a lot of them had
come from prison, were there concerns about that? Well, yeah, because the thing
is obviously, you know, if your housing association that is supporting people
with specific needs, if you can't meet those needs then you shouldn't be taking
on those tenants, they should be getting signposted to someone who can. So our
support was kind of low level, maybe medium support, you know, and these service
users with quite high level, complex needs. And you felt it was deliberate
deception, did you? Yes, definitely, absolutely. I mean, you're a taxpayer,
Carmen, how do you feel about the fact that this sector is using taxpayers'
money to pay people to offer what sounds like, you know, in some instances and
the one that you've been involved in shoddy services? Yeah, it's just really
angry and frustrated. Everyone that's working, works really hard for the money
and they're not keeping an eye on it. There needs to be more done to make sure
that people are being supported properly and the money is getting used as they
say it's being used. Carmen Railton and the director of the accommodation
provider Vinyard told us he strongly denied Carmen's allegations and said these
concerns were not brought to his attention at the time. Clive Betts is chair of
the Leveling Up Housing and Communities Committee, which is supporting today's
bill. It also has government backing and he talked to me about what he saw as
the failings in the current system. There's some very good providers, let's make
that clear at the beginning. But when the committee looked at it and heard the
evidence about the standards of accommodation that people were asked to live in,
this is supposed to be supported accommodation, yet people were getting no
support often at all, except a loaf of bread on the table and some margarine to
put on it. And people were being ripped off with the providers in some cases
getting hundreds of thousands of pounds a week in housing benefit payments. So
lousy accommodation, lack of support and lots of public money going in. So the
users were getting ripped off, but the taxpayer was as well or is as well?
Absolutely. And I think we said as a committee very often when we make
recommendations, it's we need to spend some more money to get this right. In
this case, we don't. We need to make sure the money that is available and being
spent is spent to much better effect. These are people with real needs. They can
be people leaving care. They can be people who fled domestic violence. We
describe the whole thing as a complete mess. And we were experienced politicians
on the committee. I've never seen experienced politicians look so shocked at
what they heard about the accommodation being provided. But what about the
system itself? Is it fit for purpose? No. The problem is it's a free for all
because some people think, oh, these are people needing support, people who've
got real needs. Therefore, it's a local authority. It's the health authority.
It's somebody in authority who is placing them in this accommodation saying
that's their need. This is how it's going to be met. It isn't. Virtually anybody
can set up and provide this exempt accommodation. And what the word exempt
means, they are exempt from any cap on the housing benefits that are paid. So it
is a real license to print money for some people who are engaging in this
system. So how of the vulnerable people that end up in this type of
accommodation, how did they fall through the cracks? How are they not picked up
by local councils, for example? Maybe the council hasn't got an obligation to
simply house everybody in every situation. And currently, there's no system of
inspections. There's no regulation. Some of the providers are social housing
regulated organizations, but many aren't. So there's really no checks, no
inspections, no overall regulation of the system. Yes, because I think it's not
even clear how many people are in these types of accommodation. There's no data
is there. Is that correct? Oh, when we asked DWP how much they were paying in
housing benefit, they couldn't tell us. One estimate had been done in the past
of £2 billion a year, but DWP has no idea. We spoke to local authorities and
they said, well, we can't really cap what's being paid because all one of these
providers has to do is to say, well, these are the rents being provided for this
sort of accommodation in this area. And local authorities have got no control
over it. They really haven't. And they've got no power to go and inspect. It's
not within their purview. I mean, this sounds like the Wild West. I mean, how
did this end up being this way? That description has been used by other people
as well. Yeah, a completely unregulated system for the worst elements of housing
provision being provided in an awful way with no support and the taxpayer being
ripped off. Right. So this bill licensing is key, is it, to stopping this from
getting out of hand? Yes. We looked at a national system of regulation where
national standards will be laid down by government. The amount of support that
has to be provided will be laid down by government. And then local authorities
will bring in a licensing scheme and would ensure that the providers meet those
standards. And government has a fallback power where they can require licenses
on a national basis if they want. But initially, it'll be for individual
authorities. And the reality is that many authorities have this problem, but
some have it much worse than others. And you're confident, are you, that this
bill will address the worst excesses of this? I'm very hopeful. You can never be
absolutely confident. There's a lot of secondary legislation to come with the
guidance and the details in it. And it's going to be important to get that right
because, as I say, we are dealing with crooks in this business and those crooks
will be looking for any loophole to continue to make their excess profits.
Labour MP Clive Betts, Chair of the Leveling Up Housing and Communities
Committee. This week, a team of international lawyers led by a British barrister
said they had found evidence that the Kremlin had financed a system of torture
centres in the southern Ukrainian city of Kherson. Russian forces occupied
Kherson a year ago, but they were driven out in November. The lawyers also
concluded that around 400 people had vanished from that city during the
occupation. Sergei Kovalsky was part of the Ukrainian resistance movement in
Kherson. He was arrested by the Russians in August. His family says he is now
being held in Moscow's high-security Lefortovo prison. They hope that he might
be returned as part of a prisoner's swap. His wife Alexandra now lives in the
city of Odessa with her three children and she told me about the events leading
to Sergei's arrest. So, first of all, when the Russians first came, he wasn't
able to leave the city because they bombed the bridge, the Antonovsky Bridge, so
he would take a boat at night and go across to help the soldiers. He was giving
locations of the Russian forces in Kherson to the Ukrainian soldiers. So he knew
he was taking a big risk, he knew something like this could happen? He
understood, and we all understood as a family that that was a great risk he was
taking. But he was a soldier and he was in the anti-terrorist operation, the
ATO, in 2015 and 16 and he fought for the liberation of Lugansk. So he had to do
it, he was doing it fighting for his country. So what happened to him after he
was taken? After the 3rd of August, when he was arrested, life became kind of
hell for us. It's all been very scary. And just explain, he was taken first to
Crimea and then to Moscow? He was detained in Kherson for the first two and a
half months where he was beaten and tortured and then on our daughter's birthday
we were allowed a telephone call with him and he told us that he was going to be
taken to Crimea and they beat him, they broke his ribs, they beat his legs, they
beat him wherever it hurts the most and they told him that they know where we
live, where his family are and if he didn't sign documents then they would come
and find us. Have you seen any evidence of the injuries that he spoke about? I
saw the injuries that he had after he was held in Kherson because they brought
him home to get some documents and when he was taken to Lefortovo in Moscow, he
said that he made bandages out of the sheets but I haven't been able to see
anything. But you have had communication with him, you have received letters? So
in Simferopol I got letters from him and he has very lovely handwriting and I
recognised that it was definitely his writing and we agreed on certain phrases
that he would use to show that it was definitely him writing, things like my
dear, I love you and in Lefortovo he has the right to correspond but he hasn't
been getting the letters that I'm sending him. What are you being told about
what charges he's facing, whether there will be a trial, when it will happen?
The charges against him are of international terrorism committed against
Russians in Ukraine. They found ten people who they say are in a kind of cell
and they say that Seryozha was one of them in a terrorist group and they need at
least two of them to confess to being a part of this. One person has confessed
and they're trying now to make Sergey confess so they're putting him under a lot
of pressure, they're not giving him any medical assistance, they're not letting
him see my letters, he hasn't got proper clothes. We want to send him clothes
but they won't let us deliver them to him. He's just got a shorts and a t-shirt
and they've given him some kind of prison coat to wear. What do you hope will
happen, Alexandra? We're hoping there will be an exchange of prisoners. Our side
are saying they'll definitely bring home everybody and they are trying but we're
very worried and scared that he'll be forgotten because Ukraine has got so much
going on at the moment and in his last letters he wrote to me that he can't get
letters from me, he's not getting any replies, but he hopes that Ukraine hasn't
forgotten about him and his fellow prisoners. He says that in spite of
everything, when he's taken out for his daily walk outside, he always shouts
out, Slava Ukraina, glory to Ukraine, and hopes that his fellow prisoners will
hear him and when one of them shouts this and the others hear, they all shout
out as well, just to keep up one another's spirits and tell one another that
they're still there. You described, Alexandra, you described life as hell. What
has it been like for you and your family over the last few months? So the first
month I just stood by the window most of the time, waiting and waiting for them
to bring him back, hoping that he would come, but also I was very scared that
they would come without him to do something horrible to me or hurt the children.
I was scared that they would find his uniform, I was scared they would find his
telephone. Fifteen huge guys with weapons came and searched our barn and I
thought that they would kill us, and there I was with a small baby, just trying
not to be frightened. And what was it like when the Ukrainian troops recaptured
Kherson? A lot of people were celebrating, but it must have been a very strange
time for you. Yes, when our soldiers came, we cried and we waited for two days
for them to arrive, and when the soldiers came, they embraced us and we saw that
they were really our boys. It was really hard to believe that they'd finally
come. They came and also told me things about Sergei, they gave me some
information about where he was and what his situation was, but if they'd only
come a little sooner, maybe he would have been freed. Alexandra Shatalova, whose
husband Sergei is being held in a Moscow prison. Well, Tanya Lokshina is the
Associate Director of Human Rights Watch for Europe and Central Asia. She left
Russia at the start of the war. She's not involved with Sergei's case, but she
has documented and is aware of other similar ones. Leforteva prison in Russia is
a high security prison which is operated by the FSB, that is the Russian
security services, and if the man is at Leforteva, it most likely means that he
is there as part of an investigation into alleged terrorist attack. In
particular, based on what we've documented over the years about how terrorism
cases are handled in Russia by the federal security services, if the federal
security service wants a confession, then torture is very likely. So this is
something that we're quite concerned about in connection with this particular
case. Now, I would want to point out that the individual in question, if he was
a combatant, possibly not an official member of the Ukrainian armed forces at
the time of his detention, but someone who worked closely with the Ukrainian
armed forces, he has the status of a prisoner of war under international
humanitarian law, and as a prisoner of war, he is entitled to relevant
protections. If we are talking about an individual who worked with the Ukrainian
armed forces while living in occupied Kherson, he cannot be prosecuted for being
a combatant as such. That's also prohibited by international law. Have you
noticed changes since the full-scale invasion last February? Has there been a
change to the way Russia has prosecuted these kind of cases? This is a different
era, really, as regards Ukrainian POWs and civilians who were detained by
Russian forces, forcibly transferred from Ukraine to Russia and then locked up
in Russian jails and penal colonies in Communiqada together with Ukrainian
prisoners of war. This is something that we have been documenting for a long
time. In this particular case, someone charged with terrorism offences who was a
partisan during the Russian occupation, what would you say the chances of
someone like him becoming part of a prisoner swap are? Because there have been
prisoner swaps during this war. Really, it's very hard to predict what the
chances are. We know that some of the Azov combatants in particular, they were
supposedly to be prosecuted in Russia on allegations of terrorism and then they
were eventually swapped, right? And these were the people in the Azov style
plant in Mariupol? Precisely. So the very fact that someone is at the fort today
and allegedly accused of terrorism does not mean that that particular individual
would not be swapped eventually. Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch. Our
closing headlines, the two biggest health unions have scrapped planned ambulance
strikes in England and Wales next week after the government agreed to talks
about this year's pay award. And finally, a Nobel Peace Prize may be an honour
but it's not a protective shield. Tonight, one of the 2022 laureates is
beginning a 10-year prison sentence. The Belarus human rights activist, Ales
Bialetsky, was found guilty by a court in Minsk of receiving foreign financing
and using it to fund a protest movement. His Vyazna movement was formed after a
crackdown on street protest by the country's autocratic leader Alexander
Lukashenko. Well Franak Vyachkorka is a senior advisor to the exiled Belarus
opposition leader Svetlana Tsikhanouskaya. On the one hand, I am surprised by
such a draconian sentence but on the other hand, it's nothing unexpected because
we know that Bialetsky is a personal enemy of Lukashenko. Lukashenko hates him
because he is opposite, absolute opposite of Lukashenko himself. Bialetsky is
human, he is open, he wants to help people and Lukashenko is just a bloodthirsty
warmonger. From me, James Kimara-Sami and the rest of the programme, have a good
night and a great weekend. Studio Direction on The World Tonight was by Alison
Purcell-Davies. The editor was Emily Craig. This is BBC Radio 4. Music education
in the UK has been in decline for years. We've actually seen an overall decrease
in the number of schools that are offering those qualifications. It's decreased
by about 35% over the last 10 years. But music plays an important part in our
lives, from the classroom. It's very good for the emotional well-being of
children. To the economy. We want to be doing as well as we possibly can do
because this island exports so much music across the whole of the world. I'm
Soweto Kinch, a musician, and I'm finding out what needs to be done to keep UK
music alive. Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts on Tuesday
morning at 11.30. Well now, Mackenzie Crook stars in Smoke, Wind and Soap
Bubbles. Our final story from Italo Calvino's Marco Valdo, dramatised and
narrated by Toby Jones. Papa! Papa! Papa, wait! What's going on down here? Every
morning, the postman hopped into the lobby of Marco Valdo's apartment block.
Hurry up! Papa! Quiet! You want to get us thrown out! One wall of the entrance
lobby was given over to individually numbered letterboxes. Each apartment in the
block was assigned their own letterbox. Even the tiny attic where Marco Valdo
lived. Papa! You won't believe it. With his six children. We've got some post,
Papa! Come and see! Quiet! Quiet! You shouldn't be playing down here. Marco
Valdo knew without looking that the only post he ever received came in brown
envelopes. Look! You see, there's something for you. This isn't for me. Yes, we
found it in our letterbox. It's specially for us. This is post, Papa! No, no,
no, no, no. It's just a leaflet. It's an advertisement for detergent or
something. Detergent? But you sent it to us. It's nothing. Look, everyone's got
one. What does it say, Papa? The cleanest wash from the richest sods. You can
always depend on blank us all. I have to go to work. Is that all? But actually,
that wasn't all. The leaflet went on to announce an extra special offer. Blank
us all were offering a free sample of their detergent. All we have to do is take
this leaflet to a shop and they'll give us some for nothing. Look, here's
another one. And over here. Here. And another. Everyone in the building got sent
one. Blank us all had evidently targeted their campaign at every household in
their block, and soon the boys had collected a whole stack of the promotional
coupons. Forty-one. How are we doing? Forty-two. Forty-three. Can I help you?
No. No, we're fine, thank you, signore. What are you two up to? We're just
collecting litter. Yes, we're just clearing the litter. Yes. Really? Yes, sir.
Oh, oh, very good. Keep it up. You're welcome. We'll do our best. By the time we
get to the end of the day, we'll have collected all the coupons. We'll do our
best. By the time Marco Valdo returned from the factory that evening, hundreds
of the Blank Us All coupons were piled all over the tiny attic. Papa, come and
look. Come and look, Papa. Quiet. You won't believe it. Look, Papa. What? Miss
Lena has had a magnificent idea. Where did you get all this stuff? Tell him.
We've decided to start our own laundry business. It just so happened during that
particular spring that the world of household detergents was in great upheaval.
Alarmed by the dynamic promotional strategy undertaken by Blank Us All, rival
detergent manufacturers began to launch their own campaigns. Wash right. Two
more for level. One spoon in the door. Right twice. There's one here for really
quick. OK, OK. Let's see. We've got wash right. Handy clean, handy clean. Wash
right. The area in which Marco Valdo's children trawled for their collection
expanded until they were having to devote whole days to the project. But this
expansion didn't go unnoticed. Rival gangs, intrigued by the activity, began to
launch their own collection initiatives. However, being slightly older than many
of the collectors, Marco Valdo's daughter, Isselina, was able to make a
constructive intervention. So from now on, we should gather all the coupons from
all the gangs into one big collection. Then we can keep them safe, protected
from thieves. Like a bank. Hang on, hang on. What are we starting here? A
laundry or a bank? Who cares? Don't you understand, Micolino? We're
millionaires! Yes, yes, but first we have to reclaim all this detergent. All of
it. But where are we going to put it all? In really, really big bottles! But
where do we put all the big bottles? Well, we'll have to rent a warehouse. We
need to buy a shipping tanker. Spring wore on, and Marco Valdo began to wake
earlier, with the lengthening of the days. Morning. Oh, morning. Oh, tell you
what, signori. Why don't I take those for you? What? Well... Why? It's just more
promotional stuff, right? Yes. One for every letterbox? Mm-hm. I can do that.
Thanks very much. Frustrated by the detergent coupons piling up in their tiny
attic, Marco Valdo saw the opportunity to stuff the leaflets right inside the
letterboxes, out of the reach of his children. But as he began to post them, he
noticed something. Smelly feet. Advertising, like fruit or flowers, has its
different seasons, and after a few weeks, the detergent season had come to an
end. Michelino examined these new leaflets, which promoted healthy foot care.
What do we do now? We begin phase two. Phase two was the redemption of the
detergent samples. Good morning. Yes? But this process proved unexpectedly
problematic. What do you want? Yes, I have come to claim my free sample of Rinse
Quick. Right. And one each of BlankoSalt and WashRite. I see. One HandyClean.
Wait, all of them? And SuperSuds. I can give you one of them. One? Yep. But what
about the rest? What is this? If this is some sort of scam, I can just as easily
call a police. No, no. No. We want to start over. You see, sir, it's for our
mother. She wants to try each brand to see which one washes cleanest. Mm-hmm.
But then things started to get more complicated. You again? Can I get my
Spumador? Out. Shopkeepers decided they would only grant one free sample per
visit, and only to those who bought something else as well. And so the gang
began running shopping errands. But these errands took more time, and the
inevitable delay in recoupment meant the postponement of their million-dollar
project. There was nothing for it but to move directly into phase three, the
sale and distribution of all the detergent they had already accumulated. Yes?
Good morning, senora. Can I interest you in some wash-rite? It gives the
cleanest, freshest wash that you're... Thanks very much. No, hang on. What? You
haven't paid. No, of course not. She can't just take it. You can't just take it.
We need your money. It's free, isn't it? Get on with you, or I shall call the
police. Unbeknownst to the gang, the detergent companies had analysed the impact
of their coupon campaign. The market researchers for Blancasol, Supersuds and
the rest soon concluded that the market was probably being rigged by receivers
and dealers in stolen goods. The police were alerted, and daily patrols set out
to find the thieves and their horde of detergent. Papa's home! Ouch! Careful!
This is ridiculous. What is all this stuff? It's our stock, Papa. Well, you have
to get rid of it. We're trying to, Papa, but it's taking longer than we thought.
Haven't you seen the police everywhere? Police? Yes, yes, police. But what do
they want? You can't store all this stuff here. This is... this is bootlegging,
probably, and we'll all end up in prison. You have to stop this now. Get rid of
it. All of it? But what are we supposed to do with it, Papa? I don't care. Just
don't let them trace it back here. Right. Stop here. So very early the following
morning, before dawn, in fact, the children pushed and pulled a cart to a bridge
at the very edge of the city, where they met up with the other carts hauled by
their associates. The carts were loaded with all their boxes and bottles of
detergent, and when the coast was clear... One, two, three. Good. The children
began hurling their unsold boxes of Lavaluxe, Washrite, Rinse Quick and the rest
into the river far below. Quick. Get a move on. Hurry up. All of it. Come on.
Wait, wait. Stop. Stop. It's not going to work. They're just floating. We'll
have to empty the boxes into the river. Pour it all in. Anyone who had happened
to be awake so early on that particular spring morning, gazing downstream, would
have been surprised to see a soft, white, snowy cloud descending from the bridge
into the river. Yes. Yes. It's working. Faster. Faster. Don't leave any clues.
That's it. Brilliant. The children watched as their dream to launch a chain of
laundrettes sank with a cloud of snowy powder below the surface of the river.
But any relief they might have felt in the successful disposal of the evidence
dissolved as soon as they noticed swarms of tiny bubbles briefly resurfacing
downstream. But the force of the current was such that the bubbles disappeared
again as the children emptied box after box after box of detergent until...
That's it. We did it. All gone. Look over there. What's going on? But no one had
considered the waterfalls. A little further downstream, the river seemed to
accelerate as it plummeted out of sight. Well, I've never seen anything like
that before. At the base of the falls, the bubbles resurfaced for a second time,
but now they were bigger. Much, much bigger. And a large clump of suds began to
accumulate under the considerable downward pressure. The foam was bright white,
whiter than white, as it began to aggregate and swell. And the combination of
all the different powders in such dense concentration began to froth and churn
until the huge bubbles pushed each other upwards. Here they come. In the early
morning light, the bubbles turned a delicate shade of pink as they began their
flight above the waking streets and rooftops. Tracing the invisible course of
the city's air currents, the clump of bubbles began to break up, but then the
fragments began to multiply as the frothing river below disgorged more and more
bubbles. And the breeze began to pick up, tossing and tearing the froth into
strands and frills that stretched into garlands, soapy garlands glistening in
the rays of the rising sun. Little by little, the city began to notice. Trams
emptied their passengers into crowds of people gazing upwards. Oh, look! Look
what's going on! That's beautiful! Now it's changing colour. It's incredible.
It's all so totally enormous! The bikes and motorbikes, the cars and the taxis,
the news vendors and the bakers, Amadeeji, the street cleaner and the various
detergent salesmen, the late night boozers stumbling home and even Marco Valdo
himself, all of them stopped to wonder until someone said, Maybe it's something
atomic. What? Yes, it's probably radioactive. What? What? Help! Help! Help!
We're all going to die! Run! Run! Run! Marco stayed exactly where he was. He was
frozen to the spot as the giant bubbles continued to bloom and couple in the
shifting breezes. It's soap. Really? Of course! Stop! It's just soap, everyone!
And the sky, the roofs and towers of the taller buildings were all transfigured
by these transparent cupolas into shapes and colours no one had ever seen
before. But then Marco Valdo noticed the familiar black smoke already belching
from the factory smokestacks. He watched as the giant bubbles drifted towards
the smoke. Soon the two currents began to intermingle and in the flux of the
smoke engulfing the foam and the globes of soap absorbing the grains of soot,
Marco Valdo began to lose himself. So beautiful. Until minutes later, scouring
the sky, he could no longer see any bubbles at all. There was just the belching
smoke. The smoke. And only the smoke. In Marco Valdo, the narrator... We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.