TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Neil For and BBC Sounds. BBC News at seven o'clock. The Royal College of
Nursing has called off next week's strike action in England while it enters what
it calls intensive talks with the government on pay, terms and conditions. The
Union's members had planned a 48-hour walkout starting on the 1st of March. Our
health reporter Michelle Roberts has more. A joint statement from the Department
of Health and Social Care and the Royal College of Nursing says both sides are
committed to finding a fair and reasonable settlement. One that recognises the
vital role nurses play in the NHS as well as the wider economic pressures facing
the UK and the Prime Minister's priority to halve inflation. The Health
Secretary will meet the Royal College of Nursing tomorrow to begin talks. The
Education Secretary says she's written to the teaching unions inviting them to
enter formal talks on pay, conditions and reform. On the condition that strikes
across the north of England next week are cancelled. President Biden has
stressed that the US and other Western countries support for Ukraine will not
waver in a defiant speech in Poland delivered in the run-up to the first
anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. He told a cheering crowd in Warsaw
that Vladimir Putin's lust for power and land would fail and painted the
conflict as a battle for democracy. In an address earlier President Putin
accused the West of fuelling the war. A Romanian court has confirmed the social
media influencer Andrew Tate and his brother Tristan will remain in custody for
a further 30 days. The two men have been held for almost two months while police
investigate allegations of human trafficking and rape which they deny. Asda and
Morrison say they're putting limits on purchases of some fruit and vegetables as
supermarkets face shortages of fresh produce. Asda is capping sales of items
such as tomatoes, peppers and lettuce at three each per customer. The shortages
are largely the result of extreme weather in Spain and North Africa where bad
weather has affected harvests. BBC News. Kirsty and Roy have company when we
head to Ambridge in just a moment and then on tonight's Front Row the Hollywood
star Michael Douglas talks about his double Oscar winning movie career, how he's
still learning the craft of acting and about his new film Ant-Man and the Wasp
Quantumania which is in cinemas now. Also on the program leading animators join
Tom Sutcliffe to discuss their fears for the future of visual effects and
animation in the UK. Front Row, usual time just after a quarter past seven. BBC
Sounds. If you own a smart speaker did you know you can access a whole world of
BBC content through it? To get started just say open BBC Sounds then ask your
speaker to play whatever you want. You could listen to a music mix like this,
play Focus Beats or try a new podcast, play Desert Island Discs. And of course
if you want to listen to live radio you can just say play Radio 4. Music, radio
and podcasts available on most smart speakers. Just say open BBC Sounds to get
started. Kirsty is hiding from her next door neighbour in the arches. Guess who
I just bumped into when I got home? You're home already? Yes, to get on with the
decorating, remember? Oh yes, yes, sorry, yes, I remember. So guess who was
waiting outside the house with a frozen shepherd's pie? Brian? Yep, Brian. He
wanted to say thank you for us having him over the other night. Oh, that's nice.
No, no that's not nice, Roy. Oh, yeah it's not, you're right. Because now he's
gone to throw on some overalls and help me with painting Phoebe's old room.
He'll be back any minute. I take it you don't want that? No, I don't. I just
wanted a little piece with my paintbrush. When are you getting home? Oh, well,
we got the architect over this weekend but I don't think I can get away for
another couple of hours at least. Oh, so looking forward to some time to just
chill out and paint without having to tiptoe around Brian. Come on, Kirsty, have
some sympathy. I have, on several occasions. You may as well have an adjoining
door so he doesn't have to bother ringing the bell. I'm sorry, but... No, Roy,
you need to get home as soon as possible and help. Well, help how? I don't know,
but he's your daughter's grandad. What's that got to do with anything? Just get
back as soon as you can. Brian, come in. Right, where do you want me? What on
earth did you say that for? Because I don't want to be the one who stands
between him and his daughters. I thought Tom was going to finish off planting
the broad beans. Don't change the subject. Suggesting he go with them sounds
like you want him to go. I do, if that's what he wants. Helen, you're making no
sense. Dad, Lee is a very experienced physiotherapist. If he can get a green
card, he'd find work out there quite easily. I can't pretend his only choice in
life is to watch his children get on a plane and move to the other side of the
world. But suggesting he go with them and set up a life in America... I've
turned this over and over in my head, Dad. I see how much he's hurting. And it
is a valid and real option. The only thing stopping him is us, him and me. It
would be selfish to try and keep him here. So what if he decides to do it? I
don't know. If Lee chooses to move to California, what happens to you and the
boys? Would you go with him? I don't see how that's possible. With the boys'
schooling and my work here... So if he goes, that's it for you two? I wish it
was simpler. I wish Mabel and Evie loved it here and didn't want to go abroad,
but they really do. And Lee's cut up about it. If he needs to be with his
children, who am I to stand in his way? I love him too much for that. Besides,
we'd still be here, living our lives, but his side of things would be pretend.
That's a very noble approach, Helen, but it's a risky one, too. One that could
cost you your happiness. Right now it is Lee's happiness I'm thinking about.
Although he's been so quiet since last night, I'm not even sure he's speaking to
me. Oh, well, that'll make judging the pancake competition fun. Yeah. Have you
had a chance to speak to Lillian yet? Oh, one problem at a time, Helen. He's
asleep in the armchair? Yes. How long? Just over an hour. Oh, can't he sleep at
his own house in his own chair? Apparently not. He started off well, really
tried to help, but you can't really distinguish between the old paint and the
new. The colours are too similar. At least he tried. So I convinced him to come
down for a break, and one cup of tea and two digestives later, he's gone. Maybe
you should wake him. Me? Yes. Oh, I was really looking forward to some telly in
me feet up after the day I've had. Join the club. I was meant to be soaking in
the bath around about now, but how can I with Brian in the living room? We could
just go out to the pub, leave him a note in case he wakes up. How does that
help? I don't know. Wouldn't it be too horrible for him to wake up with no-one
here? Well, maybe he won't wake up and he'd still be asleep when we get back.
Either way, I'm starving, so... Well, look, I know it's my turn, but I haven't
had a chance to cook. I thought you said he brought a shepherd's pie? Oh, yeah.
I'll go and put it in the oven. Tony? Lee! You've come to collect me for the
pancake competition. In fact, shouldn't you be over there flipping pancakes
already? Natasha and Pat are there with Helen. They seem to be doing okay
without me. You were all gug-ho yesterday. Yesterday seems a long time ago.
Listen, Lee, is this about the girls being excited about San Francisco? They
confided in you too? No, Helen did. Right. Only because she was trying to get
her thoughts in order. Did she tell you she suggested I move to California with
them? Yes. Wow. So she's really been thinking about it. She's obviously looking
for a way out. Nonsense! She's literally asking me to leave, Tony. Oh, maybe I
shouldn't be discussing this with you, but... Lee, she's reminding you there is
an option where you get to be closer to them, no matter what it costs Helen and
the boys. So she's willing to let me go? I'm not sure willing is the right word.
She's been in knots about this. She seemed pretty calm and clear last night.
It's not an easy situation for either of you, but each day she sees you enjoying
being a father with Mabel and Evie, she's acutely aware of what you'll be
missing when they go. I asked her, what about us? She didn't say anything. It's
not her decision to make, it's yours. I know my daughter, Lee, she doesn't want
this to be more difficult for you than it has to be. Sooner or later, the girls
will be getting on a plane, and it seems you have a decision to make. It would
be all right if it was just one decision. I thought this was about me and the
girls, not me and Helen as well. Maybe I'm just not good at judging this kind of
thing. I don't think that's it. Then why would she tell me going was an option?
Because if she faced the same situation with Jack and Henry, what would you tell
her? Stay and let your boys go? What she said took every bit of love and
strength she has in her, Lee. She suggested it because she loves you, and she
knows how much you love your girls. What am I supposed to do, Tony? I don't envy
your situation, but I will say this. Being a good parent isn't just about being
in the same house or the same country as your children. Of course it's the
ideal, but when it's not possible, that's not the end. There are a dozen ways
you can be present in each other's lives in a meaningful and real way, even long
distance. I keep worrying they'll think I don't love them. Mabel and Evie are
old enough to know you love them, Lee. I see it whenever you're together. Yeah?
Yes. And you have this knack of making all four children feel loved without ever
feeling like they're competing for first place. Why do you think they all get
along so well? That is true parenting in my book. The UK's canals and rivers are
teeming with a plethora... Oh, I'm awfully sorry. I don't know what it is about
this chair and that narrator's voice. It puts me right to sleep. Don't worry,
Brian. Happens to the best of us. You're probably more tired than you think you
are. Maybe an early night would do you good. Yes, yeah. Well, I'd better be off.
Oh, and don't forget the shepherd's pie. It's already in the oven. Oh, good.
I'll be back. It's already in the oven. Oh, good. Good. Give yourselves a night
off cooking. Thanks. Why don't you stay? What? It's a massive shepherd's pie.
It's too big for two. I know. Joy's food parcels are very generously portioned.
Yeah, listen, thank you, but I couldn't possibly impose after the embarrassment
of dropping off. Oh, well. And you've got something for your dinner, have you?
Yes, yes, yes. Don't worry about me. There's no point in defrosting another dish
when there's plenty to go round. If you're both sure. Of course. Well, I might
go and get change, if that's OK. Maybe we could crack open a decent bottle of
wine from next door. Oh, sounds great. I'll bring some over. It'll be ready by
the time you get back. Excellent. I'll see you both in a moment. Yeah. Ow!
What's got into you? He was ready to leave. Oh, come on. He did bring the pie
over. These freezers are stocked full of them. I'm only trying to find the
silver lining. There isn't one, Roy. Our house has been taken over. Quality wine
and good home cooking isn't the silver lining. It's not that I don't feel awful
for him, and my heart goes out to him. It really does. But... Say it. Brian's
company isn't exactly... He always asks about work. And before I know it, he's
going on about ways to develop the rewilding site that are diametrically
opposite to my basic world view. He means well. I know, and I hate myself for
saying this, but once he's had a couple of drinks, he doesn't know when to stop.
And I'm so tired of having to smile politely and wait for him to wind down. I
don't know what's worse, when he's out like a light on the sofa or when he's
railroading the conversation. Well, do you want to call him and tell him not to
come? Oh, sure. There's nothing mean about that. You're the one who wants rid of
him. And you're the one who keeps inviting him back. I do not. You literally
just did! I did, didn't I? Yeah. Oh, I'd better get changed too. And tonight,
you're doing all the clearing up. Thanks for coming out for a walk with me. Oh,
you don't have to thank me. It's nice. Walk those pancakes off. They're quite
full-on, aren't they? Sorry I was late tonight. That's OK. You've got a lot on
your mind. I have. Especially after what I said last night. I haven't stopped
thinking about it. Since you said the words, I kept wondering what you meant.
You suggesting I go. You could have asked me. I was right there. Yeah, but I'm a
typical man, aren't I? A dumb bloke who's happier to get lost in his own
thoughts than ask for directions. And? I thought, why is the woman I love
looking for a way out? Why is she keen for me to leave the country? Keen? Lee,
that's not what I said and it's certainly not what I meant. I know. I spoke to
your dad. Oh. He was great. He cleared a few things up. Such as? Such as, what
would I say to you if it was your decision to make? And then I spoke to Alicia.
And tonight I'll be speaking to Mabel and Evie themselves. So you've come to a
decision? I have. The way I see it, if you can be courageous enough to support
me moving away to be nearer my girls, even if it means losing us, then I ought
to be man enough to let my girls be happy. So let them go and try out San
Francisco for themselves. I told Alicia I want video calls, visits in the
holidays whenever possible, and I need to trust they'll always know I'm their
dad, know how much I love them. And then I have to do everything I can to be a
meaningful, present part of their lives. So you're staying? I'm staying. In this
way, I get to be a good dad to my daughters, and to my sons too. I've been
trying these past few days to think of how I might tell the boys that you might
be moving far away. I just couldn't do it. I couldn't find the words. Good. I'll
leave you to it, as I'm now. Adil has some tough love for Roy when we return to
Ambridge tomorrow night at seven. Are sperm counts falling? James Gallagher will
investigate for tonight's Inside Health at nine o'clock. And before that, at
eight o'clock, this week's Fireland Four turns the spotlight on the Fire
Brigade. Let's hear more now from Jane Deeth. It started with London Fire
Brigade. A review found the culture was toxic and the level of ingrained
prejudice against women was dangerous. It opened a Pandora's box of revelations
of sexist bullying in other fire services. Fireland Four has been listening to
firefighters' experiences. Women who've had their kit tampered with had fire
axes thrown at their heads and had to fight off sexual assault. They say no one
helped them, and they were silenced because they were forced out when they dared
to complain. But now that silence is being broken. On Fireland Four, after the
news. This is BBC Radio 4. Time now for tonight's Front Row with Tom Sutcliffe.
Hello. Strange place, the quantum realm. Snail-headed horses, rubber buildings
and Michael Douglas too. In just a moment, he talks to us about the latest
addition to the Marvel Extended Universe, Ant-Man and the Wasp, Quantumania, a
film in which his very familiar face is one of the few sights that hasn't been
generated by a computer. British companies have been prominent in providing such
visual effects and animation for Hollywood, but for how long if the British
government doesn't keep pace with tax reliefs offered elsewhere? We're also
joined tonight by William Sargent of Framestore and Sean Clarke of Aardman
Animation, both worried about how their industry is going to stay competitive
after Brexit. And we have orchestral manoeuvres in the dark. The Odessa
Philharmonic there with the Ukrainian national anthem, conducted by Hobart Earl
in a performance in which the only electricity was musical. He talks to us later
about playing under blackout conditions, and we report on an operatic
contribution to Ukraine's continuing resistance to Russia. We're starting,
though, with Michael Douglas, Hollywood royalty by inheritance as the son of
Kirk Douglas, but also an actor who carved out a place at the head of the A-list
in his own right, particularly with a string of big films in the 80s. They
included Fatal Attraction, Falling Down and Wall Street, for which he won a Best
Actor Oscar. He won another Oscar as the producer of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest, and an Emmy for his performance as the closeted entertainer Liberace in
Steven Soderbergh's film Behind the Candelabra. And, though he's now 78, he
shows no signs of stopping, his latest appearance being in Ant-Man and the Wasp,
Quantumania, in which he plays an inventor, Hank Pym. Meddling with the laws of
time and space obviously runs in the family, because after Hank's granddaughter
gets a bit carried away with her science project, the entire family, Ant-Man's
son-in-law and all, are accidentally whirled down a cosmic plughole. When I
talked to Michael Douglas about the film, I suggested that while the setting
might be otherworldly, the essential plot here was a family road trip. Very
astute analysis. It's exactly what it is when it's all broken down. I mean, that
family road trip is totally camouflaged in this new world, the quantum realm.
About 90% of the movie, except for the very beginning and the end, take place in
this minuscule, tiny, tiny world, totally fresh. And it's really impressive, I
must say. You know, when you're doing these so-called green screen movies, you
get a suggestion of what it might look like. So you only see green when you're
filming. You're not seeing any of the effects or even a placeholder. No, now you
see some of the effects. The effects that are done by the time of the filming
are up on the screens, and are part of it. For instance, there's that one bar
scene when we first arrive, when Bill Murray arrives. That was a combination of
the creatures, a weird assortment of actual actors dressed up. And then beyond
that, on the screen, Bill's spaceship pulls into the parking place, and you
believe it's actually there. So you have something to act against. Sometimes you
have something to relate to. What advice would Sandy Kaminsky give about green
screen acting? You play him, you play the acting coach in The Kaminsky Method, a
very funny Netflix series. What would he say to a young actor about the best way
to deal with it? It's comic books. It's larger than life. It's a degree of
theatricality, but not theatricality. Your dialogue may seem simplistic. It is.
But it follows the same sort of tight, short, curt sentences that one gets in
comic books, except for Hank Pym, the professor, who every now and again has to
elaborate and articulate as if he really understands what the hell is going on.
So you've been studying the quantum realm. Mm-hmm. Why didn't you ask me about
it? I tried, Mum, a lot. You never wanted to talk about it. Cassie's just been
curious, and we gave her some pointers. This isn't exactly ant science, is it,
Henry? You know how dangerous the quantum realm is. We all do, Mum. Nobody's
going to the quantum realm. That's why we made this. Your daughter built a
subatomic Hubble telescope in a basement. And are you at all nostalgic for the
days when there was a bit less in the way of digital effects? I mean, you know,
the special effects in Wall Street were the script. Right. Those lines that kind
of went into the conversation and stayed there. Right. My entire career has been
contemporary, and so it was a conscious effort on my part, saying after 50 years
in the business and doing all these contemporary projects, except for one, to do
a green screen. I was curious about acting when things were not there, and so I
was curious, and that's really the reason why I wanted to try it. And it's
different. You have to have much more faith and trust in your director when you
say, I really feel like I'm overacting, because you don't see things. They're
telling you, okay, there's a comet coming at you, and then it's going past, and
your eyes are wide, and this, and you feel like, I really feel silly. They say,
trust me, don't. So it's a unique kind of partnership, whereas normally as an
actor you trust your own instincts. And 99.9% of the time they're absolutely
right, because they know, they've seen the storyboards, they know how it's all
going to come. But when you're driving the spaceship by plunging your hands into
two giant animated transparent jelly worms, which are writhing around, you're
just pushing into thin air, aren't you? No, no, those plastic things were
actually coming up, and I had to lubricate my arms to go in, and they were
already lubricated. I felt a little bit like an obstetrician. There is a
generation of filmmakers who kind of minds the prevalence of these superhero
movies, the way in which they really take up a lot of space in Hollywood now.
What's your feeling about that? Well, I guess I remember a time during my
father's period where it was nothing but westerns. And with the advent of
streaming, thank goodness for the sci-fi green screen Marvel pictures, because
that seems to be a large part of what's supporting movie theaters' very
existence these days. I think we have enough space, and you can't argue a
success. I mean, Marvel's done close to 40 now, and I think 36 out of the 40
have been blockbusters. Well, it's an interesting analogy, that with westerns,
because westerns did occupy a huge amount of real estate, and they became
another way of telling different stories within that. But I wonder, I mean, I
was thinking about your filmography, you know, Fatal Attraction, Falling Down,
Wall Street, The War of the Roses, films like that, they provoked debate about
real issues in the world. I mean, sometimes quite complicated debate. In Falling
Down, there was a lot of anger about that film. The superhero movies don't do
that, do they? No. No, they don't. And my career has generally been based on,
you know, controversial films, sort of the grey area, not right or wrong, but
just sort of ambivalence and kind of questioning. Yeah, that's what has
interested me, but allow me once in a while to go off in another direction. I
enjoy this, this is a different area, sort of a different style. It's a
pleasure. But it's... I'm guessing, I mean, you say, you know, there are the
challenges of green-skin, but I'm guessing that this wasn't the toughest day at
the office for you. And I'm wondering, in your career, what was the biggest
stretch for you as an actor? What was the role that really...? One that I
enjoyed, I mean, there's kind of character acting, which I really like. You
don't have the confidence as a leading man necessarily just to use your own
persona. It's something I'm actually working on later in my life, where just
being yourself. A lot of leading men, it's sometimes harder just to be yourself.
So I like characters. So something like behind the candelabra, where I play
Liberace, was enjoyable, hard work. You know what? I have a great idea. Why
don't you come work for me? As what? Well, you could be my secretary. I don't
type. Hell, Scott, I can pay people to type. I need a companion, a bodyguard,
someone to keep people off my back, someone I can talk to the way we talked
tonight. Please. Say yes, Scott. Wall Street was hard. It was hard work, a lot
of dialogue and very demanding. Oliver Stone was an excellent director, and he
pushed me. In what ways did he push you? I mean, it was tough on set, was it?
Well, he pushed me. He came to me the second week of shooting. He came into my
trailer and said, Are you OK? I said, Yeah. He said, Are you doing drugs? I
said, No. Because you look like you've never acted before in your life. Well,
Gordon Gekko just shrivels up into a little ball. And I said, Well, I guess I'd
better go look at some dailies, because that's the only time I look at dailies
if there's an issue or something. He said, Yeah, you better. And I went to look
at them, and I thought it was pretty good. I'm looking, and I came back, and I
said, Yeah. It's not far from OK. He said, It is, isn't it? I said, What do you
want, Oliver? What Oliver wanted was a little more nastiness. And he was willing
to be the confront me. And if I was going to be angry at him, angry at him for
the rest of the pictures, he's to run next to the camera with his script,
looking at it, not even looking at me. And that was so be it. And that's his
kind of commitment. But as a result, I won an Oscar, and he made me a better
actor for it. So I will always be indebted to that. The point is, ladies and
gentlemen, that greed, for lack of a better word, is good. Greed is right. Greed
works. If I've got the maths right, your father, Kirk Douglas, was still making,
I think he made his last film at 88. Probably, yeah. You don't need to make a
reputation. You've already got that. I'm taking it. You don't need to pay the
utility bills by going to work. What is it that gets you out for those kind of
early morning calls? I love my job. I love working. I mean, I think it's true
with most, I use the word loosely, artists, you don't think about 65 years old
and being, oh, thank God I can retire now. So I just do this because I enjoy it.
You suggested that you're still kind of learning how to do it, just in an answer
to this question. I try to, yeah. I've never been really comfortable with a
screen. Early on in my career, someone said to me, you know, the camera can tell
when you're lying. Who is the camera? So I was so, I was into this sort of
method acting of thinking, oh, my God, I can't lie. And then, of course, I think
it was fatal attraction. It was that far along the line, getting ready for my
characterization and method acting. And they said, okay, okay, I got to be a
lawyer. I said, all right, well, I could be a lawyer. You live in New York City.
Yeah, I live in New York City. You're an adulterer. Well, you know, that's a
possibility. You know, so all of a sudden I said, well, wait a minute, I could
play this part. You know, I know this sounds silly. But once, and then, once I
realized that, then I said, wait a minute, I lie every day. At least once a day
I'm telling a lie. I mean, acting is about lying. Acting is lying, making,
convincing somebody that you're telling the truth. And so I had this total
epiphany, and it sort of freed me up and made me enjoy what up to then had just
been painful as a profession. And once that sort of happened, I just became
enjoying it much, much more. One of the pieces of advice Sandy Kaminsky gives
his students is you've got to love the character. We never quite know how to
take Sandy's. Because we don't know how quite. But is that a good, is that a
good note? It is. And that's probably why I love villains. You know, that's why
most actors, male actors, love, love the villains. You know, for a long time,
ladies, I'm going back to when I produced One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest, and
five actresses turned down the role of Nurse Ratched before we were able to get
Luz Fletcher. Because at that time, an actress or woman did not want to play a
villain, whereas a guy, that's all he ever wanted to do was to play a villain.
That was the most fun. And what do you feel, last question, just about that
streaming revolution? It was interesting. I was watching Wall Street last night,
and there's this very interesting moment where Gordon Gekko pulls out this
little tiny television, and he's showing off. You know, it's a toy he's bought
for his kid. And Charlie Sheen looks at it and says, you can't see anything on
that. And I thought, oh, you don't know what's coming. How about I'm going to
have the old brick cell phone on the cell phone? But that little screen has
become important. People watch on it, don't they? They do. And good content is
made for it. Very good content. I'm so happy and excited about it because, at
least in the U.S., not so much over here in the U.K., but the television careers
and film careers run separate tracks. And granted, kind of feature films look
sort of down on television, and it was very difficult to make the transition.
And when I produced Cuckoo's Nest, I was still in the streets of San Francisco,
a TV show, which I had left to produce that show. We won the Oscar. Now I'm an
Academy-winning producer. But as an actor, I can't get arrested in feature
films. So I actually started doing a couple of movies where I was producing it,
but in this case, Jeff Bridges, I'm thinking of a movie called Starman, got the
role. So streaming has brought in the best of feature film, predominantly
writers, because in streaming, the writer could also be a producer and do well,
as well as television talent acting and directing. You know, I think it beats
with anything that supposedly, but even when we talk about anything that's in a
movie theater, is there for maybe a week, possibly more, before it goes into
streaming. So that is the future. Michael Douglas, I really enjoyed that
conversation, so much so it made up for having to go and see the film first.
Anyway, Ant-Man and the Wasp, Quantumania, is in cinemas now. You don't need to
go to the quantum realm to find yourself in an alternative universe, of course.
But critics can do it too, brutally. Ever since the 24th of February last year,
musicians and artists in Ukraine have been in a very different world, performing
work under the threat of Russian missiles with companies pulled out of shape by
conscription and the urgency of national defence. Ukraine Opera won Company of
the Year at the International Opera Awards last year for their achievement in
producing outstanding work in challenging circumstances. And this week, they're
reviving a work they first premiered last year, Katerina, which tells the story
of a Ukrainian girl whose love is betrayed by a Russian soldier. For Front Row,
Luke Jones talked to the opera's director, Oksana Taranenko. You know, the war
actually started in 2014. Since then, like, the biggest part of Ukrainian
society became aware of what kind of neighbour called himself our brother. And I
was thinking of what can be offered to the Ukrainian public with Ukrainian art.
So COVID times gave me time for that. And actually, when we started to rehearse
Katerina, we already put in the mise-en-scene, in costume, in aesthetics, in
choreography. We already put all our understanding of the situation of the
relationship between us and we call them Moscovites. These people are
Moscovites. They are just wild beasts. Story of Katerina herself, she got
pregnant from the Moscovite. She got abandoned and she committed suicide because
she didn't have any other choice. So rehearsals were well underway. You had this
new opera. But then, of course, war breaks out. All my actors, they are on the
beach collecting sand for sandbags. You know, they were covering the theatre
building with those sandbags to protect it. I'm from Kiev and composer and
choreographer Oleg Siskler and composer Alexander Zhordin, three of us,
Kievites. It took us 16 hours to get back to Kiev to join our families. And when
did you feel safe to return and to even think about doing some kind of creative
work? That was all about decision of the CEO of Odessa Opera, Nadiya Babich.
This courageous woman, she called me and said, like, Oksana, we are going back
to work. Whatever cost, we are going to make this premiere on September. So
immediately my life gained the future back and I came back. Could you just
describe for me the opera house in Odessa, just so we can picture it in our
minds? Odessa Opera House. This is the pearl of Odessa. The theatre itself is
situated in a quite dangerous spot because it's very close to the harbour. And
of course, Russians are trying to reach the harbour. And was it damaged at all?
Oh, no, no, no. There is no scratch. Happily. What about your performers? How
easy was it to reassemble them as the war continued? Well, actually, there was
like two thirds of the people because mainly, you know, women went abroad. Lots
of men from the orchestra, they went to army. Our choreographer, Alexey
Sklyarenko, he volunteered to Territory Defence. He was paramedic. I mean, it
was a huge job to take him back at least for two weeks so he can finish his
choreographic job. His reality was totally split. We were underselling as well.
There were alerts a lot. And it was very annoying. We were not scary, but we
were annoyed because we were losing time. So you were even taking rehearsals
down into the bomb shelters when you needed to? Yeah, we did that. Yes. The
spirit was very high. Oksana, at that time, when so many awful things were still
happening, the piece must have really taken on a new meaning for you. Most of
Ukrainians identified themselves with this misused and raped Katerina. But the
main message that people got that I put that and people got it that never again,
we will not be victim anymore. Alexander Rodin, who wrote, who composed the
music, and he also did libretto, he managed somehow to transmit that spirit of
the land and all our yearly ceremonies. You think that when the war was very
much still going on, people would stop going to the opera and the theatre and
seeing live music. That would be one of the first things that they dispense
with. The theatre was totally full and it still stalled out. While
paradoxically, at that time, you know, there's opera being considered as a high
art now became like closer to people, you know, because the music and singing
and Ukrainians, we are singing nation. It kind of affects the subconscious
strength of the people and releases that. Survival is not only about physical
survival. Survival is about what we are surviving actually for. What is our
idea? Who we are? What we are going to give to our children, to our future
generations? And that brings these answers definitely. Oksana Terenenko talking
to Luke Jones there and Katerina is now being streamed on Arte Concert and
returns to the Odessa Opera stage this coming Friday. Now to talk more about
performing in wartime is Hobart Earl, who's been principal conductor of the
Odessa Philharmonic Orchestra for over 30 years now. To such effect, in fact,
that he was named a People's Artist of Ukraine in 2013. Welcome to front row,
Hobart. Is it very common for that? You weren't born in Ukraine, I think you
were born in Venezuela. Is that right? Correct. So is it common for the People's
Artist of Ukraine to go to somebody from outside the country? Actually, I am the
first non-Slavic person to have that honor. It's a huge honor. And the way it
works, it's a government award. You have to have had a certain amount of time as
Distinguished Artist of Ukraine before you get upgraded. You work your way up. I
take it you recognize much of what we've just heard from Oksana. That
interruption of rehearsals, that's been happening to you too. Absolutely.
Although I will say this, that the situation in Odessa this past January when I
was there, I spent three weeks there doing New Year's concerts and other
concerts, was that the musicians entirely by their own will, and they've been
doing that when I'm there and when not, is pretty much to ignore the air raid
sirens. And I have a gut feeling that that's not only with the Odessa
Philharmonic Orchestra, I think that's with a lot of other performing arts
groups as well. I know your circumstances are slightly different from the Opera
House because that is down near the docks and has a reliable supply of
electricity. You don't. That concert we heard at the top of the program there
had to be played without any lighting at all, except for the audience using
their phones and little torches to light the musicians. What was that like?
Well, the audience used their phones to make their way into the concert hall
because it's pitch dark. But once they were seated, their phones were off. The
orchestra has small little battery powered lamps on each stand that work either
on batteries or with power banks. And unfortunately, some of our concerts have
been from start to finish in the total darkness. It's absolutely the last way
you would want it, but I assume you get an extraordinary atmosphere from that,
don't you? A different way of listening. There is no question that the audience
is so totally focused when it's dark. Our New Year's concert, traditional New
Year's concert, which is Julian calendar New Year, that's January 13th, it's New
Year's Eve in the Julian calendar, was in darkness from start to finish. And the
atmosphere was magical because there wasn't a single free seat in the entire
hall. Having said that, I think it's easier for the orchestra to play when the
lights are on because this visual communication between the players gets lost.
And it's a very sort of special atmosphere. But I think if we took a roll call,
we'd find that the orchestra would be much happier playing with the lights on.
Presumably the conductor is very important in that role. You need a spotlight on
you. In that repertoire, they do need me very much. And what we have is a very
sort of small lamp that's quite high above my head. But I have to stand in the
middle to make sure that I'm really well seen. And of course, we rehearsed that
way to make sure that if the concert would be in the dark, that it was, that
everyone could see me well. Because the Viennese waltzes are very, very subtle.
The orchestra is very good at that. We've been doing that for many, many years.
I studied in Vienna and I love this music dearly. But still, they do need me in
that repertoire. So it's an added problem. Talking about the repertoire, how
much has it changed? One could understand that there would be a deep reluctance
to hear a lot of Russian standards at the moment. Have you increased the amount
of Ukrainian music you're playing? Well, we have always taken pride in that we
do a lot of Ukrainian music. And just now, literally two, three weeks ago, we
gave the first performance in Odessa, at least since 1991, if not at all, of the
7th Symphony by the Crimean Tatar composer Alemdar Karamanov. His 7th Symphony
is called Moonlit Sea. It was written in 1958. It's extremely unusual music for
that period and for that period in Soviet music as well. And this was wonderful
because the audience was, I think, very, very taken by this music, this
atmospheric. Odessa is by the sea. And of course, when it's dark and if you have
a full moon, you have this moonlit path. So this atmospheric music was very
interesting for everyone, including some of the musicians who didn't play, who
actually came to hear the performance, came backstage to see how taken they were
by the music, which, of course, they never knew before. You've played music by
Miroslav Skoric as well. We've got a little bit of that. That's another kind of
Ukrainian composer. Let's just hear a little bit of it before we talk. Now, I
hope up to my untutored ear, that sounds as though it's absolutely tapping into
kind of folk, folk music and Ukrainian folk music. Is that right? It absolutely
is, unfortunately, because of the link I'm on here. I didn't hear what excerpt
you played from the piece. We're live, but that is absolutely it's what's called
Hutsul music. Hutsul are a mountain people in the western region, the Carpathian
mountain region of Ukraine. And this is one of Skoric's masterpieces written.
It's actually movie music for Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors. It was a 1965
classic of Soviet music for which Skoric, a Soviet film. You've come here now to
give a talk, music in wartime, a huge subject that. What are you actually
focusing on? Well, the talk, Tom, is a video presentation of lots of short
videos of ours from 2014 until today. Unfortunately, this has been going on for
nine years. Of course, it got a lot worse on February 24th last year, much
worse. But still, we've been in the situation of war. And between the videos, I
speak about the music that's being heard. I speak about the history of Ukraine.
I speak about how performers adapt to performing under wartime, how composers
sometimes consciously, sometimes subconsciously reflect music, wartime in their
music. And then perhaps most interestingly, how audiences can perceive the same
piece of music differently under times of war with very precise examples in the
videos that are being played. Just give us one example, will you, of that change
of audience perception? I'll give you an example without naming the composers,
so as to ruin the surprise. But it's a piece of music which is extremely well
known to every single person in the former Soviet Union. It's a waltz. It's one
of these very famous wartime waltzes from the Second World War, which everyone
grew up with. But here's the thing. It was not written to have anything to do
with the Second World War. It was written way, way, way before. And the people
who heard that music before the Second World War came around could have never
dreamed that it would become to be perceived as wartime music. And of course,
nowadays, it's perceived in an entirely different way. Because we've got a fresh
war going on. And I think there's no question. That's one example. But there are
other examples in my talk of how, for example, in the Requiem of Valentin
Silvestrov, when you suddenly have a Ukrainian text in the middle of this Latin
Requiem, which was written way before this conflict came about. And he's quoting
a poem by Taras Shevchenko, in which suddenly it goes into Ukraine. The Requiem
is a memory of his wife, but suddenly Shevchenko goes into Ukraine. That's a
bombshell. It must have an enormous effect on an audience. Thank you very much
indeed, Hobart Earl. And that talk you're going to give, Ukraine music in
wartime, is tomorrow at 2.30pm at the University of St Andrews, the Laidlaw
Music Centre. And admission to that is free. And you might like to know that the
Ukrainian-born pianist Dinara Clinton is going to feature on Add to Playlist
this Friday. Now, in terms of agricultural exports, Sean le Mouton, Sean
Daschaff and Sean la Pecora are a notable British success. You'll probably know
them better as Sean the Sheep. But as well as being sold to French, German and
Italian television, Aardman Animation's creation has travelled world-wide.
Animation, children's programming and visual effects are a great British
success. But according to Aardman's managing director, Sean Clarke, things are
now as precarious as the cliffhanger moment from a Wallace and Gromit film.
Don't worry, Gromit. I'm cool, right behind you. Hang in there, Gromit.
Everything's under control. A scene from The Wrong Trousers, the kind of home-
grown hit which those in the industry fear might be endangered if the tax
reliefs and assistance offered to creative businesses don't match those
available elsewhere. The government has just concluded a consultation with
audiovisual companies about this. Joining Sean Clarke to talk about the case
they've been making is William Sargent, one of the founders and now chairman of
the very successful creative studio Framestore, which has been essential to the
success of numerous films and television series, including Paddington, Top Gun
Maverick and recently The Last of Us. Sean Clarke, you said recently about
children's television particularly, what's produced in this country will go off
the edge of a cliff in the next couple of years unless something is done. What
is the cliff, first of all, that they might go over? It sounds a bit like a
Wallace and Gromit film, doesn't it? It does a bit. Essentially, what I was
getting at was without any investment, we will change from being a very proud
nation that makes and has been making for the last 50 years children's
television to a nation that conceives ideas and they're made elsewhere. That's
all principally around how we look at investment and infrastructure. In the last
10 years, there's been much change in the industry driven by streamers, much
disruption and a lot of money has come into the industry. The Treasury brief for
this consultation said that in 2021 to 2022 alone, audiovisual release provided
£927 million in support to film and television and video games industries. Could
you just clarify how that works? I mean, it's not money you're being given, is
it? It's money you don't have to give the government that you can then reinvest.
Is that how it works? Yes, essentially, you get a tax relief, you get the tax
back so you can include it as part of your financing. You have to have to
deficit finance it during production, but you essentially get that money back.
So it's an important part of any financing plan. But what's happened is in the
last 10 years, there's a lot of money come into the industry and clearly other
countries were a part of that. So they are coming in with much more competitive
tax credits ranging from anywhere between 37 and 50 percent, whereas we're at 25
percent. And I think all we're asking for is a level playing field to compete.
You know, Aardman and Framestore and many other companies are very proud of
making productions in this country and we want to continue that. I really feel
passionately we want to be able to have that next Aardman, that next Shaun the
Sheep, and without that investment, then I think that diminishes. I just want to
bring in William Sargent here. Do you share Shaun's sense of alarm to the same
degree? I think what Shaun is highlighting is that we have built a business. We
take what you just said, the 900 million of tax credits. It actually delivered
three and a half billion of tax. Right. And 15 billion pound industry. So it's
actually incredibly good money. So from that point of view, we have delivered on
the support that all governments in the UK have given us over the last 20 years.
So we've built it and we have the platform in that. What Shaun is correctly
identifying is that the other G8 countries would like to have a piece of the
action and are going after it. And that's really what he's talking about, the
competitiveness of where we are now. Now, Shaun, I presume that the other G8
countries would have been going after that money, whatever happened with Brexit.
But has Brexit made a difference, too? It has. And, you know, when we were part
of the European Union, we were able to access creative European media funding.
And I think when I looked at the stats and accounts, the UK accessed on average
around 21 to 22 million pounds a year. And we currently have a replacement for
that, which is around seven million. We also had, which was a brilliant
initiative, a young audience content fund, which was linked to supporting UK
production. About 40 million over three years, 221 projects were created,
including an urban project. And that's now come to an end. So if we're going to
compete, you know, we really need to compete with a competitive tax credit and
investment for producers to be able to keep the rights. If you don't keep the
rights, you have to sell them to finance them. And, you know, that dilutes the
creative integrity of the project. You have more people involved in the
creativity. And it also means there's less money coming back into the country.
Everybody quotes Peppa Pig. That's owned by a US toy company. So all the profits
go back into the US versus coming back into into this country. Does freedom of
movement make a difference here? I mean, we're told that these are talent
industries and as it were, being able to hire the right talent is crucial, isn't
it? It is crucial. And, you know, a third of our colleagues come from the member
states in Europe. And we now have a cost, obviously, to bring them in and that.
But I think to take it to the bigger picture, the tax credit has built an
industry that currently supports a quarter of a million jobs. That's a tenfold
increase over the last 20 years. And that right there, you know, we have five
billion pounds coming in every year from effectively Hollywood and North
American places like that. Now, that underpins a huge set of jobs and so forth.
And in our case, we're at the technology end of it. And technology is basically
about 80 percent of the large films like Maverick and Harry Potter and those
sort of films that you see. And we, for example, do tap into the European
Commission grants and that. But for us, you see, the issue is that there's a cap
at the last 20 percent doesn't have a tax credit. Visual effects is portable and
leaves the country. One of the things that we're trying to do in this tax credit
consultation is to make sure that we remove that so that the visual effects stay
here. Because the visual effects drive the industry. And let me give an example
of the output. At present, the Imperial College are using software developed in
our sector to to have the cost of trials for degenerative drugs development.
Right. So our industry is the R&D bedrock. The technology part of the of the
industry is it's a key part of the community. And we own that at present. That's
what that's why the other countries want it, because we own the seed of the
future of digital skills. So it goes in all directions. In your view, in your
view, does does Brexit make it easier for easier for us to do some of these
things? It's a no brainer. Just take away the cap, for example, and you
transform it. And the key there is the visual effects, the digital production
side of the industry. Really, if we get that right and the metaverse is coming
in behind it, what we do is the metaverse and the UK leads in that. Right. And
instead of talking about a quarter of a million jobs, we're talking about a
million jobs in 10 to 15 years time. It's as basic as that. And we have a choice
whether we want it or not. And as Sean says, if we're not competitive, we won't
get those jobs. Sean Clark, they are also talking about simplifying tax rules.
This is an absolute blizzard of acronyms when you look at this. Is that
something that will help? Is that significant, do you think? Just simplifying
the regime? Any simplification is useful. I fear. I totally support what Will is
saying in terms of protecting the effects, but my fear is that if they took away
the cap, they would reduce the tax credit. So I think that the message really
is, is if you take away the cap, you know, at least maintain it and look at
increasing it. You know, we need a level playing field and we need investment to
encourage people to carry on making productions in this in this country. I was
very struck by a little line that said in order to qualify for these tax
reliefs, productions must be certified as culturally British by the BFI. Now,
Sean, you would have no problem at all with Wallace and Gromit and Sean the
Sheep, I would have thought. Very clearly culturally British. What about Top Gun
Maverick? Sci-fi movies and fantasy movies, if you stick a castle in a few lines
of British poetry and definitely a few British actors, you'll probably be
qualifying as a British movie. So there are ways around it. There is a creative
approach to it. We're a creative industry. We have a creative approach to
qualifying as a British movie. Well, thank you very much indeed, Sean Clark and
William Sargent. Apparently, government action is coming by 2024, they say. Do
you believe them? In terms of action? In terms of action. Are you holding your
breath? Well, I believe that they look, they understand it. And certainly the
prime minister, when he was chancellor, certainly got the picture. OK, right.
Well, we'll follow that story up, of course, and we will come back to it in the
future to say what's happened. Thank you very much indeed, Sean Clark and
William Sargent. That is it for tonight on tomorrow's Front Row from Salford.
The actor turned film director Nathaniel Martello-White on his psychological
thriller The Strays. Sounds very interesting. And we look to the great New
Yorker writer Janet Malcolm's autobiographical essays, Still Pictures. Join Nick
Hadd for that at 7.15 tomorrow. Until then, good night. Front Row was presented
by Tom Sutcliffe and the producer was Harry Parker. The studio engineer was
Giles Aspin. Coming up after the news, Phylon 4 investigates claims of racism,
sexism and bullying in the UK fire service.