TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hello and welcome to The World at One with me, Johnny Diamond. Tributes,
prayers and silence across the UK to mark a year of war in Ukraine. From
Ukraine, defiance. For us it's existential. In order to survive and have the
future we have to continue. We'll hear from the US ambassador to NATO. Also
today, after an 11-year-old girl in Cambodia dies of bird flu, experts say we
must prepare. We absolutely need to watch this one like a hawk. When it does
infect people it can be very nasty indeed. The good news at the moment is that
there's no evidence of human to human spread. And in defence of brutalism, where
concrete and brick is unadorned. People do kind of leap to thinking about
crumbling lumps of concrete falling off and poverty and lack of investment. But
these buildings are so characterful. The BBC News is read by Viji Allis.
President Volodymyr Zelensky has said Ukraine will not rest until all of its
land has been liberated as he marked exactly a year since Russia launched its
full-scale invasion. In a video address, Mr Zelensky said his country had
endured a year of pain but had emerged with a sense of invincibility. Ceremonies
are being held in cities and towns across Ukraine to mark the anniversary of
Europe's biggest conflict since the Second World War. Our correspondent in Kiev,
James Waterhouse, reports. This morning President Zelensky handed medals out to
soldiers on what is a bittersweet day for his capital and country. His forces
prevailed in the battle for Kiev last year but Russia still occupies a fifth of
Ukrainian territory. Plus, Moscow already seems to have started major offensives
across the vast front line, which Ukraine is broadly continuing to defend. Mr
Zelensky has described the situation as difficult and painful and is waiting to
use more Western hardware like tanks to try to break the deadlock. Today, the
Polish government announced their first Leopard 2 tanks had been sent to Kiev.
Russia's invasion has faltered throughout but its forces seem determined to
seize the initiative after months of static fighting. Twelve months on from the
invasion, Moscow remains defiant despite setbacks and international criticism.
Here's our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg. The one-year anniversary of the war
is not headline news in Russia. The lunchtime bulletins on state TV glossing
over the fact that President Putin's special military operation failed to
achieve what the Kremlin had expected, a swift victory. Over the last 12 months,
Russia's armed forces have suffered heavy casualties, forcing President Putin to
declare mobilization and draft hundreds of thousands of Russians into the army.
But publicly at least, officials here remain confident and determined. In a
message on social media, the former president, Dmitry Medvedev, predicted a
Russian victory and he suggested pushing back the borders of those who are
threats to Russia as far as possible, even if they're the borders of Poland. The
UK has marked the anniversary with a minute's silence led by Rishi Sunak from
the steps of Downing Street. A group of Ukrainian troops being trained by the UK
stood alongside the Prime Minister for the occasion. The King has paid tribute
to what he called the remarkable courage and resilience of the people of
Ukraine. Elsewhere, activists in Berlin have placed a destroyed Russian tank
outside Moscow's embassy in the city and called for an end to the war. In Paris,
the Eiffel Tower was lit with the blue and yellow colours of the Ukrainian flag.
The leaders of the five biggest Stormont parties have met Northern Ireland's
Chief Constable, Simon Byrne, to send a message of unity after the attempted
murder of a senior police officer. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in
a critical condition in hospital following Wednesday's shooting in Oma. Four men
have been arrested. Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page is at police
headquarters in Belfast. Simon Byrne said he hoped standing alongside political
leaders would send a message that there was no support for political violence.
The Vice President of Sinn Féin, Michelle O'Neill, described the attempted
murder of John Caldwell as an attack on the whole community. The Democratic
Unionist Party leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, said the people who carried out
the shooting were not the future of Northern Ireland. The police investigation
is focused on the dissident Republican paramilitary organisation known as the
New IRA. It's thought to be the largest of the armed groups which are opposed to
the peace process. Mr Byrne said he was concerned by the tempo of the group's
activity, but officers were working round the clock to deal with the threat. A
fourth man was arrested overnight in relation to the shooting of Mr Caldwell.
Junior doctors in England have announced three days of strike action over pay
from the 13th to the 15th of March. Their union, the British Medical
Association, announced earlier this week that members had voted overwhelmingly
in favour of taking industrial action. The BMA says doctors have seen their pay
eroded by 26% in the last 15 years, once inflation is taken into account. The
government called the move disappointing and said it was only willing to talk
about pay if walkouts were called off. Nominations have closed in the Scottish
National Party leadership race. Three candidates have declared their intention
to stand in the contest to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as party leader and
Scotland's first minister. Kate Forbes, Humza Yousaf and Ash Regan, although
there's so far been no confirmation of whether they have enough nominations.
Miss Regan officially launched her campaign this morning, conceding she was the
outsider in the race but pledging to unite the party. Our Scotland correspondent
Lorna Gordon reports. The race to replace Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP
is still in its early stages but already it's been fractious, highlighting
divisions about social policy in a party that has independence as its primary
aim. Ash Regan is the third candidate to launch their campaign. She vowed that
if she became party leader she would set up an independence commission on her
first day in the job and that her position would be that a majority of seats and
votes cast in any election going forward would trigger negotiations on Scotland
becoming independent. Miss Regan, who resigned from her ministerial position
over the gender recognition reform bill, also confirmed she would not challenge
the UK government's section 35 order blocking the bill, saying she believed the
legislation was flawed and did not command public support. The order of British
Airways International Airlines Group has returned to profit for the first time
since the start of the Covid pandemic. Across all of its companies, IAG made an
operating profit of £1.1 billion last year, compared with a loss of more than
£2.6 billion in 2021. Yesterday, the group bought out Spanish-based Air Europa
for more than £350 million. The publisher Puffin says it will release what it
calls a classic collection of Roald Dahl's books after it was criticised for
editing his work to remove potentially offensive words. Puffin says the 17
titles will include archive material and sit alongside the newly rewritten
books. Thanks very much, Viji. Some figures to start today's programme. It is
365 days since Russia invaded Ukraine. There are now 8 million Ukrainian
refugees scattered through Europe. There's between 5.5 and 7 million Ukrainians
displaced within their own country. 100,000 Ukrainian soldiers are thought to
have been killed. Maybe 200,000 Russians have lost their lives or been wounded.
Ukraine's economy has shrunk by a third. Damage to infrastructure and buildings
is estimated at well over half a trillion pounds. The West has spent almost £150
billion on aid to Ukraine. This morning at 11 o'clock here in parts of Britain,
silence and services to mourn and mark and remember. Ceremonies to mark this
anniversary have been taking place across Ukraine. Of course, it's President
Volodymyr Zelensky, who has captured the imagination of so many this past year,
reiterated that his nation stood undefeated. Ivana Klimpusz-Tsintsadze is an MP
and Chair of the Parliamentary Committee on Integration of Ukraine into the EU.
She told us what it felt to be like in Kiev today after a year of war.
Absolutely resolute to continue fighting till we have this upper hand over the
aggressor and over the occupier. We would be saying no truth if we were not
admitting that a lot of us feel exhausted, but that does not mean that it
changes our attitude towards what is happening and it does not change the need
to kick the aggressor out of the country. So for us, it's existential. In order
to survive and have the future, we have to continue. I'm happy to see some of
the tectonic changes that have happened across the globe and different nations
who have changed their policies in terms of actually being ready and acting on
providing support to Ukraine, including the military support. At the same time,
I would like to see it coming at a much more faster speed. Well, much has
already been heard today from Ukraine. Unsurprisingly, it is, of course, the
victim of Russia's aggression. Less has been heard from Russia, a nation
constantly rewriting its own history to reflect its present and perhaps affect
its future. Our Russia editor, of course, is Steve Rosenberg. He's been in the
country on and off for the BBC for well over two decades and has the benefit of
a longer view than many. I spoke to him a moment ago and asked him what struck
him as the biggest shift in Russia this year. It feels to me as if Russia has
changed in a huge way. The country has mobilised to support this special
military operation. Everything has been mobilised for the war in Ukraine. So
factories and enterprises are now producing supplies and items for the war
effort. Children in schools are being told to write letters for soldiers at the
front. And of course, people, hundreds of thousands of Russians have been
drafted into the army and are being sent down to Ukraine. So that's the biggest
change I see and I feel. And if you walk around Moscow, you know, you see the
portraits of Russian soldiers staring down at you from billboards, from bus
stops with the words hero on there. Russians are being told that their country
has changed. You know, life's not going to go back to what it was before. That's
the message that Vladimir Putin has put out to the people. That draft, that
conscription, alongside with ideological opposition to the war, prompted
something between half a million and a million people to leave. We're not quite
sure of the exact numbers for obvious reasons. Do you feel their absence? You
know, it's funny, I do. Just when you're walking around or you're in the metro
or the shopping centres which feel very empty, it does feel as if a lot of
people have left here. And who left? You know, skilled, educated, you know, IT
specialists. There's no doubt that this is going to have an effect on the
economy here and on Russia's future. Now, Vladimir Putin likes to remind the
world that the Russian economy has not collapsed, as many expected it to. But
the departure of so many people, this brain drain, is surely something that the
Russian authorities have to worry about when they're thinking about the future.
For a couple of centuries now, Russia has been grappling over what it is, what
kind of a country it is, in particular as to whether it has a European destiny.
Is that European destiny over? Is it now separate ideologically and
civilisationally from the area that it looked to for so long? Today, yes. But as
you say, you know, Russia swings like a metronome between east and west.
Sometimes it thinks that it's part of Europe. And then a new, a different leader
comes to power and suddenly it doesn't. Suddenly it's looking east. And that's
been the course of Russian history for centuries. So it may feel we're in a very
dark place at the moment and that Russia has turned its back on Europe and the
West. But if you step back and you take a historical view, perhaps
optimistically, we can hope that perhaps things will go back the other way. Our
Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg, there. In the past seven or so days, the US has
cranked up its warning to China not to sell arms to Russia. Serious consequences
would follow, said the Secretary of State, Antony Blinken. Well, just published
in the German news magazine Der Spiegel is a report that Russia and China are in
negotiations over strike drones. Der Spiegel's national security reporter,
Fidelia Schmid, was on the story. We've obtained information that Russia is in
advanced negotiations with a Chinese UAV producer, which is called Xion Bingo
Intelligent Aviation Technology. And Bingo has agreed to build 100 prototype
drones, strike drones, and deliver them to Russia by April. These drones can
carry a warhead of between 35 and 50 kilograms. So we know about the agreement,
but we don't know how close the Chinese are to fulfilling their promises. If
this sale does go ahead, how would the US and NATO react? Ambassador Julianne
Smith is the United States permanent representative to NATO. Well, I think the
United States has been quite clear in terms of its warnings to the PRC not to
provide material support to Russia. These warnings were issued very early,
before the war even began a year ago. And as far as we can monitor, it appears
that over the last year, China has in fact held back from providing any sort of
lethal or military assistance. As, however, you have heard Secretary Blinken and
others state, we do have some indications that China is now entertaining the
idea of providing some sort of military assistance or security assistance to
Russia. Secretary Blinken was able to meet with his Chinese counterpart Wang Yi
in Munich just days ago, and he reiterated the warnings that this would
significantly alter the bilateral relationship between the United States and the
PRC. We are doing everything we can to discourage them from moving forward with
this type of decision. But because we are so concerned about it, we have been
urging others to weigh in. Certainly NATO allies are concerned as well.
Collectively, we are monitoring the situation very closely, and we're doing what
we can to issue very stark warnings about the consequences of shifting their
position on security assistance to Russia. The Secretary of State spoke about
serious consequences. I mean, is it fair to assume that in amongst those might
be something like sanctions? Yes. Well, to date, the United States has already
sanctioned some Chinese companies because of our concern about their involvement
in this particular war. So I think it's pretty clear that the United States
would look at sanctions should China move out on military assistance to Russia
at this juncture. The Secretary of State has also been very open with the
intelligence, hasn't he, over the last few days, the intelligence that there may
be a fresh move by China to sell to Russia. What is the aim of that? Is that
about rallying allies? Is it about warning China off? Is it a combination of the
two? It's an important point because the United States has shared an
unprecedented level of intelligence with its partners and allies for well over a
year now as it relates to the war in Ukraine. You'll remember months before
Russia actually went into Ukraine, the United States took the decision to share
its intelligence on Russian movements around the Ukrainian border with partners
and allies, as well as with the Ukrainians themselves, so that we could come
together and issue stark warnings. We could come together and share a common
sight picture, and we could come together and essentially plan for all possible
contingencies. And that's exactly what we did. Once the war started, that
practice continued. The United States and other allies, such as the United
Kingdom, have come into the NATO family, so to speak, to share additional pieces
of intelligence on what we were seeing on the ground, what we were monitoring in
terms of Russian activities. And now you're correct. Once again, the United
States is coming forward and sharing intelligence about our indications that
China is now possibly altering its position on security assistance to Russia.
And the point of that, again, is to bring together a collection of partners and
allies so that we can prepare for future scenarios. We can make lists of
potential consequences that the PRC would face and prepare for any possible
contingency. So that has been a very concerted effort on the part of the United
States, and I suspect it will stay that way. That was Julianne Smith, the US
permanent representative to NATO. Coming up, is it now dress down Friday every
day? Does no one care what people wear to work anymore? Do you get in touch with
us on social media? Use the hashtag BBCWATO. Our email address is worldatone at
bbc.co.uk. Junior doctors in England will strike for 72 hours, and the dates
were released this morning. It's March the 13th to March the 15th. They're
seeking to make up what the British Medical Association says is a sharp fall in
their wages after inflation. Despite the name, junior doctors are far from all
fresh-faced graduates from medical school. They make up around 40% of the
medical workforce. So this strike will be a very big deal. Matthew Taylor is the
chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the health system in
England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Good afternoon, Matthew. Hi. Hi. How
serious is this for the NHS in England? So this is news that I think NHS leaders
were dreading. I think this action will be extremely difficult for us to manage.
It'll be difficult to manage on the days of the action for a whole number of
reasons. But we're going to have to, as we did in the last junior doctor strike,
ask consultants to take on a greater load. The problem is that consultants
themselves are having an indicative ballot. And so it's very unclear the degree
to which consultants will necessarily be willing to fill in for junior doctors.
So just as the same week, we've had good news in relation to negotiation about
the nurses action. And we hope that the other unions might also be part of some
kind of deal there. This is very disappointing. If the consultants do agree to
help out with what the junior doctors would be doing if they weren't on strike,
then the consultants aren't doing what they would normally be doing, which is
presumably quite a lot of tackling the backlog in elective surgery. No, that's
exactly right. And last time we had junior doctors action, we saw hundreds of
thousands of appointments, cancelled operations cancelled. You know, the NHS
works flat out at all times. So if you take out, you know, essentially kind of
40% of the medical workforce, it's going to have a huge impact. And, you know,
the fundamental challenge for the health service is that we are trying to meet
very high levels of demand, which is expressed in primary care, A&E departments,
etc. But at the same time, try to do something about the backlog of illness in
the community, a backlog that built up before Covid, built up more during Covid.
You've got 7 million people, as you know, on waiting lists. Now that balancing
act of meeting demand at the same time as making inroads into kind of the levels
of sickness in the community, that's the day to day work of the health service.
We've made some progress. It's hard to do. But I'm afraid if you take those
three days, it's not going to be possible to do that anymore. I suspect that a
lot of the work on the kind of backlog will have to be put on one side as we
focus on immediate demand. And each of these strikes, you know, they've been
going on now for over two months. They all have an impact on our capacity to
recover services in the way we want to. Matthew, thank you very much indeed.
Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation. At midday today,
nominations closed for the post of SNP leader and thus Scottish first minister.
The party has confirmed Kate Forbes, Humza Yousaf and Ash Regan all have made it
onto the ballot paper. It's barely a week since Nicola Sturgeon announced her
resignation and the nationalist movement has been scrabbling to find its feet
since then. The last hat flung into the ring was that of Ash Regan, member of
the Scottish Parliament, the woman who quit as community safety minister over
the Gender Recognition Reform Act. That act, of course, would be part of what
brought Nicola Sturgeon down. Ms Regan pledged an independence convention on day
one of her premiership and said she would not challenge the UK government in the
Supreme Court on the gender ID law. She also cast doubt on whether Peter
Murrell, Nicola Sturgeon's husband, can remain as the party's chief executive.
Yeah, I think this situation that we've got ourselves into where we've got a
party leader who is married to the chief executive of the party, I don't think
we would accept that in a corporate setting. I don't think it's appropriate. I
think the fact that Peter Murrell is running this contest to replace Nicola
Sturgeon is a clear conflict of interest. One of her two rivals, Scotland's
health secretary Humza Yousaf, is also facing questions this lunchtime. Mr
Yousaf has insisted that he did support gay marriage in 2014 in contrast to his
rival Kate Forbes. She said that she would have opposed gay marriage had she
been in the Scottish Parliament at the time. But former minister Alex Neil
challenged Mr Yousaf's account in an interview with Radio Scotland. When it came
to the equal marriage bill, Humza didn't have the courage to actually go and
vote for it at stage three because of pressures he was under from the mosque, in
his words. And he sought the permission of the then First Minister Alex Salmond
to skip the vote. I don't think that that shows leadership. So what is the
effect of all this infighting on the party, on the nationalist movement? Jim
Sillars was deputy leader of the SNP in the 1990s. He joins us. Good afternoon.
Good afternoon. Are you excited by the candidate field? No, the candidate
field's OK. What worries me, and I'm really disappointed in the misjudgment of
people like Ian Blackford and John Swinney and Neil Gray, who believed that it
was possible to knock Kate Forbes out of the race by demonising her as a member
of the Free Church of Scotland. And we're now sort of plunged into a theological
argument. And actually, it has backfired because the people I talk to, and it's
pretty clear coming through, that people see Kate Forbes having the quality of
authenticity and honesty, which is a very rare quality in politics today. And
folk are saying, I don't agree with her. But what I do like is when she says
something, she really means it. And that's fine by us. So it's backfired on
them. And I hope they've learned that lesson and that we'll now deal with what I
would call the secular matters that really affect everybody on a day to day and
in the future in Scotland. The economy, education, reform of the National Health
Service, how we deal with the elderly, and whether we've got a population
policy, because the forecast is that Scotland is due to lose almost a million of
its population. That's a potential catastrophe. These are the things that the
party and the candidates should be talking about. And if they keep up the
theological stuff, then they're going to do enormous damage to the party as
such. Do you think, sorry, sorry, Mr Sillis, do you think, do you think that
this process has been a little rushed and that in fact, it might have been
helpful if Nicola Sturgeon had prepared the ground a wee bit more before she'd
quit? Well, the problem with Nicola is the same with Alex Salmond. They ran a
cult of personality. And by the very nature of that kind of organisation, you
don't have a number of successors. So we were, we were surprised when she
decided to go. And there's no obvious successor lying around or one or two. So
we've got three candidates and I'm quite happy with the three candidates. I
haven't made up my mind yet. I'm waiting to see what they actually say on what I
described as the secular issues, which are absolutely fundamental to our way of
life in Scotland. One thing does seem clear, which is that whoever gets elected,
they will struggle to fill the shoes of their two predecessors. Oh, no, I don't
agree with that at all. No, no, I don't agree. I think Alex Salmond was a, was
someone with extraordinary political ability. I don't think that's the same with
Nicola Sturgeon. And I'm quite sure that, well, I hope, I say this in all
sincerity, I hope that the new leader engages in, you know, a more congenial way
of running the party and also in running the government. One person rule has not
worked and one person rule will not work. We will leave it there. Jim Sillis,
thank you very much for joining us on The World at One. In the last hour, the
World Health Organization has confirmed that it's reviewing its global risk
assessment on bird flu after an outbreak in Cambodia. An 11 year old girl died
in the southeast of the country after contracting the H5N1 strain of the virus
earlier this week and her father has tested positive. Professor Peter Openshaw
is Professor of Experimental Medicine at Imperial College London, a member of
Nervtag, you might remember that, the group that advises the British government
on new and emerging threats from respiratory viruses. I asked him how concerned
we should be in the UK. We absolutely need to watch this one like a hawk. You
know, the H5N1 virus, you know, has been around since we first detected it back
in 1996. But since then, it's been mutating in its highly pathogenic form and
spreading to other species. I think it's worrying that it's spreading to mammals
and appears to be causing quite high mortality in species of bird that
previously weren't affected. But as you say, very few people have been infected
by this current strain. But if we look back since 2003, there's been 861
confirmed human cases with 455 deaths. So when it does infect people, it can be
very nasty indeed. I think the good news at the moment is that there's no
evidence of human to human spread. I want to come back to that fatality rate in
a second. But first of all, this question of the jumping between species, it's
clearly jumped from birds to mammals. It moves from mammals to mammals as well.
Are we clear how human beings pick it up? Are they picking it up from birds or
from other mammals? Do we know? Well, at the moment, it appears to be those in
reasonably close contact. I think it is important that the public know that if
they find sick birds in particular, that they should not pick them up or handle
them because those are potentially a source of infection. I mean, the real
danger is to the poultry industry and also to wild birds, including quite rare
and precious wild bird populations. And we've seen the poultry industry
effectively had to put all its birds inside in an attempt to protect the birds
that it has. The sort of key alarm is that figure which you cited earlier, isn't
it? It's the fact that so many people who, if they catch it, die. Do we know
why? There were studies actually done by Jeremy Farah and others when there was
an outbreak of a highly pathogenic H5N1 in Vietnam. And they showed that it's
largely the immune overresponse, which causes a condition called shock lung or
it's akin to sepsis, really. And it can be very abrupt and can cause respiratory
failure. And what, if anything, can be done to prepare? I think we've got to
increase surveillance. It's vital that we maintain our surveillance systems that
have been in place globally. We need to really watch the sequence changes that
are going on and avoid complacency. I think many of us are rather COVID
fatigued, and that includes the decision makers and may think that we just have
not got the time and energy to focus on yet another virus. I think it's
absolutely vital that we gear up for making vaccines that are more demonstrably
effective than the current H5N1 candidate vaccines, and also that we stockpile
antivirals and antibiotics and other supplies that might be needed should there
be another respiratory outbreak. I mean, we need to prepare for the worst but
obviously hope for the best, to use the old phrase. And that would be now, in
your estimation, the need for that preparation? Yes, the fact that we're still
in a COVID-19 pandemic in no way lessens the likelihood of another pandemic
coming from another source, and this is the one that we're really worried about
at the moment. Professor Peter Openshaw. Jumpsuits, athleisure wear, even
pyjamas, just some of the sartorial horrors that have sprung out from the
pandemic. And now the clothing choices made as many worked from home have
reached deep into the workplace itself. Four fifths of job advertisements
monitored by one group last month specified a dress code that took a relaxed
attitude to what employees could wear. Ayesha Vardag is a divorce lawyer who
recently relaxed the dress code for staff in her law firm. Theo van den Broeck
is editorial director at Soho House, contributing editor to the very smart men's
style magazine GQ. Welcome to you both. Ayesha, can I start with you? What
prompted the relaxation and what's been the product? I wouldn't really describe
it as a relaxation. I'd describe it as an expansion of the parameters. I've made
very clear I don't want people turning up in hoodies unless they're actually in
the tech department, which are kind of hardwired to wear hoodies. I want people
to be elegant and to have appropriate gravitas and to show due respect to the
clients that we're dealing with, which are ultra high net worth clients. It has
to be the right sort of attire. But within that, I have said, express yourself,
bring your personality to work, which is one of our core values. And we have
brilliant people that are creative. I want them to be able to show their
creativity. So as I said, if you want to wear gold leather trousers and an
electric blue sequined jacket, that is absolutely fine by me. And I welcome
that. And actually, some of them have been, well, me included, have been
enjoying that. Tao, would you be seen in gold leather trousers and a blue
sequined jacket? It sounds like my estimation of elegance is slightly different
to Aisha's. What about the suit, though, Tao? Is the suit, well, is it dead? I
think the suit has transformed into something that perhaps should be worn in
occasions that demand something smarter. The idea of a dress code, I think, was
originally created to make people feel as comfortable in environments as it was
to make them look appropriate. And I think now that we're working in this kind
of hybrid way, we should be dressing in a hybrid way. And a suit is a very kind
of monolithic thing. So if you take a jacket and or a pair of trousers from a
suit and wear it with something a little bit more casual, then you can still
embrace that kind of tailored aspect, which I think is really important in a
workplace because it gives you structure, it makes you look a little bit more
held together, and maybe people will take you a little bit more seriously
without having to kind of opt in to that full two meat and two veg suit vibe.
Aisha, can I just ask you, what prompted you to make the move? I mean, for so
long, places like lawyers' offices, accountants' offices, all kinds of white
collar jobs, to be honest, it's been suit for the men, quite often a pantsuit
for the women as well. And then you thought enough. What was the thing that
prompted it? Yeah, I mean, we're particularly famous, I'm particularly famous
for requiring a particularly formal dress code, encouraging double cuff shirts
and cufflinks and Oxford lace-ups and jackets, not cardigans. You were quite
strict, weren't you? Very strict, very much on the classic, classic. And well,
one day, well, it's partly the pandemic happened and everybody got used to
living in their pajamas. And then partly, I had to kind of lead the charge on
bringing everybody back to work after the pandemic. And suddenly, there's lots
of resistance to that. So you have to think, what is it about being in a
community together and being at work together when you could do it all remotely?
And there's a sort of special magic about people being together and there's a
chemistry and there's an excitement. But in order to really have everybody
benefit from that, you have to have people able to really to be themselves. So
yeah, I'm all in favor of structure. I think I'm on the same pages as Jai on
lots of things, even if he might not like my idea of elegance, but I like his.
And so yeah, structure and making an effort, but being yourself, expressing
yourself, bringing your personality to the people that you're going to be
physically near so that you all have that magic together that makes for an
exciting, stimulating community. I walked in, I saw one of my new partners,
we're about to go on a new partner dinner. And she was saying, sorry, I'm not
dress code compliant. I'm wearing my leather trousers because we're about to go
to dinner. And I said, but God, you look fantastic. You look so chic. I think we
need a new dress code. And I sat down and wrote it straight away. There's an
awful lot of leather trousers. I can tell you that for a start. Tao, do you lose
anything, Tao, when you drop a dress code or when you soften it? I think it
really depends on how you kind of take it on. Like Aisha, making it elegant and
giving that structure is a kind of dress code in and of itself. So giving people
guidance, I think is really important because people do like to be told what to
do to a certain degree. And I think it's a lot about kind of embracing this
idea, as I said, of structure and kind of leaning away from certain garments. I,
for instance, will not wear tracksuit bottoms into the office. That's a strict
no. Jersey, no. Knitwear, however, yes, because there's a certain, the fabric
just looks better and it holds you together in a more, again, structured way. So
I think there are lenient parameters within it. But I think people, as I say,
they do like to be told what to do to a certain degree. And there's a kind of
pack mentality that comes into play in an office. And if one person is standing
out in either a too smart way or a too slovenly way, it's going to be difficult.
We'll leave it there. Thank you very much, Aisha, Vardhag and Tao van den
Broecke. A real pleasure to talk to you. Thanks. It's a pretty rare day that a
city centre car park becomes the focus of a heritage campaign. But that is the
fate of the Rupert Street car park in Bristol. To its fans, a fine example of
the brutalist movement of the 50s and 60s. To its detractors, perhaps a
startlingly ugly collection of concrete platforms that sustains an outdated car
based economy. Its replacement would be a high rise block of flats. Brutalism
became associated rather unfortunately with urban decay and soulless city
centres. At its best, think London's National Theatre or the bus station in
Preston. It has an honesty and a simplicity with the structure and materials of
the building rather than decoration at the forefront. Catherine Croft is the
director of the 20th Century Society. It's behind the campaign to save the
Rupert Street car park. She's also the author of Concrete Architecture.
Catherine's been telling me about her love for brutalism and why this car park
is worth saving. Another sign of the times is Britain's changing architectural
skyline and structures like this, the first of its kind in this country, will
soon no doubt be almost commonplace. If you haven't already identified it, it's
a multi-deck garage at Bristol. I think that brutalist buildings are just
incredibly robust and sculptural and quite often very dramatic. They have a kind
of real sense of place and presence and they use materials in a very direct way.
I think that they have an energy that is really hard to match. I mean, have we
lost some gems from the brutalist collection across the UK? Some of the best
examples have gone. So the Tricon Centre in Portsmouth was demolished, the Get
Carter car park in Gateshead's gone, the Birmingham Central Library, they've all
been completely demolished and they were all fantastic buildings. Is there a
presentation problem for brutalist buildings that they don't sell themselves
terribly well, even with their names, frankly? Yeah, I was going to say that the
whole term brutalism is hardly what you'd pick if you were setting yourself up
to promote a period of architecture, isn't it? And I think that kind of
association with concrete and with poorly constructed and badly maintained
concrete is a problem. People do kind of leap to thinking about exposed rebar
and crumbling lumps of concrete falling off and poverty and lack of investment
and things that are stopping new development regenerate city centres. But we
would argue that these buildings are so characterful that they're absolutely
what can give city centres a new sense of vitality and a new sense of being
somewhere different and special and exciting to go. And there are buildings and
structures that were pretty controversial when they were launched that are now
loved and adored, aren't they? I mean, one thinks in particular here in the
capital of the National Theatre. London South Bank saw a 120-year-old dream
begin to come true. Jenny Lee, Arts Minister, was there. Work was beginning on
Britain's National Theatre, which should be completed by 1973 at a cost of £7.5
million. This is what the National Theatre will look like when it's finished. It
should be worth waiting for. Prince Charles, now our king, said that the
National Theatre was a sneaky way to get a power station built in the centre of
London. He was incredibly rude about it. I think the National is now probably,
you know, it's my favourite building and loved by huge numbers of people and
just the sheer number of people that love walking up and down and having cups of
coffee on the South Bank's testament to that. And I think with just a little bit
more investment, a lot of these buildings could be made a lot more popular.
Catherine Croft of the 20th Century Society. PM is at five with, for the very
last time, Carolyn Quinn. I'm Johnny Diamond and that's The World at just gone
140. We leave you this lunchtime with a reminder of how this programme has
covered this past year in Ukraine, a year in which so much has changed for so
many. Charles hit the capital of Ukraine as Russian troops advanced from the
north, the south and the east of the country. Despite all the warnings, the news
this morning scarcely seemed credible. Russia had invaded a European country.
It's a headline from another age. I think it was around 5am I got woken up by an
incredibly loud explosion and that was followed by a series of more explosions
throughout the morning. I saw the skylight up a few times kind of with fire and
smoke. Yuri Zastavny is the owner of Pravda small craft brewery in the Western
Ukrainian city of Lviv. Well, they're not making beer anymore, but Molotov
cocktails. Making Molotov cocktails requires precision, work safety, because you
can hurt yourself if you don't do it right and a good recipe. So we decided to
really put our skill together to do this. The increased attacks on Kharkiv
prompted Daniel, his wife and three children to leave this morning. Now he spoke
to me from the road. I love my country, I love my city. It used to be a very
beautiful city, but now it's been demolished. I don't know why. They call us
brothers and sisters, but how they behave, this is not... Sorry, I'm full of
emotions. Sorry. I hope that within like a few weeks or a couple of months, the
latest, the latest, everything is resolved. Right here in my city of Kherson, it
doesn't feel safe for sure. We have more simple problems like food scarcity and
medicine scarcity because of rebrushing, sublocating any entrance and exit to
and from the city and refusing to let the Ukrainian humanitarian convoys in.
There was a siren and we heard a very loud explosion. Everything was flying
everywhere. We were lying on the floor. I just shouted to my children, just lie
down, lie down. The house was shaking. The bomb got into their house and the
house was in flame. Absolutely. It was absolutely black and there was a hole
inside the house. All people were killed and they were lying on the ground. Some
people were damaged so much. Studio direction was by Antonio Finance. The editor
was Fran Doherty. And if you go to the BBC News website and click on the war in
Ukraine, there are a number of features, videos and analysis articles. This is
BBC Radio 4 and now Matthew Syed concludes his series tracing the evolution of a
word at the centre of our times. What do we mean when we say the word woke?
You're always politically woke and all that stuff. Potential woke fury. Tofu
eating, woke karate. It's a term that we see almost everywhere and seems to have
become synonymous with an era of angry debate. I'm Matthew Syed and as an author
and columnist I've been known to use the word woke myself to describe an
overzealous approach to identity politics. But for this series I've been tracing
the evolution of the term, discovering its journey from a way to describe
awareness of racism in 1930s America. If I stay woke he dies. To its status
today as a political insult. It's a job creation scheme created by the woke for
the woke. This is woke, the journey of a word. And in these programmes I've been
telling the stories of some of those who have used woke and been defined by it.
In the last episode I explored how a photo embedded the word amongst white
people during the presidency of Donald Trump. Today's story centres around
Governor Ron DeSantis, a figure who's seen by some as an heir to Trump, by
others as his deadly rival. But it all begins on a university campus in the port
city of Tampa, Florida, with a student named Sam Recheck. I'm a senior at the
University of South Florida in Tampa. I study philosophy and political science
and my extracurricular activities have centred around student rights,
specifically the first amendment rights or free speech rights. Sam is passionate
about freedom of speech. He's dedicated a lot of his time at university
promoting it, including founding a forum where students can have civil
discussions about contemporary political issues. Sam was anxious to keep things
bipartisan, particularly as he believes the idea of freedom of speech is
separate from right or left. I don't think I really would identify with either
of the contemporary American dominant political parties and I often don't even
really label myself as a liberal or a progressive or a conservative because I
think that my views are in flux. That's not to say I'm not political though. I
am a very political person, I would say. For most of Sam's time at university,
his activity on free speech had been about theory, ideas, discussion. But this
year, all that changed. Sam decided to put his ideas into practice by facing off
against Governor Ron DeSantis over his use of the word woke. He's part of a
group that has taken the Governor's administration to court over a bill which
they believe amounts to censorship. It's known as the Stop Woke Act. We reject
woke ideology. Ron DeSantis is one of the most prominent users of the word woke
as a pejorative term. Here he is borrowing from Churchill in his re-election
speech. We fight the woke in the legislature. We fight the woke in the schools.
We fight the woke in the corporations. We will never ever surrender to the woke
mind. Nicole Holliday is a linguist from Pomona College in California who has
analyzed the use of woke by DeSantis and others. Woke occupied this place of
being very related to a super common word, awake, but not having in the
mainstream, not actually already having a use. That is also the reason that it's
useful as a slogan. It's a great thing to write on t-shirts, right? Nobody's
going to write political correctness. It's super long. But woke, it became a
prime term to be argued against. So when we think about DeSantis, he's framing
it as wokeness is a threat. These people over here to the left of you are a
threat to you because they're trying to change your way of life. And in that
way, it's a way to argue for traditionalism, for conservative values, whatever
they may be. And in this way, I think it's under-specified and therefore
attractive because it becomes a catch-all. So you can just use woke to say
people I don't like. And you see that kind of usage from conservative
politicians. Like they just say woke and the audience can think it means
whatever they want it to mean. Florida is where woke goes to die. We contacted
Governor Ron DeSantis to ask if he would be able to contribute to this program,
but he was unavailable. DeSantis first introduced the Stop Woke Bill to the
Florida Senate in 2022. Woke was turned into an acronym standing for Wrong to
Our Kids and Employees, W-O-K-E. The bill itself was aimed at addressing the
promotion of what he describes as harmful ideas about systemic injustice,
including racial injustice. It's part of a larger culture war the American right
is waging on what they call critical race theory, an academic term that has
become all-encompassing, used to refer to teaching on the existence and impact
of institutional racism. The Stop Woke Bill, officially titled the Individual
Freedom Act, included restrictions on the syllabus of public universities
designed to prevent certain teaching on this topic. And this is where Sam
Recheck stepped in. When I first read this bill, I thought this was pretty
clearly crossing the line of censorship. Sam and one of his professors were
approached to be plaintiffs against the state in an effort to get part of the
bill struck down. I thought this bill would not hold up if challenged by law. As
a student, I felt like I was being robbed of the opportunity to discuss
controversial concepts in class. I suspected that many professors felt like
there was a weight on their shoulders of having to adjust syllabi or modify
class discussion because of fear of state retribution. And I thought that's a
pretty unfortunate way to operate as public universities. In September 2022, the
plaintiffs delivered their testimonies and the state's lawyers offered their
case. And just a few months later, the judge's verdict was in. The federal judge
ruling against the governor's so-called Stop Woke Act, calling it
unconstitutional. He called aspects of the law positively dystopian. The state
of Florida, led by DeSantis, is appealing the case. That was a great feeling to
think that I had had at least a small role in taking that weight of censorship
off of professors' shoulders, even temporarily. DeSantis is perhaps the most
notable example of a figure using woke as a tool for political advantage. For
him, it refers to a new way of thinking about race, gender and other categories
that he believes is detrimental to American society. But is that usage correct?
James O'Malley is a writer who's argued that to be woke does correspond to a new
way of thinking. I think defining woke is very complicated because it's used in
so many different ways by so many different people who are perhaps mostly
detractors. However, I do think what the term also captures is a bunch of other
new ideas which are sort of increasingly prevalent or influential in progressive
lefty politics. Often it's used in a way which actually implies the other person
accepts quite a few radical premises. James argues that these ideas are linked
by an opposition to systemic injustice, but also other things like a preference
for lived experience over empirical data and an attitude to political
disagreement where a single dispute escalates into a reason to oppose someone on
everything, making cooperation and consensus far more difficult. Another key
aspect identified as a woke trait is the restriction of platforms for free
speech from those whose ideas are deemed to cause distress. Ironically, the very
thing that Ron DeSantis has been accused of doing through his anti-woke bill. I
think woke became the term to describe this new set of ideas because there isn't
really anything else. There's other sorts of words people use, progressive or
liberal, but when you've got a sort of internecine ideological debate like this,
those words already have a specific sort of meanings. I mean, I do not like the
word woke. I think it's become basically meaningless for these reasons. But
unfortunately, I think it's the best word we have because the people who do sort
of advocate these ideas don't seem to have come up with a better one. There are
those, mainly on the political right, who see the rise of these woke ideas as a
danger to society. Matthew Goodwin is a professor of politics at the University
of Kent. I think there's always a temptation when talking about wokeness to
think that we are still basically talking about continuation of the civil rights
campaigns in Western democracies in the 1960s and the 1970s. I don't hold that
view. I think wokeness or radical progressivism has really evolved into a very
different creed. It is really now actually undermining, not strengthening
liberal societies in a number of different ways. It's morphed away from
liberalism's traditional focus on safeguarding the rights of individuals to
instead becoming utterly preoccupied with fixed group identities. Matthew
believes that when concern for woke ideas is raised, it's dismissed unfairly as
a way to stoke anger against minorities and those that speak for them. This is a
very distinctive body of thought that is very prevalent within institutions and
that is very different from classical liberalism. We need to be able to talk
about what we're teaching children in school, secondary. We need to be able to
talk about how we think about our history and we need to be able to talk about
how we can actually hold our society together and bring about social cohesion.
And my personal view is that wokeness or radical progressivism is not conducive
to doing any of that. It seems that much of the modern use of woke centres
around education, the ideas that the next generation are absorbing. But what
about the students themselves? Do any of them still use woke? And what does it
mean to them? My final interview of this series was with another group who have
turned woke into an acronym, but something altogether different from Ron
DeSantis. Meet the students from Women of Keele Educate at Keele University in
Staffordshire. Women of Keele Educate was set up by a collective of us. It was
started because there was sort of a fundamental frustration with some of the
representation of speakers and people in sort of policy positions at
universities. So a lot of the places where people wanted to go and find other
feminists who had opinions on class, race and how all these other lived
experiences intersect was kind of lacking. So the idea of using the word woke in
this way was, it was kind of a tongue in cheek kind of response to the
criticisms that were coming. It is striking to see the word woke continuing on
its semantic twists and turns, pulled from one group and one age to another.
It's interesting too that woke is still being used in a tongue in cheek way.
This was echoed by free speech advocate Sam Recheck in Florida. If you're in the
know, there's some irony that you can play on with the term woke. It's almost
like it's achieved meme status a little bit. The legal battle over the Stop Woke
Bill continues. Ron DeSantis is not showing any signs of slowing down in his
rhetoric or his agenda. We're not going to let this state descend into some type
of woke dumpster fire. Across this series, I've traced woke's origins and I've
discovered it's still very much in flux. It's travelled a very long way from its
African-American roots, but in its original sense of articulating the need for
an awareness of injustice, it is still, I think, necessary in our own times.
Whether woke continues to be used in the years to come remains to be seen, but I
think it's unlikely that in the near future, there'll emerge a word with such an
uncanny capacity to draw our emotions because of its brevity, its metaphorical
power and its divisive potential. There's a good chance that woke, for the time
being at least, is here to stay. That was Woke, the journey of a word. It was
presented by Matthew Side and produced by Sam Peach. You can hear the whole
series on BBC Sounds. This evening on Radio 4, a Ukrainian-born pianist and a
British jazz-funk musician help us add to playlists. That's at 7.15. Now a look
ahead to this evening's 6.30 Comedy. Hello, I'm Andy Zolklin and on this week's
News Quiz I'm joined by Holly Walsh, Andy Parsons, Ian Smith and Kate Andrews.
On this week's show we talk the Labour mission, Rishi Sunak's protocol
proposition and Vladimir Putin's lack of contrition. That's the News Quiz
tonight at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.