TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at 11 o'clock.
Labour has defended offering a job to the former civil servant Sue Gray, who led
the investigation into lockdown parties at Downing Street. Some Conservative MPs
have said the move casts doubt on Ms Gray's impartiality during her inquiry, but
Labour has dismissed such claims as ludicrous. Alex Thomas, who's from the think
tank the Institute for Government and is a former civil servant, says this is an
unusual situation. I don't think they have a good argument when they talk about
the Partygate report or call into question Sue Gray's record as a civil servant.
I do think this is unusual, it's surprising. Although civil servants have
crossed the aisle before, it hasn't happened before with a civil servant who is
still serving of this seniority. A number of energy firms are understood to be
preparing for the government to provide further financial support for households
with their gas and electricity bills. The current assistance is due to be scaled
back at the end of this month. The Treasury said it wouldn't comment on
speculation. The chief executive of the HS2 rail project says various options
are being considered to curb rising costs. Mark Thurston has told the BBC that
one of the options could be delaying its completion. He also said the impact of
rising inflation over the past year had had a significant impact on the project.
The MP for Bermondsey and Old Southwark, Neil Coyle, is facing a five-day
suspension for drunkenly abusing two people in a Commons bar. The recommendation
has been made by a parliamentary watchdog after he was found to have breached
his bullying and harassment policy. Mr Coyle, who had the Labour whip removed
last year, has apologised. The Arctic Monkeys and Guns and Roses are at a
headline this year's Glastonbury Festival. The organisers had already revealed
Sir Elton John would top the bill on the third day of the festival as part of
his farewell tour. This year's line-up also includes Christine and the Queens,
Fatboy Slim, Lana Del Rey and Blondie. BBC News. In half an hour here on Radio
4, we'll begin a new series with the poet Lem Sissay as he reflects on aspects
of his own uniqueness and what it means to stand out. That's at 11.30. But
first, the astronaut Tim Peake journeys into the misunderstood phenomenon of
homesickness and asks if its impact is critically underappreciated in homesick
planet. I'm British astronaut Tim Peake and in 2015 I was launched into space
from Kazakhstan to carry out a six-month mission on the International Space
Station. At the moment of launch, you're completely focused on the technical
details. What's happening with the rocket? Is it safe? Are we maintaining
pressure? Are the engines functioning normally and how is the launch process
going? 30 to 60 seconds. Pitch. Rolling geolominal. Copy. Having also been
through a violent launch process, it takes you into a completely new realm. It
takes so much effort to get there that you're very aware you've put yourself in
a very precarious position. 90 seconds. Engines stable. Fire. Fire. Fire. But
then when you finally get into orbit and the engine's cut out, it goes very
quiet. And that's when you're allowed to unstrap and take off your gloves so
you're allowed to lift the helmet of your spacesuit and you get to look out of
the window and look down at Earth. And it's quite remarkable. I don't think I
was fully prepared for that emotional impact of looking out the window. I've
never associated home to be a specific place, but I always associate home with
my family. But going out into space, that was really what struck me looking down
at the planet and thinking, wow, you know, that is it. Not only are you faced by
this incredibly beautiful sight beneath you, but that is home. I'm not sure I've
ever been to a space station. But that is home. I'm not sure that I've ever
experienced true homesickness. Even at 19, when I left to join the army and
walked across Sandhurst Parade Square with an ironing board under my arm, I
didn't experience homesickness. But after several months in space, looking back
at Earth, I began to long for nature, to feel the wind and rain again, to be
surrounded by forests and mountains and oceans. So I'm fascinated by
homesickness, because I think perhaps for me that first experience of yearning
for home has come much, much later in life. But what is this powerful desire for
home? Is homesickness a psychological illness, a cultural phenomenon, or
something else? Throughout the whole six-month mission, whenever you have a
moment to go to the cupola window and see Earth, it just anchors you straight
away. I think something that's quite incredible is going to be for the first
humans to go off to Mars, where they won't actually get that. They'll look
outside the window and just see blackness and see other stars in the Milky Way.
It'll be incredibly hard to pick out Earth, just like it's hard for us to pick
out Mars. You have to have the right psychological characteristic to be able to
do that. You looked out this one lone round window that you had, and it was just
red rock as far as you could see. It had a strange effect to live on this very
red, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very,
very, very rocky volcano that looked a lot like Mars. I mean, Mauna Loa is a
shield volcano, and these are the kinds of enormous volcanoes that are on Mars
as well. Kate Green is a writer and former laser physicist who took part in a
NASA-funded simulated Mars mission called High Seas. The idea was to simulate a
surface mission on Mars. A crew of six people, including Kate, were put into a
geodesic habitation dome on a dusty red Mars-like environment on Hawaii. There
they lived day to day like astronauts for four months. I absolutely stole time
to go outside and lay in my simulated space suit and I laid down on the rocks
and just watched the meteorites streak through the sky and feel that cosmic
feeling. Something I've been thinking about is the crews that go to Mars and the
psychological impact of actually seeing Earth disappear until it's a small speck
of light, no bigger than any other star, and the impact that will have. Were you
able to kind of reach any of those levels of isolation or did you have any
thoughts about how crews are going to be able to deal with that level of
isolation? Well, I'll be honest, I don't think I was able to reach that level of
isolation. I mean, it's pretty special to have NASA give you permission as an
adult to pretend to live on Mars and I did my best, but there were still plenty
of reminders that this was not Mars. I did try to project myself into that
astronaut position of seeing Earth recede and having it become just a speck in
the sky like any other star. I don't think we can know. I think it is, you can
try, but the actual impact of that will likely vary from person to person, no
matter how you were selected and what the selection committee believes your
intellectual, emotional, psychic makeup is. I think that it will surprise every
person when they actually encounter that distance. I mean, it's just, no one
knows that. If you talk about homesickness, you know, these days people tend to
think of it as something that I don't know, perhaps small children have, or, you
know, it's a bit childlike. It doesn't really seem very important. Whereas
there's a psychologically, there is a history. I mean, in previous millennia,
people have thought of it as a sickness, a sickness that kills. I mean, it used
to be given on death certificates as a reason for soldiers dying was
homesickness, what they used to call nostalgia. It seemed to be more accepted
before that these are the aspects of our emotions that affect us so profoundly.
You don't have to leave planet earth to experience an existential loss of home.
Sarah Temple-Smith is a therapist with the Refugee Council and works with adults
and young refugees in the UK. The young people that I work with, or, you know,
adult refugees, they've lost home in its most profound sense. It's difficult
really to even get near what they've lost because it's not just the place or
even the people. Home is, for all of us, it's a sense of security, stability,
the sense of belonging, wherever that is, the sense of being part of something,
of being connected at a very deep level. That's really what home is. Home is the
place where when you go back, they have to let you in. It's not necessarily
talking about a house or a family. Think of that in terms of a country. None of
the people I work with can go back. They wouldn't be let in, or if they were let
in, it would be for torture or to be killed. So, the place they come from, in
whatever sense, the place where they have all their connections, the place in
which they expected to have a future, where their language comes from, and all
the expressions, all the humour, the music, being clever with words, all that
kind of thing, it's completely gone. The life they thought they were going to
have, everything is gone. It's a cultural bereavement. It was a nice house, big
house. Houses are big in Afghanistan. And we were happy because it was our own
house. My mum and dad, they got married. They start a new life in that house.
But it was like a classic architecture. But when we grew up, we brought a bit
changes. Zahra is a 30-year-old Afghan journalist, and after her husband
divorced her, she returned to her childhood home in Kabul to live with her
mother and two children. There was lots of memory. There was my brother's
photos, my sister who were in Turkey and my brothers were in Germany, and my mum
and dad's photos in the wall when they were young. After the war, Zahra was
forced to leave her home and go to a place called the village of Qom. After
Zahra moved back home, she helped her mum refurbish the house. In Afghanistan,
it's a culture every new year because it was our new year. We changed
everything. Everything new. We changed the curtains and I sewed the curtains my
own because I know how to sew. Our sofa was not very old, but we tried to change
the style. And I had something called the Taliban door, which was reaching home,
and I couldn't even take that. And when Taliban come, it was difficult for me to
see how I had hope and wishes to stay in that house. I'm sorry. Sorry. We had
our own house and it was my country. It was my language. I didn't have any
problem. I was a journalist. I had good job, good salary. Everything was good
for me. But at the age of 30, 31, I learned it is very difficult if you are not
in your country or if you don't have any home. On the 19th of August, Zahra
escaped Kabul on a flight with her children. Because she was a journalist on TV,
she was known to the Taliban. At night, when I experienced someone unknown came
to my house and I was on the phone with my sister and brother and I said, what
should I do? The situation is bad. My mom went to open the door. The door was
knocked and she went to open the door. My son was with her. And when they opened
the door and my son was shouting and crying and asking for help, and just my mom
could shut the door and she came inside and she couldn't breathe. I asked my son
who was he? He said there was a man, fat and big man, and he had no hair and he
tried to kidnap me. The situation is bad. So it is difficult if you're in your
own country, but you can't survive your children. So you say that, yes, I will
be somewhere else, like a refugee, but at least I want to survive my children,
to help them to stay alive. Zahra arrived in Birmingham and stayed in a hotel
for six months before moving into a flat. I miss my mom. I miss the way she
cooked for us. I miss the way how she served for us. And I miss my country, my
home, everything. Zahra feels like she has lost two mothers, her biological
mother and her motherland. We say in our language, motherland, because your
country is like your mother. It is your second mother or maybe your first
mother, because it creates everything for you. And you used to grow up there,
and if you not, your grandparent, your parents. So you take everything like
genetic, that you love your home. I asked Sarah Temple-Smith if a greater
appreciation of homesickness could help us to treat the intense trauma felt by
refugees who are forced to leave home, and migrants who choose to leave home,
but nevertheless experience profound homesickness. It's a stress response,
homesickness. I mean, there's some thought that homesickness is strangely
thought to be an evolutionary response to make sure that as herd animals, we
stay together, because we need, humans needed each other. We still do, but we
needed each other to protect ourselves because we didn't have all the things
that animals had, the claws, the teeth, the wings, I don't know. So we needed to
be herd animals. Well, we are herd animals. That's why for us, for primates, for
mammals, for humans, we need to attach in order to be kept safe as a baby when
we can't protect ourselves. So attachment is important. Homesickness, what you
have here is ruptured attachment, but it doesn't mean that what you only have is
ruptured attachment. It is unimaginable for most of us, as you say, that it's
one thing to voluntarily take yourself out of a home environment to travel away,
to miss somewhere, to have a yearning, but there's this profound loss, this
destabilizing feeling of a lack of sense of security, a lack of place in the
world. This is profoundly affecting, but it can also be across a whole
community. So I mean, this is why it's not necessarily PTSD as such and why this
can be muddled up. And this is why it is such homesickness is such a profound
issue for refugees and asylum seekers. I mean, there've been studies all over
the world of large groups of refugees or asylum seekers, all experiencing these
feelings, these longings. There is a bit of a difference. I mean, you talk about
homesickness, you might have somebody who's living in another country and maybe
they have to go there for work. So it may not be something they choose. And
they're really, really homesick. And it affects them to the extent that they
withdraw. They don't connect anymore. Perhaps they have anhedonism. They can't
enjoy things. They might, it might lead to quite profound sadness and
depression. So I wouldn't, I'm not in any way minimizing homesickness in other
situations. But what you have here with asylum seekers and refugees is that that
home doesn't exist, is gone. There's no return. It can't, it doesn't exist. And
yet it's all they think about. The United Nations Refugee Agency estimates that
worldwide there are 117.2 million displaced and stateless people and an
estimated 280 million international migrants. Could there be homesickness all
around us that we're ignoring? And it doesn't just affect those recently
displaced or relocated through their own choice to migrate. It can affect
families for generations. Refugees are growing up in a kind of third place that
is neither here nor there and often exists in a kind of metaphysical
construction of their own, which is studded with memories of their parents and
grandparents. I was born to refugees in Germany, Afghan refugees. And we didn't
have papers until I was 10. So I don't know where my home is exactly. I think I
still am figuring that out. I made Afghanistan the subject of my desires for a
very long time. This mythical ancestral homeland that I hadn't seen, but where
my parents came from and where once they had been very happy and, and they were
very happy. And I was very happy there, but where my parents came from and where
once they had been very happy and everything would have been fine if the wars
hadn't happened. And there was this kind of, yeah, nostalgic version where we
would still live there and my life would be very different and we wouldn't have
food anxiety and other things like they wouldn't have plummeted through the
classes. Four years ago, when Arya was 28, her father took her and her younger
sister to Kabul for the first time. She arrived in Kabul after a long flight via
Turkey. There was something in the air that felt very familiar, which was very
strange because I felt as though my body knew where I was without me realising
it. And I felt happy, not as emotional as I thought I would feel. I thought I
would cry tears of joy or experience some great epiphany. That did not happen.
My sister got sick the first night she started throwing up. She had, I don't
know what happened, but yeah, it was like when you travel to a second or third
world country, whatever these classifications are, I don't like them, but you go
somewhere where you're not used to the cuisine and the water and something might
happen. You might get a stomach bug and that's what happened to her. And the
first three days she was so extremely sick that I got pissed off with her,
really, because I felt as though she was ruining this homeland trip for me by
her body rejecting it and her body asserting a kind of like Western standard
that I didn't want to accept. But then things turned around really quickly. She
got better. And by the end of the trip, it was me who was sick. So, and I just
wanted to get out of there. I realised that I'm actually from Germany. And even
if I don't want to admit that, because I never felt at home there, then I was
grieving something. But that homesickness that I'm describing is, I think, an
existential homesickness. And it's always there. Sometimes it's dormant, but
sometimes it comes out like a virus. But I'm carrying it and I'm carrying it
within my body. And the only ways to combat that are to really create a nice
home in my apartment or house that I am in at that point. But I have moved
around so much. I think I am actually used to not feeling at home. Aria began
grieving for something which no longer existed, belonging to a place yearned for
by her grandparents and her parents. But what about homesickness for a place
that literally no longer exists? Really, we watched as the cliff effectively
came closer. And eventually there came a time when the house on the edge of the
cliff was demolished. So, we became the house on the edge of the cliff. When
Juliette Blacksland moved into her home on the Suffolk coast, she knew it wasn't
going to be forever. But what Juliette didn't realise was how quickly the cliff
would disappear into the sea. We actually had a series of storms in 2019 where
we lost more than was expected in the November of that year. And the net result
was that we lost an enormous amount of land coming towards the house, as it
were. So, the coastal engineer actually sort of condemned it in the middle of
winter just before Christmas. But first they said, you've got two months notice.
And then they said, could you move in two weeks? And then they said, could you
move by the weekend? Norfolk and Suffolk have some of the fastest eroding
coastline in north-western Europe. The communities living in these areas are
particularly vulnerable to climate change because of rising sea levels and more
extreme weather. There are towns and villages across the world moving because of
these changes in our climate. The World Bank has predicted that unless remedial
action is taken, there'll be an estimated 216 million climate migrants across
the globe by 2050. The erosion is significant and there will be a significant
loss in the future of the church at Cove Hive and some listed farm buildings and
some very nice houses. So, that is a strange sense of talking about
homesickness, almost being homesick for something which is soon to be lost, but
is not lost, if you see what I mean. Normally you have to move for a reason, but
time has gone, but the place is still there. But with this, it's a strange thing
because the house you lived in physically is removed. It's demolished. The space
station is a laboratory. It's mostly vital metallic, lots of instruments, lots
of computer equipment. There is nothing green. There is nothing growing. And so
when we would have dinner, there would be a poster of this green field with a
lone tree and some sunflowers. We'd all end up just gazing at this poster. It
made you realise just how important it is to have that connection with Mother
Nature. That's what made me feel the most homesick for our planet. Only being
able to view Earth's natural wonders, the Himalayas, the Andes, the lush greens
of Central Africa, but not being able to participate. Karuna is a city
surrounded by vast mountains in northern Sweden, close to Norway, 250km north of
the Arctic Circle. Before the city of Karuna was established in 1912, it was
home to the Sami people and reindeer herders. The skies are very big and the
horizon is very clear. The mountains are very dense, and the air is very cold.
And so in 1912, it was home to the Sami people and reindeer herders. The skies
are very big and the horizons are very wide. They started almost 20 years ago,
and they understand that the mine eats the city. And they started to talk about
a move and moving the city and moving houses and moving buildings. Karuna is a
community that for 20 years has been living on borrowed time. But not because
Because of an iron ore mine, the whole community where Lena Tjarnberg is the
vicar have or are preparing to move to a new location. When I moved here eight
years ago, they had talked about it for a very long time. About three, four
years, they have started to move buildings and last year they closed the old
city and opened a new city. And people started to realise this is going to be
real. And when I moved here, it was more grief, I think, when people were
talking about it and in some way, I think, fear. But after we closed the city,
the old city, and we opened a new, I think people are not so much sad about it
or more in some way excited. In two years, Lena's church in Koruna is going to
be loaded onto a trailer and moved. Ole Thurs is overseeing the project. It
weighs about 600 tons. And it's a wooden church. It was built in 1912. And they
made the church looking like a big Sámi tent or something like a home of the
wandering people of the north. There could have been a fire in the centre of the
church and so, and there's just a little, little small wooden crucifix on the
altar. Ole told me that he's surprised about the lack of grief and homesickness
the community feel as a whole. And Lena thinks that's because of the community's
relationship with nature, particularly the nearby mountains of Norway. It's not
only the house who is home here. I think the nature is home too for most of the
people here, because we know that the mountain is not going to touch that. It's
going to be like that for many, many years. So the mind doesn't take the nature.
I think Kiruna church is the living room for the people who live here. I think
the nature is the same. It's the home. I think they love the nature more than
the houses and the streets. And it's more important than the houses and the city
for people here. When you actually get outside the space station, it's a mixture
of emotions because it's absolutely phenomenal to see the universe through just
the thin visor of your helmet and then to be able to turn around in any
direction and to look one way and see the earth beneath you and the next
direction out into the Milky Way. It felt as if space was all around you. When
you look up at the sky, having been into space, especially on a sunny day and
you see this blue sky, it's easy to think that it's very comforting up there,
but it's not. Having been into space, it reminds you that actually it's a very
harsh and hostile environment up there. And what's comforting is down here.
Given the huge numbers of people migrating and displaced because of conflict,
oppression and even climate change, homesickness really is a condition of our
time. And it's even more pertinent in this moment in history because what
protects us all from the harshness of space is at risk. Just every sunrise and
every sunset, I saw from the space station how thin the Earth's atmosphere is.
We see the atmosphere obliquely when the sun is low on the horizon and shining
through it. And it's the tiniest strip of gas, just 16 kilometers thick. And
this really reminds you that if it weren't for that strip of gas, Earth would be
like Mars or Venus and this would be a hostile planet. And it really gives you
perspective that this is the planet that we're designed to live on. I'm a huge
fan of space exploration and do believe that we'll soon have habitation modules
on the Moon and Mars. But at the same time, I'm acutely aware that every crew
that travels there will be thinking of Earth as the most beautiful planet in the
solar system. And it will always be home. Homesick Planet was produced by Kate
Bissell and Gail Tolley. Now let's look ahead to next week on Radio 4. Welcome
to the Spark. When we're in the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that
are different than the decisions that we would make if we were looking from the
outside in. Bold thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or
remember that these inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human
connection can save a life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new series of close-up
conversations. More big thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world. And
hearing some of the personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best
decisions I've ever made in my life was making that step. The Spark starts next
Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, Lem Sisset is
the one and only. Each week, the poet will reflect on an element of himself that
has, at some point in his life, made him unique. This week, he remembers the
start of his career, when he was often the only poet on the bill. I'm the only
person called Lem Sisset in the world. I'm the only person in this dressing
room. I'm squinting in the mirror, talking to myself. In a moment, I'll be the
only person on stage. The only person everyone's looking at. The only person
with a name in the title of the show. It's time, Lem. Yeah? Just a second. Have
you ever walked this walk from the dressing room to the stage? Do you know what
it's like to appear alone in front of a crowd? Do you want to experience it the
way I do? You've no way of answering that, because actually, we recorded this
months ago. This is Manchester. It's where I started as a poet in the 1980s. I
shared the bill with comedians like Steve Coogan and John Thompson and Carolina
Hearn. Nearly there, we're nearly there. Musicians like Johnny Dangerously, who
later formed I Am Clute, and Claire Mooney, who sang about love and then about
smashing the system. We were the underbelly of Tony Wilson's cultural behemoth.
I was often the only poet on the bill, but tonight, I'm the only person on the
bill. I am the one and only. Now, let's go. Please welcome to the stage, Lem
Sese. Welcome to Lem Sese is the one and only. An exploration, an investigation,
an interrogation of times when I was the only one. This week, I'm exploring when
I was the only poet on the mixed bill. Everyone's unique. It's what unites us.
We all have the hallmarks of a unique existence, our thoughts and thought
patterns. But let's face a stark reality. Some people are more unique than
others, aren't we? I stood out in the poet, comedian, musician days of the mid-
eighties, Manchester. I would end my 15-minute slot before the musician or the
comedian with a poem like African metaphor, which would stun the friendly
audience into fearful silence. And you can't sweep dust under the rug anymore.
You can't keep hiding bodies under the boards of the floor. And now, said the
compare, agra-man, the human anagram. I had no concept that I was draining the
blood from the faces of fellow comedians. A minute earlier, I had been reading
funny poems about Manchester. I'm a Mancunoid, fit and strong, your days are up
and it won't be long. If you look at me one second more, I'll be your head in
the well floor. And yet they encouraged me, you know, audience and performers
alike. I built tension, comedians released it and the singers soothed us. The
whole caboodle kind of worked. And throughout my career, being the only poet has
served me well, like when I was the only poet on stage performing as an actor
slash poet, playing Scully in Jim Cartwright's East from Bolton Road at the
Royal Court. I like to roll my R's when I say Royal Court. Hold on a minute,
people who roll the R don't roll all their R's because there's also an R in
court, but you don't roll the R in court. You don't say Royal Court, Google. Why
are some R's rolled when others are not rolled at all? Why? And the survey says,
in Spanish, when the word starts with an R, you must roll it, you must roll the
R when there is a double R in the middle of a word, no word in Spanish starts or
ends in double R. A rolling R also calls an alveolar trill. An alveolar trill
sounds like a character in a Roald Dahl novel. Wikipedia, the voice alveolar
trill is a type of continental sound used in some spoken languages. Continental.
The British Council website says, alveolar consonants are consonant sounds that
are produced with the tongue close to or touching the ridge between, behind the
teeth on the roof of the mouth. The name comes from alveoli, the sockets of the
teeth. We are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences and
knowledge. We all know things that other people don't. For example, I know what
an alveolar trill is. Give me a cheer if you do too. CHEERING Oh, OK. So quite a
lot of you know. So, this might not work with the script. Can we do this again?
If you don't mind. You don't know, OK? You don't know. How many of you here know
the term alveolar trill? Ah, you see? That is the sound of hands not raising in
the air. Sort of like the sound of trees when there's no breeze. The sound of a
building which isn't falling down. The sound of a match before the strike, yeah.
The sound of a river frozen in midwinter, if we are defined by sound, then we
are defined by movement. And none of you knew what an alveolar trill was. None
of you. Well, now you do. Now, that's what Radio 4 is for. So, what was that
about? Well, it's about unique thought processes, isn't it? I've foreshadowed
that before the story. What? I asked Ed to tell the audience before the show to
cheer if I asked, do they know what alveolar trill was? Listen. When you are
asked, who knows what an alveolar trill is? I need you to all cheer as if you
do. And then we'll ask it again and you will have to stay silent like you don't,
OK? I was doing a joke about how I thought knowing something would make me
unique, but then I wasn't. I'm just trying to make this into a one and only
experience, Henry. Which is part of a series. How am I doing, Henry? I want to
talk about it with you. You're Henry Normal, poet, TV producer, extraordinaire.
Nice exposition. Thanks. It's interesting, this business of being the only poet
on the bill. Can you remember what was the most extraordinary bill that you were
on as a poet? Extraordinary bill that I was on as a poet? Well, I opened a
penguin pool. A penguin pool? In Chester Zoo. Were you the support to the
penguins? I sort of was. There was a lot of press there, Henry. There were
circles around the brand-new penguin pool of Chester Zoo. But there was no
clicking while I read my penguin poem, Henry. Do you recommend working with
animals and fish and birds? Never again, Henry, never again. Each of us is
unique, one and only. Take now, for example. You have no way of knowing whether
or not you are hearing me precisely as another person is hearing me. Oh, you
understand the words, you can decipher their meaning, you can tell the style in
which I am speaking, but the individual tonal sound as per the exact shape of
your ear reverberating in the exact shape of your head is unique to you by
fractions. You are the only one who can hear me in the exact way you are hearing
me right now. You are the only one who can hear me in the exact way you are
hearing me right now. You are the only one who can hear me in the exact way you
are hearing me right now. Audio or radio, unlike theatre, is a singular
experience. We tend not to listen to radio sat in rows, we listen individually.
I think it must be why poetry works on radio. Our uniqueness is what unites us,
and it seems that we see our uniqueness most of all when we're newborn, and so
too a poem which celebrates the essence of the you, newborn. You are a visible
original, a pinnacle of miracle, critical, untypical, all but inexplicable. My
love is unconditional in every single syllable, untethered and uncynical. I
thank the lobes, occipital. Occipital, occipital, occipital, occipital. Without
you I'm invisible, an intolerant monosyllable, ill-placed and ill-paced and
unrhythmical, unkissable, immiscible, immiscible, immiscible, immiscible,
immiscible. So in this oratorical, the lyrically impossible, the spectacle
receptacle for rhymes of bestolyptical, invincible, indivisible, the crux of all
that's critical, distinct and distinguished, utterly inextinguishable, the
ineffable, effable, incredible spectacle, the impeccable festival of you.
CHEERING AND APPLAUSE And there you hear the beautiful sound of applause and
that particular arrangement, that sound will never be exactly replicated. It
would be impossible to replicate in its entirety. It was one and only for the
one and only. And if you listen closely, applause sounds very much like the
downpour of rain. I'm going to try this here. If you could just, the front row,
clap, but not at the same time, just... And slowly. And then once you do that,
I'm going to ask the second row to do it, and then the third and then the
fourth, and we're going to try and see if we can replicate a downpour. If you
could start. APPLAUSE CHEERING AND APPLAUSE APPLAUSE APPLAUSE Rainfall, like
applause, is utterly unique every time it happens. It never rains the same way
twice. By the way, if you hadn't joined in, we'd just put a microphone outside,
cos it's Manchester. LAUGHTER And we'd have rain soon enough. Being unique is
all well and good, but I get recognised, I've got to tell you, in the street. It
happened yesterday. Are you the poet? A woman said to me in the street. It's not
that I wait for times like this, but I happen to have, and thus produced, a
photograph of myself, including website... LAUGHTER..and contact details for my
agent. Would you like me to sign it, I said. My agent printed them for a reading
at Guerrilla in Manchester, and I'm on my way to rehearsals right now, and she
gushed, you know. Oh, don't let me make you late, she said. Not at all, I said.
I'll never forget you, she said. She stared past the photo of me into my real
eyes. It was...it was the poem, she said. I wrote it down, she whispered. Which
of my poems would she recall? Would it be my death poem? You Went Out For Coffee
But Came Back As Ashes? Or the wedding poem, You May Not Have Been My First
Choice But You Will Be My Last? LAUGHTER Or my biker's country music love poem,
I Want A Tattoo Of You That Is Bigger Than Me? Having noticed the watery eye of
reminiscence, it felt rude not to ask which exact poem she alluded to. They F
You Up, Your Mum And Dad? LAUGHTER That one, she said. There was a pause. And
now I can say, she said, that I've finally met the poet Benjamin Zephaniah.
LAUGHTER Can I have a selfie, she said. It was then that I retreated into my
mind to read the beginnings of an original work of my own. To selfie or not to
selfie, that is the question. Whether tis nobler in the mind to suffer the flash
and blurs of fame and notoriety or to scream against the raised selfie stick and
by opposing, end them. LAUGHTER Well, I should tell you that I signed the
photograph. Love, Ben. LAUGHTER And I took the photo into her pocket. I could
put half of my early career down to not being Benjamin Zephaniah. Just as I was
about to leave, her child said, Is he famous, Mum? Are you famous? LAUGHTER
Well, the mood changed. Being the only one was not good enough. I had to be
known to be the one and only. I had to be famous. LEM, why have you brought this
down to fame? That wasn't the end of the bit. Why did you jump in there? Waiting
to the end, that's what anyone else would have done. But the audience will have
forgotten the set-up by the time we go back and it just doesn't make sense. I
thought you wanted this to be unique. I do. So what are you talking about
Benjamin Zephaniah for? You're nothing like Benjamin. You took your OBE. Yeah, I
guess I did. What do you mean you owe your career to not being him? I just mean
that in the early years, when Benjamin wasn't available, bookers would often
book me in lieu of him being available. Do you think there's somebody out there
being called the new Lem Sissay? There could be, Henry, there could be. Building
up resentment? Yeah. Go round going, I'm nothing like Lem Sissay. Actually, I
don't think that's the case, Henry. What I think is that there are lots of young
poets out there who look at that Lem Sissay and think, well, that's old news
really. Oh, well, that's it, isn't it? When you're young, you don't want to do
what your dad did or your grandad or your great-grand. You want something new,
don't you? I remember sort of looking over at the Liverpool Poets, for example,
but I still thought they were just brilliant then even, didn't I? Did you? I
think I did. I didn't think they were passionate enough. That's what I liked
about you when you started. Now, I've since realised that they were older than
us and you probably lose a bit of passion as you get older, but what I liked
about you when you started was that passion and I think you've kept it. I think
that's very kind of you to say, Henry, but my passion now, you know, is it, you
know, am I just basically angry at the younger new poets? Is that where my
passion is? There's probably a new poet going around going, he's too passionate,
him. Actually, I think that could well be true, to be honest, because the idea
of passion, you know, the idea of actually showing your anger on stage or
showing how you really feel, that's not... That's not cool anymore. That's not
cool. No, no. I don't think it was then. That was a hole I filled. Right. Play
on. I fell to my knees. A dark shadow of cloud covers the child's innocent,
panic-stricken face. Are you famous? Famous. Famous. Famous. I stumble through
the battlefield, looming above him. I fix him with my glittering eye and mutter
the words in a moment of clarity. The answer is in the question. I maintain eye
contact until the child and his mother weep. I leave them to catch the 192 buzz.
My work here was done to guerrilla in Manchester. Wrong buzz, mate. Next one's
coming in two hours. Hey, are you that poet, Tony Walsh? Oh, for... See? Didn't
work. I said it'd be unique, I didn't say it'd be better. Sometimes there are
conventions for a reason. A few years ago, one poet in Manchester galvanised the
people of this city in their hour of need through his unique voice when
Manchester needed to come together in the vacuum created by the bombing on the
22nd of May 2017. They didn't call for Countert. They called for Tony Walsh. And
we make things from steel, we make things from cotton, we make people laugh,
take the... mix them and rot them. And we make you at home, we make you feel
welcome, we make something happen, we can't seem to help it. And if you're
looking for history, then yes, we've a wealth. But the Manchester way.....is to
make it yourself. DOORBELL RINGS Hey, Lipset, blimey. Good to see you, mate.
Good to see you, man. How are you? Take a seat, my friend. Thank you. How did it
happen that you were on that stage on that memorable day? The poem was a pre-
existing poem that I'd written a few years before. So, a few months previously,
one of the senior political figures in the city had died and there was a
memorial service for him at the cathedral and I performed it there in front of
the great and the good. So it was fresh in people's minds. The poem? The poem.
So they specifically didn't want politicians speaking. They feared that if any
politician said anything, the other side would want to speak as well and
somebody's going to get jeered and that wouldn't have been appropriate. So it's,
you know, get that poet guy that did the poem that time. I see. Yeah. So they
invited me down and I rushed into Manchester, threw a suit on, printed the poem
off in a slightly larger font than it was so I wouldn't have to wear my glasses.
So why did the... Why did the crowd respond to that poem at that point? We'll
both know the quote from Mayor Angelou who said, they won't remember a thing you
said, they won't remember a thing you did, they'll remember how you made them
feel. And that poem, it would seem, made a lot of people feel the same thing in
that moment in the city and around the world on TV. And I'm clear, a lot of what
was being felt in that square was being felt anyway. But what that made the poet
and the poem was, was a lightning rod for all that feeling. And people were
confused how to feel. We all felt so many things. There was anger, there was
bafflement, there was confusion, grief, all of those things. And there are
moments of humour in the poetry, in the poem. Make us a brew while you're up,
love. And there's a few things. But nothing really came into context altogether.
So it was a concern to me as to whether those would strike the right note in the
square that day. But what became very interesting was lines that were written
for entirely different circumstances gained a different resonance when that
meaning was overlaid onto them. So some are born here, some are drawn here, but
we all call it home. Many people of diverse heritage, particularly Muslim
people, felt that that line included them within the city's grief, and often
singled that line out to thank me for. Can I ask you a question? What did it
feel like after you had said the last lines of the poems and then felt the
applause of the audience? Tell me what that felt like. As a performer, I was
conscious of how I brought the poem to a full stop. So the final lines were, I
always remember, never forget, forever Manchester. And how do I bring that to a
full stop? So there was a phrase that I'd heard a couple of days before, not of
my writing, choose love, choose love, choose love Manchester. So I used that as
my full stop. And in many ways, I think that was the most important thing I said
that day. And people have said that the poem, coming so quickly after the bomb,
got in there with inclusive, tolerant messages before any hateful messages could
get in there. And there was, you know, I stayed in a square afterwards, a lot of
people did, and there was a lot of seat guys, I remember, with that traditional
drum. And they stayed, and it was a very surreal atmosphere that I would find,
even as a poet, very hard to describe. But it was beautiful in many ways. And
the flowers that emerged in the city over the coming days, and the spontaneous
singing, and things like that, you know, that was the arts in a space of public
grief, and public commemoration, and public solidarity, you know. And only the
arts can do this. And religion tries to do the same thing, but it uses the arts
to do it. You know, it uses song, it uses what is in effect poetry, it uses
painting, it uses architecture as a way to get into people's heads and hearts,
you know. What is it like being the only poet on the bill? I find myself in that
position quite often. I introduced the Stranglers from the main stage of a
festival once. And it was a hometown crowd, and I thought people would know who
I was, and I had a poem about the festival. But when I walked out, what I hadn't
reckoned for was two or three hundred hardcore Stranglers fans had travelled
from all over to be in the front row. And they weren't expecting a poet to come
on just before the Stranglers, so that turned out to be scarier than I'd
anticipated. But, you know, I've worked in schools for years, and, you know, I
did the One Love concert after the bomb to 60,000, 70,000 people in the stadium,
live to 150 million people, they told me. And I was a little bit nervous, but,
you know, 180 year nines on a hot Friday afternoon is scary. I do like taking
poetry to places where people don't expect it or haven't been exposed to it and
confounding those expectations. And you and I both know poetry can do something
electric in those circumstances. We can tap into something primal, and it can be
astonishing. It's ancient, it's in us. You know, I talk about how we, you know,
we live to, we literally live to a rhythm, don't we, in a heartbeat. And we live
to rhythms of hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, yearly. Rhythms, and I think we're
hardwired to receive it. And if you can tap into that, there's a reason why
rhyme poetry in particular is prized by anybody who's trying to get any message
across, whether it's religion or vote for me or buy these beans. You know, it
gets into people's heads and hearts, and it stays there. And that makes it a
valuable method. Nice interview, Lem. Thanks. Of course, you wrote that for me
to say, didn't you? So... Yeah, Henry, yeah, I did. That's right. Let me ask you
a question. When did you first say you were a poet? Well, I knew I was a poet
when I was 12, actually. Did you ever say to anybody, I'm a poet? No, not at 12,
but at 14 I did. Yeah. I said it at school. I said, that's what I want to do.
That's what I want to be. No, no, you said, that's what you want to be. No,
that's what I was. No, that's what I was. No, it's what I was. I said, that's
what I was. Can you remember the first time you said it? Well, actually, no. I
said, that's what I want to be, because I didn't know what a poet was. I just
knew that I did what a poet does. Right. So I was earning the right to say that
I'm a poet by sending out the first kind of salvo, is it? Is that the word?
Salvo? Yeah, it's a good word. You know, first, you know, just, I'd like to be a
poet when I'm, you know... And when do you think was the first time you actually
said to yourself, I'm not, I'm going to be a poet, but I am a poet? That's a
really good question. Even though it's my show. Yeah. But it's a good question
that you're asking me. Well, you edit me out. Yeah, it took me a while. I did my
first gigs in Manchester. Still didn't call myself a poet when I performed. So
did they say, ladies and gentlemen, please welcome, we don't know what he's
doing, but he wants to be a poet at some point. That's very good. No, actually,
I'd published my first book myself then, you know. So I still didn't, oh no, I
did call myself a poet. I had a poem as my first poem in there. Yeah. I am a
poet and it is my life, I would slip my wrist with a pen, not a knife. I am a
poet from now until then, my life is my paper, my knife is my pen. Fantastic.
Only a poet could write that. Poetry is the slowest seller in the market, often
in the furthest corner of the bookshelf. And so we perform. Instead of rolling
my tongue around a juicy adjective while finding myself an abstract objective to
metaphorically master through a perfect perspective and economically edit to its
utmost connective, I find myself lost in a cell full of words. I know what I
want to do, can't find the verbs. Rhymes are on the run through the keel and
under the door, saying I'm going to die a slow death if you use me anymore. But
a padded cell is not enough, it's another cliche, another padded out and post
piece of poetry today. My illness is spreading, pathetic as the odd sock, as the
fact that that gets me to the rhyme that I've got writer's block. Suicide seems
to be the only recurring choice. On top of all this, I'm an oral poet and I
think I'm losing my... I love the time when the poet performs next to the
juggler, next to the musician, next to the fire eater, next to the clown, next
to the guitarist, and someone's swallowing a ukulele. You could never quite
guarantee that everyone on stage was stable. Performers rocked your world. There
was a kind of diversity and not a single standard. There was a curiosity in the
audience, a willingness. When John Thompson walked on stage in a tuxedo with a
pint of beer to perform his character Bernard Wright on... Oh, dear. There's a
black fella, a Pakistani and a Jew in a nightclub. What a fine example of an
integrated community. He performed Bernard Wright on in clubs and bars within a
mile radius of Bernard Manning. Those were years a poet would follow a raffle,
the bingo, or a band live performance. It is one of a kind, isn't it? Unique. It
will never be the same. It is what it is at the moment that it is it. The
patterns can't be replicated exactly. You've seen something unique. Take care
and be as unique as you are. Thanks a lot. L'Emsissé is the one and only. It was
written and performed by L'Emsissé. It was produced by Ed Morrish and it was a
Lead Mojo production for BBC Radio 4. Well, the audience go off to the bar and
I'm back here, the only poet in the dressing room, the only person in the
dressing room. Each of us had a unique experience. We sort of fell in love. But
of course, they haven't heard the finished thing yet. Can't wait to hear the
edit. And L'Ems will be back at the same time next Friday here on Radio 4 when
he'll be the only non-graduate at the ceremony. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me,
Samira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the lines that I write, I personally do
actually really love.