TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 by Mary Ward Lowry and the reader is Roshan Stone. BBC News at 11 o'clock. The
UN General Assembly has demanded that Russia immediately withdraw its troops
from Ukraine. 180 member nations took part in a vote on the eve of the first
anniversary of the war. 141 nations voted in favour of the motion. The US
ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said the vote, which has no legal
power, gave a clear message. These 141 countries reiterated a clear demand to
Russia. Withdraw. Withdraw immediately, completely and unconditionally from
Ukraine's internationally recognised territory. Send your troops home and end
this war. The BBC has been told that an off-duty police officer got up and
warned children to run away during an attack in Northern Ireland, where he was
shot multiple times. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was with his son
after a football coaching session in County Tyrone when two men opened fire.
Canada has launched an investigation into the online social media app TikTok
because of concerns about how the platform collects and uses personal
information. Earlier, EU officials were ordered to remove the app from their
official devices. TikTok, which is owned by a Chinese company, insists it
doesn't operate any differently to other social media sites. A preliminary
report into the derailment of a train carrying toxic chemicals in the US has
found that a wheel overheated. The crash three weeks ago led to the town of East
Palestine in Ohio being evacuated. The actor Alec Baldwin has pleaded not guilty
to involuntary manslaughter over the death of a cinematographer shot dead on the
set of the film Rust. Mr Baldwin was holding the gun which killed Helena
Hutchins in October 2021. BBC News. If you own a smart speaker, did you know you
can access a whole world of BBC content through it? To get started, just say
open BBC sounds, then ask your speaker to play whatever you want. You could
listen to a music mix like this, play Focus Beats. Or try a new podcast, play
Desert Island Discs. And of course, if you want to listen to live radio, you can
just say play Radio 4. Music, radio and podcasts available on most smart
speakers. Just say open BBC sounds to get started. And now on Radio 4, it's time
to welcome back the Stoneybridge Town Council, Denzel and Gwyneth, Two Line
Terry, The Little Girl and more, with another series of the Absolutely Radio
Show. Denzel! Gwyneth, what in all that onesie have happened to you? I have been
to a funeral, Denzel, where it are customary to wear black as a sign of respect.
I see, and that's why you have also painted your face black. Yes, I have. I'm a
bit of a painter. I'm a painter, too. I paint my own portraits. I'm a painter,
too. I paint my own portraits. I'm a painter, too. I paint my own portraits. I
see, and that's why you have also painted your face and teeth black. Yes,
Denzel, that are correct. And I have also painted the rest of my body black as
well, in case I had to get undressed. Ah, yes, because you never know what you
might have to get undressed at a Welsh funeral. That are what I thought, Denzel.
And the service was at the Church of St Ilch. And who have died? Oh, lots of
people, Denzel. No, I mean, his funeral. Old Mrs. F... And... And... And it was
nice in a way, because she wanted to die at 87. Why 87? Because that are where
she lived. Not for 87. Just down the road. And it was all very quick. She didn't
suffer. She was just putting out the bins on the front path when she was gunned
down by the Taliban. I think they were in Wales on their holidays and they got a
bitch carried away. Yes, Wales often have that effect on people if they haven't
been here before. Anyway, it were a beautiful funeral, and we started with a
minute's silence, and then the Reverend Harry Lujer said that because Mrs. F was
a Welsh speaker, we should have another minute's silence in Welsh. If you ask
me, he are a bit too pious, Gwynedd. He are not pious, Denzel. He are nothing
like a pie. He are a very holy man. Oh, I shouldn't think you've got any more
holes than anyone else, Gwynedd. Although I imagine the one around the back will
be slightly larger than most things. Seeing as he talks out of it so much. How
can you say that? He are a very wonderful man. When he walks into a room, it
lights up. Oh, anyone can do that, Gwynedd. You just flick the switch. What I've
got to understand, Gwynedd, are that people like me... No, they don't, Denzel.
What? No, people don't like you, Denzel. Why do you think Al Cappuccino's coffee
bar gave you a disloyalty card? Nobody likes you, but that's enough about you.
I've just got to pop round to Mrs. Goseinen's to feed her cat. You're going to
feed cat to Mrs. Goseinen? Are we silly, Denzel? Mrs. Goseinen are dead. She had
a heart attack. Oh, right. Did she smoke? No, I think she just went, ah, and
fell over. Well, that'll be another funeral then. And just think, Gwynedd, one
day it'll be yow going into the box to be committed. Shut up, Denzel. When yow
die, you'll go to hell. No, worse than that, you'll go to rill. Well, that are
not fair, Gwynedd. Not fair to rill? No, not fair to me. I don't want to go to
rill. Well, yow will be. Ah, come in. Take a seat. Aye, thank you. I'm Richard
Grant, warehouse manager. Aye, and I'm Callum Gilhooly, candidate for the job.
Yes, we have your name. It's not a bad name for a job like this. Good work, I
think. Callum, can you stack this shelf over there? Ah, yeah, that's fine, Bob.
Or whoever it is. It might not be Bob. Your name's fine, Callum. It's not an
issue. Well, that's good news, eh? Off to a flyer. What next? Can you list your
strengths? Well, I'm very good at speaking. Can always think of something to
say. Even when I've got nothing to say, I can think of something to say. Just
the way I am, I think. OK, now that's how you see yourself. But how do you think
other people would describe you? Oh, I don't have to think, I know. My dad
always called me a clown. And my mum just called me that boy. So, what do you
like to do outside of work? Outside of work, various things. Go home. Eat.
Sleep. Get up. Eat some more, maybe sleep again. Loads and loads of stuff,
really. And why should we here at the co-op consider hiring you? Well, because
I've asked, so it's only polite, you know. And why do you want to work here?
Well, this is where the job is, so... Right, and what is your salary
expectation? Oh, I like to be paid every week into my bank account. And what
motivates you? I like to be paid every week into my bank account. My bank
account. OK, we're almost done. Now, this is just a bit of fun, Callum. If you
were a biscuit, what type of biscuit would you be? Well, I'm not sure I'd want
to be a biscuit. I'm not too keen on being eaten. OK, I hear you. Oh, that's
good, I'm audible. Which could be handy in a warehouse, you know. So you can add
that to my list of threats. Yes, let's try a different tack. Say you were an
animal. I'm still applying for the shelf stacking job, you know. Yes, this is
just to get to know you, if we can. Oh, right, right. An animal. I'd plump for
being a goat. Decent chance of just being milked, you know. I tell you what, do
you want to ask me what sort of motorbike I'd like to be? No, we don't ask that
one. Oh, shame. Great. Look, I've heard enough. We'll let you know. Me too, I'll
be in touch. Are you not sure you want the job? Well, I have to say, I'm a bit
worried about maybe having to be a biscuit or an animal. I mean, I'll need to
think about it. Well, I can tell you my decision now, if that would help. Might
as well. Well, I think we'll pass this time, but thanks for your interest. Oh,
that's fine, and I'll let you know what I think in a couple of days. And then we
can take it from there. Everybody seems to have one, they talk about them
endlessly. Conversation starts to blow when we talk about our health
deficiencies. My aching back is playing up. I think I've got a cold. My foot
hurts. I think I've got gout. I've got blood in me poo and I don't know what to
do. Oh, people, please leave it out. I'm not a man who's censorious, but I don't
want to hear this stuff. We grow up, get old, our bodies stop to work. Just
accept it. Life gets tough. I don't want to hear about health adversity or your
latest allergy. Illness scares me. I want to live. I don't want to be history. I
spend my life trying to cheat death or run a marathon every day. I drink green
tea and I monitor my pee. So please don't remind me of my own mortality. With
your medical problems, please get some pills. Stop sharing all your ills.
Medical problems. Just pat your lip. I don't care about your arthritic hip.
Medical problems. So please show me some courtesy and don't talk to me about
your swollen knee. B12 deficiency, colonoscopy, or your hepatitis B, egg
continency, going gluten free, or your ear deformity, or your discolored wee.
Take your medical difficulty to your GP, not me. Yes, I do know what is hashtag
times up. It is what to say if someone does have a look or a twiddle or a poke
of someone else's private parts without asking for their permission. And if a
grown up lady goes to get a job and the boss does say, I will pay you more money
if you tickle my tinkle, then the lady can shout times up, because times up does
mean it is stop it o'clock. And if anybody does say something what you do not
like, like when a man did shout out of a lorry at your big sister, oh, you have
got some lovely melons. When she was not even holding any melons, then that is
called sexy harassment. And you can report the rude men to the police and it is
called doing a me too. And your sister and mum does get very cross if somebody
does do a whistle like this, whistle, whistle, because that is disrespecting.
But my nan wishes someone would do a whistle at her, because she does wink and
say, oh, chance would be a fine thing. It is a bit confusing. And the times up
and me too first started in America when there was a man called, yeah, he was
called Hardy Wine Penis. And he was a very big scary man, who has got a face
like scrambled egg on meat. And anyway, Harvey Winklespleen was boss of all the
posh films. And in the olden days, before 2018, all the acting people, what
would like to watch, Olympic Oscar medal, did want to have a job in his films.
But Hardy said the ladies can only have a job or win a medal if they did have a
shower with him or massage his hairy winklepenis. And when the lady actors did
say no, thank you to Hardy, he did get very, very cross. And he said, if you do
not have a sex cuddle with me, I will tell everyone you are rubbish at acting
and you will never get a job again. And you will get poor and ugly. And you will
never get a job again. You will get poor and ugly and you will die in a dustbin.
And most of the ladies were very frightened and didn't tell no one, not even
their mums and dads. But then one lady did give him a kick up his nuts and run
away and say, that is enough, I am telling on you, time is up. And all the other
acting women shouted out, me too, all at once. And it was so loud that finally
the police did hear them and come and arrested Harvey. And he did so, boo-hoo,
poor me, it's not my fault I got a condition. And the police did lock him up in
a nice comfy health farm where he can get a massage every day. And all the women
did a huge cheer because at long last they are safe and now they can be in any
film they like, as long as they are called Judi Dench or Myrtle Street. And my
dad says, the world's gone mad. And he says he is never going to give any ladies
a hug ever again in case he gets in trouble. And my mum says, thank God for
that. But I am very worried because what if Hardy Winklepin does get together
all his friends, what did also get into trouble for the inappropriates, and they
make a great big gang and all come back to punish the ladies what make them
stop. And what if they say, time's up for time's up. And then maybe there will
have to be a new thing called hashtag get off me now, you blastered. That is why
it's time's up, it is, it's true. CHEERING AND APPLAUSE MUSIC Bigger, better,
faster, harder news and more whooshing noises than any other radio station. This
is News News News. Good evening, I'm Brian Devlin, so there. And now on News
News News with Brian Devlin, it's 8.33 and we have breaking news at a walking
party in the Swiss Alps near the Matterhorn has been reported missing. The party
includes a famous actor and a famous sportswoman. We now go over live to our
reporter, Debbie Kinghorn at the Matterhorn. What do we know so far about the
missing actor and sportswoman? Well, Brian, the famous actor and famous
sportswoman are part of a party of 12 who set out yesterday morning from
Chamonix for a day's trekking and they haven't been heard of since. And do we
know who else was in the party of 12? No idea. Nobody famous? No, nobody famous.
Have the famous actor and sportswoman been named at this time? They've not been
named yet, as their families have not all been contacted. Well, this is very
exciting. Debbie, I'll leave you there. I have with me in the studio Martin
Baines, our arts correspondent. Martin, is there any connection that we know of
between the famous actor and the famous sportswoman? No, Brian, not that we're
aware of. So there's no implication that the famous actor and the famous
sportswoman are in any sort of relationship? Not that we're aware of. So there's
no implication that the famous actor and the famous sportswoman are in any sort
of relationship? Not until now there wasn't, no. LAUGHTER Thank you, Martin. I
bring in now our tributes correspondent, Ewan Douglas. Ewan, how is the news
being received in this country? Well, as you can imagine, Brian, tributes are
starting to pour in on social media. Yes, well, of course, people must be very
affected. Yes, they are. LAUGHTER I meant by the news. Here's just one example
from Twitter. I don't know who it is, who's missing and who may or may not die,
but I'm completely devastated whoever it is or was. LAUGHTER We now go to our
vigils correspondent, Robin Gateside, in Hampstead. What's happening there,
Robin? Well, Brian, we've been hearing that flowers and tributes are being laid
outside the homes of various famous actors and sportswomen all over the country.
Incredible. And I'm outside the home of famous Shakespearean actor Sir Gerald
Eddington. He's been outside his house here in Hampstead demonstrating with
mourners, asking them to remove their flowers and wreaths, and has been trying
to explain to them that he has never been to the Alps on a trekking trip and is
still very much alive. Yes, yes, and are people believing him? Some are, Brian.
Some aren't. Sir Gerald is a very good actor, of course. So I think some
mourners assume he is just playing alive. Yes, of course. Thank you, Robin. I'm
hearing that Debbie Kinghorn at the Matterhorn has some more breaking news for
us. Yes, Brian, the news is good. The famous actor and famous sportswoman have
turned up at their hotel, cold and tired, but alive. Right. Are you sure? Yes,
they're unharmed. They spent a night in a small shepherd's hut somewhere on the
mountainside. Luckily, they managed to keep warm. Yes, I'll bet they did.
Terrific news, as you were. Thank you. Hello, Tom. Hello, Dad. Your father and I
need to tell you something. OK. Tom, you're 18 now. Yes, I know. And we're both
very proud of you, aren't we, Martin? Yes, we are, darling, very proud. Right.
But we feel we owe it to you to tell you... And we maybe should have told you
before. Yeah, we've been putting it off, to be honest. Tom, you're not adopted.
Sorry? You're not adopted. You're ours. We're your birth parents. I see. I know
this must come as, you know, something of a shock. Well, yes, it does. And I
know you've had your troubles recently, and your exam results were very
disappointing. I see. But there's no real reason for all of this. No, no, no
back story of a difficult first few years. No, no, it turns out you're just not
very bright. Right. Which it seems you get from us. Yeah, it's all very
disappointing all round, really. So that's it. I'm stuck with you two, then? It
would appear so, and we're stuck with you. Yeah, and, well, while we're about
it, we might as well tell you. Your mother and I, after some discussion, much
heartache, have decided, no, yes, we're staying together. What? It's the only
way. We get on. I mean, we're well suited. I'm sorry if this has been a shock
for you, but at least now everything, you know, is out in the open. Not quite.
Sorry. There's something you need to know about me, now that we're all being
totally honest and open. Do we need to do this now? Yes, we do. Mum, Dad, I'm
gender certain. Are you sure? Positive. I'm heterosexual, and I always have
been. Oh, it's very brave of you to tell us, Tom. Well, I must admit, I feel
better now that it's out and I'm in. You do know what all this means, don't you?
No, what does it mean, darling? It means we're a very dull, conventional,
moderately happy and contented family. I don't know about anyone else, but I for
one could do with a drink. Oh my God, you mean... Yes, it's true. I'm an
occasional sensible drinker. Oh, I knew there was something else we had to tell
you, Tom. Oh God, when will it all end? Now, I think. Yes, that's probably
everything. And now we continue with part 117 of Two-Line Terry, the story of
the remarkable Scottish singer and whistler, Terence McCruna, who had many hits
in the 1950s and 60s with his two-line songs. It was 1963, and Terry was offered
his first film role in the romantic comedy Bikini Bloodbath. It was here he met
and fell in love with his temperamental Swedish co-star, Monica Yip. Their
relationship was torrid and turbulent. Terry wrote about their ups and downs in
the song Stairs or Lift. She preferred to climb the stairs, but it was the lift
for me. One could say we were raised differently. Then bad news. Terry was
shocked when he found out that Monica had been having an affair with Thomas
Tome, a handsome librarian from Gothenburg. Terry and Monica broke up. However,
things went from bad to worse for Monica two days later when Thomas Tome left
her. She was incandescent with rage and was arrested by the police after an
incident in the Gothenburg police station. She was later arrested by the police
for a crime she had committed. She was incandescent with rage and was arrested
by the police after an incident in the Gothenburg public library. Terry attended
Monica's court hearing and wrote the number three hit, Defacing a Library Book.
She tippexed out all the full stops in the library book, that was her offence.
And the judge said anyone doing that sort of thing should expect a long
sentence. After serving her long sentence, she was so old she went straight to
the Your Next Old Folks Home. Unfortunately, she hated the living conditions and
rebelled. The police were again called and Terry sang about this incident in the
number 47 hit, Afternoon Nap. Monica refused to take her afternoon nap as a
protest. Police arrived and charged her with resisting arrest. Good evening,
ladies and gentlemen. I'm Frank Hovis. I was watching Doctor Who the other day
and a couple of Daleks were having this conversation. Have you seen the doctor?
No, I couldn't get an appointment for three weeks. The guaranteed way to see the
doctor these days is to hang about in the waiting room and then when the doctor
calls out somebody's name but nobody gets up to go in, you go in. So I went in,
doctor said, morning Mrs Patel. I said, morning doctor. The doctor said, how are
you? I said, well, he stopped me there and said, good, off you go then. That was
it. I was disappointed. So I did what I usually do when I'm feeling a bit
disappointed. I'm afraid I resorted to the old shaft and helmet. Shaft and
helmet's the old miners club, by the way. I don't know if you fancy the swift
half, you know. Anyway, I got chatting to someone and he said, what are you
going to say to the doctor for? Anyway, what's the problem? I said,
constipation. He said, plenty of fresh fruit. That's the answer. Well, the
bananas were all right but I couldn't get the apples up. I said, try as I might,
try as I might. I go, the chemist's shop, it's no better. I'm losing my hair at
the front, you know, receding hairline. So I went in and they've got a product
there guaranteed to reverse hair loss. And it worked. I started losing it from
the back instead. Not what I wanted, ladies and gentlemen. But the only person I
know who's had a good result medically is my wife because she was having
terrible trouble, terrible trouble with molluscs. Shellfish, you know. Cockles,
muscles all over her body. So she's got a doctor. He gave her a tube of anti-
winkle cream. Brilliant, did the trick, did the trick. Of course, the big health
issue now is stress, isn't it? Get it, ladies and gentlemen? Anxiety. And my way
of coping with all that is to enjoy the simple pleasures of life. You know,
sitting quietly, looking out the window whilst having a poo. Taxi driver didn't
like that very much. I know, I know, it's a bit unpleasant, get it, gentlemen?
But that sort of thing shouldn't be swept under the carpet, should it? Anyway, I
gave him a tip, gave the driver a tip. I said, clean out the back of your car.
No, no, no, I gave him a real tip. I gave him a tenner. Actually, it was the
fiver I'd wiped my bottom with. We leave it there, as I did, ladies and
gentlemen. Good night. I am calling this week's Stoneybridge council meeting to
order. Thank you. Now, we've got a lot to get through tonight because it's
almost time to record our pitch for the new local radio franchise. As you know,
we are proposing to call the station Stoney FM. Oh. I still don't know what FM
stands for. Me, eh. So technically, it would be called Stoney for any sake. The
point is we've finished the script for our pitch and if you're all free, we're
recording it straight after the meeting. We better have a wee rehearsal then. We
better have a wee rehearsal now. Now, come on. You've got your scripts in front
of you and the pitch opens with what I believe they call in the biz, a jangle.
It's jingle. Whatever. Hit it, Bobby. If you're feeling sad and lonely and you
don't have a crony, there's been some acrimony or you might have lost your pony,
tune into Stoney FM. And cue Maegre. Welcome to the all-new Stoney FM radio
station, broadcasting live some days of the week for a wee while to most of
Stoneybridge. We will bring you updates, news, views and much, much, much, much,
much, much, much, much, much, much, much, much, much, much. Too much muches,
Maegre. More. Right, Boby and Eck, you're next. Hi, fellow Stoney-ers, my name
is Boby. And mine isn't. And me and isn't will be bringing you- He's called Eck,
not isn't. Sorry. Me and Ek will be bringing you the Drivel Time Show. Shouldn't
that be drive time? It should be, but we're being realistic. Also on Stoney FM,
you can hear me, Brucey, doing my big morning shift. I beg your pardon? Shift.
That's a relief. I thought you said big morning shift. Shut it, Ek. Jingle boy.
It's gonna be a massive hit. It's Brucey's big morning shift. Moving on, Willie.
And also on brand new Stoney FM, we have this. And after this, well that,
there's me. Me. Willie, with my own show, the late night graveyard slot, live
from the cemetery. Weather and courting couples permitted. But don't worry,
there's something for everyone on Stoney FM. Even women and young people. Yes,
why not join me, Maygrit? Oh, no, sorry. Why not join me, Maygrit? On women's
quarter of an hour. And a grime slot for the young folk. When we will discuss
how young people can deal with dirt around the house and rushing off the walls.
So why not give Stoney FM a listen? After all, How bad can it be? Stoney FM's
the number one. Go ahead and do it and here's the flan. Chais. The Absolutely
Waves Young Show is written and performed by Pete Beggy, Morwenna Banks, Murray
Hunter, Gordon Kennedy and George Sparks. The producers were Gordon Kennedy and
Gus Beasley. And it is an absolutely Gus man production for the BBC. It is, it's
true. And there'll be more from the Absolutely team at the same time next week.
Tomorrow evening on Radio 4, buckle up for the Wild West roundup of rogue
headlines. That is the news quiz. Andy Saltzman saddling up to ride him in at
half past six. On Radio 4. Our Father. Who art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name.
The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the world. On earth as it is in
heaven. In this year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of this
prayer. As we forgive those who trespass against us. Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom.
Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. For ever and ever. Begins next Wednesday
evening at 8.45. Amen. Now on Radio 4 to Westminster and a great salad shortage.
Today in Parliament. Order. Order. Good evening. This is Sean Curran at
Westminster, where the Environment Secretary warns MPs that some fruit and
vegetables could be in short supply for another month. We've been told there's
an issue for about another, potentially two, up to four weeks and I'm very keen
that the sector gets on and gets that alternative sourcing options. Big changes
are in the pipeline for English football, including plans for an independent
regulator. With the most radical overhaul of football governance since the rules
were first invented in a London pub back in 1863. And what the rising cost of
living means for struggling pubs. They would have to charge £18 a pint to cover
their rising costs. Now, some of the UK's biggest supermarkets have imposed
limits on sales of tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. The salad shortages have
been blamed on bad weather in Europe and Africa. And the Environment Secretary,
Therese Coffey, says it could be another month before the shelves are full
again. We anticipate the situation will last about another two to four weeks.
It's important that we try and make sure that we get alternative sourcing
options. And that's why the department has already been in discussion with the
retailers. It's why there'll be further discussions led by ministers as well, so
that we can try and get over this and try and avoid similar situations in the
future. Even if we cannot control the weather, it is important that we try and
make sure the supply continues to not be frustrated in quite the way it has been
due to these unusual weather incidents. She told MPs the UK had a highly
resilient food supply chain and it was well equipped to deal with disruption.
Now, we've seen in the last few days, as the Morrison's, Aldi and Tesco apply
item limits to a small number of fruit and vegetables in response to issues for
supply from Spain and North Africa. And these have been predominantly caused by
seasonal weather hampering production and harvest during December and January.
The Environment Secretary said farmers and growers around the world had been
under pressure caused by the invasion of Ukraine and the outbreak of bird flu in
Europe. And she said the farming minister, Mark Spencer, would meet the
supermarkets to discuss plans to tackle the shortages. To raise coffee was
answering an urgent question tabled by Labour's Shadow Environment Secretary,
Jim McMahon, who said there was genuine public concern about the availability of
food. As the Secretary responsible for our food security, and let's bear in mind
that food security is national security, this is absolutely mission critical.
And frankly, I found that response to be completely detached from the reality
that's being faced on the ground. He accepted that external factors such as
Covid, Brexit, the war in Ukraine and energy prices had had an impact, but he
rejected the suggestion that they were entirely to blame for the problems. He
said the government could have done more to help farmers. This is the result of
indifference and differing from government. And in the end, if the government
don't understand that food security is national security and we need to end
sticking past the politics and have a long term plan, frankly, there is no hope
for the nation. The SNP's Patricia Gibson complained that the government had
failed to heed warnings from farmers across the UK about the risk of food
shortages as a result of rising costs and Brexit trade barriers. Is the
Secretary of State, in all honesty, not embarrassed and ashamed that under her
and her government's watch, the UK is poorer, has less food, a declining
agricultural sector and higher food costs because of Brexit failure and the
empty rhetoric of taking back control? A Conservative, Selaine Saxby, suggested
a return to more traditional eating habits. Actually, the supermarkets are still
importing far too many produce for us and that actually we should be eating more
seasonally and supporting our own British farmers. And if we were actually to
move to a seasonal line of eating, many of these problems would be avoided.
Therese Coffey agreed, up to a point. It's important to make sure that we
cherish the specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of people would be
eating turnips right now, rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of
lettuce and tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious that consumers want a year-
round choice and that is what our supermarkets and food and growers, food
producers and growers around the world try to satisfy. Another Conservative, Sir
Desmond Swain, mocked the idea that Brexit was to blame for the shortages. If
only I had been told before I voted for Brexit that it was going to cause frost
in Morocco, I could have made a different decision, couldn't I? A Liberal
Democrat, Vera Hobhouse, said the Minister had dismissed the concerns of the
farming industry about food shortages. Does she agree the Prime Minister should
call a Cobra meeting because this is now a national emergency and out of the
control of her department? Therese Coffey didn't respond to that suggestion that
Rishi Sunak should hold an emergency Cobra meeting. Now, the Sports Minister has
promised to put fans front and centre of a shake-up in the way football is run
in England. Stuart Andrew said a new regulator would help prevent historic clubs
going out of business and give supporters a bigger say in the way they were run.
David Cornock reports. Football fans have had a long wait for these plans.
Stuart Andrew was determined not to undersell them. With the most radical
overhaul of football governance since the rules were first invented in a London
pub back in 1863. He set out some of the problems the government wanted to
tackle. Many, if not most, club owners are good custodians of their clubs. But
all too often we hear of flagrant financial misconduct, unsustainable risk-
taking and poor governance driving clubs to the brink. 64 clubs have collapsed
into administration during the last 30 years. The Minister said too many
lifelong supporters had been let down, ignored or shut out by their own clubs. A
new independent regulator would have wide-ranging powers. The regulator will
operate a licensing system for all clubs in the top five tiers of English
football. Those clubs will have to show they have sound financial business
models and good corporate governance before being allowed to compete. The new
watchdog could block clubs from joining a breakaway European Super League. Fans
would also have to be consulted before owners changed club colours or badges.
Geoff Smith for Labour welcomed the changes. Too often decisions affecting our
clubs have been made without reference to the fans, without whom football would
be nothing. Historic clubs have collapsed because of the reckless actions of
owners. But he wondered why ministers were offering only a policy document,
known in the jargon as a white paper, rather than changing the law now. They
delayed, too consumed by chaos in the Tory party and in the government. The
promise to legislate was watered down to the publication of a white paper. The
white paper was promised for months, and when we were finally told we could
expect it weeks ago before recess, instead it was leaked to the public. Instead
it was leaked to the Sun newspaper. The plans follow a fan-led review, chaired
by the Conservative former sports minister, Tracey Crouch. I genuinely believe
that the white paper does nothing to threaten the competitiveness, the wealth,
the attractiveness of the Premier League. But it will protect English football
from vulnerabilities, vulnerabilities that in the past have had devastating
consequences. Several MPs, including Labour's Clive Betts, wanted to see the
regulator ensure some of the riches of the Premier League are shared more
widely. One of the most important things is the distribution of the enormous
wealth of football to get a fairer reflection right throughout the whole of the
pyramid. Stuart Andrews said the regulator would have the power to intervene if
the football authorities couldn't agree how to share the money. We still urge
them to get on with it. They still could come up with a deal, and I sincerely
hope that they can do that. Many Premier League clubs now have foreign owners.
Labour's John McDonnell welcomed the proposed greater focus on sources of
wealth, and he had a suggestion for areas to investigate. In particular, sources
of wealth from, for example, state funds, sovereign funds, and individuals
associated with regimes which have records of human rights abuses. These are
criteria that are introduced now on the London Stock Exchange and elsewhere,
which need to be taken into consideration because of the reputational damage to
the individual club, but also the country as well. In its response to the plans,
the Premier League said it was vital regulation didn't damage the game or its
ability to attract investment. Stuart Andrew had a message for his critics. I
know that there are some within football that are being somewhat critical today
of us publishing this white paper and our intention to establish an independent
football regulator, but they had their chance. They've had so many
opportunities, frankly, to sort this out, and they failed to do so. The plans
cover the men's game in England. A Conservative, Catherine Fletcher, wondered...
What this review has to say to women's football to both increase ground-level
participation, but also ensure that there is investment going into the ever-
expanding women's professional game. Stuart Andrew said the government had
commissioned an independent review of the women's game, and he celebrated its
growing popularity since England's Lionesses won the European Championships last
year. David Cornock. The former Conservative Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, has
backed the idea of charging patients who repeatedly miss appointments in
England's NHS. The proposal for a £10 charge was floated by Rishi Sunak during
his campaign for the Tory leadership, but it was later shelved. Speaking in a
Commons debate, Matt Hancock, who now sits as an independent, reckoned it was
all about efficiency. Many, many appointments are missed, and this wastes the
time of clinicians too. And I think we should... It was right to float it, it's
right to consider it, but I would be totally against having to pay for the very
first. A Conservative, Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown, agreed. He said he'd been for
a procedure recently, which he estimated had cost the NHS quite a lot of money.
When I was talking to the consultant, she told me that on some days she had a
50% no-show. But a Labour MP, Margaret Greenwood, disagreed. Seven million
adults in this country are functionally illiterate, and we have huge numbers of
people with dementia. If a letter comes through the door, they may not
understand it and all the rest of it. Doesn't he not agree with me, actually, it
would be much better to put resources into understanding why people don't come
to appointments. Matt Hancock went on to argue that the biggest reform he wanted
to see was better use of technology and data, because inefficiency could have
real consequences. Letters being sent out with appointment dates that arrive
after the appointment has happened. Who gets a letter these days for an
appointment anyway? We all use modern technology instead. They mean that
different parts of the NHS can't talk to each other and indeed can't talk to
social care. It means that you can end up going into hospital for a serious
procedure and then your GP not knowing that you've had the serious procedure
because you went in urgently rather than through your GP. But Labour's Florence
Eshalomi saw a problem with a move online. For a number of my constituents and
probably his constituents as well, access to the internet is a luxury they
cannot afford. A number of people I represent cannot afford a monthly broadband
connection because they are choosing between heating their home or paying their
rent. They do not have monthly broadband, so they can't be logging on to book
online patients. They want to see a GP and they can't. Paulette Hamilton was an
NHS nurse for 25 years. Now a Labour MP, she said if one of her constituents
thought a loved one had had a heart attack or stroke and dialed 999... They can
expect to wait 27 agonising minutes. In December, many waited for over an hour.
In November, my husband had a stroke. The ambulance never came. A health
minister, Neil O'Brien, said there were certain foundation stones of the NHS
which would never change. Free at the point of use regardless of income,
comprehensive with services provided solely on the basis of need and not and
never ever for sale to the private sector. But of course we simply can't just
preserve the NHS, we need to make it fit for the future and the challenges that
we face are changing and the NHS needs to change with them, like an ageing
population, a backlog created by Covid. The health minister, Neil O'Brien.
You're listening to Today in Parliament with me, Sean Curran. Still to come, MPs
hear of the horrors facing Christian women and girls in Sudan. They're
vulnerable to rape, to forced marriage, to domestic violence. But first, a pub
would have to charge £18 a pint to cover its rising electricity bill and other
increasing costs, according to a senior Labour MP. Rachel Byrne explains.
Labour's Dame Meg Hillier, who chairs Parliament's public spending watchdog, the
Public Accounts Committee, wanted to give an example of what she said were the
challenges facing the hospitality industry. In May last year, the electricity
bill for the George and Vulture pub in her London constituency had gone from
£18,000 a year to about £46,000 and there was more to come. They've been quoted
and estimated £175,000 when they renew in May of this year. Now, with energy
prices dropping, I'm hopeful, they're hopeful that will drop a bit. But if you
add to that the business rate increases, which has tripled, and rent going up,
they estimate that from May this year, if all those figures crystallise at that
high level, they would have to charge £18 a pint to cover their rising costs. I
mean, it's clearly not feasible. Kate Nicholls is the chief executive of UK
Hospitality, which represents companies around England, Scotland and Wales. She
said the hospitality sector had been viable, strong and growing before the Covid
pandemic, but had not had time to recover from that. And then they've been hit
by the crisis as a result of the war in Ukraine and rising prices in sort of
February, April last year, where the two hits started to come. So that's where
you've got particular problems. And unlike the rest of the industries, a
disproportionate number of hospitality businesses had contracts that came up for
renewal for energy at an earlier part in the year than other parts of the
economy. She continued. Currently, we're sitting at around, it's fluctuated
between 96 and 106% of pre-Covid levels of revenue for the sector as a whole
over the last year. You'd need to be doing 125% of pre-Covid levels of trade
just to stand still in the current cost price environment. Kate Nicholls said
that in 30 years of working in the sector, it had never been harder to break
even because of the cost pressures. A conservative Jill Mortimer picked up on
the point about energy contracts, which were hitting hospitality companies in
her constituency. They were forced into taking new fixed price contracts in the
midst of all this, which, you know, they were on a rising market, they bought in
there and now they're going to be stuck there on the falling market. I mean, do
you think that we should be looking at a way of helping businesses get out of
those contracts or try and adjust them? Kate Nicholls said that half of
hospitality businesses across the UK had taken out contracts between July and
December at the peak of the market. She said these usually lasted 12 months, so
there were problems on the horizon. We would encourage suppliers to act
pragmatically in where they could, try and renegotiate those contracts post-
April. That would keep prices lower, it would get passed through happening
quicker, maintain business viability. Daria Vyas from the trade body for the
energy industry, Energy UK, was asked by Meg Hillier how small businesses,
particularly in the hospitality sector, could be helped. Daria Vyas explained.
Some of the work that we're doing with trade associations and with Ofgem as well
are around some of the basic things like better communication around the
pricing, but also better understanding business models and risks. I think better
communications all very well, but if it's that level of price increase that I
just quoted for Georgia Vulture, that's not… I think it is… You can communicate
as much as you want. Holding talks was all very well, said Meg Hillier, but…
I've got businesses right now facing huge energy hikes. I can't see how they
could survive. I mean, I hope they do survive, but I don't know how you can
charge 18… even in George, I can tell you 18 pounds a pint doesn't cut it. I'm
not joking about it. It's a serious point, but you're having all these talks. It
won't help anybody this year, and we're going to see a real crunch point at the
end of March. Daria Vyas defended her organisation's members. The energy
companies are basing their decisions on the tools that are available to them,
and they are building in the risk as it is based on their understanding. So I do
think that we do need to come back to the conversation around how do we better
understand so we can tailor. She insisted energy companies had not been asleep
at the wheel during the energy price crisis. Rachel Byrne. Now, MPs have
expressed their shock and horror at the shooting of an off-duty police officer
in Omar, County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was shot
multiple times after coaching young people at football. Children, parents and
coaches were at the scene at the time. In the Commons, the Alliance MP Stephen
Farrie called it a brutal and cowardly attack. I am certain that the leader
would wish to join with me in expressing the hope that the officer does recover.
He's currently critically ill in hospital, and also in terms of expressing
solidarity with the brave officers of the Peace Service of Northern Ireland and
the wider police family as they uphold the rule of law and protect the wider
community in Northern Ireland. The leader of the Commons, Penny Mordaunt, agreed
it was a shocking attack. The Prime Minister has issued a statement on this
appalling attack, and we think about the effect, the ripple effect it will have
on the community. They and the officer in particular are very much in our
thoughts today. Now, last month, Nadeem Sahawi was sacked as Tory party chairman
after an inquiry by the Prime Minister's ethics adviser found that he had failed
to disclose that HMRC was investigating his tax affairs. Rishi Sunak said Sir
Laurie Magnus' investigation made it clear that there'd been a serious breach of
the ministerial code. This morning, Sir Laurie appeared before a committee of
MPs. One of them, a Conservative, Tom Randall, wanted to know... Are you
confident that you had access to all the relevant information and the co-
operation of those involved during the course of that investigation? Sir Laurie
Magnus said he had. First of all, the co-operation of Mr Sir Harvey, and we
should put that on record. He authorised access to HMRC, who I was able to speak
to. And Sir Laurie said he'd had what he called stellar support from the Cabinet
Office. Now, the Environment Secretary has suggested that people struggling to
afford their food bills could consider working more hours. Therese Coffey was
responding to a Labour MP, Rachel Maskell, who said food price inflation was
running at almost 17%. Government has built its food poverty infrastructure with
dependency on voluntary donations and retail waste donations. However, due to
demand, food banks in York are running out, eking out food supplies. She wanted
to know what ministers were doing to ensure no one missed out. Therese Coffey
conceded that inflation was really tough at the moment. She said people in need
could get help from the Household Support Fund through local councils in
England. But of course, we do know that one of the best ways to boost their
incomes is not only to get into work if they're not on work already, but
potentially to work some more hours, to get upskilled, to get a higher income.
But of course, the local welfare grant that was given some time ago now by
central government to local councils is there for them to use as well. Rachel
Maskell was heard to say that's appalling, as the minister suggested working
more hours. Now, let's go to the House of Lords, where a minister has said the
EU is wrong to delay the UK's membership of a European research programme
because of disagreements over trading arrangements in Northern Ireland.
Christina Cooper reports. Horizon is a European Union scheme which distributes
billions of pounds to scientists engaged in cutting-edge research. Until Brexit,
the UK was a member and is looking to rejoin. But the EU has said it won't
cooperate on that due to the dispute over the Northern Ireland Protocol. This
week, it emerged that the Treasury has taken back the £1.6 billion in science
funding intended for the UK's involvement in Horizon because of the uncertainty
over membership. A Liberal Democrat, Lady Brinton, urged the government to
reverse the decision. The government has now withdrawn a massive £1.6 billion of
unspent R&D funding, a good portion of which was the UK Horizon replacement. So
will the government reinstate this funding, not just the 484, as a matter of
urgency? The minister, Lord Parkinson, said membership of Horizon was part of
the Brexit agreement and the government was disappointed that the EU hadn't
acted on it. The surrender of the capital budget she mentions reflects the fact
that if we were to associate in this financial year, which obviously ends soon,
any cash payment would take place next year, but that funding remains available
to ensure that people who would qualify for Horizon do not suffer a shortfall.
Given that the EU has delayed its final decision on UK membership while the
dispute over Northern Ireland is unresolved, a Conservative, Lord Cormack,
wished the Prime Minister success with his protocol negotiations. Which would
transform relations between this country and the EU. And would it not be a very,
very good idea indeed if those who landed us in this mess kept quiet? The UK
government insists that Horizon and the Northern Ireland Protocol are distinct
issues. It is wrong to link this issue, as the EU has done, to the Northern
Ireland Protocol. These were separate agreements. The trade and cooperation
agreement undertook to allow the UK's participation in Horizon, just as a number
of non-EU states do. We hope that the EU will follow through on its promises,
notwithstanding discussions on the protocol. Speaking for Labour, Lord Bassam
had some advice for the Minister. I always think it's best to know when you're
beat on this. My view is this, and I'm sure the Minister won't agree, that the
original negotiation on this programme was badly handled and we've been left
with a poor deal. The Conservative, Lord Hannon, a prominent Brexit supporter,
said that four of the world's top 20 universities were in the UK. Most of the
others are in other Anglosphere countries. None is in the European Union.
Instead of approaching this question as supplicants, shouldn't we be raising our
eyes to the greater opportunities that lie over more distant horizons? The
Minister replied that the UK wanted to continue scientific collaboration with
the EU, but the government was determined to seize opportunities in other
countries, such as the US, Canada, India and South Korea. Christina Cooper. MPs
have called on the government to do more to help the people of Sudan. The
country has faced economic and political turmoil since 2021, when a military
hunter seized power from the civilian-led transitional government. According to
aid agencies, nearly 16 million people need humanitarian help. The DUP's Jim
Shannon said religious minorities were being persecuted. The Sudanese Church of
Christ in Jabor, Jaborona, was attacked on four separate occasions in the first
three months after the coup, right away almost. Church leaders received threats
from extremist groups, church leaders received threats from extremists living in
the area. One threat stated, if the government gives you permission to build a
church here, then you better be prepared to collect your dead bodies. He said
there was a clear pattern of behaviour. The rolling back of minority rights by
the junta, a withdrawal of police protection and a return of a fundamentalist
rhetoric has led to these attacks and to others. Attackers are able to act with
impurity and the police rarely investigate these attacks and intimidate or even
arrest the victims. If you make a complaint, you actually become almost a
perpetrator, according to the police. For the SNP, Kirsten Oswald was
particularly concerned about women and girls. There are groups of marginalised
people who are doubly marginalised and women and girls in Sudan very much fall
into that situation at the moment, particularly Christian women and girls,
particularly those who are converts, they're vulnerable to rape, to forced
marriage, to domestic violence. There are reports of extremists kidnapping
Sudanese girls for marriage or for sexual slavery. She said church leaders were
particularly targeted and endangered. There are reports of drugs being falsely
planted on them, Christian men and boys are vulnerable to beatings or
significantly worse. People may be shunned, they may face intense persecution in
the workplace. So whatever way you look at it, whatever angle you look at it
from, this is a situation of grave concern. The Foreign Office Minister, Anne-
Marie Trevelyan, said in recent months there had been some small progress
towards a return to democratic government. So whilst the human rights situation
remains concerning, there have been some limited improvements in response to
international pressure. The UK has continued to lobby the de facto authorities
to end all sexual and gender-based violence against women and girls, to protect
religious and media freedoms, and to end violence against people exercising
their right to protest. The Minister, Anne-Marie Trevelyan. MPs across the
Commons have paid tribute to the football commentator John Motson, who's died at
the age of 77. The Conservative former sports minister, Tracy Crouch, said he
wasn't just a voice at matches, but he was also a commentator inside the heads
of millions of children, having a kickabout in their back garden. He commentated
many times on my Ricky Veer-esque swerves around flowerpot midfielders, and my
Gazza-style chips over defenders, before my Clive Allen-style cup-winning glory
goals against the back wall. His voice was unique, his expertise was second to
none, his sheepskin iconic. He will be much missed. And those comments from
Tracy Crouch bring us to the closing headline from Westminster. The Environment
Secretary, Therese Coffey, said shortages of some fruit and vegetables could
last another month. I'm Sean Curran. The studio manager was Annie Gardner. The
editor was Alicia McCarthy. And that was Today in Parliament. And this is BBC
Radio 4.