TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Time! BBC News at 8 o'clock. Tributes have been paid to two women and a man who
were found dead in a crashed car almost two days after they went missing. They
were found in a vehicle which had come off a major road in Cardiff. Another
woman and a man were taken to hospital with serious injuries. Police said they
were supporting the families. Nellie Baird from BBC Wales is at the scene. Over
the weekend, concerns were raised, appeals on social media for the five people.
So Sophie Rousson, Eve Smith and Darcy Ross, three young women, and then two
men, Rafael Jean and Shane Loughlin. They haven't been seen since around 2am on
Saturday morning. Many people we've spoken to here have been concerned that
perhaps they had been there for some time. The Metropolitan Police has
apologised for missing opportunities to arrest one of their officers before he
killed Sarah Everard. Wayne Cousins, who has since been dismissed from the
force, was earlier sentenced to a further 19 months in prison for exposing
himself to women on three occasions. He's already serving a whole life term.
Downing Street has said it hopes to open more legal routes for asylum seekers
once new laws to deter small boat crossings are in place. Under the new
legislation, illegal migrants would be removed and banned from applying for
British citizenship. Refugee charities have criticised the plans. A UN envoy to
Afghanistan says restrictions imposed on women and girls by the Taliban may be a
crime against humanity. In the report, Richard Bennett said the country's
restrictions on women were having a devastating impact on the whole population.
He said they were tantamount to gender apartheid. A parole board has heard that
Charles Bronson, one of the UK's most violent offenders, would not cope with
being released. The 70-year-old was convicted of armed robbery in 1974, aged 21,
and has spent the majority of his life in prison since. The panel is still
deciding if he can be released. BBC News. Hello, Greg James here, and I'm back
with a brand new series of Rewinder. Can you believe? It is back again. We have
access to the enormous BBC archive once again to unearth some hidden gems. If
we're going to save Scobag, we'll get my pig. This week, find out what salad
Kate Winslet cooked on Ready, Steady, Cook. Bit of an iceberg lettuce. Why were
people complaining about oeuregala? Because we obviously had this problem of
spoons bending in my wife's hand. And how could you win this prize? Good
bouncing 16-pound hand. No, no, really. That's Rewinder with me, Greg James,
this Saturday from 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, the
technology journalist Lara Lewington presents a documentary made with a helping
hand from the artificial intelligence everyone's talking about, ChatGPT, and
I'll let ChatGPT tell you more. This documentary is all about the clever
computer that's changing the way we communicate and access information. Those
words weren't written by a human. They were written by an artificial
intelligence, an online service you've probably heard a lot about over recent
months, ChatGPT. I am a computer program designed to process and understand
natural language created by open AI. I've been trained on a vast amount of text
data. When you type a question or statement to me, I analyze the words to
generate a response. Think of it as super-powered predictive text. It works on
the statistical probability of what words make sense to follow one another,
resulting in something you could believe was written by a person. So whilst we
delve into how this kind of technology is changing our world, maybe it can also
help me make this documentary. Hi, I'm ChatGPT. I'm here to assist you with any
questions or tasks you might have. This is the voice we've given the technology
because it writes but doesn't speak. Well, we're making this documentary, so
obviously I wanted to know what ChatGPT itself would think that I should say. So
we asked it to write an introduction and here's what it came up with. Oh dear.
Hey there techies, Lara Lewington here, your favorite technology journalist from
BBC Click. I did not write this. I'm so sorry. Right, let's see what happens if
I ask it for a more British sounding version. Good day, tech enthusiasts. That
doesn't sound obviously British. I'm absolutely thrilled. Thrilled? OK, maybe
that is a bit. For this new project, I've partnered with ChatGPT, a highly
intelligent AI language model to delve into the forefront of artificial
intelligence and explore its incredible capabilities. All sounds a bit too
enthusiastic for me. I'd like a bit more balance. This is the BBC after all. So
in my own words, I'm Lara Lewington. I'm passionate about AI from a very human
perspective. The part that we should let it play in our lives, the decisions
that we should be letting it make and crucially, how we feel about our
interactions with machine rather than man. In my job presenting the BBC's
technology show Click, I'm always looking to the future. So I've been mulling
this over for years, but the emergence of ChatGPT has taken the AI debate
mainstream. The ethical and practical decisions over what AI will do will affect
us all. And just because we can do something doesn't mean we should. Right,
ChatGPT, where do we start? How can I get my virtual producer to be genuinely
helpful? You can read articles, watch videos and explore the OpenAI website to
get a better understanding. I suppose that's actually what I'm doing now. Define
the scope. I guess I need to give it a bit of a brief as to what it's for. So
maybe I'll add that in a follow up question. Plan my approach. Script writing,
filming, editing, review. This documentary isn't just about journalism. For
creative writing, customer service, the way we communicate with our loved ones
and in education, is this the moment it could all change? It's an extraordinary
phenomena. It's burst on the scene. For the essay, less than a minute, I think.
I think this is going to force the education system to rethink how we educate
our young people. It's like a pencil and a piece of paper or Photoshop. It looks
to me like AI will replace tasks, not jobs. The first time I used it, I wanted
to ask it to write a letter to my husband to apologise for the fact that I've
been grumpy as I had a toothache. And the letter that it came back with was
extremely formal, like something that had been written about 70 years ago and
just had some weird turns of phrase. My dearest husband, I want to take a moment
to express my sincerest apologies for my recent grumpiness. I know I've not been
myself and I'm deeply sorry for any inconvenience or hurt that my behaviour may
have caused. Why would I apologise for the inconvenience of being grumpy? It's
just a really weird word to use. At first, I was amazed. Then you start really
thinking about its output, comparing it to our own words. And of course, it's
not the same. But this is just the first version of a sophisticated kind of AI
that's been open to us all. Anyone can test drive it and it'll just get better.
The arrival of ChatGPT has provided delight and dilemmas aplenty. There are big
ethical questions at play. One debate is whether a student opening up a website,
typing in some instructions and submitting the results as their work is cheating
or not. So at Stirling University, they've been experimenting. Hello. Oh, hey
guys. Come on, take a seat. Thank you. Right, we're talking about ChatGPT today.
That's Connor McEwan, a senior lecturer at Stirling University. OK, I've sent
you this exercise. I've asked you to ask ChatGPT a question to see if it can
answer if AIs can create art. And I want you to try and get it to produce about
500 words. The fourth year digital media students work out what they're going to
ask ChatGPT. They aren't cheating. This is their assignment. I'm going to ask
ChatGPT to write an essay. This is Celine Grech. So please write an essay about
the integration of AI and art. OK, let's send. So it's saying right now that
artificial intelligence and art have been intertwined for decades. But the
integration of AI and the creation of art has greatly accelerated over the last
decade. In this essay, we will explore the various ways. It's as easy as that.
And how quick? For the essay? Less than a minute, I think, didn't it? I mean,
it's a whole lot of words as well. It's super detailed. Let's pause there.
Celine has just done her assignment in about a minute. But who really did it?
Where did ChatGPT get its information? Who should she credit? This takes me to
Professor Sir Nigel Shugbolt at Oxford University's Institute of Ethics in AI.
Well, I think the instant reaction was that this was cheating. But of course,
maybe this is actually just moving with the times. Is it any different to taking
a calculator into an exam? Many researchers, many students use it as a reference
point. I think what we have to think is that the key thing is not to present the
output of GPT as if it's your own work. One of the guiding principles I always
use in AI, the ethics of AI, is a thing should say what it is and be what it
says. So we're definitely going to need to regulate on the use in exam
conditions or in formal assessment conditions. But in other areas, we can see
these tools as enhancing or enriching a learning experience. It feels like we've
been here before. I remember the big arguments that were around Wikipedia when
it first came out. And articles couldn't possibly be as good as something as
Encyclopedia Britannica, which had been so carefully curated. Over the years,
the quality of Wikipedia has become one of the most trusted sources on the Web.
Back at the seminar at Stirling University, Gregor Forbes is assessing ChatGPT's
attempt at his essay. He's used the technology before, so he knows what to look
out for. A sequence of references at the bottom. And if I take any of these
links or try and look up any of these references, I'll find out that they don't
exist. The person who wrote them didn't exist. It very often will just make
things up that aren't true. This is something that happens constantly. It is
very high tech, but it's not high tech enough that I think it's a perfect cheat.
And really, I think the only person you're cheating is yourself if you don't do
the work. For me, the most amazing thing about this technology is if you are a
student struggling with writing for whatever reason, that can be stress,
anxiety. You can be dealing with serious disabilities that prevent you from
writing some barrier to access. Nothing is more terrifying than a blank page.
And ChatGPT stops that from being a reality. Look, guys, thank you very much for
everything in class today. I'll talk to you all later. When the students have
gone, their lecturer, Connor, still has lecture planning to do. I need
technological help, often just to get me past the blank page stage. So any
lecture that I have written, anything longer than 500 words, it began with a
template that ChatGPT helped me to write. So one way that it can really help
teachers is by marking work and providing feedback. Former teacher Dan
Fitzpatrick works on digital strategy for colleges in the northeast of England
and writes about AI in education. So, for example, I'm doing it here with an
English GCSE question. I've put the question in and the student answer and then
the mark schemes grade it and tell me why you've given that grade. So I press
enter and immediately it starts typing. And literally within a fraction of a
second, I've got the grade. That was very quick. What do you think of the
outcome? It works. This is one where I've actually got what the answer would be
from the examiner and it gives the right answer. When you do this with human
markers, you get more variation. OK, and in this case, the grade and the
comments were the same as a human had given, give or take. Yeah, pretty much
exactly the same. Wow. I think we're talking about something completely
different here. We're not just talking about a new shiny toy. We're talking
about something that is literally, as we speak, revolutionising pretty much
every industry on the planet. If we bury our heads in the sand and we've seen
educators and schools in Australia and New York and other places in America kind
of ban this technology, I think we're just going to widen that digital gap. So
students are using it, teachers and lecturers are using it. It's also making
things up and we can't tell where it's got the information from if the sources
are made up. The issues it raises in education are relevant to lots of other
areas too, as I discussed with Professor Sir Nigel Shadbolt. But aside from
writing essays, what should we let it do? Play doctor, financial advisor,
friend? What sort of decisions do you think we're going to need to make and how
do we make those decisions? In areas which really matter to us, we'll need to
seriously ask ourselves, how does this system account for itself? How
transparent can it be about the sources? So around issues of accountability and
transparency, fairness and equity, all of the key ethical questions that concern
us when we think about using AI, they're right at the centre, fore, square and
centre in the use of GPT. Chat GPT, I need your help again. My producer fed the
interview that I did with Nigel into the AI to ask it to choose the elements
that it thought were the most interesting. And well, let's just say it didn't
agree with us at all on which the best bits were. There's been a lot of talk
about how Chat GPT can write books, marketing campaigns, plays, essays, films.
So how about one of my favourite shows at the moment, Line of Duty. Can it write
a scene? How about a conversation between Steve and Kate? Well, it's definitely
laying it out like a script. What's going on, Steve? I think we might be on to
something big with this one. Really? What have you got? It does sort of sound
like them in their ongoing mission to uncover corruption and bring criminals to
justice. It's pretty bland, but I think it's believable. Certainly
superficially, I am impressed. But what does this mean for screenwriters? And
can an AI really write to broadcast standards? Good evening, everyone. Welcome,
welcome to how to co-write a screenplay with artificial intelligence. The very
fact that there's an event in London about co-writing a screenplay with AI shows
that even the most creative people are wondering what it means for them. It
raises the same questions art created by AI has for years about what creativity
is and whether it takes a human suffering or joy to create something that can
then make us feel the intended response. Or maybe it doesn't matter as long as
it's good. Stephen Fellows was hosting the event. He's a film analyst and script
writer. So the idea of being a writer will shift and change as it did when
computers came out and people didn't have to format their own scripts or
spellcheck. But it's the same journey. Obviously, at the beginning, people can
be quite worried and cynical, although obviously all these people turned up.
Including Jane. At the moment, I'm a content designer. There's a huge interest
in AI at the moment. So I'm here to find out how I could use AI to save time. So
I've got my characters, I'm thinking, oh, I'm going to develop this into a
really cool idea. So I'm really keen to see what happens to that room of writers
over the next few months. How many of them will embrace it and start to use it?
Jane has come away feeling reassured. I found the session interesting. You know,
the examples that he came up with, I found were very derivative and generic.
Yeah, I don't think filmmakers or content creators have a lot to be frightened
of just yet. But yeah, I do think it's a useful tool to run your content through
and to have a look at. Writers are going to have to change what it means to be a
writer and what's special about them as a writer. And so rather than them having
the advantage of, well, I have the software and I have the knowledge and I've
learned all the rules of storytelling necessarily, it might be more about them
being better selectors, curators, putting together the right ingredients rather
than having to grow them themselves. It's like a pencil and a piece of paper or
Photoshop. It looks to me like AI will replace tasks, not jobs. OK, I had a few
tasks for you, ChatGPT. Let's look at interview questions you've come up with
for me. Here are a few of the questions you could consider asking her. One of
the concerns around AI is its potential to perpetuate bias or discrimination.
How is this issue being addressed in the development and implementation of
ChatGPT and what more can be done to mitigate these risks? It's a great
question. I think it's a great question. I would have just asked it more
conversationally. And I know the perfect person to ask. Assistant Professor Kate
Rendenburg taught me some of what I know, and she studies the impact of AI on
people at London School of Economics. A real concern about these large language
models is that they're replicating all that bias and prejudice in ways that are
really hard for us to detect. So there are some kind of cases where the system
is just clearly outputting something that's problematic. It's racist, it's
sexist. These problems have long existed in AI systems, but now more people are
interacting with AI using ChatGPT, and that will only grow as more language
models become available. So researchers have found that many of these models are
what they call kind of anglo-centric. So say that I've asked, you know, a kind
of large language model a question, what do I make for dinner? It's likely that
I'll get an example recipe from an anglophone culture, say a roast. I won't get
an example recipe from a non-anglophone culture. And those biases reach into so
many aspects of AI. ChatGPT is trained on text created by us. So it carries
human biases. Perhaps it could overcome that bias better than we can, though.
After several months of having access to this technology, I can already see the
huge impact of it not just being able to write, but also being able to read
natural language this well. Maybe this could be a solution for the seemingly
impossible job of policing social media. But at the same time, it could make
spreading disinformation easier. And if it's to play therapist or write medical
reports, some radiologists do see this being the future, it'll need regulation
and certainty that it's saying the right thing. In our interview with ChatGPT,
we asked it the classic job interview question, How do you see yourself in five
years' time? From personalized virtual assistants to improved medical diagnosis,
the potential applications of these powerful language models are virtually
limitless, offering the possibility of a brighter, more efficient, and more
connected future. Improving communication, enhancing customer service,
revolutionizing education, streamlining business operations, improving access to
information. So, Nigel, in the spirit of this, I've of course asked it to write
some questions for you. So I'm going to read you one of them. How do you think
ChatGPT can be leveraged to enhance human-machine interactions and improve
customer service experiences? And the answer is they're going to be widely used
because you can take GPT as is and further train it and refine it. Professor Sir
Nigel Shadbolt. A company based in Ireland developing an online customer service
chatbot with ChatGPT technology. Fergal Reid is the director of machine learning
at Intercom. He's trialling it on me so I can see the difference it can make.
I'm going to pretend I'm talking to my bank. As a customer, I won't necessarily
know the difference, but it is changing things behind the scenes. OK, so I'm
typing in I've lost my card. Please can I cancel it and order a new one? So I am
now the support rep. I'm sort of like handling this conversation. I have many
different conversations here. No problem. Sorry to hear that. I will send you a
new one. So I've wrote like a short and snappy kind of shorthand version here.
I'm just clicking a button here to expand this out. So again, this takes the new
AI models that OpenAI have produced and it turns it into, Hi there, I'm sorry to
hear that you're having a problem with your product. That's not quite right.
It's not quite perfect. So it's like just going to delete your product and say,
Hi, I'm sorry to hear you're having a problem. I apologize for any
inconveniences caused. I'll get a replacement sent out to you right away. Is
there anything else I can do for you? When I ask it how long my car's going to
take to arrive, it does give me the information, but it also pretends to care.
The AI gives me this slightly frustrating longer answer. I don't really want a
full conversation. I just want the facts. That is a personal preference. Some
people may enjoy it more, but generally, I think the benefit here is for the
company more than the customer. I'm juggling several conversations. You are a
busy person. And so the idea is that speeds up the support rep and helps them
answer multiple questions at once. And then it also gets to the person who's
asking the question, just their answer in a better, faster timeframe. What other
areas do you think generative AI is really going to make a difference for? We
think it's going to make a difference across many, many industries. Almost
everything you can think of from things like banking, things like travel, things
like utilities, like power companies, internet companies, there are so many
different industries where people are writing text for a living. It can be made
faster. It can be made more efficient. We may not even know what's human
anymore. Some may embrace the fact that it's not a person. That's what I want to
ask Kate Rendenberg from the London School of Economics about. There is another
side to this. Some people may while away their evenings playing with chat GPT,
having a bit of fun, but there are others who start to live this like an actual
relationship. And there are platforms allowing people to do that. So what do you
think about the relationships that people can have with AI? I think that people
can have all kinds of helpful and productive relationships with AI, especially
as they become more human. What these companies need to do is ensure that their
products are doing precisely this, allowing people to have these productive
relationships with AI systems. So here's one kind of example. You could imagine
that I'm using a chat bot and I'm a highly anxious person. Many academics are.
And so what's helpful for me in talking to this chat bot is that it's kind of
reflecting my anxieties back at me. It's reflecting certain patterns of thought.
And because it's doing that, I can kind of see these patterns of thought with a
little more distance. And I might recognize, hey, I'm actually spiraling
unhelpfully into thinking about something. And maybe I don't need to be doing
that. So that's the kind of best case scenario. Of course, there's another more
troubling scenario where you've got a chat bot. I give it the same inputs. It
gives me the exact same kind of reaction. But just because of the kind of person
I am, I think, aha, that's confirmation. I really ought to be worried about
this. And let me keep talking to this chat bot and getting more and more
worried. Do you think from a human perspective, it's healthy for an AI chat bot
to act like a friend? So people have exhibited a kind of willingness to express
things to chat bots that they might not express to another human being. So say
that I use this chat bot as a friend. I use it to explore my kind of deep fears,
my anxieties, my insecurities. And then I recognize them. I really have to face
them. And I bring them to my human friends. And I start to talk about them. Or I
bring them to my family or therapist or partner, to whomever. So we can think a
lot of use cases where just given the wonderful neurodiversity and variety of
people, actually, these systems will be quite helpful, quite human, quite
friendly. Bot. There is a bot. I think we really need to consider the kind of
vulnerabilities we create in people if they start relying on these systems as
their only friend. And also the potential for these systems to be quite
manipulative. For example, if the system suddenly tells you, please send 500
pounds to this bank account in order for me to keep staying online. And, you
know, I think we have real reason to worry about those vulnerabilities. Of
course, all these chat bots are imperfect. They were built by humans. And it's
only the beginning. Our online experiences will simply get better. Not to be
cast into chat GPT's shadow, Google soon announced BARD, its large language AI
model which is soon to soup up your Google search. It promises to provide easier
to digest and more rounded responses. Meanwhile, the best known search engine no
one was using, Microsoft Bing, has been powered by chat GPT for test users. As
one of them, I can tell you that despite its rightful warnings to expect some
mistakes and surprises right now, combine AI with search and you're really
virtually talking. There's even a sense of pseudo warmth. I asked it to help me
plan a workout. I want better abs and running daily isn't cutting it. It claimed
to care about my fitness, providing a clear and sensible seeming plan with
plenty of links. If only it could do the exercise for me. There have been
reports of users pushing it to its limits, though, and it has not gone well. I
guess the same can happen with humans, and Microsoft was able to rein it in. So
chat GPT, what's your conclusion to all this? Overall, I believe that we are at
a turning point in our use of AI and that these technologies will continue to
shape the way we live and work in many different ways in the years to come. And
this is the script that he wrote for me as a conclusion. With the ability to
analyze and interpret vast amounts of information, chat GPT and other language
models are poised to revolutionize nearly every aspect of our lives and usher in
a new era of innovation and progress. My actual thoughts? Well, initially, I was
blown away by what chat GPT could do. Then, when I tried it for practical
purposes, well, I couldn't literally take its words. They had to be fact-
checked, and I needed to make them sound like something that I'd say. But the
potential here for this and its rivals in so many areas is absolutely huge, and
this is just the start. I hope that the script lines I provided are helpful and
meet your needs for your radio documentary on chat GPT. Thank you. You did, chat
GPT. You helped. But I'm still figuring out my feelings for you because there is
a lot to think about. When it comes to my job, though, am I worried about you
and your rivals? Maybe I should be, but I'm actually excited about what I'm
looking at. I'm excited about what I'm covering here. This is a huge step
forward in something that's going to make an enormous difference in the years to
come. So my excitement for that completely outweighs my concern that this could
maybe be doing my job. A documentary by me, chat GPT, well, sort of, was
produced with a lot of help from Fiona Wood. A lot of help from Fiona Walker and
presented by the real Lara Lewington. The voice of chat GPT was thanks to
another piece of tech called Descript. The documentary was produced by Novel for
BBC Radio 4. Thank you, chat GPT. I'll be out of a job shortly. In a moment,
Rosie Campbell asks, do the backgrounds of our politicians influence voters'
choices at the ballot box? Meanwhile, tomorrow morning... Welcome to The Spock.
In the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than the
decisions that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold
thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these
inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a
life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new series of Close-Up Conversations. More big
thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world. And hearing some of the
personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best decisions I've ever made
in my life was making that step. The Spock starts tomorrow morning at 11 on BBC
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And now on BBC Radio 4 Analysis, Rosie Campbell
considers what really seems to matter to voters when they choose a candidate.
Does your MP's background matter to you? I'm a first generation immigrant. My
parents immigrated here. My mum's a pharmacist. At some point when I was a
teenager, she bought her own pharmacy. She was also then a small business owner
and I did all the accounts and the books. I started off as a university college
lecturer and then I did some writing. And I was happy being a lecturer but I did
feel I had a duty. When I saw what was happening to my own community about
unemployment and poverty, I felt I had some duty to do something about it. When
I was a poor kid growing up on a council estate, I didn't think I was poor. I
was just like everyone else. It was just the life lot that you got. We had a
garden full of vegetables, chickens at the bottom of the garden for the eggs.
And that was our food bank. So if we were short on anything, we then went in the
garden or the allotment and got the food out. Classic theories of representative
democracy argued it's the representation of our ideas, not our personal
characteristics, our age, gender, race or class, for example, that should
matter. Current debates about the diversity of our politicians suggest many of
us are interested in who our MPs are and that they represent us and our
identity. But is that really true? I'm Rosie Campbell, Professor of Politics at
King's College London, and in this programme we will explore whether MPs'
personal backgrounds and history really are the most critical factors leading to
good political representation. Am I looking for someone like me? What does
academic research tell us about how much weight voters give candidates' personal
stories? I asked Professor Maria Sobolewska from the University of Manchester.
So I looked specifically at voters of minority ethnic origins, and what we have
actually found in the 2010 election when we did a detailed study of this is that
voters generally preferred politicians from the correct political party. So
political party was much more important to them than the similarity in terms of
how people looked. If somebody had the chance to vote for somebody from the same
ethnic background as themselves, that person was from the wrong political party
that would not have trumped the party choice. So party was definitely much more
important. However, if you are stood in a very competitive seat, it's a three-
way marginal, let's say, even a very small effect, 2% maybe vote loss, that of
course can mean the difference between getting elected and not getting elected.
However, if you are stood by your political party in a safe seat, even getting
3% less vote than another candidate from that party would have gotten doesn't
make any difference because your party's advantage in that seat is 15 or 20%. So
this really is one of the reasons why it is so important that political parties
put those underrepresented candidates in the safe seats, because this is really
the only way they can break through their potential discrimination from the
voters and get elected. You've reminded me of some work that I did with Olly
Heath when we were looking at whether women voters are more likely to vote for
women candidates. And what we found that there's only a really niche group of
women who might do that because it's people who strongly identify as feminist
might be pushed, as you've described, from supporting their preferred party to
another party to support a woman. But we're very, very few people who would do
that. Is that a similar pattern that you're seeing amongst ethnic minority
voters? Absolutely. And I always think that it's a great simplification of our
kind of decision-making at the polling station to say that we vote along some
kind of identity lines. So one of the reasons why some of our social identities
become more important for us in terms of how we vote is because there are
political parties talking about those issues, campaigning on those issues, and
making us aware of those identities when we are trying to choose how to vote.
But of course we have many identities that are not kind of deemed important at
the time of voting and we are not simply politically mobilised on. If Maria is
right about the political mobilisation of identities, then perhaps I've been
asking the wrong question. We're not looking for someone like me, but perhaps
we're looking for someone like us. Yes, it is about groups. And I think this is
why we use this word identity, because we do have people who we think are more
like us and they are more in our in-group. Maria has thoroughly debunked the
idea that we voters are simply drawn to politicians who look like ourselves or
share our personal histories. Rather, it's the perspectives and values that we
believe we share with people who've had similar life experiences that attract us
to politicians like us. I asked Dr Mike Bankole, Lecturer in Politics at Royal
Holloway, University of London, whether in his interviews with Black MPs he
found that they felt they were better able to represent Black constituents.
Look, we've made some big strides in politics. We've gone from a position where
we had only four minority MPs elected for the first time in 1987. We've now got
to a position where we have 67 minority MPs across three major parties in this
country, or four major parties in the United Kingdom. So that's actually
something that's pretty significant. But when I was speaking to people for my
research, a lot of the work that minority MPs do to represent the interests of
minorities goes, you know, it doesn't get reported in the news because a lot of
it's constituency work. So Labour's minority MPs, a lot of them represent what
we would call ethnically diverse constituencies. So they have almost an added
onus to represent the interests of minorities. One MP, and I think it was a
really powerful statement, said, it's my duty. And I think because a lot of
minority MPs are backbench MPs, it's a certain Labour side of things. They have
this scope to do this job, maybe a bit more than MPs who are frontbench shadow
ministers or ministers on the Conservative side. The Windrush is a perfect
example for those who don't know Windrush. You know, Windrush scandals was
caused by government policies, which meant that members of the British Caribbean
community were affected and were refused access to particular services in this
country. And what that meant was that a lot of minority MPs who represent
constituencies with British Caribbeans had to almost, you know, act on their
behalf and try and get these constituents access to key services. And I spoke to
an MP who is still fighting for one of their constituents who's being faced with
threats of deportation because of the Windrush scandal. And this is an ongoing
fight, by the way, the Windrush scandal hasn't just disappeared. And for the MPs
involved, it's an emotional thing because they have links to these communities
in some cases, and they can share the trauma these families are going through,
because the MP I interviewed was a British Caribbean MP. So they felt that the
trauma the family were going through, and there was almost a sense of that could
have been me. So I think it is really, really central to a lot of minority MPs
and their activity. They try to bring their understanding and knowledge of these
communities into their casework. And Windrush is just another example of that.
This is not to say white MPs didn't support Windrush cases, of course, but
Mike's example of how some black politicians supported victims of the Windrush
scandal shows us that who our MPs are can be important for good political
representation, but only when our group memberships play a strong role in
shaping our political attitudes through shared experiences. Rushanara Ali,
Labour MP for Bethnal Green and Bow, backs this theory up. Hers is an ethnically
diverse constituency where 37% of the population have a Bangladeshi heritage.
She says that her constituents voted for her not just because of one aspect of
her identity, but because there are multiple elements of her personal story that
voters relate to. We all have multiple identities. In my case, I'm of working
class background, who was the first in my family to go to university and to get
elected into Parliament as the first person of British Bangladeshi heritage in
Parliament and one of the first three Muslim women to have got elected into
Parliament. The point is that, you know, I straddle, and many of us do, in terms
of different backgrounds and different identities. It's not that if you're
working class, then you can't be of colour. There are black and Asian people of
working class background in this country. The important thing is that political
parties need to reach out, encourage talent from all backgrounds. And need to do
more to make sure that people from different professions can get into politics.
Historically, we had people who came from manual jobs, having done manual jobs,
who went into Parliament. It's really important that there's diversity in terms
of the kinds of jobs people have done before they enter politics. Because,
again, you bring those experiences, those insights, that can make a massive
difference to what you then go on to do and how you're influenced and shaped by
what you do. If I am looking for someone like me and I do a manual job, it may
be hard to find that person in the UK Parliament. As Ruchinara says, there's
been a significant decline in the proportion of MPs who held manual jobs before
entering Parliament, down from nearly 16% in 1979 to just 3% in 2015. When my
colleagues and I collected data after the 2019 general election, we couldn't
find any MPs who'd held a manual job immediately prior to entering Parliament.
And the only former minor we found was the Conservative MP for Ashfield, Lee
Anderson. As Ruchinara was alluding to, there's been a growth in the proportion
of MPs who were already politicians or working in politics before entering
Parliament, up from 3% in 1979 to 17% in 2015. But in many cases, what job you
do, who you are, is less important than the other ways in which a voter can
connect with you. Ruchinara, again. I got the nomination in 2007 and although
the Labour Party had made great strides in getting more women into Parliament,
there were still big challenges across political parties. There remain, you
know, about a third of Members of Parliament are women now. And also, even
within my own party, there are huge barriers to women of minority ethnic
backgrounds getting into Parliament. So I think that there was a real awareness
of that. And not just among those who are of my background, among white middle
class party members. And I had a lot of support from white middle class, as well
as white working class members. And for white working class members in my
constituency, the thing that they really loved was that I went to the local
school, I grew up in the area, most of my education apart from university was in
the borough. And they really liked, you know, they often would describe it as,
you're one of our girls. You know, that's how some of the elders would describe
it. They really liked that connection and they didn't see racial difference.
They saw that I was part of the community. Lord Barwell, former Conservative
Member of Parliament for Croydon Central and former Downing Street Chief of
Staff to Theresa May, backs up the idea that someone from where I'm from does
make a difference. In an individual constituency, you can never reflect the
makeup of all your constituents. But being local, I think, does in a marginal
seat, parties will tend to try and have a local candidate because they know it
makes a bit of a difference on the ballot paper. And then I think in aggregate,
voters do look at what the party's team looks like and what that tells them
about that party and the extent to which people feel, well, I can identify with
those people. So we shouldn't judge individual politicians in that sense, but
the team as a whole tells you something about the party. And you as someone who
was trying to secure as many votes as you possibly could for the Conservative
Party thought this is worth doing at the margins. It's likely to make a
difference. I wanted to represent the place where I was from. I wasn't
particularly interested in being the MP for somewhere that I didn't know. And
you kind of feel like you're a sort of hard lobbyist. Then to me, my passion for
it was being the MP for Croydon. That's the place I've lived all my life. And
that's why I wanted to do the job. But I definitely could tell you knocking on
doors. And it was a marginal constituency that people would often say, I've seen
you at the supermarket or, you know, your kids go to the same school. So that
sense that people viewed you as someone from the place made a difference. Not
for everybody, because obviously some people were definitely going to be Labour
voters and some people were definitely Conservatives. But for the ones that were
floating voters, I think it did make a difference to feel, well, this person
catches the same trains as me, goes to the same hospital as me. Kids are at the
same school. Those things make a difference. There's a considerable body of
academic research showing that Rushanara and Lord Barwell are right. Candidates
with strong local connections benefit from a small electoral advantage that
could influence who wins in a marginal constituency. In fact, I was a co-author
of a 2017 paper that shows that even the distance between the candidate's
residential address and the voters home has an impact. Local matters in
marginals. And if I'm looking for someone like me, does gender matter at the
ballot box as much, more or less? 52% of the population are women, but currently
women make up 35% of MPs. In 2021, my colleague Minna Cooper-Coles at King's
College London wrote a review of the existing global evidence with the
Westminster Foundation for Democracy. That shows that women policymakers are
more likely to raise and champion issues that disproportionately affect women
and the most vulnerable in society. And those that are given greater priority by
women voters, such as health, education and welfare. Both the Liberal Democrats
and the Labour Party have opted at various times for all women shortlists when
selecting candidates. Christine Jardine is the Liberal Democrat MP for Edinburgh
West and their spokesperson on the Cabinet Office, Women Equalities and
Scotland. I was always, we don't need all women shortlists. I didn't need an all
women shortlist to get selected in Gordon where I stood there. But I think
gradually what brought us round to it was the fact that things weren't changing
without all women shortlists. And then of course we had the election in 2015
where we had eight male MPs. And that just was, for a party that prides itself
on championing equality in all ways, that just was unacceptable. And I think
that's what probably changed a lot of people's minds. So do you think that
voters either are more likely to vote for a women candidate or are women voters
more likely to vote for a women candidate or less likely? I don't think that's
an issue anymore, to be absolutely honest. I, when I've been out knocking doors,
nobody has ever said to me, I'm not going to vote for you because you're a
woman. And nobody has ever said to me, I'm going to vote for you because you're
a woman. What they ask me is what I'm going to stand for, what I'm going to do
when I'm elected and what the party is going to do. That's what they care about.
My gender, I don't think is important to them. So if we as individuals don't
really mind whether our MPs are men or women, why does it matter that we should
have, say, 50% of our MPs be women? Well, that comes back to what I said
earlier. You have to, if you're going to represent people, you have to
understand their issues. You have to understand how their lives are affected
every day. So Parliament has to reflect, for me, what society looks like. You've
described a situation where in your lifetime we've gone from very, very few
women in Parliament to a much better level of representation. Has that changed
anything in terms of the legislation that the Parliament has passed or the way
Parliament operates? Oh, absolutely. Even in the five years I've been in
Parliament, I've seen a change in the dynamic of how we talk about things. There
are far more things that we talk about which are about equality generally. And I
think it has a huge influence on the legislation that passes here and it will
make a difference to future generations. That there were women, there were
ethnic minorities, there were people from less able groups, all of these things.
The more diverse we can make Parliament, then the more it can be, it can listen,
it can hear what different groups within society are saying and actually take
them on board. So although most voters aren't concerned whether their MP is a
man or a woman, since there have been more women and people from ethnic
minorities in Parliament, issues that were considered to be outside of the
political arena, such as domestic violence, childcare and institutional racism,
have become important areas for legislation. Of course, societal attitudes to
domestic violence have changed. But there is an argument that the Domestic Abuse
Act of 2021, with its historically wide range of what constitutes domestic
abuse, would not have been enacted without diversity among politicians. Well I
think the country's in a very bad state. For instance, you take a working man
working all the week through and allow him just a packet of fags and a pint of
beer, there's about 16 bub a week taxed on that alone. And it's not good enough,
you mean? And it's not good enough, no. What's your solution for the present
situation? Well I think they should cut it down a bit. That 1950 voter knows
what's important to him. And the working man or woman is still an important part
of the debate today. Social class no longer defines our attachment to political
parties. But that doesn't mean that the class backgrounds of our politicians
have ceased to matter altogether. Historically, Labour-supporting constituencies
in the Midlands and the North of England, with strong working-class communities,
have become key electoral battlegrounds, otherwise known as the Red Wall.
Sebastian Payne is the director of the centre-right think tank Onward and the
author of Broken Heartland, a journey through Labour's lost England. The Red
Wall was the culmination of a disconnect between the Labour Party and many of
its traditional voters that's been happening for many decades through de-
industrialisation and the changing style of the Labour Party under Tony Blair.
And when we got to the 2019 election, that was the moment that the umbilical
cord between Labour and its traditional working-class heartland was broken. And
that's been weakening for some time. But when it came to Brexit, where the
Labour leadership was on the opposite side of its traditional heartlands, the
figure of Jeremy Corbyn, who was anathema to the Red Wall, and the appeal of
Boris Johnson, you saw about 40 or so constituencies, many of whom had never
voted Conservative ever, most of them not since the Second World War, went
Conservative for the first time that delivered Boris Johnson that extra large
majority. I'm really interested in how the relationship between class and
politics has changed over time. You've described that historically, working-
class voters used to vote for the Labour Party in huge numbers and that that's
changed. Some commentators say class isn't important in politics anymore. Do you
think that's true? I think class is certainly not as important. And I'd point to
the Boris Johnson being the fact of that, that he was an upper middle class
individual. He went to Eton, Oxford, worked in very high levels of the British
establishment. Yet he managed to win off the back of millions of working-class
votes, which you would think would just be completely running away from someone
like Boris Johnson. Yet, in fact, they actively embraced him. So that's why I
think that shows why class is not the defining factor that it once was. If you
went to anyone around the country, and I reckon this is still true today, and
said, who would you like to have a pint with out of all political leaders, by
far and away, Boris Johnson would be the top. I find that an interesting
perspective because Nigel Farage always portrayed himself as someone you could
have a pint with, although I believe he's actually really a wine drinker. And
actually, Nigel Farage was very unpopular with women. Do you think women want to
go and sit in the pub with Boris Johnson? There is obviously a different gender
divide here, and I think this is actually a wider issue for the Conservative
Party as well. Because I think, you know, when we look at issues with the
childcare market, what have you, they are going to need to be resolved. And if
you look at the 2019 election, it was clear that Boris Johnson was more popular
with men than he was with women. Again, it's not a blanket thing you can say
across the spectrum. But I imagine women who would be in the C2D social group
would be more wanting and willing to have a pint with Boris Johnson than women
in the ABC1 group. So you've really brought attention to the fact that place
based identity has gained importance in politics. Why do you think that is? I
mean, we used to have national swing. You know, things used to be pretty uniform
across the country. Why do you think geography has become so important? I think,
first of all, it's how the country has changed that geography, I think, has
always been important. I don't think it's been misunderstood in many respects,
but I think fundamentally it has risen in recent years because of the imbalance
in the British economy. The other element is that we've been far too overly
centralised as a country in terms of our of our politics and the way we do
everything. Everything has been about Westminster and London. And what we saw in
2016 with the Brexit referendum and in the politics as follow is a reassertion
of trying to deal with those places that need a greater focus from central
government. So I think it's a very good thing that place is now at the central
of the political conversation. But we're still not where we need to be in the
sense that we've still not got enough devolution. There's still far too much
power in Westminster and Whitehall. And to deal with the big problems facing the
country, that's why you have to focus it on local solutions with local leaders.
So you've described how there are traditional conservatives and then perhaps
those who don't fit that mould. And many of the MPs who the Conservative Party
returned from the Red Wall perhaps weren't traditional conservatives. Has that
had any consequences for the party at Westminster? The Conservative
Parliamentary Party has become much broader in its opinion and its characters
than it would have been otherwise. And part of that is the simple fact they've
got a big majority. The Conservative Parliamentary Party has not been this big
since 1987. So that's obviously going to create a different attitude towards it.
Now, there are many voices in that. The most prominent one, of course, is Lee
Anderson, the new deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, who imagining him
10, 15 years ago would have been outside of the realms. I think it's an
excellent thing the Conservative Party has got people like Lee Anderson in who
can represent all different parts of the electoral coalition, because the
Conservative Party strives to be a one nation party and to do that, you need to
have people from all parts of the nation. What's so different about Lee
Anderson? Lee Anderson talks his mind in a way that is very bracing. And for his
supporters, they will say he's saying what no one else will say. He tells it
like it is, all that sort of thing. His detractors will say, of which there are
of course many on social media, will say that he is ill-informed. There was an
excellent profile of Lee Anderson in the Times which highlighted about how much
Lee Anderson is linked to place. I've spent a couple of days out and about with
Lee Anderson in Ashfield, in his constituency in the East Midlands, and he gets
that place. He knows these people. He knows their issues. And he sees it as his
aim to represent their voice in Westminster. And his slogan is, from the pits to
Parliament. That used to be the Labour Party slogan. And the fact he's
representing the Tories shows how much has changed since 2016. As Sebastian
says, social class is no longer a reliable predictor of party support. Lord
Barwell thinks the identity of someone like me can only get you so far. You have
to have a policy for someone like me as well. I think that the biggest factor in
it is the housing situation in this country. So I've just passed 50, so I'm a
few years older than you. But I was probably the last generation where you could
just about, with your partner, on a normal salary, just about get on the housing
ladder. And now, unless you get some incredible job in the city or you inherit
some wealth from family members, it's virtually impossible for people on
ordinary salaries in their 20s to get into home ownership. And that's a real
challenge for the Conservative Party, because if you're basically selling people
a sort of free market ownership society, and actually most of them haven't got
any way of getting into that, then you're going to really struggle to appeal to
people. Now, there are other things to it as well. I think Brexit is a factor
because there's a clear age skew on views on Brexit. But I think that housing
thing is definitely a part of it. If the Conservative Party wants to tackle that
age challenge it's got, then it's going to have to really think about what it
has to say about housing, what it has to say about childcare. So it's got a
compelling role. It's not that there aren't young people who are sort of centre
right in their views on the economy. But the Conservative Party hasn't got a
policy offering at the moment that is compelling to people at that age. It comes
back to economics, really, and policy and material things more than identity. As
we've discussed earlier, identity is a factor. But ultimately, what drives most
of how most of us vote is, do we think the person with that rosette on shares
our values and has got some good ideas for what to do about the country? Lord
Barwell has confirmed that age is now the most significant social cleavage
influencing how we vote. But younger voters aren't necessarily drawn to younger
politicians. Instead, liberal values and material concerns about housing and the
cost of childcare are driving the generational political divide. Demands for
working class representation have not gone away, but they're enmeshed with local
identities. Questions of social representation will matter at the next general
election, because although who our MPs are is not the main driver of vote
choice, having a more diverse House of Commons does make a difference to the
kinds of legislation that are passed. Strategically securing enough marginal
seats to form a government at the next general election may well require a
careful balancing of the personnel of politics, ensuring that our politicians
reflect contemporary Britain to gain the extra votes needed to get over the
line. Analysis was presented by Rosie Campbell and produced by Vicki Broadbent.
After the news here on BBC Radio 4, Philip Ball tells the story of Galileo's
lost letter and questions how he challenged the church in Science Stories. BBC
Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming East London Mosque when the story broke.
The three schoolgirls from the area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria
to join the Islamic State group. Breaking news this morning, three British
schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of the girls
to emerge from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her steps
from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and to
investigate the truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As a
danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum
story, Series 2 of I'm Not a Monster.