TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Beginning next Saturday afternoon at three. The latest messages from the leak
of Matt Hancock's WhatsApps suggests that he had concerns about Eat Out to Help
Out scheme, which was introduced by the Treasury to encourage people back to
restaurants after the lockdown. He referred to the scheme in 2020 as Eat Out to
Help the Virus Get About. Mr Hancock has criticised the leak and said only a
partial account of what happened had been published. The head of the UN's
nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, says that he has had constructive meetings with
Iranian officials on the first day of his visit to the country. He's there
because inspectors detected traces of uranium enriched to almost weapons-grade
level. Bethany Bell reports. Mr Grossi, who's hoping to get Iran to increase its
cooperation with his inspectors, said his team was working hard to have good
solutions. The most recent questions about Iran's nuclear work relate to the
discovery of uranium particles enriched to nearly 84% purity at Fordow. Weapons-
grade uranium is 90%. Tehran says its nuclear work is peaceful. Police in
Australia say they've made what's thought to be the country's biggest ever drug
bust. The amount of cocaine seized in the joint operation with the United States
is equivalent to half of Australia's annual consumption. The drugs were
intercepted after leaving South America and replaced with fake packages which
the authorities could track. And the architect of the Walkie Talkie building in
London and Manchester City's football academy has died. Rafael Vignoli, who was
78, was responsible for more than 600 buildings around the world. In 2013, it
was found that sunlight reflecting off the Walkie Talkie building's curved side
had melted parts of a car parked nearby. BBC News. Next on Radio 4, Anita Rani
will be here with Weekend Women's Hour, just after this. The Patch on BBC Radio
4. One producer. What was amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this
was. One random generated postcode. So I've got to press that? Press that button
and a story unfolding there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell
then? Everything and anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you
do after being a prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on
Wednesday mornings at 9. Hello and welcome to Weekend Woman's Hour. I'm Anita
Rani. I'm going to take you through a carefully curated selection of some of the
finest Woman's Hour interviews from over the week. Coming up, the actor, singer,
songwriter and all-round South London superstar Cynthia Erivo on her role in the
upcoming film, Luther, the Fallen Son, and the liberation she found in
expressing her bisexuality. And it's the shape of a pair with the power to
create life or indeed death in certain circumstances. What am I talking about?
The womb. Plus, as this week marked a change in the marriage laws in England and
Wales, we hear from two Woman's Hour listeners on getting married willingly at
16. Did it work? Or was it a decision they came to regret? And all week we've
been celebrating riot girls and campaigning women. We listen back to our
interview with Jo Cheatham on joining the No More Page 3 campaign team, growing
up in Rotherham and the power of grassroots campaigns. But first, dozens of
schoolgirls in Iran have been admitted to hospital this week after being
poisoned whilst at school, according to reports from an Iranian news agency.
More than a thousand students have been affected since November. They've
suffered respiratory problems, nausea, dizziness and fatigue. Many Iranians
suspect the poisonings are a deliberate attempt to force girls' schools to close
and prevent them from going to school. The Iranian government has not said
whether it believes they're premeditated. While on Friday, I spoke to Azadeh
Porzand, a human rights researcher, and Ferenac Amidi, BBC correspondent. I
started by asking Ferenac, what do we know about what's happening to these
schoolgirls? Basically, we really don't know much because there hasn't been a
proper investigation into what has been happening. The poisoning started around
three months ago, that was in November. And it started, the first school that
the incident took place in was in the city of Qom, which is a very conservative
religious city and it's known for being the centre of religious studies and
religious schools in Iran. In that first incident, 18 students were poisoned.
Then the second time, a couple of weeks after that, again, the same school was
attacked. And then after that, it started spreading to other cities, Erdabil and
other cities started spreading. And then I was reading a report by the daily
newspaper Etemad in Iran, which is published in Iran. And they said that 58
schools in 10 different provinces have been attacked. But it's very interesting
that this has been going on for three months. Parents have protested, they have
been asking officials to investigate and look into what is happening. But
nothing really has taken place. And when you listen to what the officials are
saying, either MPs or other officials, police chief, interior minister, health
minister, you get a sense of confusion. You don't really get any kind of
information or you cannot really map out what is happening. So we don't know
what the gas is. That is very interesting that after all of these students, 1000
students have been poisoned and not a blood sample has been taken, nothing. You
cannot determine what the gas was, what caused poisoning or how did this gas get
into the schools or who was behind it? Nothing is really clear. So what do we
know then? How are these girls being poisoned? Have you spoken to anybody? Well,
when you speak to, and I have to mention that that is so difficult to speak to
people in Iran. This is after one of the largest waves of the largest waves of
protests and uprising in Iran since 1979. So the oppression in Iran and the
censorship and the harassment by security forces is at its peak right now in
Iran. So people are very scared to speak to journalists and journalists are all
arrested. Most of the journalists that are independent are arrested in Iran at
the moment. So it's very hard to get actually personal accounts and statements
from people. I was able to speak to a couple of people. And what we are seeing,
what they are reporting is that some strong pungent smell fills the air. And
after a while, students start getting sick. They some of them even report
feeling a bit paralyzed in their legs and not being able to move. They feel
dizzy, nauseous, and then they collapse. But what we also understand is that the
symptoms go away mostly in 24 hours. Now, there are reports of some students
saying that they have seen an object being thrown into the school from outside
and then the smell comes. There are some of the students reports hearing
something like a small explosion before the smell fills the air. But none of
these can be verified independently. Is there any kind of investigation into
this yet? What's happening? Well, yeah, the Islamic Republic claims that it's
going to investigate that, you know, different authorities are, you know,
claiming that the investigation has started. According to one of the news
agencies affiliated with the Islamic Republic, I think yesterday, three
individuals are arrested. You know, you see on their sort of propaganda TV
stations that they interviewed, you know, it's clearly somebody has been
intimidated and they interview them to say, oh, I was a truck driver and I was
carrying oil and I neglected by leaving my car next to a school. So I think
basically what it is, is that usual scenario of the Islamic Republic's regime of
claiming investigations that are not adequate, are not independent and just
simply is to distract the public and mostly for international consumption at
this point. Do we know, do we have any idea who might be behind it, Azadeh? In
my opinion, it doesn't matter who is directly behind it, because the
intentionality at this point lies with the Islamic Republic of Iran. When we
don't have enough information and evidence as human rights researchers, we have
no choice but to look into precedents. And when you look at the precedents and
the performance of the Islamic Republic, you know, you see a regime that is
heavily anti-women and girls and after especially the recent protests, extremely
vulnerable to the power of women and their collective uprising and in particular
the Gen Z women. This is the severe consequences of what could happen. And the
rebellion of these young girls, it got the attention of the world because, you
know, people were being killed. Let's not forget 600 people, at least 600 people
were shot dead on the streets of Tehran for protesting. And these girls so
bravely were protesting in their schools. They kicked out officials of the
government out of their schools. So it's interesting. A lot of people in Iran,
when you go on social media and you see the reactions of people, the public to
these poisonings, they say that this is the revenge that the state is taking out
on these girls. What do you think? Well, I just cannot help but to remember the
speeches of the Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei in the past few months, in one of
which he explicitly said, you know, these children, these girls who got involved
in the uprisings, you know, they were just, it's out of naivety and a little bit
of punishment will fix them. You know, these are threats from like the higher
authority of a very brutal regime. So I really think we have to not dismiss the
high probability of a speculation that this is indeed a systematic revenge. And
usually when the leader Ali Khamenei gives such speeches, we do see such
reactions against women. It was a few years ago back in Isfahan, when the topic
of hijab was really hot and women were wearing their hijab a bit more loosely
and Isfahan is a traditional conservative society, actually it's where I come
from. But then a wave of acid attacks started happening against women. So women
were walking down the street and they were being sprayed with acid. And this
came after, you know, high ranking officials and the leader were talking about
the hijab and that women need to obey the rules and issues like that. So it is,
and again, right now that this is happening to the school girls, people are
bringing up that incident as well, saying, where did you, you talked about
investigations, because back then they said, we are investigating, we are going
to look into this. No one ever got arrested for those acid attacks. And the
investigation really didn't go anywhere. Is it working? Is it preventing girls
from going to school? These poison attacks that we're seeing now? What's the
response been? Personally, I've seen sort of mixed reactions on social media. So
obviously, you know, many parents are worried, you know, they're thinking of
potentially keeping their kids at home for a bit. But I also have seen, you
know, very courageous tweets, for example, by some moms who are saying we are
thinking with other moms to get together and start patrolling outside of school
so that our kids can still go to school. So they're taking the initiative into
their hands. It's incredible. Yeah, I spoke to a few mothers, their daughters
are not in schools that have been attacked. But they are worried, they are
anxious. And they have this dilemma, because one of them has a son as well. And
she was like, there's no way I'm gonna keep my daughter at home and let my son
go to school because this is actually what certain people want. The radicals,
the hardliners, super conservatives, ultra conservatives, that's what they want.
They want our girls to stay at home and the boys to go to school. When you say
what do they want? This is a question that comes up time and time again. What is
it that they want? What's the end game here for women? I think when you look at
this system, this regime since 1979, from the beginning that they took power,
their goal and all of their policies was directed at marginalizing women and
getting them back to home. So the first thing that Ayatollah Khomeini did was to
revoke the Family Protection Act that gave women power in marriage, gave them
right to divorce, made them not equal, but semi equal to their partner, to their
husband. That was the first thing that was revoked. Then the mandatory hijab
came. So always the policies have been towards marginalizing women. So maybe
this is actually what they are looking for. I just wonder what the atmosphere
must be like. There must be a climate of fear. Yeah, I mean, fear certainly, and
this is an intimidation technique. So to a degree, it may be serving its
purpose. But I still think that even though these protests that we saw since
September are not on the street, like in high numbers, I don't think the protest
movement has died. And this is a protest movement led by women. And so I think
the spirit of protest, of grievances, of wanting change is as strong as ever. So
I really see, I think, you know, this spirit stronger than the fear element at
the moment. And Azadeh, you grew up in Iran. How does it compare to your
experience of being a young girl going to school? I did grow up in Iran. And I
grew up, I mean, I was born into a family of activists. So I was in, you know,
my parents were in and out of jail. They had threatened to harm me if my parents
continued their work. And I remember that how the schools that I used to go to
were so supportive of this threat. A couple of times, even my school had to go
into lockdown only because of me. And, you know, many parents, even some of the
parents who would wear the complete veil, sometimes they would be taking care of
me when my mom was in jail. They would even bring me a chador, like the full
veil, when I had to go see my mom at the Revolutionary Court. So, you know, yes,
these schools are highly ideological. You know, you as a seven year old have to
wear a full veil to go to school. The history that you read is distorted. You
know, the religious studies that you read are much more than you should be
exposed to. But at a grassroot level, school, I think, in many ways is where the
coalescence of parents, of children happens. And I think the Islamic Republic
has realized this is a political hub more than they had hoped for. So they're
fearing schoolgirls? Yeah, during the Cultural Revolution, soon after the
Islamic Republic was established, they felt free to close down universities and
cleanse them of non-Islamic elements. The Cultural Revolution. Yeah, the
Cultural Revolution. And so I think that now it has gone into schools and it's
going to be a battleground for women. I really think so. International Relations