TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 If you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The Gold Watch on BBC
iPlayer. BBC News at four o'clock. The Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadka has said
there's the possibility of the deal in the next few days between the EU and UK
about post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. But he says it's not
guaranteed and negotiators still have a gap to close. Marches and rallies have
taken place in County Tyrone in support of a police officer critically wounded
by a gunman on Wednesday. Five people have been arrested in connection with the
attack on Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Omer. Voting has officially
ended in the Nigerian elections, but officials say people who are still queuing
will be allowed to vote. There have been reports of violence at some polling
stations. Nkechi Obongye reports. In Lagos, Nigeria's biggest city, there have
been violent incidents at several polling stations. At one visited by the BBC, a
group of men were seen leaving the place holding bottles and sticks and leaving
ballot papers scattered on the ground, and some voters were bruised or injured.
The polls have now officially closed, but there are still long queues in many
areas, after severe delays to set up the new electronic voting machines. Police
searching for Laurel Aldridge, the sister-in-law of the actor Mackenzie Crook,
say they found a body. The 62-year-old was reported missing from her home in
Warburton in West Sussex nearly two weeks ago. Sussex police say they're working
to identify the body, but her family is being kept informed. Divers have
recovered two bodies from the Firth of Clyde after a tugboat capsized yesterday.
It had been escorting a cruise ship when it overturned. And a letter written by
the Pet Shop Boys star Neil Tennant thanking Janice Long for playing the band's
debut single on Radio 1 in 1984 has been discovered in Altringham. It was tucked
into the sleeve of a 12-inch copy of West End Girls that Trevor Morris bought as
a job loss at auction for his new record shop. BBC News. Later this afternoon on
Radio 4, the housing campaigner Kwejo Twenaboa will be speaking to Nick Robinson
about how he channeled the power of social media to voice his experience of poor
social housing, and as a result became a powerful figure in Westminster. We'll
join them both for political thinking at half past five. But now it's time for
Weekend Woman's Hour with Hayley Hassell. Good afternoon and welcome to Weekend
Woman's Hour, the programme each Saturday where we gather together the best bits
of Woman's Hour from the week and put them all together for you. Coming up on
the programme today. Black women are more likely to get a later cancer
diagnosis, a study by Cancer Research UK has shown. We'll hear from someone who
tried three times to get medical help before she was diagnosed with incurable
breast cancer. And we'll hear from the inspirational woman who became a female
surgeon in the 1970s when it was an all-male world. People would be surprised
and almost reluctant to believe that you could be that person with that amount
of responsibility. It sometimes worked in the opposite direction of course
because once they discovered that in fact you were that person with that
responsibility then suddenly it seemed as though you must be something extra
special. Plus, the woman who has written a book about how we live in a society
divided by what people view as reasonable or unreasonable and find out why one
of Ireland's greatest singer-songwriters bought a purple Aga cuckoo. It is the
best thing that caused me far less grief than the man ever did and I didn't run
off with other raggas or anything like that so then people said get a neutral
coloured one in case you want to sell that. I said no I'm getting a purple one.
I love my purple one so yeah. That's Eleanor McAvoy who you'll hear more from a
little bit later on. Before first, the Russian invasion of Ukraine on February
24th, 2022 has created Europe's largest refugee crisis since World War II. The
war has severely impacted social cohesion, community security and the resilience
of local communities, especially women and girls. Approximately 5.4 million
people have been displaced inside Ukraine with 8 million people registered as
refugees across Europe. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recently verified more than 7,000 civilian deaths but says that the
real numbers could be much higher. Currently based in Kiev, Dei Melinda Simons
has been the British Ambassador for Ukraine since September 2019. She joined me
yesterday and told me what it feels like thinking back to that time, one year
ago, when Russia invaded. It was such a traumatic time for everybody. For me,
for all my staff, those of us who were evacuated and particularly my Ukrainian
colleagues who found themselves fleeing, actually this morning I had a really
lovely session with my staff in which we encouraged each other to talk about
what we were reflecting on today. Most of us talked about how hard it was to
think of that time but we also talked about the strength that we took from it,
how we coped, what we had learned and most importantly of all, how differently
we all felt now that we were back. I've characterised this myself as this time
last year being consumed with uncertainty and I was certainly afraid, all of us
were afraid at that time. It was so impossible to tell what might happen
particularly to Kiev to the capital. This time we think of ourselves as people
who are determined, who feel like we're making a real contribution. That's not
just actually staff at the British Embassy in Kiev, that's people all over, the
regionally deoccupied, free places, of course Kiev classifies itself as being
deoccupied, Russians having tried to get into Kiev, people going about their
work and opening up businesses and finding ways to contribute to the economy and
build their lives. All of that is characterised as a positive way to contribute
towards the defence of Ukraine. So how I feel now is really different from how I
felt a year ago. That difference I can tell in a lot of the things you tweet
about and a lot of the interviews you've done and that travel from fear to
determination. I mean you've mentioned that you are now the eyes and ears of
Ukraine so that we and the rest of the world can really understand what it's
like that. But that must be incredibly difficult position for you. When you took
this job you never imagined you'd be in the middle of a war zone. How is daily
life for you now and how are you and your colleagues coping with that? Well
actually the ambassador job is always busy so being busy isn't different. The
difference leading an embassy through wartime is that the job stops being a job
and it becomes a life because war isn't a five day a week thing. And Russians
don't stop shelling Kiev at the weekend so they can go and have a rest. So the
uncertainty about how your daily life is going to be is a 24-7 thing. And also
talking with ministers, with officials or frankly with survivors or witnesses or
activists or people delivering humanitarian aid is also a round the clock thing.
So I think the biggest difference for me in terms of the work I do is of course
it's all geared towards the UK effort to support Ukraine to defend itself but
it's relentless and the pressure of keeping your resilience going through that
relentlessness where you may not get the chance for the downtime and of course
I'm separated from my family because they can't live with me here while this war
is going on. Those are probably my main sources of pressure. And of course 90%
of those who have fled the fighting are women and children. What is daily life
like for those women who have stayed? I know you go out and meet them often. How
are they coping? Well of course if they're in places like Kiev or Lviv, largely
if they're in the west of Ukraine they may have more carer responsibilities and
certainly for many of them whose partners have been mobilised they're now the
main person in the household keeping things together. That's like your daily
life but amplified with more uncertainty about your family. If you're in a
recently deoccupied place in Ukraine, if for example you're in Sumy or Kharkiv
or even Harsan which is currently being shelled relentlessly then it's more
about survival because there's so much less available to you, less in terms of
products that you can buy and obviously less in terms of work that would
generate income. If you are a woman who's living inside an occupied part of
Ukraine, from all that I'm able to hear because of course I can't go into
Russian occupied parts of Ukraine, it is a nightmare. A nightmare that will only
be told through survivor testimony after those places are deoccupied. I want to
move on to one of the most disturbing events of this war. You tweeted last April
that rape is a weapon of war and there have been what has been referred to as an
alarming increase in gender based violence and transactional sex for food and
survival. I'm just going to read one of your tweets. You said, rape is a weapon
of war, though we don't yet know the full extent of its use in Ukraine. It's
already clear it was part of Russian arsenal. Women raped in front of their
kids, girls in front of their families. As a deliberate act of subjugation, rape
is a war crime. Now it's very difficult for me to read that and it must be
horrendous for you to be made aware of but I know it's a big concern for you.
It's also an issue I've been passionate about for most of my career. I've done a
lot of the UK has been a leader on preventing sexual violence. I ran that
conference 10 years ago, another one last year, to keep the issue of sexual
violence in war on the agenda and it's been heartbreaking to be in a country
where the sheer scale of it is still unknown, of course, because there are still
occupied parts of Ukraine. It's really clear how rape is being used as part of
this hybrid war to subjugate people. I put that tweet out after the liberation
of places like Butch and Bravari where we saw all of us have now seen, all
visitors to Ukraine have gone to these places and seen what Russian troops have
done there but the invisible thing. They have seen mass executions, murder of
people, shooting people in their cars as they try to escape. It's appalling
stuff but the invisible side of this and why I put my tweet out was what
happened to people who were trapped who couldn't escape and that that included
widespread sexual violence. It's incredibly important to me personally but it's
certainly an important part of UK policy that we talk about this and we support
it and it's one of the areas that we are giving our support to and one of the
areas that First Lady of Ukraine has stepped up to to speak about and give some
championship to because this is a country among many countries where people
don't talk about this kind of thing. It's quite taboo. Women don't talk about
sexual violence. They don't use talk about domestic violence very much. So
you've got a journey really to enable women to feel that if this has happened to
them they can acknowledge it as a thing that has happened to them. You talk
about raising awareness about it but how are the authorities attempting to
combat the violence against women? It's actually I think they're doing a pretty
good job. Again they've got an issue of scale like all parts of government do
but you have the Ministry of Social Policy making sure that their law
enforcement and their social services are appropriately trained and the Ministry
of Interior working together with them to make sure that services are integrated
which means that if you're a woman to whom something like this has happened
there is a place that you can go to where you can speak to social services, to
healthcare, you can give your story to a lawyer and have it recorded, you can
speak to police about security in your area, you can stare to shelter. This was
already evolving before the war so actually this is something that Ukraine knows
how to do but it is the scale of it that is the challenge to try to make that
available to that many more women. And again funding shelters and this sort of
care and funding for the recording of crimes is another area that the UK is
active in here. And I know that women are playing an active part in the war
effort as well. While registering for military service is compulsory for men,
women can choose to volunteer can't they? And in fact aren't they making 22% up
of Ukraine's armed forces? So what role are women playing on the front line?
Well so they are fighting now. So in the early years of women joining up they
tended to be assigned to administrative roles but now they are able to take
combat roles and they are doing that. And I'm sorry to say that women are also
dying on the battlefield alongside men and that's it's all incredibly hard but
that too is incredibly hard. They face some administrative issues that we've
also given publicity to to make sure that they're not forgotten. For example
making sure they have access to the right size uniform is a thing the right size
medical care which of course has to be bespoke for women and that has been a
journey but a journey which the Ministry of Defence here is making good progress
on. But it's important to remember that there are so many different ways to be
defending your country. You can be fighting on the front line but there are also
a rising number here of women D miners. This is on its way to being the most
mined country in the world. The landmass of mines in this country is equivalent
to the size of Britain at this stage. The challenge is enormous. So you need
women as well as men stepping up to help clean areas of land so that people can
work and so that fights can proceed. And this sort of gender equality is
something I know you're really passionate about. It's been really high on your
agenda with your work in Ukraine. What do you see as the impact of women's
involvement in the war long term? Because some are saying that many women
involved in this war will chip away at traditional sexist attitudes and it will
perhaps create a more equal society afterwards. What do you make of that? I
think it's perfectly possible. One thing that I do think has happened here is
that as in probably situations of war elsewhere, it throws up many different
kinds of hero. So people have many more pictures of what constitutes bravery in
their country. So of course there is frontline bravery and military bravery. But
there's also community bravery and there is family bravery and people are
talking about this at all different levels. It's also becoming clear how many
women have been agile in setting up businesses and moving them online so that
they can trade, they can make stuff and sell it. And this too is being
recognised. So I definitely think that has a long trail after the war ends. I
wondered, you talked earlier about initially having that fear but now having
that sort of acceptance in a way. Just earlier this week you tweeted that sirens
were sounding in Kiev and there's been a lot of those in the last few days. So
you've had to move away from the windows, pick up a book and carry on. It sounds
so matter of fact, it's commonplace, which is sad in itself, but it sounds like
the fear is lesson two. How is it for you and your team there at the moment?
Yes, I think all of us are in a place where we are alive to it. We often talk
with each other actually about how sirens can make your hand shake, they can
make your heartbeat faster, they can actually sounds that aren't sirens that you
think might be like just the sound of a motorbike or something on the road can
make you start as if something is happening. But none of us talk about it as an
active fear. And all of us talk about not being complacent, nobody ignores an
air raid siren. But we factor it in to the daily work and we are deliberate in
carrying on, in keeping calm and carrying on. And if we have to continue our
work away from windows, then that's what we do. I've lost count of the number of
times I have moved my laptop down into the basement of this house and carried on
my work. Or I've moved from sleeping in my bedroom to sleeping in a teeny room
next door that's got no windows. It's just become a thing. I never ever want it
to feel normal, but I never or never want to let it overwhelm me. Dame Melinda
Simmons, the British ambassador for Ukraine. And of course, we thank her and
everyone in her team for the amazing work they're doing. Who gets to decide
about social norms, about what's reasonable and unreasonable behaviour? Is it
okay to breastfeed in public, to topple the statue of a slave trader, or to let
your children play in the garden while others are working from home? Well,
according to Dr Kirsty Sedgman, the author of a new book on being unreasonable,
breaking the rules and making things better, we're living in an age of division.
Dr Sedgman spoke to Nula and began by explaining why she uses the terms
reasonable and unreasonable. Well, it's because when I started thinking about
this back in 2014 now, when I had my first baby and suddenly found myself being
judged by the world for all my parenting choices, I asked myself exactly that
same question. I kept using the word reasonable and unreasonable rather than one
of its synonyms like acceptable or appropriate. And I wondered why. So I did
some digging and I found that from about the 1800s, something called the
reasonable man standard really became embedded within every aspect of the
international legal system as a kind of objective, neutral, imaginary figure
that was used to judge everything from reasonable accommodations in disability
law to reasonable use of force in cases of police brutality to reasonable
conduct in complaints of sexual harassment. And then when I traced it backwards,
I found that that idea of the reasonable person or before that the reasonable
man, it's at the heart of our Western moral philosophy. Let's turn back to
breastfeeding for a moment though. You say that was the personal eye opener that
showed you two sides of reasonable or unreasonable. Explain that a little more
for our listeners. Well, it was August 2014 and I was finding feeding just
really difficult. And at that same time breastfeeding itself was all over the
knees because I don't know if you remember this, but a mother who was sitting in
Claridge's restaurant was told to cover up her feeding baby with a tablecloth.
But that went viral really when Nigel Farage waded in saying that it's not too
hard surely to breastfeed discreetly. And then I was sitting at home nursing my
little baby and I realized that people were erupting over this. And the
arguments on the one side, people were saying that, well, it's the legal right
of feeding parents not to be made to feel uncomfortable when people, when
they're giving their kids the necessary nourishment to survive. But on the other
hand, the opposite side of the argument said that it's my fellow citizens right
to expect that people like me should take reasonable measures not to inflict our
breasts on other people and make them feel uncomfortable. And when I watched
that backlash unfold, what I realized is that fundamentally everyone had just
such very different ideas about what it means to be reasonably discreet. Does it
mean facing the wall? Does it mean slinking away to the loo, getting out any one
boob at a time rather than both of them simultaneously? And then the big
question for me is how can anyone confidently really advise on what is
reasonable without going through my own lived experience? Well, that is an
interesting one because I think if I've understood correctly reading the book,
you would have been, you would have understood maybe not fully Nigel Farage's
position, but you said you would have thought previously that it was reasonable
to cover up before having the baby, before realizing how difficult the whole
machinations of breastfeeding that baby in public might be. And I'm wondering
then if you can understand that pre-baby person and the person that you are now,
how would that ever come to a compromise if both people are so sure that their
way is the correct way? Well, for me, I would never have dreamed of shaming
other people, but I did think that I would be covering up with a feeding cloth.
And then I realized that actually I needed to sit totally still for up to an
hour so that things didn't slip. I had to keep an eye at every second on my
baby's mouth, otherwise nearly instant pain and damage. And legally, it's really
important that women have the right to breastfeed in any way that makes them
feel comfortable because otherwise we can see really low rates of breastfeeding
throughout the anglophone world, which to some extent is down to that fear of
being shamed. Yes. And you talk about the look and the touching in so many
aspects, which you talk about it as well in other public domains, whether it's
on an airplane, for example, with a kid crying. But you are calling for people
to be unreasonable, to make things better, to break the rules. How do you
understand something like that happening? And what sort of instant are you
talking about? Well, that really is the big question at the heart of the book.
In a world where everyone thinks that they're being reasonable, how together can
we figure out what's right? So when I talk about breaking the rules, I do it
with the necessary care. I'm absolutely not suggesting that anyone should be
able to do whatever they like at any point without consequence. The last thing
that we need is more selfish people who are just thinking only about themselves.
So what I'm really talking about here are cases of great injustice, whether it's
the climate crisis that we're currently facing or racial discrimination or
violence against women. Those cases where throughout history being reasonable
and calm and engaging in endless civil debates just hasn't fixed things. Then
maybe we need to give ourselves and other people permission to be unreasonable.
So what are you talking about? Civil disobedience? Yes. So one of the cases that
I talk about, because I'm based in Bristol, is the famous Colston statue
incident. And I look into all the things that happened for years beforehand,
those attempts to play by the rules, by campaigners, to set up petitions, to
talk about the issue, to persuade, and the reasons that those attempts to be
reasonable got blocked for really for decades. But it's only a certain sort of
unreasonable that you want. Yes, because of course we need to be able to draw
lines. We have to be able to draw moral lines between acceptable and acceptable,
appropriate, inappropriate, between good and bad. But who draws them and how do
you decide them? If there's such a difference of opinion, which we've seen, you
don't have to go too far in any sphere to be able to pick them out. And I'm not
even talking about social media yet. Absolutely. And manners, consideration,
respect, all of those things are fundamental to the proper running of societies.
I'm not questioning whether we need those things at all. What I'm questioning is
whether they are as simple and common sense as we often consider them to be.
Because take manners. Historically, manners have been absolutely used to make
shared social life better and cleaner and safer for everyone. But also at times
they've been wielded by the powerful as a weapon to divide and disempower. And
that's really hard to figure out in rhetorical, hypothetical terms. So a really
specific example. Manner's rules like wash your hands before eating food. That's
good. Of course it is. But rules like which set of cutlery to use first at a
posh dinner, that kind of etiquette. Well, that's really nothing to do with
safety or kindness. It's about figuring out who belongs at the table and who
doesn't. Dr Kirsty Sedgman there speaking to Nula about how we decide what's
reasonable and what's unreasonable. Well, still to come on the programme. Have
you ever bought something to get over a break up? You'll hear how a purple aga
cooker was a game changing purchase for one of my next guests, the brilliant
Irish singer-songwriter Eleanor McAvoy. Plus the woman who became a surgeon in a
medical world full of men. And when she told her consultant she was getting
married, the response was, what a pity. Avril Mansfield will be here talking us
through her career and what she thinks about the current state of the NHS. And
remember that you can enjoy Woman's Hour any hour of the day if you can't join
us live at 10am during the week. Just go to BBC Sounds and search for Woman's
Hour. New research from the Cancer Research UK and NHS Digital has revealed that
black women from Caribbean and African backgrounds are more likely to be
diagnosed with cancer at later stages, when treatment is less likely to be
successful. This study is the first to show that ethnicity is a significant
factor in late stage diagnosis. Well, to discuss the reasons for this
inequality, Nula was joined this week by Kruti Shruti, Head of Policy
Development at Cancer Research UK and Adobia Obeng who sought medical help three
times over two years before she was diagnosed with incurable breast cancer at
age 31. Nula asks Kruti why black women are more likely to be diagnosed later.
We don't know exactly what the reasons are, but previous research does give us
some clues. We know from previous studies that ethnic minority groups have lower
awareness of the signs and symptoms of cancer. And even if they do spot
something, there are more barriers that prevent them from going to their GP to
get checked out. So for example, we know that they are more likely to be
embarrassed about talking about these issues to their GP. And interestingly,
black and Asian communities are also more likely to have fatalistic attitudes
towards cancer. So an attitude which is, well, there's no point doing anything
about it because it's not in my control. So I'm not going to go and see my GP.
But something I think that's really important is that while these behavioural
factors are really important component, it's not just down to individual
behaviour. There also seems to be differences in access to care. So ethnic
minority groups are more likely to report having to go multiple times to their
GP compared to white groups to get referred for further tests. So clearly there
is a systematic problem here that we need to address. Well, I want to bring in
Adobea. Welcome Adobea. For our listeners, you are black. What was your
experience of finding out you had cancer? My experience was a devastating
experience, obviously. First of all, finding out that I had breast cancer and
then obviously finding out that it was a secondary diagnosis. And unfortunately,
like I say, in my case, incurable. Take us back to this journey that you've gone
through from your first inclination to visit a doctor. What was that? I found a
lump in my breast in 2016. So I would have been 29 at the time. And my first
thought wasn't, oh, let me go and get this checked out. It was a small lump in
my breast. And I was getting on with my day and my life. But I noticed that the
breast lump was getting bigger and I thought, OK, I need to get it checked out.
When I first initially went to my GP, had an exam and I was told that it was
just ordinary breast lumps and it was nothing to be worried about. And because
of my age, my GP wasn't concerned and I was sent on my way and I just continued
on with life. And I did so until 2017 when the lump had grown even larger and I
was starting to notice it and I started to notice all the discolouration and the
dimpling, which at the time, I wasn't aware of it, but at the time I was
presenting all the symptoms of breast cancer and then had to go to the GP again.
And then I was told again that it wasn't anything to be worried about and it's
just a breast lump. And if it becomes painful, then I should come back. My
goodness, my goodness. It continued. Tell our listeners what happened next. So
in April of 2018, I was going to work an ordinary Monday and I had an
excruciating pain in my chest, a pain that I've never experienced before. And I
was finding it very difficult to breathe. Luckily, I was with a work colleague
and we went to my local accident emergency. And when I arrived there, I was told
by the doctors on duty there that I had musculoskeletal pain and was given some
painkillers and sent home. That following week, the pain was getting even more
excruciating. I was finding it difficult to move around, to breathe. And I
insisted again, when I went into A&E again, that I need a scan, some sort of
scan because something is not right. And I need to find out what's happening. I
did have a CT scan done and I was told in May of 2018 that I had breast cancer.
And unfortunately, it had spread to my lymph nodes and they were querying errors
in my lung and my bone at the time. So yeah, that was pretty much my journey.
And it was an uphill battle because I had to insist that I needed some sort of
scan because something wasn't right. Adobia, I mean, it must have been
incredibly traumatic. But to bring you back at that point, when you were told
that, what went through your mind? I mean, up until the time I had all sorts of
the tests, I had to have a biopsy and a mammogram and all the tests that you
need for them to find out exactly what's happening. I was actually in denial for
a very long time. It was only once the oncologist said the words, you have
breast cancer, that I actually had to take a step back and realise, wow, this is
serious and I have this serious disease. But up until that point, cancer, I
wasn't thinking that I had breast cancer. I was going through the words of the
GP telling me that I'm too young and it's nothing to worry about. It's breast
lump. So yeah, it was a very difficult and traumatic experience for me. And I
want to hear more about your life. And thank you for sharing that, Adobia. I'm
sure it's very difficult. But, Crudy, what about that, that experience that poor
Adobia went through? It's really difficult to hear, isn't it? And the sad truth
is that this isn't one instance what research suggests is that this is happening
systematically. And it needs to be addressed. What I would like to see is the
government do more to make tackling these inequalities a priority for the health
community. And some of that is going to have to include making sure that we have
more data, better data sets so that we can understand what's going on and we can
address that, we can actually understand what the barriers are and we can
address the problems. It's also going to need to be resourcing the health
service properly because if the health service haven't got the headspace to
address these really important issues, which they haven't at the moment, they
are on the brink, then it's not going to be possible to move forward. I'm going
to read a little of the Department of Health and Social Care statement that we
just received. And more patients are being diagnosed, they say, and start in
treatment earlier with 92 community diagnostic centers open since 2021,
delivering over 3 million test scans and checks, including to detect cancer. We
also recently announced a 10 million pound investment in more breast cancer
screening units as well as software and service upgrades. The NHS Help Us Help
You awareness campaign includes advertising targeted to reach black, Asian and
minority ethnic groups to address challenges to earlier diagnosis such as fear
of what might be found. They go on to say, addressing cancer together with other
conditions in a joint-up strategy will allow us to focus where there are
similarities in approach and ensure care is focused on the patient. But that
wasn't you, Adobea, it wasn't about a fear of what might be found. No, it
wasn't. It was, I mean, in my opinion, sort of being misdiagnosed. Like I said,
I was presenting all the symptoms of breast cancer. I had obviously the lump, I
had the dimpling, I had the discoloration. The only thing that wasn't happening
that I didn't have was the leaking from the nipple, but I was presenting all
symptoms of breast cancer. And unfortunately, that wasn't picked up on. Why do
you think it wasn't? I mean, I have different theories, but I feel perhaps maybe
the GP just didn't know what breast cancer looked like on a dark skin person. So
perhaps, you know, they weren't able to just pick up on those symptoms on my
body, unfortunately. Maybe they didn't have access to the medical journals that
shows how breast cancer presents on darker skin. But I feel that had he have
known what to look for, what it would look like on my skin. Maybe he may have
been able to pick up on it sooner when I first sort of went in. I'm so sorry to
hear that. A question did come in from a listener to you, Kriti. Does black
women in your research include women of mixed race? It doesn't. Black women, we
are specifically referring to Caribbean and African women. I understand. Adobe,
let me go back to you. Your life now, that was 21, 29, excuse me, when you first
found the lump, 31, I believe by the time you were diagnosed. Tell me about now.
Well, now I'm on a hormone-targeted treatment, which is working fantastically. I
will be coming up to my sort of five years of being on treatment and having my
condition stable in May of this year. But it has been, like I said, it's been an
uphill battle. I've had my down times, I've had great news, I've had bad news,
I've had emotional times as well. But I maintain on trying to stay positive and
just kind of having faith in the treatment that I'm on, which is working
wonderfully for me at the moment. Yeah, we wish you the best of luck with that.
Kriti, Adobe there mentioned black skin, for example, or not being able to
perhaps be familiar with the skin or some of the symptoms. What else needs to be
done to try and change these numbers that you've seen? Yeah, there are a few
things. So I think that it's really important that we do more campaigns to raise
awareness of the signs and symptoms of cancer targeted at those communities
where awareness is lower. There's been a great example where black men are at
higher risk of prostate cancer. And there have been a lot of campaigns over the
over recent years to raise awareness of this amongst both black men and GPs. And
we're seeing much better diagnosis rates, early diagnosis rates among amongst
them. Cancer Research UK run talk cancer workshops with community leaders to
help them have conversations about cancer with their community. And these are
aimed at breaking down barriers to get people to see their GP if they have a
concern. And it also emphasizes the importance of early diagnosis. Just before I
let you go, Adobe, have you gone back to those doctors that didn't diagnose you?
Have you had that confrontation? No, I haven't. I thought I feel like I'm still
harboring some kind of resentment. And a little bit of a disappointment and
anger in that situation. I actually moved GPs as well. I completely moved a GP
surgery. I think, like I said, trying to maintain a sort of like a positive
mindset and just kind of moving on and moving forward with my life. It's not
something that I'm thinking about going to sort of approach or speak to them
about. I kind of have made my decision to leave the GP practice that I was at
that misdiagnosed me. And now I found my voice and if anything, you know,
resent. So I find that my treatment isn't how I expect it to be. I will speak up
about it now. And I think that's a good lesson that I learned from my
experience. Adobe are open there talking to Nula about her experiences of being
diagnosed with breast cancer. And you also heard from Kruti Shruti there from
Cancer Research UK. Time for some music now to ease you into your Saturday
afternoon. Earlier this week, Nula had the brilliant Eleanor McAvoy in the
Woman's Hour studio. Eleanor is one of Ireland's foremost songwriters and has
worked with the likes of U2, Sinead O'Connor and Mary Black. She's the composer
and co-performer of A Woman's Heart and the title track for the best selling
Irish album in Irish history and one of Ireland's favourite folk songs. And
she's currently on a UK tour with her latest album, Give Me Some Wine, which has
themes ranging from breakups to motherhood and female friendship. Eleanor began
by telling Nula about what inspired the album. During lockdown, like a lot of
people, I think I reflected on my life and where I was and, you know, you know,
what my role was in the music business now as a 56 year old woman, you know. How
do I fit into them? You know, we could see what the doctors and nurses were
doing. What was I doing? And without wanting to get too new-agey about it, I'm a
huge believer in the healing power of music. And, you know, I think that, you
know, my mission when I get up on stage is to, you know, to make people who are
down or tired after work, to transform them, to bring joy into their lives. And
that's not to say that you don't hit the darker spots, you address the more
serious issues. But if I'm not sending them home at the end of the night with
joy in their hearts, I feel I have failed. Let's learn a little bit more about
you. You studied music at Trinity College in Dublin, played in orchestras, I was
also reading. But when did the songwriting come into play? To be honest, Nula, I
was always songwriting. It's just I never really sang them for anybody. So I
mean, I'd hundred the songs written, you know, literally before I'd ever played
one to any. I don't know what I think I thought I was, you know, Emily Dickinson
or something, and I was going to die at 35 and they'd find all these thousands
of songs in my bedroom. I don't know what I was thinking, but it was odd because
once I'd written the song, I didn't feel the need to play it. For me, the joy
was in the writing or the buzz or the compulsion was in the writing part still
is, to be honest. But then when I was in symphony orchestra, I played a track to
my brother and he said, oh, I wonder, you got to be doing this, you know, get
me, I borrowed his band and did a demo and then just started to look for I
actually had a turning point moment. I walked into the symphony orchestra one
day and I mean, you're on a salary when you're in an orchestra and all that. But
I had been I was down the back of the second violins, you know, and this
gentleman had been moved down behind me and he used to lead the orchestra, a
very, you know, eminent violinist. And I thought, oh, my God, as you get older,
you get moved back in this job. You know, most jobs as you get older and get
more mature and get more experienced, they move you up the chain, but of course
your fingers go, you know, and I thought, oh, Eleanor, give the songwriting
thing a shot. Just try it. So that day I went to the manager of the orchestra
and said, look, Patty, I won't be, you know, I'm going to leaving my notice and,
you know, don't be calling me again after X-Men weeks. And I went to say now, I
don't know, I haven't seen it for years, actually. So I don't. But some of the
tracks going back to the album are very personal to you. Yeah, you know, I had a
time in obviously Covid was a tough time for our industry. But to be honest, it
was nothing compared to what had happened. Me prior to that, I'd had a lot of
stuff happen at the same time. You know, my dad died in a couple of weeks later.
My relationship of 23 years, literally just like that overnight went and it was
an awful shock. And, you know, it was it was very horrible and complicated. And
it turned out he'd had somebody else in another country the whole time he'd been
with me. Yeah. So I mean, it was you find out 23 years of your life has been a
sham and it puts you with certainly it put me into a very dark psychological
place. I mean, I experienced darkness. I don't think I've ever experienced in my
life. So I had to think, OK, how do you how do you how do you get yourself out
of this? Or do you know? So for me, I could just start again, start a new life.
And for me, that sort of worked. And by the way, don't worry, there's only two
tracks about it on the album in case anybody thinks. But it is. But it is an
awful lot to take on. And was this kind of towards the end of lockdown or? And
no, it was just before. So it was a year before lockdown. OK, so I had a year of
kind of trying to get over that and then lockdown hit. And, you know, I feel
very guilty saying this, but in a way, lockdown provided me with a bit of time
to heal because I was pretending to the world I was fine because, you know, in
my business, you've got to get up on stage. The show must go on. You know, if
you want to make a living, you've got to keep doing it. And and I just had to
kind of withdraw a bit from social media and all that just to kind of, you know,
start again, essentially, and kind of reinvent myself. And I decided, God, this
time, like, what decisions have you made in your life, girl, that have that led
to this? You know, and I. But that sounds like you're blaming yourself. Well,
you know, I've since had that again, I'm sounding very new age here, but I did
go for I actually did go for therapy. And I have to say it was absolutely
transformational. And I wish I'd gone 20 years ago because I put up with stuff I
should never have put up with. It wasn't really a big thing in Dublin, though,
in the 1780s. You know what it was like. I mean, you know what it was like back
then. God. And what is it like then touring because you're in the middle of it
at the moment. It's great. It's I'm loving it, you know, but you know, you're it
made me look at like things like the song I'm going to do for you. So yeah,
street, you know, it's a little tiny street off the street. And one day I was
there and this is ages ago, but I met my ex, you know, from 30 years ago from
college and show me age there. But anyway, and when I thought about that, I
thought during lockdown, I was thinking, God, the roads not taken. What if I had
gone that road instead of that road? You know, so it was all of this kind of
reflection. Well, you know, we talk about the breakup there. I believe there's a
connection to a purple. I get that you have the Cuckoo stove range. Yeah. Well,
after the breakup, I don't know. I got it. I got a I bought a purple lager in a
moment of I don't know, midlife crisis or something, but it is the best thing
that caused me far less grief than the man ever did. And I didn't run off with
other rags or anything like that. So yeah, I just love it. It's just and people
said, get a neutral colored one case you want to sell. I said, no, I'm getting a
purple one. I love my purple one. So yeah. Well, a lot of people because I threw
it out to our audience and there's nothing that they are, if not responsive. Let
me see. After a breakup, I bought myself a plane ticket to East Africa and had
an adventure. Absolute winner. When I left my husband 35 years ago, I bought a
pink fluffy dressing gown. He hated pink and a piece of breaded chicken. He was
a vegetarian. All my dressing gowns are still pink and not that my husband would
notice. He actually has a new one now who loves her and is happy with whatever
she wears or eats. I dyed my hair red, says another. When my ex told me he was
leaving, he hated red hair. Oh, he's in my bad books too then. I bought myself a
lovely convertible BMW when the divorce was finalized. That's Terry. Let me see
another post breakup gift. I recently split from my husband. I bought myself a
concert ticket and a hotel room to meet friends from an online fan club of the
same band. Not something I could have done before. And I'm so excited. Isn't
that wonderful? And isn't that a lovely segue to get you to perform? South Ann
Street for us now. Yes, South Ann Street. There's a little street you will know.
It's off Grafton Street. If you've ever been to Dublin, there's a couple of bars
there. You never know who you might run into. As Eleanor was telling us, she ran
into the ex from 30 years previous, was it, Eleanor? As she pops on her
headphones there. Yeah. Okay, like launching? You can sure can. Go for it. Well,
I almost didn't know him. I nearly passed him, boy. It took us both a moment to
get over our surprise. Then we hugged each other clumsily and laughed a bit too
long as the shoppers on South Ann Street hurried on. I said I'd heard that he
was married and living overseas. He said he'd seen my posters on a billboard
near his street. And he'd heard about what happened and we both just looked away
and headed from South Ann Street to McDade's. Where we drank to ancient love for
hours on end and raised our glasses to remember ups and friends. And we drank to
chance encounters too long overdue on South Ann Street on a Tuesday afternoon.
And it felt just like it used to. Like we'd never been apart. Like back when we
were students on a bench in College Park. But I felt something deep inside me I
really can't explain in a pub beside South Ann Street in the rain. When we drank
to ancient love for hours on end and raised our glasses to remember ups and
friends. And we drank to chance encounters too long overdue on South Ann Street
on a Tuesday afternoon. We embraced before we parted to walk into the night with
the complicated sadness at this complicated life of where ships passing in the
night occasionally meet at the corner of South Ann and Grafton Street. Where we
drank to ancient love for hours on end and raised our glasses to remember ups
and friends. And we drank to chance encounters too long overdue on South Ann
Street on a Tuesday afternoon. Yes we drank to ancient love for hours on end. We
raised our glasses to remember ups and friends. And sometimes if I'm lonely and
I'm walking on my own I'll detour down South Ann Street going home. The lovely
music there of Eleanor McAvoy who did a live performance in the Women's Hour
Studios. Her album Gimme Some Wine is out now. And thank you as always for your
messages into the programme. Here are a few more we got about things that you
bought after a breakup. Frances in Scotland says I bought a black and deco drill
and have never looked back. Lucy texts to say the day an ex-boyfriend got
married I bought myself a second hand soprano saxophone. 30 odd years later
playing in a street band with a bunch of glorious friends is one of the
loveliest things I do. Best breakup purchase ever. Ansara sent us an email I
bought myself a beautiful Art Deco cocktail cabinet when my ex-husband moved
out. I now have regular cocktail parties and get to spend joyful time with my
friends. Cheers. Well, cheers to you all and thank you for those messages. My
next guest has made waves in the medical world and has done so more often than
not as the only woman surgeon in the hospital. Avril Mansfield qualified as a
surgeon in the early 1970s, a time when women medics were outnumbered by men
eight to one. Nonetheless, Avril rose through the ranks and went on to become
the UK's first female vascular surgeon and first female professor of surgery.
Now aged 85 Avril has written her memoir Life in Her Hands and she joined me
earlier this week. She started by telling me what first got her interested in
surgery. I started to read books when I was about eight or nine about medicine
and particularly about surgery and the history of surgery and I was fascinated
by the fact that people were exploring operations without them knowing whether
they could work or even if people could survive perhaps for example having their
chest opened. Somebody had to do it first and as a small child I was captivated
by that and I wanted to go along in that direction. I was used to seeing women
doctors surprisingly. My school doctor was female, the person who delivered me
into the world was female so women doctors were not a rarity for me so it seemed
perfectly reasonable that I should think I could go along in that direction in
my future career. And talking about how you came into this world I was
fascinated to read that your first interest into medical research was when you
learned about your own quite traumatic birth for your mother and how there was
no real understanding of your mother's complications. Did that map your interest
into surgery? It certainly mapped a specialty interest in my future career
because she got a deep vein thrombosis and a massive pulmonary embolism which
very nearly killed her and I was completely perplexed by this and fascinated by
why it should happen and a lot of my research was about why that should happen
and how we can prevent it from happening. It's much less frequent now than it
used to be but in those days it was often fairly lethal. Yes and I'm sure your
family are very proud about that but I believe you were in the local paper when
you were a child and because and you said you wanted to be a surgeon but they
printed that you wanted to be a nurse. Why was that? Was that just because it
was seen as inappropriate or unlikely that girls could be doctors? No it was my
mother. My mother thought it was above my station to say I wanted to be a
doctor, certainly not a surgeon but certainly just to say you want to be a
doctor you can't say that. You can say you want to be a nurse if you if you must
and I have nothing against nurses at all. I love nurses but I wanted to be a
doctor and I wanted to make that quite plain so I was really very cross about
that but yes indeed they did publish that. Well when you were a child living in
Blackpool there was no NHS of course and I read with fascination you describing
your father coming home with his wages and putting money in a pot on the
mantelpiece for the doctor. Yes. So becoming ill or being in an accident must
have been quite a worry then. What was life like for you before the NHS? It was
extremely difficult and it is really a very strong memory when the NHS came into
existence and that pot on the mantelpiece could be removed. Things like my
mother requiring surgery to correct for the damage that had been done when I was
born put a huge strain on family resources. It had to be paid for. It wasn't it
wasn't going to come free so I saw that that weight of responsibility that came
from quite a small income. My father was on a relatively small wage as a welder
which is what his job was so to see that change to think that everybody could be
treated properly and at when they needed it was a wonderful step forward even
for a child of eight or nine or whatever age I was at the time it was it was
very clear that this was a momentous moment. But I do wonder how you look on the
medical students of today because for instance you talk about current students
not being able to perform minor operations until much later in their study in
their career but but but how much do you think today's teachings have changed
from when you were there and is that positive or negative in some ways? In some
respects it's changed but in truth the medical students are just the same.
They're wonderful young people who really do want to be looking after patients
doing the best for patients that they are all like that and we need to foster
that in our young students we need to encourage that because that's really what
we all want when we're sick we want somebody who wants to care for us and to to
give of their best to us and most most students do. Clearly the fact that they
can't do some procedures when they're students which I was allowed to do is just
the way of life it's it's pushed things back a little bit and I sometimes am
concerned that people don't discover whether they really have aptitude for
something like surgery which is after all a skill they may not learn that at an
early age they may have to wait a bit before they can discover whether that
really is the future career for them because of pushing it back to a slightly
older age. Yeah you going into that world as a surgeon and then as a consultant
as well it was a male-dominated environment and you were often overlooked you
were called a slip of a thing and someone presumed that you were just taking
someone's history and the doctor was on their way. Were you overlooked and and
how how difficult was it in that environment for you? Well you would write in a
way that that people would be surprised and almost reluctant to believe that you
could be that person with that amount of responsibility. It sometimes worked in
the opposite direction of course because once they discovered that in fact you
were that person with that responsibility then suddenly it seemed as though you
must be something extra special so being female it was not without its
advantages you stood out from the crowd you weren't one of a huge crowd of men
you were you were the odd female so there were some some benefits from being the
occasional woman. And I believe when you told your senior surgeon that you
planned to get married he said what a pity thought you had such a promising
career ahead of you. He did I was really disappointed by that because he was a
great supporter he was the senior consultant and clearly you know from a
different era not used to having women who wanted to pursue a career in surgery
and he saw it as something that you had to be totally dedicated to and there
wouldn't be room in your life for anything else but I proved that that was not
the case you could do both. You did and then you went on to set up the women in
surgery initiative what what have you done for women beyond just succeeding
yourself you've you've helped so many generations after you as well. My hope is
that what we did with that women in surgical training scheme at the college was
to make them aware of the fact that it's perfectly feasible perfectly possible
and indeed desirable for women to pursue a career in surgery. There's nothing
odd about it there's nothing wrong with it and it is of course an extremely
fulfilling career and a lot of women have said you can't be what you can't see
and so making it more visible I think was really very important and the other
aspect of it was that we were at that stage only two percent of surgeons were
female and we were approaching about 50 percent of medical students were female
so the sums just didn't add up we needed to encourage some of those women going
into medicine to believe that it was perfectly okay to become a surgeon if
that's what you wanted to do. I've said all my life that what's most important
is that you actually take a good close look at the career of surgery because
you're going to be stuck with it for the next 30 years and it is quite a
demanding job as you can imagine and a wonderful one don't get me wrong I loved
it I loved every minute of it but you do have to make sure that that is what you
want to do so I encourage young women to explore it and enjoy it. Yeah bringing
us to that that that current generation many of the papers are inundated with
stories of the NHS strikes at the moment now you said to yourself that you were
you were in this to help people altruism was the core of being a doctor for you
you wouldn't walk away from anything so with that in mind I'd love to know your
opinions on the recent strikes in the NHS how do you feel about doctors going on
strike it's often criticized as leaving vulnerable patients without care isn't
that a difficult question I kind of guessed you would ask me about this because
we need to push it back but it's something I know that I could not have done I
couldn't have walked away I never could and sometimes I would actually dedicate
myself to a patient when perhaps I should have been dedicating myself to to some
other issue in the family or at home because they were paramount that the
patient was always the paramount concern as far as I was concerned I understand
and sympathize with the situation that the medical profession is in we I want
the health service to succeed I want it to be successful I want it to engage
with the young people who are working in it so that they are content to stay in
it and are properly paid to do what they're doing in it because they do work
hard extremely hard but it's just for me it would have been extremely difficult
to walk away from a patient I'm sure it's difficult for them too I don't think
any of them actually want to neglect their patients they just need to make a
give a message to someone and that's the way they're finding to do it you're
right and it is a difficult subject especially in your position I don't know
what you're going to do next you've had got so many awards you've achieved so
much you've even met the queen what is next for you Avril? Well I took up the
cello in retirement so that's really the thing I need to concentrate on is
getting better at playing my cello which I love! Of course she did she's
unstoppable well the brilliant Avril Mansfield was talking to me there and her
book Life in Her Hands is available now. That's all from me this afternoon but
don't forget to tune into Woman's Hour on Monday at 10am when Nula will be
speaking about marriage. As the marriage and civil partnership minimum age act
comes into effect she'll hear from people who got married before they were 18
about their experiences and we'd love to hear from you too. Were you married at
16 or 17? Did it last or do you regress it? You can text Woman's Hour on 84844,
texts will be charged at your standard message rate, check with your network
provider for exact costs and you can contact us on social media it's at
bbcwoman's hour or you can email us through our website. Nula will be here on
Woman's Hour on Monday from 10am have a lovely rest of your weekend. Weekend
Woman's Hour was presented by Hayley Hassell and produced by Lottie Garten.
Discover the very best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when the
theatre becomes absolutely silent and they're like what's happening? With live
discussions, news and reviews. It was extraordinary I got very moved. And
interviews with the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I
pay a lot of attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to
inspire me. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me Samira Ahmed for Front Row. Some of the
lines that I write I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to
Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15 with thousands of episodes now on BBC
Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4 it's 5 o'clock.