TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Hogan were reading The Advocate by Marcello Voice. It was abridged by Isabel
Creed and Jill Waters and produced by Jill Waters and the Waters Company for BBC
Radio 4. BBC News at 11 o'clock. Rishi Sunak has insisted he's up for the fight
to get his migration bill passed. The UN's refugee agency has criticised the
proposal saying that detaining and deporting anyone who crosses on a small boat
amounts to a ban on claiming asylum. The Prime Minister says the government has
tried every other way of preventing the crossings. Catherine Wollard is the head
of the European Council on Refugees. She says countries just need to make their
asylum systems function. Rather than investing a huge amount in deterrence which
doesn't deter anybody after all or fantasy deals with other countries which also
don't work. Europe and the UK has huge labour market needs and public opinion is
actually more favourable to hosting and receiving refugees than it was 30 years
ago. The RMT union has suspended all industrial action at Network Rail after
receiving a new pay offer but walkouts are still due to take place next
Wednesday on the London Underground and next Thursday at the train operating
companies. Israeli forces have killed at least six Palestinians in a raid on
Janine in the occupied West Bank. The Israeli military says one of the dead is a
militant suspected of killing two Jewish settlers last week. Five women have
sued the American state of Texas saying they were denied abortions even though
their lives were in danger. A US Supreme Court ruling removed the constitutional
right to an abortion last year. The women want the state to clarify that doctors
can provide abortions in cases where continuing the pregnancy is unsafe or if
the fetus is unlikely to survive. The White House says it supports a bipartisan
bill in Congress that will give President Biden new powers to ban the Chinese
owned app TikTok and other foreign technologies that could pose security
threats. The legislation is backed by dozens of Democrats and Republicans in the
Senate and comes after government officials were banned from installing the app
on their phones. BBC News. The award-winning comedian Alex Edelman and some of
his friends take a look at politics through the eyes of millennials in a moment
and we catch up with a busy day at Westminster in half an hour. Today in
Parliament is at 11.30. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East
End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter. The order has entered the 1960s.
Barely eight years late. But the midwives of Nonata's house are forever
constant. You've a home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the
midwife. We will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. It's
time once more to hear from the award-winning comedian Alex Edelman and his
friends as they discuss all things millennial. In this episode Alex takes a
personal look at politics, how the internet has changed young people's political
outlook and what the political future might hold. Good evening and thank you for
listening. My name is Alex Edelman and I'm the guy who appointed himself to
speak on behalf of an entire generation for four 30-minute radio shows. Can you
believe the cheek? I can't. This is the second series of a show called Peer
Group. The first aired around the end of 2017 and it tickles me that as someone
with intense ADHD, I'm now returning for a second series of something despite
not being able to remember the end of the first one. I have no idea what made it
but I'm hoping my you gotta hand it to him section on ISIS was left on the
cutting room floor and then my hour-long love letter to the work of Kevin Spacey
has aged as well as I thought it would. It differs from series one in two ways.
First, I have gotten a nose job and if you're wondering, yes, it's bigger.
Secondly, it's called Peer Group because you're going to be hearing from some of
my peers intermittently. Friends, journalists, experts and in some cases all
three. This episode is about politics. I'd love to have a group that represents
me in the UK but I'm too poor for the Tories and I'm too Jewish for labor. I
love that short intake of breath by the way. Oh yeah. I'm Alex Edelman. Welcome
to Peer Group. All right. People say young people are apathetic about voting
that were disengaged from the political system. Today's specific focus is on
what we millennials believe in and care about, specifically when it comes to
politics and defense and nuance and blah, blah, blah. It's Donald Trump. It's
all about Donald Trump. It has to be. It's not all about Donald Trump but like,
let's be honest, that's what most things are now. And I know you're like, Alex,
we came out to forget. Why are you doing this? Everything we've done
collectively for the last 21 months is like a valiant but pointless effort to
forget that Donald Trump is the president of the United States. Every time you
think you've got away with it for a few minutes, someone on the news or on the
street or in a tree just yells at you, Donald Trump is president of the United
States. Donald Trump is in Home Alone 2. Did you know that? Donald Trump is
legitimately in Home Alone 2. You know how I rediscovered that? I was watching
Home Alone 2 with my girlfriend's daughter and then Donald Trump was there and
she's eight years old and she was like, is that Donald Trump? I said, yeah.
She's like, if you're the president, they let you be in Home Alone 2. I'm like,
yeah, he hasn't always been the president. Like trying to destroy America and
hurrying along climate change, like that I can deal with, but messing with Home
Alone 2. But that's like, that's Donald Trump. He is the real estate mogul who
lives in the White House and rent free in the head of every citizen on the
planet. And like the first time I thought about Donald Trump becoming president
was in 2015. And that was just to laugh at the idea of Donald Trump becoming
president. Remember when that was laughable? Remember 2015, Obama was in charge,
the EU's biggest problem was Greece. All of your favorite celebrities were still
alive. It was the golden age. And like we had divisive times in 2015. You may,
of course, you guys had a general election when the Tories crushed in Miliband's
labor party and lefties were like, this is an all time low. In 2016, he was
like, I'll fetch the spade. I mean, and Brexit was bad, obviously, but Donald
Trump, America's id broke everything. I did a bunch of chats with friends, as I
said, and a lot of it was about Trump. But there's one in particular you want to
listen to. Here's political commentator and my really good friend, David
Burstein. There have been a lot of things that have happened and Trump has
certainly been an important one. He's really turned the entire millennial
political activism path on its head. I think in not a particularly good way.
David Burstein, he's an author, a political operative and the founder of an
organization that gets millennials to run for office. But his most impressive
credential is that since he graduated from NYU with me, he has managed to stay
friendly with me. And in 2015, David predicted that Trump was going to win the
Republican nomination and then the presidency. And I'm not kidding. I called
David Burstein. I'm not kidding. I called David and he picked up the phone and I
just went, ha ha ha ha. I laughed at him for 60 seconds consecutively, timed the
60 seconds and then hung up the phone. And then the day after the election, he
called me and he went, are you still laughing? I didn't believe it could happen.
And then over the next year, it started to happen. My hashtags became more and
more desperate. First, I was like, hashtag feel the burn. And then he lost. And
then I was hashtag I'm with her. And then she lost. And then I had a hashtag.
There's no way they're going to actually inaugurate him, is there? And then they
did. And I was like, hashtag moving to the UK forever. In November 2016, I was
at a wedding in Florida the week before the election, and I decided to do my
part by doing some volunteering. So you know that when Hillary won, I could say
that I had done my bit. And I was in a city called Pembroke Pines. And I went
around to the local Hillary for president office in Wynwood. And I joined a team
and went around knocking on doors, wearing a badge with an H on it, which
luckily I had left over from my time in the Steps fan club. Some young faces
just like we have no idea what that is. Unfortunately, the doors that we were
knocking on belong to some of Florida's oldest people. And that is an extremely
competitive field, not an actual field. That would be a cemetery. And I said to
Nate, I didn't realize how old some of the people in Florida were. Nate was the
guy I was knocking on doors with. He's a waiter. And he looked at me and he
said, this is how old Florida is. Last week in the tip field on the receipt,
someone just wrote, get a haircut, communists. These people spend their days
hooked up to IV drips that provide them with constant streams of vitamins and
Fox News. And they already knew everything they need to know about Hillary
Clinton. They knew about her emails. A lot of them didn't know what emails were,
but they knew that Hillary had it. And that was bad. So Nate and I had like a
lot of doors slammed in our faces that day. After the first one, I was like,
that person was rude. And after the fifth one, I was like, these people are
rude. And after the 10th one, I'm like, we're going to lose Florida. And we did.
And by the way, uh, Florida was a battleground state. A lot of places that were
up for grabs, Hillary seemed to lose them all. And David has a really good
reason for us losing. There's this whole problem of someone like Obama in what
he did and the kind of candidate he was, the kind of president he was really
fetishized idealism in a pretty problematic way. First of all, how dare you say
that about Barack? He was the people's princess. You're going to say that about
my hero, Barack Obama, the man who went to the moon. By the way, I know that
Barack Obama didn't go to the moon, but there's a bunch of stuff on the internet
about him being responsible for hurricane Katrina. So if they get to blame him
for that, I get to thank him for the giant leap that he took for mankind. Barack
Obama, first Kenyan on the moon. And Barack Obama like made us feel like
anything was possible. Here's the thing. Barack Obama made us feel like anything
was possible. Here's the thing. Barack Obama made us feel like we fixed it.
We're like, look, we're done. We did it. Cool, young, mixed race. This is who we
are. Probably. This is what the whole nation is. Probably. We're all done. And
that was a really easy attitude for us because like he didn't make us feel like
anything was possible. And then Donald Trump reminded us that yes, literally
anything is possible. And it's hard to like blame Barack Obama to be like,
Obama, how dare he make people think that humans are inherently good and want to
make the world a better place. Here's David again. It's hard to under play the
level of complacency that people slipped in, certainly on a political front in
the United States. During the Obama administration, people wanted to believe
that a lot of things were solved and over and problems were done. And people
lapsed in voting. Young people lapsed in voting. And people lapsed in voting.
Young people lapsed in voting in 2016 over 2012. The truth is David's right. And
it's possible that like we need to rethink our approach. Like, I think the
problem for millennials is that right now there's actually a little too much
idealism and not enough pragmatism. Like the day after Trump won, Emma Watson
tweeted, today I am going to deliver Maya Angelou books to the New York subway
and fight even harder for the things we believe in. And I was like, oh, this is
why we lost. That's why Hillary got clobbered in Florida. They hadn't read
enough Maya Angelou. It's a shame you lost your job at the factory, Todd. But on
the bright side, now you can read sonnets full time. I was laughing at some of
the responses, though, which is strange because I'm on that side, but I was so
bummed out. I had gone full circle and I was laughing at everything. Like some
she wrote, I'm going to hand out this poetry on the subway and underneath it,
someone had written 10 points to Gryffindor. And you shouldn't laugh at that
because Emma Watson is one of the great activists of our generation, and she
deserves a bit more respect than the 10 points to Gryffindor jokes that she has
had to endure for like the last 20 years of her life. We should aspire to
better, which doesn't mean that I'm not going to make Harry Potter jokes, but I
want to make better Harry Potter jokes. Here we go. Sorry to hear about the
election, Emma. Shame you couldn't use your time turner to take you back to the
Obama administration. Sorry to hear about the election, Emma. Shame you couldn't
liberate a few more house elves to vote for Hillary. Sorry to hear about the
election, Emma. Shame you couldn't pretend to care about blue collar workers the
same way you pretended to care about Ron Weasley. I know none of those jokes are
very relevant to today's theme, but I'm not going to pretend I didn't hugely
enjoy writing them, and then I have like 15 more in my back pocket. But it
wasn't that we didn't vote or weren't engaged. It's just that the approaches
aren't quite working. Well, you know, pragmatic idealism is something that I
have believed for some time was the governing ideology of the millennial
generation, right? Which basically said, we want to change the world, but we
want to have a clear plan of how to do it. Pragmatic idealism. The term is not
like super in the mainstream, but I think that's a really good definition. It's
what David's been using. Pragmatic idealism. That's sort of like a guiding
political and philosophical approach for millennials. The ideas that change all
at once is unrealistic, but change like week to week or month to month, I think
is a really good definition. Ideas that change all at once is unrealistic, but
change like week to week or month to month or year to year like that could work.
It's like weight loss, like liposuction is a bad idea, but we could all probably
stop having Haribo for breakfast. I've started doing that by the way, and it's
really working out for me because I've dropped some pounds and I still have my
Haribo lunch and my Haribo dinner. Pragmatic idealism is like balancing a young
person's interests with a more realistic approach. Like, what do we want?
Change. When do we want it? Incrementally. But Obama for Trump, for idealistic
people was one step forward and then two steps back. It's like the first time
you win an argument with your dad when you're a child, and he's so humiliated by
it, he takes away your allowance for a little while. You know what I mean? This
is my first taste of independent thought, and you correct your dad, actually
Frankenstein was the doctor and the monster is Frankenstein's monster. And
you're like, woo, check me out going toe to toe with dad. And then the next day
you're like, woo, check me out walking to school. And like, if you want to
actually get involved, though, there are organizations. There's one called
Sleeping Giant that organizes corporate boycotts, and it's effective and it gets
results. And like millennials are engaged. Here's my friend and journalist,
Rebecca Nicholson. I think there's an argument that people live online and
they're too busy looking at their Snapchatogram to be able to do anything
practical. But I just don't think that's true. I think that that follows on and
leads to actual activism in the real world. Like I went to so many protests
after Donald Trump, but despite my clever, understated meta signage, the
president didn't immediately step down. And that's the problem with protests.
It's not even like preaching to the choir so much as like getting the choir
together at a park on a Sunday. I find it also like really hard to buy into
boycotts because to me, boycotts are very much a thing for the American right,
like right wing American conservatives. In the past year, right wing American
conservatives have boycotted Walmarts, Starbucks and Nike. And in doing so, they
have forced them into bankruptcy and shut them down completely. Oh no, wait,
they're everywhere. All these companies in some ways did something mildly
critical of Trump or supportive of dozens of groups that Trump has managed to
offend. And so like boycott now seems like a real knee jerk reaction that no
one's immune from. Like conservatives boycotted the play Hamilton, but like,
come on, you're not boycotting it because you're upset. You're boycotting it
because he can't get tickets. I'm too in boycotting Hamilton, but I am on the
returns list. And if anyone has access to Lin-Manuel Miranda, please do reach
out. But until then I am boycotting and I urge any decent people to return their
tickets, preferably to weekend matinees. But until then the boycott continues
strong has ever banned this filth. That had bipartisan support until the Mike
Pence thing. Dick Cheney said that was his favorite cultural thing he's ever
seen. Although maybe that's because it was about a vice president shooting a
dude. Here's David again. Very easy to just get drawn into an endless loop of
stuff and feel like you've been engaged and immersed in these whole new
phenomenon, and particularly when it comes to politics, where people are
immersing themselves in news and information. And it's like simulating being on
the front lines of battle. And at the end of the day, you've just been sitting
on your computer for an hour reading, you know, nothing's happened. Nothing's
changed. You haven't done anything, but you feel like you're part of something.
You're part of a movement. I think there's almost too much to be engaged with. I
think that's a big problem. Like recently I went to a get together of some
political activists and we're talking about some strategy. And this guy just
went, what are we going to do about the diminishing population of whales? And I
didn't know it was a problem, but I was like, well, it would help if they had
like a language that wasn't so hard to speak maybe. And he was like, not the
country, the animals. And I tried to save face by the way. I was like, oh yeah,
that's what I meant. Their language is hard to speak as well. I mean, whales
have more vowels than the Welsh, but I mean, and he said to me, Rory, he went
like, do you ever think about how few whales there are? And I was like, not
really. Like there are people who have that as a job, like marine biologists.
And he went, we all have a little bit of responsibility. You know, and I was
willing to listen. So like I put down my harpoon and the whale population, how
is that my concern? I can't impregnate any more than I already have. I try,
they're so slippery. And I don't need to feel guilty about that as well. Do I?
When someone brings new guilt into your life and I'm like, oh, I already have so
much privilege to check. Like I'm a straight white man. Do I have to add not a
whale to that list? And he got really, like really hoppy with me, this guy, he
was furious at like how flippant I was. He was like, how do you sleep at night?
And I was like, actually I have a CD of whale song. It's actually pretty easy.
You know, maybe I should be doing more. I really do like the CD. And he's like,
well, whales could become extinct in the next 20 years. And I was like, is it
bad that my first thought is like, we should get some recording dates in if
that's happening. But at least that's like real life chat. It made me aware of
the issue. And a lot of our concerns and conversations don't come from real life
stuff. They come from the internet. Here's my friend, comic and writer, Brandon
Wardell. I like internet activism when there is like a specific call to action
and there's like a specific thing you can do where it's like, oh, go to this
rally or call this number, blah, blah, blah. But sometimes it's solely just like
quote tweeting an article and being like, this is not normal or whatever. Like,
I understand that concern from Brandon, because the funny thing is the way I
engage is through social media. And like, I sort of understand the president
because of that. Like, this is the last thing about Trump. I promise the last
thing about Trump until the man outside your house in the tree reminds you this
is like legit the last thing. I'm afraid of Donald Trump. And I wondered why.
And it's because in some ways, like he's so much like me. Like the way that he
talks and he wants to please everyone in front of him and he'll lie when he
isn't sure what to say. He's a petty little bitch. And he uses public platforms
to shame people, Stacey. And he doesn't read enough. And I'm like, that's like
100% me. And also, the biggest thing is like the most trusted people in his life
aren't the experts. They're like whoever he spoke to last. And that's how I feel
about everything. We have a total collapse of expertism that exists in our world
where we've really devalued almost all of our experts on everything. A four star
general who's served in the Asian theater and has known knows everything there
is to know about North Korea. Their opinion about North Korea is become
basically about as valuable as your friend. Like you ever have a conversation
with somebody and they're really convincing. And after a few minutes, you're
like, maybe we should kill everybody. Like I'm lying about the guy with the
whales. Like after 10 seconds of like listening to him and I was like, this is
now my biggest concern. This is a group of political friends. And if I'm being
totally honest, I was like, this is what we need to focus on now. And everyone's
like, Alex, we're talking about immigrants. And I'm like, the whales are
migrants too. We need to take care of them. I'm Jewish. If you've ever met me or
see me live or legit read any article or review that's ever been written about
me ever, you'll know that I'm Jewish. So I do feel like talking about anti-
Semitism and labor. I know there are only a small amount of anti-Semitism labor
party in there doing as much as they can to fix it. But if you showed up at an
actual party and someone was like, listen, rumors of anti-Semitism at this party
have been greatly exaggerated. There are only a few people posting that instead
of punch, you would prefer to drink the blood of children. You'd be like, I'm
going to go to a different party if that's okay. I'm going to go to the Lib Dem
party down the road. Sure. No one's there, but still. And it is a problem by the
way, Damian Enticott was a local labor counselor from Bogner Regis, which I
heard is like a bit like Brighton, but without all the pesky tolerance. Posted a
meme with an accusation that Jews will drink the blood of children. A very old
meme, a meme originating in the fifth century BC. So less of a meme, more of a
cave painting. And more than any other anti-Semitic canard, it like really
drives me crazy because it crops up like every so often throughout history with
really murderous effects. And like, we can't even eat ham. Does this mean you
think that when like my friends are inside getting sausage rolls at Greg's I'm
outside drinking a not so innocent smoothie? Do you know how hard it is to make
anything kosher? You have to kill it the right way. That's to be the right kind
of animal. You have to salt it so there's no blood. That's part of every kosher
product. Do you know how hard it would be to get a kosher baby? You have to go
to Brooklyn for that. By the way, they were like, what's your explanation? And
Damien Etikat was like, I was distracted because I was shopping. You know, when
you're distracted while shopping, what was he shopping for? Matches and crosses
probably. And I told a friend that I was offended by it. It's like the first
thing in a while that I was actually offended by because like, that's quite an
old problematic thing. And my friend told me I was being a bit sensitive. But
it's like forced me to think about whether I am too easily offended or not. But
it's like forced me to think about whether I am too easily offended by things.
My friend Rebecca Nicholson, she wrote an article about snowflakes for The
Guardian, the definitive article on snowflakes. And she has like a really
interesting take. I don't think that I'm a snowflake. And I don't think at any
point during that article, did I hint that I was and I was not offended by being
called a snowflake. But that gets you into all sorts of spirals about who's the
snowflake? Are you the snowflake for calling me a snowflake when I'm not a
snowflake? Are you more of a snowflake? Who's the snowflake? No one's a
snowflake. It's so confusing now. If you're listening at home, I've diagrammed
it out here and it is extremely confusing. Because there's another thing that
millennials get accused of. This is the other thing that people really berate
millennials for not having a sense of humor. Alex aside, most millennials have a
sense of humor. And there ends Rebecca's contribution to our series. As
comedians, like you get asked a lot, like what jokes are okay, what jokes cross
the line. And it's like a very hot topic in an increasingly offended world. One
person in the comedy world was talking a lot about this year was this guy called
Count Dankula. You'll be amazed to learn that's not his birth name. Has everyone
heard of Count Dankula? No, whole bunch of nos. I first heard about Count
Dankula after he had already become a free speech hero. He's like a YouTube
comedian with some really unfortunate views and some like even more unfortunate
piercings, but that is not relevant here. Count Dankula taught his girlfriend's
pug to give a Nazi salute every time he said Sieg Heil. Yeah. And for a second,
it looked like he was going to prison for breaching the communications act. And
a journalist asked me, do you think Count Dankula, the YouTube comedian, should
go to jail for what he's done? And I said, yes. And they said, why? And I said,
I've never heard of him. I just think every YouTube comedian should do like six
months in jail. Which I do think, by the way, I think the stupid prank videos
that every YouTube comedian seems to do will be way more entertaining in prison.
We're like farting into someone's pillow might have real life repercussions.
There were lots of defenses for this guy and none of them were good. I said to
my friend, I was like, you know, this is pretty dumb. And he went, yeah. And the
dog didn't even do a really good salute. And I was like, that's not my objection
that it wasn't good. I'm not sure how many Jews there were in world war two
critiquing Nazi salutes. Like my great grandparents being like, if you can't get
your arm up at least 45 degrees, I am not getting on the train. Obviously you
don't want to shut down free speech, but like, I think there is a line between
free speech and hate speech. I'm not jealous of a ton from past generations, but
I do think you guys may have had better free speech heroes than us. Martin
Luther King fought and died for the idea that all men are created equal versus
count Dankula who vlogged for the idea that dogs can hate Jews too. If you ask
them nicely enough. Here's the thing. My idealism said, this guy sucks. He said
some stuff that suggested he wasn't just like a really edgy dog trainer, but
like my pragmatism said, like you can't send people to jail for teaching stuff
to dogs. Otherwise they're going to be a few Britain's got talent winners
sitting on death row. Sit, sit, sit on death row. I think we've sadly ended up
with a badly divided political scene where there's so much noise. It's very hard
to penetrate or affect change in like any meaningful way because like we're
arguing over like pointless crap, like Nazi pugs and like people really feel
that division. And my friend Alfie has like a really succinct suggestion. What
we really need is a war. You know, that's not an uncommon argument by the way.
Cause then I think we'd stop kind of essentializing each other with all these
terms and seeing each other in these log lines about I'm a sex positive Jew. I
agree with you. I agree with you for a specific reason. Cause I think our
biggest problem is directionlessness and what the quote unquote greatest
generation had in both the U S and the UK was direction. And the direction was
beat the Nazis. But now that's not even a direction that everybody agrees on, by
the way, cause there are pugs who'd be like, wait a second. There are some good
Nazi pugs on both sides. So like, what is the direction? I have a few
suggestions, but we should probably go with David. Cause he's the one who really
knows what he's talking about. I think we should all be reaching out. I think we
should all be more focused on how do we connect with people because we have this
big problem where the divisions between people who have different ideologies
have grown so large that we all should have a pretty vested interest in trying
to get whatever to come together. We can't. In closing, I'm going to build some
bridges to the right as a gesture of goodwill. I will not force any books of
poetry on you during your morning commutes. In return, send me your Hamilton
tickets. Thank you so much. I'm Alex Edelman. Good night. Alex Edelman's peer
group was written by Alex Edelman with additional material by Ivo Gret. My peer
group was Alfie Brown, Brandon Wardell, Rebecca Nicholson, and David Burstein.
The producer was Sam Michelle and it was a BBC Studios production. And we'll
hear more from Alex and his peer group at the same time next week here on Radio
4, where they'll be discussing modern attitudes to love and relationships. Alex
will be thinking about how he struggles with his emotions sometimes, but it's
the internet responsible. That's next Tuesday at the same time. Today in
Parliament is next, but first, let's look ahead to this weekend. Now on Radio 4
to Westminster, where the illegal migration bill is presented to MPs. Today in
Parliament. Good evening, this is Sean Curran at Westminster, where the Home
Secretary has a new plan to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small boats.
Labour accuses ministers of government by gimmick. Also on the programme, health
chiefs in England say plans to improve cancer care after the pandemic are behind
schedule. We're not going to meet the pre-pandemic target by the end of March,
simply because of those record levels of demand. But we're going to start
tonight with that statement from the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, to mark
the introduction of the illegal migration bill. She said the small boat problem
was part of a global migration crisis and yesterday's laws were not fit for
purpose. So to anyone proposing de facto open borders through unlimited safe and
legal routes as the alternative, let's be honest, there are 100 million people
around the world who could qualify for protection under our current laws. Let's
be clear, they are coming here. She said the small boat crossings would continue
until the world knew that people who came to Britain illegally would be detained
and removed to their own country if it was safe, or to a third country such as
Rwanda. This bill enables detention of illegal arrivals without bail or judicial
review within the first 28 days of detention until they can be removed. It puts
a duty on the Home Secretary to remove illegal entrants and will radically
narrow the number of challenges and appeals that can suspend removal. Only those
under 18, medically unfit to fly or at a real risk of serious and irreversible
harm, an exceedingly high bar in the country we are removing them to, will be
able to delay their removal. Any other claims will be heard remotely after
removal. Suella Braverman said the British people were famously fair and
patient. But their sense of fair play has been tested beyond its limits and
they've seen the country taken for a ride. Their patience has run out. The law-
abiding patriotic majority have said enough is enough. Labour's Shadow Home
Secretary Yvette Cooper said the government had made similar promises before.
She called this announcement Groundhog Day and said earlier legislation hadn't
worked. As part of last year's bill, the Home Office considered 18,000 people as
inadmissible for the asylum system because they had travelled through safe third
countries, but because they had no return agreements in place, just 21 of them
were returned. That is 0.1%. She asked what would be different this time. They
still don't have any return agreements in place. The Home Secretary herself has
admitted Rwanda is failing and even if it gets going it will only take a few
hundred people. So what will happen to the other 99% of people under this bill?
Yvette Cooper said Labour would set up a new cross-border police unit to go
after the criminal gangs. They could be setting out a serious plan today and we
would work with them on it and so would everyone across the country. Instead
it's just more chaos. They say no ifs, no buts, but all of us know they're going
to spend the whole of the next year iffing and butting and looking for someone
else to blame when all goes wrong. Enough is enough. We can't afford any more of
this slogans and not solutions, just government by gimmick, ramping up the
rhetoric on refugees but picking fights simply to have someone else to blame
when things go wrong. This bill isn't a solution. It is a con that risks making
the chaos worse. Britain deserves better than this chaos. Britain is better than
this. Suella Braverman said Labour hadn't even seen the bill but it had already
said it wouldn't support the legislation. After five minutes of hysteria,
histrionics and criticism I'm still not clear. I've just got no idea what
Labour's plan is. The SNP's Stuart Macdonald said his party would oppose the
bill every step of the way. Her bill will not so much as lay a solitary finger
on people smugglers or people traffickers but it will cause serious and
devastating harm for people who have already endured incredible suffering.
Afghans let down by the government's utterly failed relocation schemes will be
locked up and off-shore. People who have fled persecution in Syria, Eritrea or
Iran will remain blocked from the asylum system. And the Green Party's Caroline
Lucas called the plan divisive and shameful. It is positively Orwellian as well
as morally repugnant to seek to ban people from claiming asylum unless they use
safe and legal routes. When those routes barely exist and when they do exist
they don't function. The Conservatives who spoke were more positive. A former
Cabinet Minister Simon Clarke said controlling illegal immigration and tackling
the small boats issue was a top priority for his constituents. He was one of
several Tories who asked about the UK's membership of the European Convention on
Human Rights. We all hope the legislation will succeed but will my right
honourable friend promise that if it is frustrated by the European Convention on
Human Rights that we will commit to leave it because leave it we must if in the
end this legislation is stalled. Mark Francois who chairs the European Research
Group of Eurosceptic Tory Backbenchers said he welcomed the principle of the
bill. The elephant in the room as has already been alluded to is the ECHR.
Unless we can somehow face them down we will remain tied up in legal knots in
our own domestic courts and ultimately in Strasbourg. So can the Home Secretary
assure the House that when we see the bill it will contain specific measures to
do that so that the bill will achieve its purpose? The SNP's Joanna Cherry
suggested that the government knew its plans would run into trouble in the
courts. And then the Tories will fight the next general election on a promise to
take the United Kingdom out of the European Convention on Human Rights. That's
the whole point of this isn't it? The Labour MP Diane Abbott called the Home
Secretary's plans deplorable and unworkable and called on her to reconsider. I
will never vote for legislation that would have led to my parents being detained
and dumped in Rwanda. Suella Braverman said it was wrong and inflammatory to
conflate people who came to the UK legitimately with those who came illegally.
Now the government has overturned a series of changes made by the House of Lords
to its public order bill. The controversial legislation aims to clamp down on
disruptive protests following demonstrations by environmental groups who used
tactics including blocking or gluing themselves to roads. Alysia McCarthy
reports. There were some big rows when peers debated the public order bill and
they backed a series of changes to the legislation. When it came back to the
Commons the government was looking to overturn most of those defeats but
opposition MPs reckoned the Lords changes should stay and were deeply unhappy
about what the bill was trying to do. The British state claimed historically to
be the bastion of our liberty but today it's been proposed it will become an
engine of our suppression. An authoritarian state has been created here and it's
not acceptable. That was Labour MP John Trickett objecting to measures giving
police the power to stop and search people in a certain area even if they
weren't suspected of doing anything wrong. He had support from a Conservative
former cabinet minister David Davis who described the legislation as over heavy-
handed. He credited the government for making some concessions, for instance
giving protections to journalists reporting on protests but he took issue with
the stop and search power. Stop and search is an abuse of our freedoms, full
stop. Being stopped by a policeman required to strip off or empty your pockets
or empty your bags and so on is an abuse which we don't allow in this country.
He argued the power needed to be restricted or removed from the bill. Lib Dem
Wendy Chamberlain used to be a police officer and quoted her party's spokesman
in the Lords, Brian Paddock, a former senior Met police officer. The fact that
you're seven times more likely to be stopped and searched by the police if
you're black than if you're white where the police require reasonable suspicion
and 14 times more likely where the police do not require reasonable suspicion
presents a prima facie case that the police are arguably misusing these powers.
As well as opposing the idea of suspicionless stop and search, Pearse had also
amended the bill to make it an offence to obstruct or harass anyone using or
providing abortion services within specified zones. A Conservative Andrew Lewer
wanted to change that to exclude people silently praying. He said he condemned
harassment against women. But that's a world away from the police being able to
detain people and question them over what they're doing if they're merely
standing there or praying quietly or worse if they are praying silently and be
asked by the police by agents of the state what are you thinking about. The
DUP's Ian Paisley chipped in. The government allows this to continue but they're
going to turn the police into a laughing stock when people mock them and say
what about all the knife crime, what about all the other problems that you have
and you're arresting people for silently praying. A so-called buffer zone was
set up around an abortion clinic in the London constituency of Labour MP Rupa
Huq. She argued there was a time and place for everything including prayer. Does
it have to literally take place outside the gates of the clinic at the moment
these women in their hour of need are seeking their treatment? Is it necessary
to take place at that place at that moment? I would say no it isn't. And SNP MP
Hannah Bardell was even more forthright. Does she share my frustration at the
number of men who have stood up in this chamber and pontificated when they will
never have to make this choice and telling women what they should have to put up
with when they are just seeking health care? She suggested those men should pipe
down and listen to women in the chamber. Winding up the debate the Home Office
Minister Chris Philp said the aim of the bill was to better balance the right to
protest with the right for people to go about their lives without disruption.
The rights of parents to get their children to school, the right of people to
get to hospital for vital treatment, the rights of people to go to work without
having their way impeded. The Minister turned to the controversial provisions on
suspicionless stop and search. He said it could only happen if a senior officer
believed that offences may be committed in a set location and the power would
only last for a day. The SNP spokesman Stuart Macdonald interrupted. That could
lead to hundreds or even thousands of suspicionless searches. That's surely
totally disproportionate. I don't accept that. Where there is a reasonable
suspicion that in the next 24 hours offences may be committed which themselves
may have a profoundly disruptive effect on members of the public it is
reasonable to prevent that. MPs were allowed to vote with their consciences on
the abortion buffer zones and Andrew Lewis' move to exempt silent prayer was
defeated. The government won all the other votes and the bill will now go back
to the House of Lords. Alicia McCarthy. Now MPs have called on the government to
confirm whether or not the UK will be rejoining the science research programme
run by the European Union. The UK had to withdraw from Horizon after Brexit.
Labour's shadow business minister, Chion Mawra, said it left the UK's brightest
and best scientists having to choose. Between the funding they desperately need
and the country they love. British research, British business is feeling the
chilling impact of not being part of the world's greatest scientific
collaboration. Ministers have said the European Union wasn't prepared to discuss
Horizon because of the row over post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern
Ireland. Now that a new system has been negotiated, the Windsor Framework, the
EU has said it's prepared to talk about Horizon. Michelle Donnellan, the
Secretary of State for Science, Innovation and Technology, told MPs that the
government's position hadn't changed. For the last two years we have tried to
associate. It was in that original deal and we welcome the comments that have
come from the EU. Of course terms would have to be favourable for the UK. We've
lost two years and we'd have to ensure that there's value for money for the
taxpayer. She made those comments as she made a statement about the plans
announced a few days ago to make the UK a science superpower by 2030. You're
listening to Today in Parliament with me, Sean Curran. Still to come, drawing
the line on who should be allowed into the classroom. This week we've had drag
queens in school. There's no way I'd want my son or daughter in front of a drag
queen. I'm sorry, I just wouldn't. But first, NHS England has admitted it is set
to miss a key cancer target laid out in the Covid recovery plan. MPs were told
that a spike in demand meant it could take another year to cut the backlog of
people waiting more than two months for diagnosis and treatment. David Cornock
reports. Before the pandemic, 14,000 people were waiting more than 62 days from
referral by AGP to either start cancer treatment or be tested and receive the
all-clear. The numbers soared as Covid took hold and NHS England set a target to
reduce the backlog to pre-pandemic levels by the end of this month. Dame Callie
Palmer, the National Cancer Director, had mixed news for MPs. We've made very
significant progress. So the backlog was at an all-time high of around 34,000
last summer. Last week it was 23,500. So we've dropped by around 10,000 but
there's still further to go. And she explained why. The reason that we're at 23
and not exactly at pre-pandemic levels is that we've seen record levels of
urgent cancer referrals since March 21. An urgent referral is when a GP arranges
for hospital tests to establish whether a patient has cancer. Callie Palmer
explained what that meant. We're not going to meet the pre-pandemic target by
the end of March simply because of those record levels of demand. Steve Brine,
the Conservative Chair of the Health and Social Care Committee, agreed it was
good news that more people were going to see their GP. I want any message from
this committee to go out this morning that we don't want people to come forward
and present with suspected cancers and I know that would be your your message.
But I mean, dare I ask then, given that some understanding towards why we're not
back at pre-pandemic levels, if we're in March 23 now, when will we be? We're
discussing currently with the Secretary of State the target for March 24. But
she set a different target for at least three quarters of patients to either
receive a cancer diagnosis or have it ruled out within 28 days had been agreed.
It's just under 71% at the moment. We are confident with all the measures we're
putting in place that we will meet that. We hope to do it much earlier than
March 24 but that's the backstop and that's really important for survival. Steve
Brine offered his own analysis of the changing targets. For people listening in
the sector, March 23 has become March 24. I mean, that's how, if I was a
newspaper headline writer, that's how I'd put it. A point he put to Professor
Peter Johnson, NHS England's National Clinical Director. I don't think anybody
is comfortable with the fact that we have a large number of people who are
waiting too long to get their diagnosis and start their treatment. What we need
to do is contend with, as Kelly says, a very large number of referrals, between
200 and 250,000 people every month are referred for investigation of possible
cancer, of whom only about 6% happily will have cancer. Labour's Rachel Maskell
asked about the impact of the delays. But for people waiting, and clearly not
all of those people will have a diagnosis, but for those waiting, clearly this
impacts on their outcomes and at the pace we're moving forward, we could be
talking about 10 years before we actually reach those targets. So I want to know
what are the limiting factors of moving ahead even faster. Kelly Palmer told her
the increase in people coming through had seen for the first time an improvement
in early diagnosis rates. The total volume in the 62-day pathway and the backlog
are both down, so they're both going in the right direction. But of course it is
hugely anxious for people who are waiting, and they're waiting longer than I
would wish them to. She said the NHS was also focusing on three cancers that
made up two-thirds of the backlog, skin, bowel and prostate. A Conservative,
Lucy Allen, was concerned about differences in survival rates. Outcomes for
people in more deprived areas, survival rates are much lower. I wonder if you
could please explain why that is and what you're doing to tackle that. Kelly
Palmer said level of social deprivation was the biggest determinant of your
cancer outcome. Talking to colleagues in Kent and Medway, some people just say
I've had my innings, I'm not coming forward doc, I'm fine, I'm 60. We need to
get past that, we can do so much for people. So there's a cultural issue,
there's a fear issue, so we've tried the fear campaign, and then there's a
practical issue about getting access to services and making sure we eradicate
variation in people's ability to access fast diagnosis and then precision
treatments. Asked about the impact of strikes in the NHS on waiting times, she
said during the initial industrial action there'd been exemptions for
chemotherapy and the most urgent cancer surgery. I am concerned about the junior
doctors' industrial action and think that will create even further impact for
patients. Sometimes it's quite hard to reschedule cancer care because it's
multiple teams. And she hoped the disputes would be resolved as quickly as
possible. David Cornock. Well, later in the day, the Health Secretary Stephen
Barclay was questioned about NHS strikes in England. The Royal College of
Nursing paused strike action in order to start talks on pay with ministers and
NHS bosses. Labour's shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, accused the health
secretary of causing problems for NHS patients. When nurses and paramedics voted
to take strike action, the Secretary of State refused to negotiate and said the
pay review body's decision was final. Now he's U-turned, but not before 144,000
operations and appointments were cancelled through his incompetence. Will the
Secretary of State now apologise to patients for this avoidable disruption?
Steve Barclay said Wes Streeting had left out a key piece of information. At
that time, the demand from the trade unions was for a 19% consolidated pay rise,
which is very different to the basis on which talks have been entered. But the
point is, we are in discussion with trade union colleagues. We have a shared
purpose to address the very real challenges that we recognise that the NHS
workforce has faced, particularly in the context of the pandemic, and a shared
desire between the trade unions and the government to focus on patients and
ensuring we get the right care in support of patients. Junior doctors are
planning to strike over pay next week, following unsuccessful talks with the
health secretary last week. Wes Streeting said Steve Barclay hadn't been in a
position to negotiate. Despite a 98% vote in favour of strikes, the Secretary of
State was sent to meet junior doctors without a mandate from the Prime Minister
to negotiate. What is the point of this health secretary if he's in office but
not in charge? The health secretary said he'd come to the Commons following a
meeting with the NHS Staff Council, which he suggested showed that Labour MPs
were preparing their questions before getting up to speed on the current
situation. Now, the proposed move by the senior civil servant Sue Gray to the
Labour Leader's Office provoked a flood of criticism from Tory MPs yesterday.
Today, peers gave their verdict, with some arguing that career moves of this
sort are to be expected. Others called it unprecedented. Here's Mandy Baker. The
rights and wrongs of Sue Gray's proposed move from top flight civil servant to
Sir Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff were picked over by MPs for more than an hour.
Peers got 10 minutes. There were no surprises in the response from the two front
benches. For Labour, Lady Smith. My Lords, we've heard a lot of nonsense on this
over the last few days, haven't we? She was appalled that Sue Gray's impeccable
credentials had been impugned. The Minister, Lady Neville-Rolfe, begged to
differ. It was unique and I would say unprecedented for a serving permanent
secretary to resign to seek to take up a very senior position, Chief of Staff,
working for the leader of the opposition. The Lords is home to quite a few
former top mandarins. One is the crossbench or independent peer Lord Butler, who
served three prime ministers from two parties. He took issue with Lady Neville-
Rolfe. The noble lady of the Minister sometimes refers to the fact that one time
she used to work for me when she was a professional civil servant in the Cabinet
Office. Would she agree with me that the appointment of Sue Gray to give
professional assistance to the opposition in preparing for the possibility of
government throws no more doubt on the impartiality of the civil service than
the noble lady's very welcome presence on the Conservative front bench? I don't
like to comment on individual cases but... She said there was a gap of 18 years
between her time at the civil service and her ministerial job. The independent
peer Lord Macpherson served three chancellors of different political colours.
People did tend to move around, he suggested. Take for example his friend Lord
Sassoon. Who was a very successful Director General at the Treasury, moved to be
Gordon Brown's Ambassador to the City and then resigned and turned up the next
day as advisor to George Osborne. He said the issue in the Sue Gray case was
whether the rules were being obeyed. So long as Ms Gray follows the
recommendations, which I would assume would be somewhere between three and six
months for an adequate cooling off period, surely she is pursuing the right and
honourable cause. A Liberal Democrat Lord Wallace reckoned Sue Gray's move was a
good thing. I would have thought we were all interested in ensuring that if
there is a change of government to next election it is competently prepared and
served and that after the relative chaos we've had in the last five years of too
many ministers moving too quickly and some members of the government deeply
suspicious of the civil service all the way through, one ought to welcome this
achievement. Labour's Lady Armstrong served in Tony Blair's government. She
worked with Sue Gray. She knew a lot about our government but that did not stop
her acting impartially when the election brought in a different government. But
that observation didn't stop a Conservative Lord Greenhalgh being outraged. He
suggested that the civil service was the finest in the world until last
Thursday. What we had last Thursday was a second permanent secretary at the
heart of government, at the heart of policy, at the heart of this government
advising government officials, advising government officials turn over and take
a political post without any break. Lady Neville-Rolf said she agreed that Sue
Gray's proposed move was completely without precedent. Mandy Baker, the
Children's Commissioner for England, says she's seriously worried about the
level of persistent absence in schools. Persistent absence is when a child
misses 10% of their time in school. Dame Rachel de Souza told MPs on the
Education Committee she had new data. 818,000 children of the 1.6 million
persistently absent children were not absent due to illness. I think that's very
serious. Alice Wilcox from the Centre for Social Justice said the number of
secondary school children who were severely absent, that's missing 50% of their
time in school, had increased to 70,000. She'd done a breakdown of the figures.
One in 10 of the children who were severely absent in autumn 2020 had a mental
health condition that was diagnosed. You're also more likely to be severely
absent if you're eligible for free school meals or if you're in receipt of SEND
support or have an EHCP. SEND is special educational needs, an EHCP is an
education health and care plan legally setting out the support that children
need. So what worked to get children into school? Dame Rachel de Souza reckoned
there were three lessons to be learned from best practice. One is using all the
systems absolutely consistently. Number two, making school a great place to go
so that children actually want to go there. And number three, the relationship
with parents, so using their attendance offices to get out and talk to parents
and children, find out what it is that the barrier is and then doing whatever it
takes to get children into school. A Conservative, Nick Fletcher, asked about
the number of children being taken out of school on religious grounds,
especially given the content of some lessons. Some of what's been taught to our
children at the moment I wouldn't be happy with as a parent and I'm just
wondering what your thoughts are and what the statistics are on parents'
children pulling the children out of school. I mean this week we've had drag
queens in school, there's no way I'd want my son or daughter in front of a drag
queen, I'm sorry, I just wouldn't, especially at the age that they are. So are
you going to see more of that if we carry on down this line and have you got any
statistics for that at the moment? Rachel D'Souza said she didn't have those
figures but she added that she was hoping for good guidance from the Department
for Education around some of the issues which she said were currently causing
concern. And that brings us to our closing headline. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, set out how the government planned to stop small boats crossing the
Channel. She said under new laws people who arrived in small boats would be
detained and deported. The Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the
Conservative government had broken the asylum system. I'm Sean Curran. The
Studio Manager was Neva Masirian. The Editor was Christina Cooper. And that was
Today in Parliament.