TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock. Time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello
there. Home secretaries can do what home secretaries do. A court finds and can
thus legally take Shamima Begum's citizenship away. We'll assess what kind of
security risk Begum represents while her lawyers haven't given up. In terms of
the legal fight, that's nowhere near over. I think what this judgement calls out
for is courage and some leadership from the Home Secretary to look at this case
afresh. Now I'm hoping you can hear some waves there because I'm standing on the
beach at the Lincolnshire resort town of Skegness. PM is coming from there
today. We've been looking at the effect on tourism of hotels being used to
accommodate asylum seekers and plans nearby to build a causeway to Norfolk. So
you've got this large area of about 780 square kilometres of water. If you want
to drive round it, it's about two and a half hours. Otherwise, in a few years'
time, you'll be able to go straight across here in about 20 minutes. Also today,
we'll have the latest on strikes and... The best gig in presenting the hosts for
Eurovision have been announced. We'll speak to Ulrika Johnson, who had the job
last time it was in the UK. We'll start with the BBC News read today by Charles
Carroll. Here's our Home and Legal correspondent Dominic Cacciani. The
Commission said those powers were squarely aimed at protecting the public and
Parliament hadn't told Ministers to first consider whether someone was a
trafficking victim. The panel's admission that it struggled to resolve these
complex legal questions means that Ms Begum's lawyers are already planning to
challenge the ruling. Another strike has been announced by members of the Unison
Union in England. They'll stage a 24-hour walkout on the 8th of March in their
dispute about pay. The announcement came as the Health Secretary, Steve Barkley,
met leaders from the Royal College of Nursing. The RCN has agreed to suspend
strikes planned for next week while the talks take place. But Andy Prendergast
from the GMB Union, which represents many other NHS staff, has accused the
Government of trying to do a tawdry backroom deal. The RCN have been brought to
the table after refusing to have derogations for the next dispute. Now, as a
union who have been trying to strike responsibly by providing emergency care, it
seems completely bizarre that the Government's reward for those who aren't
entering into those discussions is preferential treatment and talks. Unions have
warned that there could be a disastrous consequence after the Chinese owners of
British Steel confirmed plans to close the coking ovens at their Scunthorpe
site. The move will mean the loss of up to 260 jobs. Bosses said they were
forced to take the decision by unprecedented increases in running costs. Tesco
and Aldi have become the latest big retailers to introduce limits on how much
fruit and veg customers can buy. Asda and Morrisons had already put restrictions
in place as extreme weather in Spain and North Africa affects harvests of
popular items such as tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. Jed Futter is from the
consultancy firm The Retail Mind. The suppliers and the producers over there,
they've been choosing who they can supply to. And what they've been working with
is where they can get the prices that they need. Because when you have a smaller
crop, prices then become more expensive. And then you will be supplying to those
customers who are prepared to pay those prices. Lancashire's Police and Crime
Commissioner has asked the College of Policing to carry out a full independent
review of the handling of the Nicola Bulley case. The force took more than three
weeks to find the body of the missing mother of two and was criticised for
releasing personal details about her. Andrew Snowden said there were questions
which rightly needed answers. And road safety groups have said they're concerned
after a software problem disabled accident detection and signage systems on many
smart motorways in England this morning. National Highways has apologised for
the problem. Here's our business reporter, Ben King. For two hours during the
morning rush, the systems which automatically detect stopped vehicles weren't
working in the north and west of England. Overhead signs which display a red X
to close blocked lanes also stopped working. The M6, M5 and M1 north of
Northampton were among the roads affected. There have been no reports of
injuries, but it's the latest in a series of technology failures on the
controversial smart motorway network where traffic runs on the hard shoulder.
The AA says those failures have put lives at risk. And that was Ben King
reporting. Thank you, Charles. Now, it's hard to imagine a more nuanced legal
judgment than the one that came from the Special Immigration Appeals Commission
today on Shamima Beghan. She lost her case. The Home Secretary had the right to
take away her British citizenship, but the judges didn't say he was right to do
so. Reasonable people with knowledge of all the relevant evidence will differ,
the lead judge, Justice Jay, said. Many would say there are shades of grey, he
wrote. Well, Danny Shaw is a crime justice and policing commentator. He used to
be the Home Affairs correspondent for the BBC and can help us understand the
finding. And Danny, maybe you can talk us through it. I've called it very
nuanced because it really is about the rights of the Home Secretary, not the
rights and the wrongs of the case. Yes, that's right, Evan. I mean, this goes
back to the February 2019 decision by Sajid Javid, who was then Home Secretary,
to deprive Shamima Beghan of her UK citizenship for the public good. And it's
clear from the judgment that the three judges at the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission really had really struggled, I think, with this ruling. They said it
was a case of great concern and difficulty with finely balanced judgments. And
in one paragraph near the beginning of the judgment, they said whatever the
extent of her ideological commitment before she left in February 2015, Shamima
Beghan could not have had any inkling of how much personal suffering she was
destined to endure. She was immediately sort of married off to a fighter for the
Islamic State group, had three children who all died. So you can get a sense
here perhaps of how the difficult emotions of the case rubbed up against the
sort of legal complexities of it. In terms of what they had to decide, the
commission had sort of nine grounds advanced by Shamima Beghan's lawyers that
the decision to deprive her of citizenship was disproportionate, irrational,
predetermined, procedurally unfair. It rendered her in effect stateless. But the
key question boiled down to this, whether Shamima Beghan had been trafficked and
what role that may have played in Saadet Javi's decision and whether that
rendered the decision unlawful or not. The judges said that the arguments
advanced on behalf of her were powerful and the counter arguments for those
representing the Home Secretary were somewhat dismissive on that point of
trafficking. And they concluded there is a credible suspicion that Shamima
Beghan was recruited, transferred and then harbored for the purpose of sexual
exploitation. They went on to say that it was a matter of basic common sense,
that radicalization must have happened as well. And it was also arguable that
the state failed in its duty to protect her from and prevent her from traveling.
Because they let her go. Yeah, this is the key point. But that didn't
necessarily mean that the that the Home Secretary's decision was unlawful. They
said the judges it wasn't mandatory for Saadet Javi to review her case through
the lens of trafficking. And the commission was not able to conclude that his
judgment that the risk to national security outweighed her personal interests,
the personal interests of Shamima Beghan was wrong. In other words, he was
reasonable to make. It was reasonable for him to make the decision that he did.
Danny, you've explained that incredibly well. Thanks so much for that. Danny
Shaw there. Well, of course, there's been reaction to the judgment. Speaking
after it, one of Miss Beghan's lawyers, Daniel Furner, called on Home Secretary
Sue Eller Braverman to review the case. In terms of the legal fight, that's
that's nowhere near over. We're not going to go into details about exactly what
that means at this stage. I think what what else this judgment calls out for,
though, is some courage and some leadership from the Home Secretary to look at
this case afresh in light of the clear and compelling factual findings that this
court has made. Well, on The World at One, Jonathan Hall, Casey, who's the
independent reviewer on terrorism legislation. Well, he told Sarah that he was
starting to wonder if the UK should continue to be at odds with other countries
on this issue of repatriation. The government's policy has always been and here
it's becoming slightly different from the rest of Western countries, from
Australia, from France and Germany, certainly from America. The position was we
only repatriate unaccompanied minors and orphans and we leave women there. So
there were two women, British citizens, and they were told, you simply can't
come back because we don't want you back. And I do wonder whatever happens in
this litigation now, you know, bringing it forward to 2023 when the camps are
just beginning to be emptied out of Europeans, whether the UK is prepared to be
a sort of an outlier on that. Well, is it more sensible in terms of security for
Shamima Begum to stay in Syria where she can perhaps influence discourse, act as
a core celeb? Or would it be more sensible security wise to bring her back and
try her here in the normal way? Dal Babu, his former chief superintendent in the
Metropolitan Police, worked with Shamima Begum's family following her
disappearance. And Dal, give us the security assessment of what you would advise
a Home Secretary just in terms of safety of the nation, so to speak. Well, Evan,
I think what's very, very clear, what seems to have trumped the entire decision
is national security. So even though the judgment talks about evidence of
trafficking, and I think we've seen that from the BBC documentary, that there
was an agent from Canada involved in trafficking these young, these 15 year
olds, these children. The decision essentially was about national security and
the Home Secretary's decision was allowed. And I think the difficulty we now
have is what do we do about individuals? Because these who have gone to ISIS,
groomed, radicalized naively, they will continue to be a potential threat. So do
you leave them there in Syria with all the insecurity that you have there, where
we pay people to look after them, individuals who may or may not want to accept
bribes, people to leave that enclosement? Or do we bring them back, take our
responsibility and introduce control orders and mitigate any security concerns
that we have? And if necessary, charge individuals. Well, you've laid out the
two options. If we look at both of those, let's suppose we brought Shamima back,
what would happen to her here? We could charge her with what? What would happen?
Well, I mean, I'm not aware of what the security information is, but if there is
security information, they could consider charging. Remember, she was a child
when she went out there and she was subjected to sexual abuse when she ended up
marrying a man in his 20s, she was 15, within weeks of arriving there. There is
suggestions that there is security information which indicates that she's
committed offenses. Then there's the possibility of looking at prosecution. But
the difficulty with that is that the government and security services would have
to disclose information and they may be reluctant to do that. There's the
potential to have control orders where you look at mitigation. So there's a
whole range of controls that can be put in place on an individual. These are
time limited. So that's a possibility. So there are things that can mitigate
that. You could ask her if she would like, as a condition of being allowed back,
to subject herself to some intrusion into her private life so that she could be
checked. I mean, she might say that's a price worth paying to come back. That's
something that's done. Yeah, I think that's all. That's very, very doable. And I
think the other element to bear in mind is that there are other individuals who
haven't been in the glare of publicity, who have come back and have had controls
put on them. And it's all under the radar. We don't know who they are. We don't
know exactly what happened when they came back. But nevertheless, individuals
have come back. Right. Dal, let's go down the other route. If she stays there,
where will Shamima Begum be in 10 years time? Well, Evan, it's eight years since
she left. So we're already talking almost a decade since she left the country.
She is potentially going to be there for some time if the camps and the
political will remains in Syria itself. But it's a very, very fragile country in
terms of its democracy and its economic settings. So you could potentially have
a situation where people leave the camps. You know, those camps are, as Daniel
says, they're emptying at the moment. So we need to be careful that we don't end
up being the outlier in amongst European countries and have a Guantanamo type
situation where it's only British individuals that are there. The other aspect
to all of this is ultimately we've talked about the legal aspect, the political
aspect. But ultimately, you need to have the practical elements and people need
consular support to come out of Syria. And the government's made it quite clear
that they're not prepared to provide any consular support. So the odds are
stacked against her. In one sentence, your opinion is we should bring her back.
And you would say do that even on security grounds, if that's your main concern,
because there's enough you can do here to keep an eye that it's worth it. Yeah,
I mean, we have to set an example as a country. We take responsibility for our
people and other countries are doing that. And we seem to be an outlier who are
not prepared to do that. So these people can potentially become more dangerous
where they are without any controls. Dal Babu, thank you so much for talking to
us on PM. Time now is 16 minutes past five. Let's get some some other headlines
from Charles. President Biden has been meeting the leaders of countries along
NATO's East European border to discuss supplying more aid to Kiev. Israeli
troops have killed at least 10 Palestinians during a raid in the occupied West
Bank. And American scientists say that the first data from the James Webb Space
Telescope has revealed six massive galaxies, possibly as old as our own, which
could shed new light on the dawn of the universe. Thank you, Charles. Now,
Strikes latest, Zoe Conway, our employment correspondent, joins us. Zoe, let's
start where we finished as we spoke yesterday, which is with education, because
the NEU, the National Education Union, is prepared to recommend a pause to
strikes next week. What is happening? Well, what's happening is that the
government have said, please call off your strike and come in and talk to us and
negotiate. And the education union has said, we'd love to call off our strike,
but we need to know what it is you're offering. There needs to be, even at
surely at the very least in private, a strong signal that there's more money on
the table. What are they being offered at the moment? They're being offered a 5%
rise for this year, which they say isn't good enough. They want more money for
this year. And that's always been a red line for them in talks. And they
discovered yesterday that the government has put in a submission to the pay
review body. That's the body that the government says is independent, that
recommends what should happen to public sector pay. That their submission to the
pay review body, the government submission, suggested that what was affordable
within school budgets was a 3% rise for most teachers. Now, of course, that
always begs the question, well, could the budget get bigger to pay a rise? But
the point is that whatever signal it is that they need, it hasn't been sent out
yet. And if they don't get it by Saturday when they meet the NEC, then the
strikes, the union NEC, then the strikes will go ahead next week. Strikes. OK,
that's education. Back to health and we know the Royal College of Nursing, the
RCN, has been meeting with government today about the situation in England.
Intriguingly, Unison has announced an escalation in strike action. There's
something going on here, isn't there? I mean, the unions, not all singing from
the same hymn sheet at the moment. That's correct. We've known for some time now
that Unison would make this announcement. We knew that they were going to call
out more of their members. Is it a coincidence they've chosen to announce this
today on the day that they've been excluded from talks? Well, I think I should
leave Unison to answer that question. But clearly, there is a lot of ill will, a
lot of bad feeling doing the rounds amongst health unions at the moment who have
been excluded from these talks with the health secretary. He's only speaking to
the Royal College of Nursing. We don't know what's going on in those talks at
the moment. But there is certainly a lot of upset from the other unions. And
this Unison strike we're talking about on the 8th of March, nine out of 10
ambulance trusts in England walking out. There are Unison members at Great
Ormond Street, for example, who have not walked out before. They're going to be
joining the action on that day. So it is an escalation. Now, could the other
unions be invited in by the health secretary? I think it's difficult to believe
that they're not going to get called in soon. And the reason why I say that is
because we had the health minister, Maria Caulfield, saying to the BBC this
morning that she doesn't think or she thinks it's difficult for nurses to be
treated as a special case, i.e. separated off from the rest of the health
workforce. And the other reason why I say that is because the head of NHS
providers, Julian Hartley, he also made it clear this morning on the Today
programme that he thinks that he wants to see a resolution for the whole
workforce. They work together. They're a team. So I think we can expect the
other unions to be called in soon. How soon is soon? I don't know. But I
wouldn't be surprised if an invitation isn't extended to the others. All right,
Zoe. Thanks for that update. Zoe Conway there. Now, it's 20, just after 20 past
five and PM is coming from the seaside resort of Skegness today in Lincolnshire.
About a 20 minute drive from here is Friskney, which I visited this morning,
surrounded by farmland down to the coast. As you get to the sea's edge or near
it, you are just north of the Wash. The Wash, the big water indent between
Norfolk to the south and east and Lincolnshire to the north and west. Now, I
went there this morning to meet James Sutcliffe. He is a man with an ambition.
His goal is to build a causeway across the Wash. It's a big idea. Why would we
do that? Well, he took me to that spot to tell me all about it. James, you
brought me to this very strange place. It's an old bombing range. We know that
from the sign there, Waincliffe Bombing Range. That is the Wash over there. Yes.
So you've got this large area of about 780 square kilometres of water, which
separates us from Norfolk. If you want to drive around it, it's about two and a
half hours on a very congested A17, which is not particularly enjoyable.
Otherwise, in a few years time, you'll be able to go straight across here in
about 20 minutes. This is your dream, your vision. So what is it? It's a massive
causeway linking Lincolnshire and Norfolk. Sort of, yes. It's actually going to
be a sand bund with a road on top. And it's a container terminal as well? Yes.
The size of Felixstowe, for example. Offshore. So that's basically where the
Wash is now, where the sea is. It's further out than that because we want to be
in the deep water. We want to have 25 metres of depth for the big ships coming
in. So we'll get the biggest container ships in the world coming in here, the
sort of thing you saw stuck in the Suez. And this is like an infomercial, isn't
it? Because you're going to tell me it's not just a road. It's not just a
container terminal. You also get... You get a lot of renewable energy. From the
tide. Huge amount of renewable energy from the tides coming and going through
the structure twice a day. Totally predictable. Doesn't matter rain or shine,
unlike wind and solar, it will produce huge amounts of power. And on top of
that, and this actually might be the clincher, is flood protection for a large
amount of the flatlands inside it. That's right. Yes, yes. I mean, the Wash area
is surrounded by bunds and sea defences up to about four and a half, five metres
in some places. With climate change and global warming and all the rest of it,
the sea level is going up by 33 centimetres anyway in the next 15, 20 years. In
addition to the fact that storms have become more fierce and overtop all the
existing defences. I should say we're actually standing on those dams really,
aren't we? This is the British version of what the Dutch have done everywhere.
Exactly. This raised bank. They've done it slightly more successfully than we
have. And it would cost a fortune, of course, to upgrade all these sea defences
all the way around and plug all the rivers all the way around as well to stop
the sea coming in. Talking of costing a fortune, Centreport, your scheme, I
mean, what are you working on? We're working on around about 2.5 billion for
this project. Container tunnel we know is 400 million, with all the equipment
and all the systems and everything else in place to operate. Yeah, we think
about 2.5 billion. Is it going to happen? Yes, it is definitely going to happen.
It's got to happen because without it, Evan, I mean, we will see the sea coming
in all the way up to Cambridge. You know, you'll have the wading birds on the
beach nearer Cambridge than it is today. Now, just listen to the birds. Listen.
Are they going to mind, incidentally? No, they're going to have a nice big
structure to sit on. You've got the birds covered, you think? I think so, yes,
because otherwise all their bird wading areas, this lot, will be underwater in
30 years' time. You know, they'll have to move further inland. There's this
sense right at the moment, perhaps more than it has been for a while, that it's
very difficult to get things done in this country. I mean, Liz Truss called it
the anti-growth coalition. Is it difficult to get things done here? Because
you're obviously a very positive thinking person about these things. Well, I've
done it before, that's why. I bought Boston Docks and I took over PD ports at
Middlesbrough and turned that around, built Poland's first deep-sea container
terminal back in 2007. I've already spent three years on this project, so I've
talked to people at Crown Estates for the seabed approvals. We've talked to all
landowners around here, all the farmers and interested parties, transport
companies and so on and so forth. And everybody's really up for it. Generally
speaking, we feel that there's a positive feeling about this whole thing. James
Sutcliffe there, giving us the virtues of his Centreport project and hoping that
work will start on that in just a few years. I hadn't actually realised until I
came to Skegness today that, in fact, it wasn't always situated in Skegness. It
was actually further round, but Natural Sea Defences, which protected it, left
it to the sea, in fact, and it was rebuilt. Now, it is 26 minutes past five. If
you've ever wanted to be a bell ringer, now could be the perfect time, because
there are concerns that some church towers will be silent over the weekend of
the King's coronation, simply because of a shortage of bell ringers. Now,
current estimates are there are about 30,000 to 40,000 ringers across the UK,
but you apparently need more for that coronation day. Joan Black has been to
Ipswich to meet a team of campanologists preparing to ring for the King. 18
countries are about to compete for the grand prix of the Eurovision Song Contest
for 1977. Just over two weeks to go until the coronation, there is a shortage of
bell ringers who will ring for the King. Is Michael Burke there? Do you know
what? I think there were two tapes playing simultaneously there. I'm sitting in
Skegness. I had no idea what was going on, but it turns out that even in the
control room in London, they don't know what's going on. We are going to be
talking about Eurovision later in the programme, and I think you might have just
heard a little bit of the queue into the Eurovision item disturbing our bell
ringers. I'm hoping now, though, Michael Burke is in the studio in London and
can tell us a little bit about the moral maze this evening. Michael, help us out
here. Yes, well, we've all got two ears. It's not a problem. Yeah, Lord Elgin
lost his marbles in the end, or at least was forced to sell them for less than
half what it had cost him to remove them from the Parthenon and died in
impoverished exile. Now, we may lose them too as part of a complicated deal for
the British Museum to return them on a kind of permanent loan to the Greeks.
Justice, writing and historic wrong, where would you stop? Wider question. What
about reparations paying off those whose ancestors were enslaved in the days of
empire, a moral imperative long overdue or an ethical nonsense, not to mention
practical minefield? Paying for the past. The moral maze after the news at eight
tonight. Thank you very much, Michael. I think we've managed to filter out the
Eurovision tape and we can go back to Joe Black, who has been to Ipswich to meet
a team of campanologists preparing to ring for the king. The unmistakable sound
of church bells has been part of the soundscape across towns and cities for
centuries. They help us celebrate, commemorate and are a weekly call to worship.
And pull through and stretch and you'll be there almost on the balance. And
again, this time. Now, with just over 10 weeks to go until the coronation, there
is a shortage of bell ringers who will ring for the king. And so the race is on
to find and train people up. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
Pull now. Brilliant. Meet Lawrence's in Ipswich, a deconsecrated church, which
is now a community hub with a bustling cafe. We find Amanda Richmond from the
Association of Ringing Teachers. She's busy putting new recruits through their
paces. We want to make sure that there are ringers for every church so that we
can all ring out for ring for the king, for the coronation. But some of our
beginners here today learn because of the Queen's Jubilee and they wanted to be
able to ring for that. And then a lot of them rang when the queen died. So we've
had this constant teaching of beginners right the way through since that
original push. We're told the bells here are the oldest entire ring of five
bells in the country, dating back to the 1400s. Lots of spacing because the
bells are slow turning. And the weekly ringing session held here on a Wednesday
lunchtime is today doubling up as a training exercise for some who have come to
answer this particular coronation call. Do you feel like you're working hard? I
do. Yeah. OK, so try and use a little less effort. The team here vary in age,
beliefs, backgrounds and experience. 61 year old grandfather, Yarnis, is a Soka
Buddhist and used to bell ring in the early 90s. Now, after a 30 year absence,
he's back in a ringing chamber. I saw some advert about them needing more bell
ringers to ensure that all the churches were ringing for the king's coronation.
And because he's such a great environmentalist and I'm an environmentalist too,
I thought I'd come back and ring for the coronation. I was surprised. I thought
I'd have to start right from the very beginning again. But the basic control of
the bell, very basic control of the bell was a bit like riding a bike. But I'm
still very much focusing on just trying to fully control that bell. Another day,
another church and another practice session. As the day starts to fade over St
Clement's, the group is back on the ropes again. Very heavy bell compared to the
other one. Sorry. Try not to look up. Fiona, an occupational therapist, is 55
and even though she's new to this hobby, her late grandfather was an established
bell ringer for many years. I think my grandfather would be extremely proud and
to be ringing for the coronation, he would be dead chuffed. At the moment, I'm
excited about it. I can't imagine that I'm going to be quite ready, but I think
I will. I hope I will. But yeah, it will be, you know, it's a once in a lifetime
opportunity, isn't it really? We've just got to get that bell a fraction high.
Go on, you can do it. Freya, an A-level student, is just 17 and has only been
ringing since November. It will be really amazing, enjoyable, something to
remember. I'd encourage younger people to really get involved with it because it
is really enjoyable and you make lots of friends very quickly. But with a
shortage of ringers and teachers, is bell ringing seen, perhaps unfairly, as a
bit old fashioned? An idea Amanda Richmond rejects quite firmly. It's absolutely
super cool and no one would ever believe that it wasn't. There is still enough
time to learn before Coronation Day. Everybody clap for Freya, please. And these
new members know they will be part of something historic and they hope to keep
on ringing for many more years to come. Joe Black reporting there. I did try it
once. It's difficult. And in fact, it looks quite dangerous, but plenty of time,
plenty of time to learn. Now, it's 27 minutes to six. You're listening to PM.
We'll have a summary of the news now from Charles Carroll. Jemima Begum's
lawyers have said that she will continue her legal battle after a judge
dismissed the latest attempt to regain her British citizenship. Ms Begum, who
travelled to Syria to join the Islamic State movement when she was 15, insists
she was a victim of trafficking. The judge said that she had a credible case,
but found the government's decision to strip the now 23-year-old of her
citizenship was lawful. The Home Secretary welcomed the court's ruling. Members
of the Unison Union have announced a fresh set of strikes across nine of
England's ten ambulance services on 8th March. A smaller number of other
services, including hospitals and blood collection, will also be involved. The
union has criticised the government's decision to hold pay talks with only the
Royal College of Nursing today. The Unite union has threatened strike action
after British Steel confirmed plans to close the coking ovens at its Scunthorpe
site, putting up to 260 jobs at risk. Unions say the move will have disastrous
consequences. The company's Chinese bosses say they were forced to take the
decision because of high running costs. Tesco and Aldi have become the latest
big supermarkets to introduce limits on the amount of certain fruit and
vegetables customers can buy. Tesco says tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers will be
limited to three of each per person. Asda and Morrisons have already put
restrictions in place as extreme weather has affected harvests in Spain and
North Africa. Lancashire's Police and Crime Commissioner has ordered an
independent review into the handling of the disappearance of Nicola Bulli.
Andrew Snowden said the public deserved answers, including why the force
released personal details about the mother of two. Lancashire Police said they
welcomed the review. And road safety groups have said they're concerned after a
software problem caused some signs to fail on the Smart Motorway network in
England. Automatic accident detection systems were disabled on a number of roads
for two hours this morning. The AA said the failure left drivers at what it
called sitting ducks. National Highways has apologised for the incident. Thank
you Charles. Now I'm broadcasting from the Embassy Theatre in Skegness this
evening. Skegness, a traditional seaside town with amusement arcades, a
fairground, fish and chip shops on every corner of the seafront. Not to mention
the Natureland Seal Sanctuary. Tourism is an important business here. But
because it has quite a few hotels, Skegness has now found itself on the front
line of an increasingly difficult national argument about the use of such
accommodation by the Home Office as places to house asylum seekers. With tens of
thousands of people applying for asylum, many arriving in small boats, and with
the Home Office taking a year or more to process applications, there are now
150,000 people in the UK waiting to be given an answer. It's a huge number, and
in the meantime, most of that 150,000 can't work and have to be given lodging by
the authorities. The issue was raised at Prime Minister's Questions today by the
Conservative MP Andrew Salu. Does the Prime Minister understand though how upset
my constituents are to have bookings for weddings and other special family
events cancelled when the Home Office took over a much-loved hotel, and will he
redouble his efforts to put an end to this practice? MP from Bedfordshire,
Andrew Salu, well the Prime Minister responded saying the Government is
committed to reducing the number of asylum seekers living in hotels. Well here
in Skegness, several hundred asylum seekers fill a number of hotels that have
been rented out for the purpose. It has been the cause of arguments. The local
MP here says the far right from outside the town have tried to exploit the
issue. But there are concerns in the town that it is taking some of the space
for the tourist traffic. I spent some time this morning talking to some of those
in the town who are close to the debate, and first, who better to speak to than
Atta, an Iranian asylum seeker here who is volunteering at the local church. I'm
Iranian, I lived in Iran, and more than one year ago I arrived to the UK from a
boat. In one of the boats? Yes. Where did you pick up the boat? In Calais, in
France? I don't know, a smuggler just brought me here. That boat journey must be
quite scary. I've not spoken to people who've been on those boats, but it does
not sound like something I would want to do. It's a small boat, right, coming
across the channel. A small boat, yeah, actually when I went to the beach, I
didn't want to settle into the boat, but the smuggler has a gun and everything,
and a knife, and they forced us to settle in. They forced you into the boat? And
it's too scary, you know. I look around and I just saw water, water, water,
nothing else. You applied for asylum when you got to the UK. Have you heard
anything about your application? No, nothing. We just stay in a hotel, and
actually I'm thankful from the government and your people to give me a home, but
we are not allowed to work. And you would like to work, basically, if you could.
I want to live here. I want to work. I want to be in the community, and I can't.
I want to rent a house. I want to live by myself, but I can't because I'm not
allowed to work here. Your hotel is here in Skegness. That's where you've been
accommodated. It's a tourist town. Tell me about the reception you have found
here from local people. Actually, I have lots of friends in Skegness, and in the
church I find good and lovely people, but some of us fight with local people,
and they beat one of my friends. Somebody broke his nose, and yeah, something
like that. I think people don't have good economic situation right now, and they
think government spend lots of their taxes to the asylum, and I understand that.
But if I can work here, I can work, I can pay tax, and I don't want government
help or taxes. So it's help to me and help to other people, actually. I'm the
vicar here. My name's Dave Middleton. And Dave, asylum has been quite a big
issue in the town. Obviously, quite a few asylum seekers are being accommodated
here. What is your view of the issue? Do you call it a problem? Do you call it
an opportunity? What do you think of this way this has been handled? For us, it
started one Sunday morning when about 35 Iranians walked in. My immediate
thought was, oh, Lord, help us, you know. But we started to understand what was
going on in their lives and what some of the problems were for them. They
converted to Christianity in Iran, but in doing so, they become an enemy of the
state, facing either long jail sentences or you are facing hanging. So they
escaped quickly, paid for by family members, and they've all paid around £16,000
to people traffickers. They have no idea of the destination. They only know that
they're getting out of Iran. Otherwise, the families have lost them. You have
been helping quite a few, a few dozen of the asylum seekers. There has been talk
of tensions in the town. Well, last time we had a meeting with Matt Warman, MP
for Skegness and Boston. We know that they shipped in around 100 people that
were really far right. So they were jeering from the back and causing quite a
stir, I think. So those are from out of town, you think? They're from out of
town. We have a so-called peaceful protest this weekend coming up. I'm not
convinced that many of them are actually from Skegness. I think they come from
other towns, which is kind of ironic because they're, you know, protesting about
other people being in Skegness and they don't even live here. I understand
perhaps some fears, but the guys that come here are possibly the nicest, most
respectful, peaceful people I've ever met. All around Skegness, you will find
guest houses, hotels, holiday apartments. I'm just going to visit one, the
Rufford, and we'll speak to the owner here, Alan. Does the fact that a lot of
hotels have been now taken up by the Home Office, does that affect the tourism
industry in general? It's the perceived problems in Skegness. You have groups of
young men standing around and it can be very intimidating, especially for young
ladies. So do you think that's going to keep tourists away? Oh, definitely. Yes,
we have actually had people phone us up and say, I'd like to cancel this year
because of the problems we have with asylum seekers. When there's one hotel here
up the road, everybody kind of, OK, we'll deal with that. But then four more
suddenly came in and it went, hey, hang on, what's going on here? Across town, I
meet Councillor Daniel Brooks. He has his own coffee shop. It's a tourist-
dependent business. He used to be Labour, but now he's set up his own political
grouping, the Skegness Urban District Society. The more and more hotels that we
get with people that have got no money and can't work, it's not good for the
community, it's not good for the local businesses. Right. Because you would
rather, at least in the summer, there were paying tourists with money in their
pocket who might come in here, than asylum seekers who don't have the money to
spend in here. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I don't blame the asylum seekers. I blame
the people that have actually put them in a seaside resort where all the
businesses rely on tourists and the tourists are outbid by the government.
They're in seafront hotels, which probably a lot of people cannot afford. And I
think that's the tension that we've got. I think the government are incompetent.
Who in their right mind would use a seaside resort, seafront hotels to house
anybody, really? It's for tourists. Well, some views around here in Skegness. I
should say the Home Office say, we continually review the security at asylum
accommodation sites with providers and the welfare of asylum seekers is of
utmost importance. It is the government's goal to try and get the numbers in
this position of waiting for their application to be dealt with. To get that
down, the Prime Minister said it should be days or weeks, not months or years.
Let's talk now, though, to Superintendent Pat Coates, who's from Lincolnshire
Police. Pat, thank you for joining us. It's a much talked about issue at the
moment. And there are a number of elements, aren't there? First, let's talk
about the protesting side of this, because virtually everybody we spoke to today
said there are people coming from outside Skegness to protest at this. And that
is unhelpful. Is that what's going on? So we do have a planned protest on
Saturday and we are in contact with the organisers of that protest. And the
organisers aren't from Skegness. They are from elsewhere in the country.
However, they are expecting local residents to support that protest as well. But
we are in dialogue with them, agreeing the route. We're working with them. You
know, they've got a right to exercise their lawful right to protest. But we're
obviously working with them to minimise disruption and obviously ensure there's
no crime disorder as a consequence of it. And the many people in Skegness who
have their own concerns about what's going on with asylum seekers, but don't
think the protests are helping. They don't have, there's nothing they can do. If
the protesters want to protest, come into Skegness and protest, organise it in
Skegness, that is up to them. They're allowed to. Yeah, so unfortunately, well,
we obviously have a right, a lawful right to protest. We have to balance those
rights with the rights of the community to go about their normal business and
businesses and everyone. So we balance those rights. As the protest is lawful
and peaceful, we will facilitate that protest. As I said, we're in dialogue with
the organisers. We do have a policing operation in place on Saturday. We're not
unsure of the numbers, but we're not expecting large numbers at the protest, so
we hope to minimise the disruption. And our message very much is to reassure the
public that the police are there. We will be responding if need be to any crime
disorder, but we're confident there will be very limited disruption to the
community. Now, let's go through other issues that might arise in relation to
population of asylum seekers here. Firstly, crime and disorder in the town,
antisocial behaviour by the people who've been put in the town. Is that a
problem for Lincolnshire, please? So we haven't seen a large increase of
antisocial behavioural crime from the people housed in the hotels towards the
local community. What we have seen, we've seen some incidents, unfortunately,
towards the asylum seekers, but they have been fairly isolated as well. That's
what we heard, but you would say those were isolated. It's not common or it's
not widespread. No, it's isolated incidents by a very small number of people.
And we haven't seen, like I said, the crime committed from asylum seekers to the
wider community, just to reassure people we haven't seen that. And we're in
constant contact with the hotels, the people that run it, and with the community
as well, engaging to find out what's happening. All right. Pat Coates, thanks so
much for helping us through that. Superintendent Pat Coates from the
Lincolnshire Police on the situation here. Now, it's just after quarter to six.
Let's have a last look at some other headlines. Here's Charles. The rail union
Aslef has announced that London Underground drivers will walk out on the 15th of
March, which is the day the Chancellor delivers his budget. A teacher has been
stabbed to death by a student in southwestern France. The woman was attacked
during a lesson. A 16-year-old boy has been arrested. And official figures
suggest that same-sex couples are marrying younger than heterosexual partners in
England and Wales. The data from the 2021 census is the first since gay couples
could legally marry. Thanks, Charles. Now, on Saturday, 93 million Nigerians get
to vote in a general election there. All eyes on an intriguing presidential race
in which the two frontrunners have found themselves challenged by a third-party
candidate with more youth appeal in what is a very young country. The election
is coming as the country faces a currency crisis, a banknote crisis, running out
of banknotes, people queuing up for the next batch of new notes to arrive at the
bank. We'll learn more about the elections in a moment. But first, the BBC's May
Aine Jones sent us this from Lagos. Cash is king here in Nigeria. Less than half
of the population has a bank account. So when the authorities decided to
redesign the currency to avoid vote buying in this weekend's elections, there
was apprehension. But the reality has been much worse than anyone could have
imagined. The country's digital banking system was glitchy and slow even before
the redesign. Now, inundated with transaction requests, it's buckled. There are
long queues in supermarket tills as people try to pay for their shopping with
their bank cards and apps. Foot traffic has fallen drastically at food markets
where transactions used to be done in cash. In Dawano markets in the northern
city of Kano, bean seller Yassir Nasir Abdulhamid is angry. Before now, we do
business very well. If you like some foreign people like Ghana and the rest come
to this market and buy beans, but now I don't see anybody. This is not good for
our leaders. This is not good. I want to advise them to change. How do you
think, if the situation continues, how do you think it's going to affect the
economy? Some of the people are going to die. This is the end. Some of the
people are going to die. The economy is a key issue in this election, but it's
not the only one. Insecurity matters just as much to voters here. Nigerian armed
forces have been battling Islamist groups in the north-east of the country for
over 12 years. Although the authorities have regained a lot of territory, the
Islamic State West Africa province has claimed attacks in other parts of the
country, suggesting its influence is spreading. The attacks have made moving
around difficult. Secessionist groups in the south-east have been attacking
civilians and electoral offices. As Africa's most populous nation and biggest
economy, what happens here impacts the wider region. The international community
will be following these polls closely. Mayeni Jones in Lagos. Well, let's get a
briefing from Anu Adeoye, who's the Financial Times West Africa correspondent
and joins us also from Lagos. So this election, Anu, occurring over the weekend,
how big a deal is this for Nigeria? It's a huge deal. I mean, 93 million
Nigerians are going to the polls to elect a successor for the outgoing
president, Muhammadu Buhari, who has served two terms and is now
constitutionally barred from running from office. So that's a sign of Nigeria's
growing democracy that the president is leaving office after his term, in
contrast to what we've seen in other parts of West Africa where coups have taken
place. So it's a huge deal for Nigerians. Now, we've heard a little bit about
this banknote crisis and all of that. What are the other things this election is
about? What are they all talking about? What is the difference between the
candidates? I mean, it's the main thing everyone's talking about is the economy
and insecurity. I think inflation is the rage globally right now, but Nigerian
citizens have been facing double digit inflation since March of 2016. So that's
been much of President Buhari's tenure. Inflation right now is at 22 percent. So
there's been elevated cost of food and other services in the country. And also
insecurity, I think, as Mayeni said in the bulletin earlier, is a big concern
for many people. We at the FT have seen a tally that shows that about 60,000
people have been killed due to violence of various groups under President
Buhari's tenure. So I think voters are saying they care a lot about who is going
to fix the economy and who is going to deal with insecurity in the country.
Extraordinary, extraordinary statistic that. Just very briefly, the youth vote.
We've got this candidate, Peter Obi, who seems to be a piece he's in his 60s or
early 60s. He seems to be appealing to the younger voters. Yeah, I mean, that's
that's what the upside down world of Nigerian politics gives you. Peter Obi is
61 years old, but he's the candidate of the youth because it's all relative.
It's two main content challenges, Bolatinubu of the ruling APC 70 and Atiku
Agubaka of the main opposition PDP 76. So you can see that at 61, Peter Obi is a
comparatively sprightly man. And he has been able to capture the attention of
mostly urban youth who are frustrated by record unemployment for young people.
So many young Nigerians have voted with their feet and moved elsewhere to seek a
better life for themselves. So Peter Obi has been able to tap into this
disaffection among Nigerian youth to offer himself as a credible alternative to
the main big parties. It'll be interesting to see if that electoral earthquake
occurs in Nigeria over the weekend. Anu Adeoye, thank you so much from Financial
Times in Lagos there. Now, Saturday, May 13th, just a week after the King's
coronation, in fact, Liverpool plays host to the Eurovision Song Contest. The
big final is that night. There'll be a couple of semifinals as well in the days
before. And today we learned he'll be presenting the event, getting the profile
up in front of a global audience of at least 11 gazillion people. It'll be
Hannah Waddingham of Ted Lasso fame with Alicia Dixon, the Ukrainian singer
Julia Sanina and Graham Norton on the Saturday night as well. It is a good gig
for a presenter for sure. Here's a flavour of the last three times the UK hosted
Eurovision and the winners in those years. 18 countries are about to compete for
the grand prix of the Eurovision Song Contest for 1977. Welcome to this, the
27th Eurovision Song Contest coming to you from the conference centre at
Harrogate in Yorkshire. Sit back and enjoy the 1998 Eurovision Song Contest. You
may have recognised Angela Rippon's voice there but also Ulrika Johnson who
presented the song contest back in 1998. And she joins us now. Did you actually
enjoy it Ulrika? It seems like you'd just be terrified of an event like that.
Good evening, Alan. Yes, I actually did, which was quite shocking. I think it
was, well I know for a fact it was the only job in my 35 year career that I ever
asked for. I felt like I was the perfect fit being a Swede and a Eurovision file
and you know with my French and my German that I would be the right fit. But
yeah, so I, you know, there was a lot of rehearsals that went on in the run up
to the event and lots of time in some sort of BBC basement and practising the
names of the countries and doing the scores and knowing them fluently and not
even having to think about it. And then, you know, having Terry Wogan by my side
who is as cool or was as cool as a cucumber and didn't even turn up for most of
the rehearsals. But yeah, I did, you know, I think someone said to me just
before I went on, you know, you've got to enjoy this moment and not be
overwhelmed. I mean, a lot can go wrong, can't it? That's the thing. I mean, the
scoring. I mean, you know, it's just it's we had our own little hitch on PM, but
nothing in the kind of, you know, frame of a scoreboard failing or someone not
rocking up and they're meant to tell you what their scores are from the jury in
Italy or whatever. Yes. I mean, it's a huge, you know, technical thing. It's and
there is a huge kind of Eurovision hierarchy there. You've got the sort of
European Broadcasting Authority. I don't know if that's what they're called
nowadays, but, you know, you have to really respect the judge. You have to hope
that when you're linking to somebody that they are going to be there, that they
can hear you. You always have a delay and you have to wait for that. So there's
a huge amount of sort of patience. And then you have a live audience. And we
were at what was then called the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham, you know,
with thousands of people in there. And they're cheering and you're trying to
keep that noise out and listen to the person you're trying to speak and
remembering that you have to do it in a couple of languages. So, well, it's the
French. The language is so impressive. Ulrika, lovely to talk to you. We'll be
talking a lot more about Eurovision, I suppose, in the next few months. Ulrika
Johnson there. Thanks. Hello, this is Sharon Horgan. And because this is radio,
you can't see me, obviously. But if you could, you'd probably be wondering why
I'm sat in a wheelbarrow from Monty Don's Garden wearing Graham Norton's jacket,
holding a winner's trophy from Pointless. Well, there's a good reason, because
these are just some of the iconic BBC items that you could win this year as part
of Red Nose Day. Oi! You haven't finished with the wheelbarrow yet. To enter,
find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose
Day. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or
over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good
luck. Now, let's get some weather. It's been rather chilly, I have to say, here
in Skegness today. But Helen Willets can tell us the forecast, Helen. Evan,
thanks. Yeah, we've had some rain as well. Not that significant, just 5 to 10
millimetres, but more than many parts of England have seen all month. And it's
still quite cloudy out there across England and Wales. Like Evan said, it's
quite chilly. It's cold enough for those showers to fall asleep in snow over the
Pennines, the Peak District, possibly the Welsh Mountains and the moors, South
West moors, through this evening and overnight. So, slowly clearing away from
the north, so frost sets in. Certainly a colder night, even where we keep the
cloud and those showers in the south at about 3 degrees Celsius. And that cloud
with those showers might hang around in southern England for tomorrow. So quite
grey and quite chilly. But elsewhere, even though it's chillier, we should see
some sunshine and temperatures will get up to about 8, 9 degrees Celsius,
average for the time of year. Northern Ireland will have those scattered showers
easing through the night. Clear skies, much colder and frosty. Minus 2 and some
ice around where the surfaces are damp. So, a cold, frosty but sunny start
tomorrow before the cloud increases through the second half of the day. High is
about 10. Finally to Scotland, becoming clear and cold here too overnight as the
showers fade. Widespread frost, icy as well where the surfaces are damp. Bright
start tomorrow, but yes, that cloud and rain pushes back into the north later in
the day. High is about 8 degrees. Thanks Helen. That's PM from Skegness. Studio
directors Julian Miller here and Ben Martin in London. And editors Joel Moores
in Skegness. Tom Baker in London. Have a good evening.