TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 No, candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as the first minister of Scotland.
You're listening to today on BBC Radio 4. It's eight o'clock on Tuesday, the
21st of February. The headlines this morning. Opposing assessments of the war in
Ukraine will be made by Vladimir Putin and Joe Biden today, with the US
president calling it a battle between democracy and autocracy. Official figures
show there was a much bigger surplus in the government's finances than predicted
last month. And a senior NHS psychologist says online gambling has created a
significant public health crisis. The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols. The
contrasting realities of the invasion of Ukraine will be laid bare by Joe Biden
and Vladimir Putin, as both leaders give major speeches. The US president is in
Poland to meet NATO allies. In Moscow this morning, President Putin will deliver
his State of the Nation address. It was cancelled in December because of a
number of Russian setbacks in Ukraine. Our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg,
reports from Moscow. It's almost exactly a year since Vladimir Putin ordered the
full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Russia's president will use this address to
parliament to try to shore up domestic support for what he still calls the
Special Military Operation. It will be an opportunity for him to repeat,
rebroadcast the Kremlin's false narrative, according to which Ukraine and the
West started this war, and Russia is acting in self-defense. For the Kremlin
leader, the Special Operation has not gone at all according to plan. What was
supposed to have lasted a few days, at most a few weeks, is said to enter its
second year with no end in sight. As well as bringing misery to Ukraine, the
invasion has resulted in heavy casualties for the Russian military. And hundreds
of thousands of Russian citizens have been drafted into the army. President
Biden arrived back in Poland last night after visiting Ukraine. He'll deliver a
speech in Warsaw and meet leaders of NATO countries in Eastern Europe. Here's
our North America editor, Sarah Smith. In his speech, President Biden will
describe the war in Ukraine as a battle between democracy and autocracy and
declare that after a year of fighting, it's democracy that has the upper hand,
as well as confirming his belief in the territorial integrity of Ukraine. The
president's surprise visit to Kiev yesterday, appearing alongside President
Zelensky, was designed to be a vivid, physical demonstration of his commitment
to continue supporting Ukraine, as he often says, for as long as it takes. But
some politicians, on the further extremes of both the left and the right in
America, are now expressing doubts about how long the US can afford to continue
supplying the Ukrainian defense forces, and polls suggest public support is also
declining. So the message Mr Biden wants to deliver on this trip is aimed as
much at an American audience at home as it is for the people of Poland and
Ukraine. China's Foreign Minister Chingang has said Beijing is deeply worried
that the war in Ukraine is in danger of spiraling out of control. A senior
Chinese diplomat is due to visit Moscow this week. China has also said it will
publish a plan for a political solution to the conflict. The Prime Minister of
Estonia, Kaya Kalas, has told this programme that the complete withdrawal of
Russian troops from Ukraine needs to happen. The worry is that every next step
is bolder. If you look back Crimea, the reaction was weak, and therefore it
gives strength to dictator to move on, because nothing really happened. You
gained popularity, you gained territories, you were better off. In an interview
with Ukraine cast on BBC Sounds, Melinda Simmons, the UK's ambassador in Kiev,
said the conflict was likely to last for some time. What's the number one thing
I would say to people who worry about how long this will go on, and I'm afraid
my answer to that is to hold our nerve. This isn't a short war. I wish it was,
but it isn't. And it means that we need to continue to support Ukrainians while
they make their progress and expect that they can push back to the extent that
negotiations in good faith can begin. The public finances were more than £5
billion in surplus in January. The figures from the Office for National
Statistics defied predictions from analysts. Here's our economics correspondent
Andy Verity. Outside of emergencies like the pandemic, January is normally a
month when the government's finances are in surplus, as self-employed people pay
the tax they owe under self-assessment. This time, economists were expecting the
finances would instead show a deficit with £8 billion more flowing out of
government coffers than the tax rolling in. Instead, receipts from self-employed
people of £21.9 billion, the highest since monthly records began 24 years ago,
meant £5.4 billion more flowing into the Exchequer than it spent. In the
financial year to date, the public sector borrowed £117 billion, £31 billion
less than forecast by the Office for Budget Responsibility. The interest on
central government's debt was £6.7 billion, the highest amount in January since
1997. But the overall picture is of public finances under much less pressure
than either private sector economists or official forecasters expected. HSBC has
described 2022 as another good year with a strong overall performance. It
recorded pre-tax profits of £14.5 billion, a drop of 7 per cent on the year
before, citing the lingering impact of Covid as well as the cost of selling its
French banking operation, but profits in the final quarter were up 92 per cent
on the final three months of 2021. A second major search and rescue operation is
underway after another series of earthquakes hit southern Turkey and northern
Syria last night. At least three people are known to have died. More than 200
others have been taken to hospital. The quakes earlier this month killed almost
45,000 people. Our correspondent Anna Foster is in the Turkish city of Adena and
told us what it was like to experience the latest tremors. I was sitting in the
lobby of a hotel which was fortunately a sturdy and quite a secure building, but
really the shaking of the ground was very, very powerful. You could see the
light fitting start to swing back and forth. But I think the most notable thing
was the way people reacted because everything that they've been through these
last couple of weeks, the images that they've seen, there was a real palpable
sense of fear. People, they got up and they ran. The head of an NHS clinic for
gamblers in the north of England has said the opportunity to bet online has
created a significant public health crisis. Matt Gaskell says a new strategy is
needed to counter the messaging from the industry. The government is preparing
to publish the first proposals for major change in the gambling laws since 2005.
Our Culture and Media editor Katie Rassell reports. The last time significant
gambling laws were passed, the smartphone didn't exist. These days there's
instant access to online betting. Matt Gaskell, the consultant psychologist at
the NHS Northern Gambling Service in England, which treats problem gamblers,
says punters have been targeted with habit-forming products online and is
troubled that the messaging about gambling is controlled by the industry itself.
The BBC has been told the delayed white paper is imminent. Among the proposals,
the draft laws expected to force the gambling companies to pay a levy to fund
education, research and treatment, it's voluntary right now, and to restrict how
much can be bet in one go on certain online games. The Betting and Gaming
Council, which represents the sector, says the overwhelming majority of the more
than 22 million people who put a bet on each month do so safely and responsibly.
Downing Street has indicated that Rishi Sunak's focus in negotiations with the
European Union about post-Brexit trading arrangements is safeguarding Northern
Ireland's place in the UK. The Prime Minister is trying to persuade sceptical
Conservative MPs and the Democratic Unionist party to support changes to the
protocol. Here's our political correspondent, Damian Gramaticus. In the past
couple of days, Rishi Sunak's attempt to seal a new deal with the EU has run
into choppy political waters. It's thought the outline has been on the Prime
Minister's desk for some time. The aim is to improve the functioning of the
trade arrangements agreed for Northern Ireland after Brexit. Over the weekend,
the Democratic Unionists indicated they were unhappy about having to follow
trade rules set by the EU over which Northern Ireland had no say. And Tory
critics of the Prime Minister's plan claim the breadth of opposition to it
within the Conservative party cannot be ignored. Yesterday, Mr Sunak met some
Tory MPs to try to win them over. Downing Street's source told the BBC Mr
Sunak's central focus has been safeguarding Northern Ireland's place in the UK.
Testing of a four-day working week suggests it doesn't harm the performance of
companies and leaves staff feeling healthier and happier. 61 businesses across
the UK took part in the study over six months last year. It was organised by
researchers here and in the United States, along with the campaign group Four
Day Week Global. Almost all of the firms involved had decided to stick with the
shorter working week. One of them is the environmental consultancy Tyler Grange.
Its managing director is Simon Ersel. I'd be pretty, pretty silly to change it
now, wouldn't I? I've got a happier team, we're making more money, our clients
are happier. It's been pretty revolutionary and pretty wonderful. We are 22%
more productive. In four days, we produce 2% more than we used to in five, which
is pretty remarkable, I think. A meeting will be held tomorrow between the
British Medical Association and health officials to discuss the pay dispute,
which could see junior doctors in England go on strike next month. The House
Secretary Steve Barclay won't be involved. A BMA source has said it's hoped the
meeting will lead to meaningful talks, which might then be enough to call off
the industrial action. Thank you, Caroline. It is coming up to 10 past 8. Some
people ask what has changed since the invasion of Ukraine a year ago. Come here
to Warsaw and you'll find the answer. Today in the Polish capital, leaders of
countries occupied for decades by the Soviet Union, countries which now relish
their freedom, democracy and prosperity, countries that fear they could be next,
will meet with the President of the United States. When President Biden speaks
at Warsaw Castle, thousands are expected to line the streets. To listen as he
declares that that war in Ukraine is in fact a war between democracy and
autocracy. Estonia is one of those countries now on the front line. We'll hear
from her Prime Minister in just a few minutes time. First though, I've been to
the Tapper military base in Estonia. 900 British troops are deployed there. They
train with Challenger tanks to fight in the snowy forests, as well as in the
streets. A reminder, they are not merely there as a deterrent. They serve
alongside French and Danish forces, part of what NATO calls its enhanced forward
presence. My name is Lieutenant Susanna Watts. I'm currently a tank troop leader
within C Squadron of the Kings Royal Hazards. Now here in the hangar we've got
what? We've got 14 Challenger 2s within each squadron, along with a whole array
of support vehicles which allow us to be combat effective for a prolonged period
of time. And that means what operating in this country? What would these tanks
do in the event of a conflict? So in Estonia the terrain is very flat with lots
of wood blocks which is very different from what we're used to training with.
Historically we've trained over big planes of open ground. So we work a lot in
conjunction with the infantry and also different forces in order to be most
effective in this really close knit terrain. For years British troops who were
deployed to Europe had no real belief that they might one day have to fight. The
Ukraine war has perhaps changed that. The 900 odd troops who are here in Camp
Tapa, just outside Tallinn, the capital of Estonia, are preparing our training
for the possibility of conflict. The hope is they are a deterrent. They're a
symbol of NATO's preparedness to defend this country. The exercises they carry
out in these Challenger tanks are a symbol though that they are prepared to
fight. So I'm Sergeant Mark Borbeck. I'm a tank troop sergeant within C
squadron, King's Royal Azars. For years I think people who are deployed to
Europe never thought they'd fight, never thought they needed to be particularly
ready to fight. But has the war in Ukraine changed that mindset? Yeah I would
say so. I think it's put into perspective the relevance, the importance of us to
be ready at all times just to reassurance the people to say that we are ready,
we're good at what we do and the vehicles and equipment we've got are up to the
job and we're good to go. I think the past six months is something that we've
been living and breathing and I'd like to hope that even down to our most junior
level they understand the importance of just merely being here is achieving a
huge amount on a diplomatic and political scale. Well that is a short distance
from the Estonian capital Tallinn. In the capital I travelled to the Estonian
government offices. Outside there is a plaque, a memorial, a reminder of the
leaders of Estonia slaughtered by what was called the communist terror in the
early 1940s. That country occupied not just by the Soviet Union but also by the
Nazis briefly as well. I went there to speak in what's called the State Elders
Room just along from the Prime Minister's office to Kaya Kalas, the Prime
Minister of Estonia, seen as a leading hawk in the EU and NATO. I asked her what
she hoped to hear from President Biden today. The message that we have heard
many times and really want to hear again is that our big allies are with us no
matter what is happening and so far it has been so. It is when I go to schools
and describe what NATO is all about. It's all about when you have a school
bully, you are weaker in your physical appearance then the school bully doesn't
bully you when you have big friends and this is how NATO works, this is how
deterrence works. So it is very important for us that the US states that this
Article 5 in NATO is ironclad and our allies are with us. That in other words
they would come to your defence if Vladimir Putin was to do to this country what
he did to Ukraine. Yeah but if we wouldn't be in NATO we would be living through
some really hard and dark times right now but we are and that's why we don't
have a war here. We have peace and we can you know build up our societies and do
all the things related to this not to deal with the war but saying that the war
has an effect on all of us. We feel it through inflation, high energy prices, I
mean Ukrainians feel it with the loss of lives. You warned at the beginning of
the war in Ukraine that if Russia was to do to this country what she has done to
Ukraine, Estonia would be wiped off the map. Does that threat still feel a real
one? What we are seeing in Ukraine that there is nothing much left if you go and
liberate them therefore our stance was that we have to be ready to protect and
defend our country from the first centimetre from the first minute and therefore
I'm really really grateful that during the NATO summit in Madrid we got very
strong decisions and we moved from deterrence posture to defence posture which
means that we are not waiting to be liberated but we are ready to defend the
country from the first minute. Back then in fact a year ago there were plenty of
fellow EU leaders fellow NATO leaders saying this is never going to happen
Vladimir Putin is not crazy he will not invade another country in that way. Do
you think they now understand that they were wrong and you and your warnings
were right? On the 21st of February, 24th of February last year I heard I saw
many shocked leaders and I heard a lot that we should have listened to you we
were naive towards Putin and Russia and I heard that and now we are one year
into this war and we hear again you know talks and things that okay let's draw
the line somewhere and of course every war ends in peace and of course everybody
knows that war is bad and peace is good but there's also difference between
peace and peace. I mean we are here in the state elders room and if you look at
their dates of death they were all killed except for one who escaped to Sweden
when the occupation started. Why I'm telling this is that while you had
prosperity and you know peace after the second world war where you built up your
society's well-being of people we also had peace here but the peace here meant
deportations my own family was deported to Siberia it meant really erasing our
elite killing the elite trying to erase our culture trying to you know erase our
language altogether so there's a difference and this is what will happen on the
occupied territories. As we look at these portraits and each one has the date
1941 for the death of each of these state elders on the wall do you feel in a
way and as you think of your own family's history that the past has returned to
haunt this country you can't escape it. When we regained our independence when
we fought our independence and freedom back we decided that we would be never
alone again never with our allies never with our friends and that's why we have
also tried to be present and and necessary for allies because if nobody knows
about you nobody knows when you're gone and nobody misses you so we have been
gone for 50 years and we felt that we weren't really missed so we don't want
that situation again. President Putin is about to deliver his state of the
nation address you want to see him defeated you want to see Russia defeated and
yet the end of the war will require him won't it he is the only person in the
end who will call off this war. One of the reasons why the western leaders
thought that the war is not going to happen is that because they looked at Putin
and Russia through this democratic lens but in democracy you are accountable for
your actions because you have elections and you have soldiers mothers protesting
and all of it. Russia doesn't have that in dictatorship the dictator only cares
for keeping the cronies around him happy keeping the army and the power
structures happy so that you could have the force and also eliminating all the
alternatives so that if the cronies around you would look that okay this guy is
dragging us all down they have nowhere to turn to because there's no alternative
this is what Putin has done. I wouldn't you know talk about the regime change or
anything if you look at the history the question for us right now is how to
really cut this cycle and one of the things that I've been talking about is
accountability accountability what the Russians have done. Spell out your fear
when you warn against peace at any price is your concern that Russia might not
occupy all of Ukraine it might not even bring down President Zelensky but they
might still win win by denying Ukraine a future as a European country as a
modern country as perhaps a NATO member. In NATO we have you know precondition
that you don't have any open conflicts so while you are waging a war against
Ukraine then so far when this war is going on we can't discuss the membership of
NATO in terms of the conditions that we have agreed and therefore I think that
for the peace in the world actually all these kind of grey zones are really
sources of instability. So those people who say look let's find a middle way to
reassure Russia let's find a middle way between Ukraine's membership of NATO and
them being a client state of Russia you say there is no middle way Ukraine must
follow Estonia and become a state in NATO is that right? I don't think so there
is a middle way actually Russia and Putin hasn't changed his goals I mean not
not once I mean he has been very clear about his goals. You've just come from
the big security conference in Munich and you heard other leaders like the
president of Brazil for example say we want you to concentrate on what worries
us on inflation on the cost of living on climate change we can't allow this war
to go on forever what is your message to people like him and people listening to
this programme it may think the same. Nobody wants this war to go on forever I
mean everybody wants this war to end. It is the way they have always operated
first you claim something that has never been yours second you present threats,
ultimatums, you terrorize and third you don't give one inch in negotiations
because there will always be people in the west who offer you something so in
the end you have something or one third or even one half of something you didn't
have before. The worry is that every next step is bolder if you look back Crimea
they were ashamed that it's the Russian soldiers you know they removed the the
tags and said that it's a little green man because they were afraid of the
reaction but the reaction was weak and therefore it you know gives strength to
dictator to move on because nothing really happened you gained popularity you
gained territories you were better off. You'll know that Boris Johnson announced
the doubling of British troops in Estonia and then they were undoubled they went
home again is that a disappointment? We were grateful that the troops were
doubled here and it was in the beginning also said that it's temporary you know
the question just was how temporary it is I mean how long is temporary so I
hoped that the temporary couldn't end when the war is going on but I understand
also the UK's arguments behind it and for me I mean we are now building the
division-sized troops together with Great Britain as our framework country which
means that some of them are stationed in UK but they know that if necessary they
will come to help. So more if we could but you understand budgets at times. Yeah
yeah no I understand and also I mean we are expanding our training facilities
and all of this that is also needed to practice. Prime Minister Kajakal is of
Estonia thank you very much for talking to me. Thank you. It's now 23 minutes
past eight. One day Nicola Bully's family said yesterday they will have to
explain to two little girls her daughters aged nine and six what happened in the
23 days before their mother going missing and the discovery of her body the
intrusion the innuendo the behavior of people who turned up in their village the
broadcasters Sky and ITV making contact after a body was found and the family
had asked for privacy and the newspapers who were part of the family statement
even though in some cases that has been selectively reported in today's papers.
Well Patience Wheatcroft joins us on the line Baroness Wheatcroft former editor
of the Sunday Telegraph and Evan Harris is here in the studio former director of
hacked off the campaign group for a free and accountable press. Morning to you
both. Morning. Good morning. Evan what are the issues for you? Well the issues
are the difference between the way that the press and broadcasters for example
are dealt with and obviously we don't know all the facts and I want to preface
it with that but Sky and ITN actually reported live and since then on the
complaints against them their own alleged failings and they're regulated by
Ofcom so there will be accountability Ofcom don't have to wait for complaint
they can investigate their conduct. The newspapers have failed to report
generally speaking the allegations against them not a single front page other
than The Guardian mentions the attack on the media. The Mail edited out in text
it says it said relatives went on they again have taken it upon themselves to
run stories about us and then they don't include to sell papers to increase
their own profiles actually it was profits that was what the police said and
then they've also taken out do the press and other media channels and so-called
professionals not know when to stop and the video of the press conference of the
police on the Mail online website leaves out any criticism of the media it goes
straight from you know we're sorry that this has happened to us to thanking
people who help them privately and and and finally newspapers are not regulated
they have a voluntary self regulation which is simply complaints handling like
the Press Complaints Commission Ipso it hasn't done any investigations in its
whole seven eight year existence and therefore it's never issued any sanction or
fine against newspaper but on this there might well be indeed there might
already be complaints to Ipso relating to exactly what you're saying or indeed
to the coverage before and they will be dealt with well they'll be dealt with as
complaints handling and the history of this is even where the the the stacked
against the complainant regulator which is not independent of the media finds
against a newspaper all it gets all it can insist on is an inside page
correction I mean it could go further but in the history of Ipso there has never
been a single front page correction of a front page story Queenbacks Brexit that
was buried inside and that means there is no there's impunity effectively and we
saw this with Grenfell we saw this with the Manchester Arena bombing every time
this there's a tragedy like this there is criticism of the newspapers and
nothing happens and Swela Brabham and and Yvette Cooper and Rishisounak have
criticized the police maybe they're right maybe they're wrong will we hear a
politician get off their knees to attack the press and the power of the press
and their their abuse of ordinary people I doubt it of course you would be
expected to say this given your own history of your own experience your own
campaigning but I'll come back to you in just a moment patient Sweetcroft do you
can can you see the point and what in can you see the point in what Evan Harris
is saying absolutely if the story is about how the papers and the media
generally behaved are true and I don't know then I think there's every reason
for people to be deeply upset and perturbed and it's now up to the regulator
Ipso in this case to demonstrate that it really has teeth as a former newspaper
editor I'd always hope that that my reporters respected the people that they
were dealing with and in any situation like the Nicola Bodhi case if the family
had said lay off that they would have absolutely run a mile what I've read about
this case people have behaved very badly not least of course members of the
public and social media so it's become the most extraordinary feeding frenzy but
I am worried that if the regulator can't now show its teeth and it can levy
fines of up to a million pounds then the media will be looking at perhaps the
call for government intervention getting louder again and that I must say
Michelle would really frighten me because if ever we've needed a free press it's
when you're living through a time with a government which is challenging human
rights to the extent it is and trying to bring in the most draconian laws we
need a press and a media that can be free to report it's a system of self-
regulation at the moment acknowledging the the point that you're saying rather
than it being government regulation of the press I think you're saying that
maybe this is a key moment where should if so then open their own investigation
rather than react to complaints well effectively there's a complaint out there I
think what they should be doing is going to the Bodhi family and and saying do
you wish to make a formal complaint a bereaved family I mean it's quite a thing
isn't it to expect that they can go through the police and I think all they need
is a yes because the complaint's already been made it's been made to the media
it's been made to the world in in general I find it appalling that the
newspapers involved edited the statement to the way they did yes it's very
common I agree with much of what what you say um uh Lady Weecroft but the
problem is Ofcom have the ability to self-start investigations and the Leveson
inquiry made recommendations that any proper regulator would a be independent
and b be able not to have to float around trying to elicit a report from a
complaint from a bereaved family you can read what's in the papers and the
fundamental problem is that we're not talking about freedom of the press we're
talking about freedom of proprietors no one is arguing for government regulation
the Leveson inquiry called for independent regulation nothing to do with
parliament in fact argue there shouldn't be ministers or ex-ministers anywhere
near it the chair of ipso is an ex-tory justice minister who you know goes to
dinner with Rupert Murdoch it's hopeless I don't think any victim could have
confidence in the puppet regulator so-called regulator that the press have it's
time that we completed the Leveson exercise completed the inquiry and that our
politicians actually had the guts to speak up for the victims of this activity
instead of parroting the lines that they want that they think that the press
proprietors and the editors will hear there's just one one final point there's
one big difference between the people on social media who I condemn and
newspapers that's the editor these purport to be edited curated product
therefore they can be regulated and they should be regulated it's hard to
regulate a bloke in his basement I absolutely agree that the editors in this
case do not all seem to have behaved as they should and I think it's the the
opportunity for Leveson not leveson sorry for ipso to demonstrate that it means
business and I do agree with you that and if it doesn't then it genuinely is the
last chance saloon but at a very worrying time patience sweetcroft Evan Harris
thank you both very much 29 minutes to nine here's Rob with the sports news
hello again Nick Liverpool against Raam Madrid at Anfield in the Champions
League tonight a first leg tie just as well this game is being played now after
two Premier League wins for Liverpool not in January when the club couldn't buy
three points said manager Joachim Klopp commentary on BBC five live while on
five live sports extra you can follow England against Pakistan in the women's
T20 cricket World Cup only heavy defeat will leave England facing holders
Australia in the semis one o'clock start to that match for the men meanwhile
it's installment 12 starting on Thursday of the Stokesian Bad Show captain Ben
Stokes and head coach Brendan McCollum in charge as England's men prepare for
the second test against New Zealand in Wellington we've been on the line a
rather indifferent one I'm afraid to England's Ody Pope part of that currently
solid top and middle order batting lineup we've always had really sort of
skilled batters going the whole way down but I think even those guys coming in
at the end everyone's so clear on their role I think Baz and Stokes here sort of
really made even the bowlers feel like batters and they're putting a lot of time
into it and I think the clarity of roles really really help them with that yes
and beyond of course all that we know that big centuries are always possible
from what I suppose anyone in the top six or seven and even in the first thing
no one went on to get a big hundred but I think if you can have guys
contributing the whole way down the order it's because you're in pretty good
stead going forward as well and then hopefully yeah one day we'll we'll kick on
and get those big hundreds as well well presumably the arrival beyond that of
Harry Brooke the re-emergence of Ben Duchat the regular appearances of yourself
it must mean that then there's surely some fierce competition now not only to
break into the current side but also to hold your place yeah a little bit of
that but I think what Baz and Stokes here have done is they've really allowed
guys to have a good run and I think that's the important thing they they sort of
realize the type of player they want in the team so if they do back you as a
player they're going to give you that extended run even if you do have a few low
scores which as a badder that can happen so I think having that can really sort
of take the pressure off a little bit and that's probably why that success has
sort of happened over the last 11 tests yes and there's no fear that this ultra
aggressive approach will suddenly come crashing down around your ears and that
the team will suddenly suffer a good old-fashioned collapse I mean we've kind of
said it as a group we said look it might happen at some point but that's okay
we've won 10 out of 11 tests winning this way we've won obviously in Pakistan
now winning New Zealand as well and we played some seriously good opponents too
so I think we can accept it if it does happen obviously we're going to try and
avoid that I think we've sort of made it pretty clear that it's almost bigger
than winning what we're trying to do to test cricket now I think we've the
franchise leagues with T20s going on around the world we want to make sure that
test cricket's still the most exciting thing to watch so that's part of what
we're doing but obviously when it's not going well it's not that fun so I think
yeah it's a mixture of the two but of course you're going to take winning ugly
we've not put in the perfect performances yet so I think that's the most
exciting thing as well. Would you say that you're almost as it were campaigning
on behalf of test cricket as a team? Yeah absolutely I think so I think we're
lucky enough in England that we get these amazing crowds pretty much every game
of the summer we get a packed house but there's some countries where it's not at
the forefront of a lot of the country's minds so I think that's what we're
trying to do is we're trying to want to really get the whole nation to
potentially follow how we play in the long term but also get people wanting to
tune in. And a couple of quick final questions for you. One more test to go of
course before the English summer is anyone allowed to talk about the Ashes?
Naturally it's in the back of all of our minds the Ashes is that's the pinnacle
it's what everyone wants to be a part of and everyone wants to get their hands
on the own we're not really talking about it but of course it's going to be on
people's minds and and it's just something to really look forward to to be
honest this summer I think a home summer it's got the potential to be amazing
and really entertaining like that O5 series which is sort of what made me fall
in love with cricket so I think that's just the prospect of that it's just
really exciting. And what about you finally are you allowing talk about being
the FEC the future England captain? I think I'm just going to keep focusing on
my batting I think of course naturally I'm going to watch how Stokesy goes about
his stuff because he's been amazing so far and keep sort of trying to develop my
cricket brain as much as I can but at the same time realize that I need to keep
scoring my runs and keep on driving that forward and making that number three
spot my own yeah and if that happens in the future great if not then I'm loving
every minute of just batting three in this England side and what we've got going
on is pretty awesome thing to be a part of. Oli it's the diplomatic answer I
expected. Oli Pope thank you very much. Exactly no other way cheers thank you.
And here are the tips then market raise on 315 number three king of the west
taunton 330 number six Amelia's dance. Thank you very much Rob and now to nine
o'clock and professor Jim Al Khalili. Hello this morning on the Life Scientific
I'm talking to a world expert in cosmic dust. Hayley Gomez grew up on a council
estate in Barrie South Wales and entered a world that was utterly alien to
almost everyone she knew. It's an inspiring personal story of succeeding against
the odds and an eye-opening introduction to our new infrared view of the
universe. Do join me if you can for a cosmic edition of the Life Scientific
after the news at nine. Thanks Jim let's look at the weather today will be
mainly cloudy with some rain in the far north. Tonight a band of rain moved
south eastward here in Warsaw people are hoping there will not be rain as the
president president Biden will be speaking to a crowd of thousands outside
Warsaw castle. You're listening to today on Radio 4 with Nick Robinson in Warsaw
and Rochelle Hussein in London and Caroline Nichols with the news. President
Putin will give a speech in the next hour updating Russians on the state of the
conflict in Ukraine. The state of the nation address was due to take place in
December but it was cancelled because of a series of military setbacks.
President Biden will speak about the war during a visit to the Polish capital
Warsaw. He'll describe it as a battle between democracy and autocracy and will
say democracy has the upper hand. China's foreign minister Ching Geng has said
Beijing is deeply worried that the fighting in Ukraine is in danger of spiraling
out of control. Official figures show the government recorded a surplus of more
than £5 billion last month. This was despite substantial spending on energy
support schemes and one-off payments to the EU. Economists had anticipated the
government would need to borrow around £8 billion to cover the gap between its
income and its spending. The head of an NHS clinic for gamblers in the north of
England has warned the opportunity to bet online has created a significant
public health crisis. Ministers are expected to publish plans soon for the first
significant changes to gambling laws since 2005. Thank you, Caroline. It is now
22 minutes tonight. It is 60 years since an American president declared Iq bin
Ein Berlin. President Kennedy, of course it was, he went on to say that people
who did not understand what he called the great issue between the free world and
the communist world should come to Berlin. Today, thousands will gather on the
streets again in Europe to hear an American president. He will spell out the
choice between what he will call democracy and autocracy. This time the venue,
Warsaw, the president, Joe Biden, a day after his historic visit to the
Ukrainian capital, Kiev. Like me, Sarah Smith is in Warsaw and will be at
President Biden's speech in Royal Palace Gardens this afternoon. Morning to you,
Sarah, are they comparing that speech or are they hoping others will compare
that speech with the speech that JFK made all those decades ago? Nobody has been
so hubristic amongst the White House team to actually directly draw our
attention to that. But yes, of course, they would be delighted with those kind
of comparisons, not least because President Biden will make a speech which
similarly has a long-term vision for what the future of Europe as democracy
confronts an autocratic aggressor from the East. Yesterday's trip was, of
course, very much about demonstrating visibly that Joe Biden wants to send the
message that the US will stick with Ukraine for the long term, for as long as it
takes, as he always says. He's going to have a wider message today speaking to
more people around the world, to Poland and to the rest of NATO, to the Allies,
celebrating the unity that they've demonstrated so far, which he has convinced
is not what Vladimir Putin expected when he invaded Ukraine and also making the
point that they do have the stamina and determination to remain united
regardless of whether Vladimir Putin thinks that ultimately they will be weak
and easily divided. But he also wants to speak wider to Russia to send the
message that the US will, of course, carry on backing and arming Ukraine, but
he'll talk also about Russian war crimes and atrocities in Ukraine and demand
that Russia be held to account for that. And that's an important new message
that we've been hearing from the US. The Vice President talked about it a couple
of days ago. And he's also going to be talking to the American public. Paul
suggests that they are growing slightly weary of this conflict and what it's
costing America. So he will lay out for Americans as well as for the rest of the
world why it is in their interests to continue to back Ukraine, not just because
of the principle of democracy and standing up to Russia's aggression, but about
defending a rules-based world order, which he sees would be under threat if
Ukraine were to fall to Russia. Now, you and other reporters in the White House
pool were expecting to travel with him on Air Force One to Warsaw, to Poland.
They managed to keep it a secret from you, although interestingly chose not to
keep it a secret from the Kremlin. Yes. And there is some disgruntled, shall we
say, the journalists who've just come off the same, the special 747 that's
usually used as Air Force One, but they only call it that when the President's
on it. So I actually have just landed in Warsaw, off what was known as Special
Air Mission 28. But they did tell us about informing Moscow several hours before
they told us that the President was coming. And of course, they claim there were
great security concerns around this. But when we press them on it, why the
President would take a 10-hour train journey if the security was that much of an
issue, they said, well, the thing is the Russians suck at dynamic targeting. In
other words, they're not capable of hitting a moving target, even a train. And
yeah, that's an official quote from the White House on background. The Russians
suck at hitting a moving target. And the secret code for this was that it was
called the Gulf Journey. Yes, yes. The journalists who were allowed to fly with
the President, a very small number of them, were told to look out for an email
telling them that they were going to be on a Gulf Journey, which of course, I
mean, it all sounds terribly amusing. And there have been jokes behind the
scenes about all of this. But of course, I mean, it is deadly serious, both the
security implications behind this and the message from the trip. And what's
interesting, when you travel behind the scenes and you're able to talk to
security officials, you do learn a little bit more about what they're thinking.
And I believe you're not going to hear much about China from the President
today, necessarily. But watch out later this week for what the US administration
starts saying. They are very worried that China is gearing up for an
intervention that they could be about to start providing Russia with lethal
assistance in this war and expect soon to hear some very explicit warnings of
the consequences if China does get involved like that. Sarah Smith, our North
America editor. Thank you. The time is now 17 minutes to nine. Kate Forbes, the
Scottish Government's Finance Secretary and a candidate to replace Nicola
Sturgeon, has lost support this morning from some of her senior colleagues at
Holyrood, including an MSP who nominated her and three Scottish Government
ministers after she spoke last night about same-sex marriage and revealed she
would not have voted for the bill legalising it had she been in the Scottish
Parliament at that time in 2014. She is on the line now. Good morning. Good
morning. Can your campaign survive this? It can because we have a large party
membership, most of whom are not on Twitter. They are ultimately the voters and
they are as diverse as the Scottish people are. And ultimately, my leadership
campaign is based on competence and vision, but also on a willingness to reach
out across Scotland and to ensure that we live in a pluralistic and tolerant
society where freedom of speech is a cornerstone. You are in a battle, though,
to lead a progressive party, one with a young base. How can you command enough
support across that party and have authority after this? Well, of course, I am
one of the youngest MSPs myself. So in terms of reaching out to that youth
voice, I think, again, our approach to doing that means that we need to be
clear, honest, not fun. I think people long for straight answers to straight
questions, but we also need to recognise that in a diverse society, my approach
is to defend to the hilt your right to live and love free of harassment and fear
in the hope that you would afford me the same right as a person of faith. And
surely that's what progressive values are all about, that somehow it's not
mutually exclusive for me to defend your right whilst you defend mine. Okay. So
if that vote, the one that happened in 2014, was happening today, if same-sex
marriage had not yet been legalised in Scotland, how would you vote on that
issue today? Well, I've already answered that question yesterday. I'll answer it
again just now. But we have always viewed marriage as a question of conscience.
And in that regard, if you look at Angela Merkel, Angela Merkel is a case in
point, she voted against equal marriage, according to her conscience, whilst
Chancellor, but it was under her leadership that the vote was held. And it was
under her leadership that the vote was implemented. So the answer to my question
about how you would vote on it today is that you would not be able to vote for
same-sex marriage today. Sorry, I actually think you can't be able to vote for
same-sex marriage if that vote was happening today. As a question of conscience,
I would have voted alongside mainstream Christian teaching that marriage is
between a man and a woman, but equal marriage is a legal right today. I am a
servant of democracy, I'm not a dictator, and I would respect and defend that
democratic choice. And if I could just make one last point. If we're seeing, as
I think we hear in the public discourse, that high public office is barred to
people of faith, or only to people with the right kind of faith, or only to
people with the sort of socially accepted faith, then we're moving into very
dangerous days in Scotland, considering some of the positions that I have
outlined are common across all major faiths, including Islam, Christianity, and
Judaism. It is generally the case, isn't it, that to command support in your own
party, you do need to be largely in tune with the views of that membership, or
you can run into difficulty. I want to put to you what Tim Farron said when he
was stepping down as leader of the liberal democrats in 2017. He said, to be a
political leader, especially of a progressive liberal party, and to live as a
committed Christian, to hold faithfully to the Bible's teaching, for him felt
impossible. You're saying you could reconcile it. Well, I'm saying that I have
been able to reconcile it over the last six years of serving in front line
politics, and indeed serving in one of the most significant roles in government
as finance and economy secretary. But ultimately, this is an election.
Ultimately, it will be the SMP members that vote. And whilst obviously we're
quite focused on a storm that is gathering in the Twitter sphere, the diversity
of SMP members reflects the diversity of the Scottish population. And if they
choose to, through this democratic process, to vote for me because they too
believe in pluralistic and tolerant society, then that would mean that I would
be proposed as leader, and it would be my job to ensure that I built a team
around me of competent and talented individuals to govern Scotland in a way that
reflects the wishes of the people of Scotland. It's not all in the Twitter
sphere. There are, as I said, people who had supported you who've withdrawn
their support this morning, including MS and MSP who nominated you. On
independence, how do you believe it can be achieved? So I think there's three
elements to this. The first is that we need to reset the whole approach. We need
to ensure that we are speaking to people across the SMP, across the Yes
movement, and dare I say it, controversial, also talking to people who haven't
yet been persuaded of independence. I think to date, decisions about strategy
and the approach have been taken by too few people in the SMP, and we need to
widen that out further. I think the second thing is that we need to get to grip
with the issues that really matter. I have been serving as Finance and Economy
Secretary. We have absolutely got to deliver a step change in our economic
handling to ensure that we have a growing economy, we have economic prosperity,
that we have secure, well-paid employment. I think when people see that and they
see competent government, they will be more persuaded. But the last point- But
just, when you say a reset and putting it at the heart, you have said putting it
at the heart, independence at the heart of the next election, does that mean it
would be a central part of the manifesto? Nicola Sturgeon had at one point
talked about it being a one issue campaign at the next general election. Yes, my
approach is that it would be front and centre, and we would use that election to
put pressure on the UK government. I would hope that people in Scotland would
vote again for the SMP, knowing the independence that's front and centre of that
manifesto. And that would demonstrate, I think it's demonstrating the weight of
support that will push the UK government's hand. They are standing in the way of
democracy, but they think they can get away with it. And we need to build that
support, make the case and ensure that it's quite clear that there is that
weight of support for independence. Kate Forbes, thank you very much. It's now
10 to 9. The last time Parliament regulated the gambling industry, this
smartphone had yet to be invented, and we had not seen the explosion of online
gambling. Well, new proposals to reform gambling are due to be published in a
white paper by the government soon. Ministers are therefore subject to intense
lobbying by a hugely profitable industry, and by those who've watched lives
being destroyed by gambling. John Meyers' son, Ryan, killed himself after
becoming addicted to gambling. John says he wants that white paper to change the
rules on advertising. TV adverts that show everybody happy, everybody ramming
groups of men and women going out, having a great time, having a great laugh,
and nobody ever loses. Let's show the downside like they did with the tobacco
adverts, like they did with alcohol. Let's show the families who are devastated
by this terrible addiction. Listening to that, our culture and media editor,
Katie Rassell. Morning to you, Katie. Do you think he's likely to get what he
wants? Morning, Nick. Well, it's a question, isn't it? I mean, as you have
probably reported many times, this white paper has been often delayed and is
long awaited. What we think is that it's going to come out in the next couple of
weeks, that's what I've been told. So imminent is the word that's being used. As
you said, Gambling Act predated the smartphone. It's a review of the Gambling
Act of 2005. Once the smartphone came in, it was obviously a game changer. You
can bet wherever, whenever now, and the laws in Great Britain just haven't
caught up with that changed world. So, you know, people say people like John
Myers there who you just heard from, you know, his son Ryan was one of Britain's
several hundred thousand problem gamblers and reformers say they don't want to
stamp out betting, but they do want to protect people who are susceptible to
gambling addiction. So, you know, for example, when it comes to football, you
know, there are eight Premier League clubs sponsored by a gambling company. Fans
are bombarded with messaging. You know, it's on the shirts, it's in the
stadiums. You can bet in real time. You can bet on who's going to score the next
goal, when it will be, how many minutes of extra time, you know, and it goes on.
So it feels like football has normalized gambling, they say. And they claim
reformers that it's targeted the most vulnerable people. So there's been, as you
said, a lot of lobbying going on. Things have been in, things have been out in
terms of this white paper, as I understand it, because, you know, MPs and peers
are on both sides of the argument, on all sides of the argument, as well as
charities, clinicians who obviously want changes and want tighter regulations. I
mean, when it comes to advertising, they are looking at tightening it up. And
that will be what, in a sense, John Myers will be happy if he gets that. Katie
Russell, our Culture and Media Editor. Thank you very much indeed. And the time
is now seven minutes to nine. When President Biden speaks here in Warsaw at
Warsaw Castle, thousands will line the streets to watch the speech in person on
huge screens that have been erected on the streets here. It would be a
significant moment, even if he had not just been to Kiev, even if we were not on
the eve of the anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine. But just what does it
mean to Poles who like Ukraine is like others were occupied by the Soviet Union
for decades and now celebrate freedom and democracy. We're joined here in Warsaw
by Pavel Paflosky, chairman of the Foundation Council at a think tank called the
War Store Institute and also by Jenny Hill, our Berlin correspondent who's
covering the speech and Biden's talks with East European countries here in
Warsaw. Jenny, you know this city well. It's going to be quite a moment. I think
so. And I think there is a real sense of excitement out there. You know,
everyone I've met is telling me he's coming. He's coming. You know, it doesn't
carry quite the same potent symbolism as his visit yesterday to Kiev, of course.
But nevertheless, this carries a big significance for a lot of people here. And
I think that's partially because it's interpreted by many as a recognition of
the shifting center of gravity within Europe. Poland is increasingly an
important ally for the US as a result of this war, as we know. But it's also
about reassurance for people here. You know, they've got a war in effect on
their doorstep. They've been telling the world for years Russia is a threat. No
one really listened. Now they were proven right. And I think that they want
those kind of security guarantees from the US, not just for Poland itself, but
for Ukraine. And that's something which will be coming up as a subject when
President Biden meets President Duda later on. There will be countries in the
meeting today, nine leaders who are meeting President Biden, who say we quite
like what Ukraine's got in terms of their degree of support. We haven't got it
for the potential invasion of our country. Yes. And that, I think, is going to
be very difficult for President Biden. There's a lot of discussion around
whether the US should be offering, for example, some kind of binding guarantee
similar to what it has with Israel, that it offers some kind of security
assurance to Ukraine. As you say, if he goes ahead and does that, then those
other countries may very well be asking for that, too. He's well aware of that.
Pavel Pavorsky, forgive my stumbling over your name a little bit earlier on.
What do you think that the politicians here in Warsaw want to hear from the
president? I believe that we are waiting for the recognition of the Polish huge
support for Ukraine that was vital to this country on different levels, because
that's the political level, the diplomatic level. Our government, our president,
were extremely actively supporting Ukraine in the European Union, in NATO. And I
think that's very important for the governing party. That's also very important
for the Polish people, people who themselves supported enormously Ukrainian
refugees. And we are talking here about millions of people, over nine million
Ukrainian refugees crossed Polish border. Of course, not all of them are staying
here, but still that's more than three million people. And it was worth one
percent of Polish GDP to support them this last year. So that's an enormous
support and a huge effort of the whole country. When you talk of the threat
coming from Russia, people might say, well, hold on, Poland's in the EU,
Poland's in NATO, unlike Ukraine, for example. It's a very different threat
here, isn't it, from the one that was experienced in Ukraine? Yeah, surely
that's different. But not so long time ago, there are only few people who are
now remembering it. In 1939, there was a huge question, is it worth to die for
Gdańsk? And of course, NATO is working in a different way, but it's still
remembered here that you may have the guarantees, but what will happen really,
we'll see. That's the first thing. And the second thing is that, well, we don't
know what type of actions Russia may take here. It might not be directly the
military invasion. There are different sorts of active measures that Russia
wants to practice in Central and Eastern Europe. Well, try to shape the politics
here, for example, sponsoring Russian backed parties. Russian backed parties,
yes, I think that, you know, Poland is so skeptical about Russia that it's
impossible to have an openly pro-Russian party here, but they are supporting
radicals, both on the left and on the right. But not every leader, Jenny, in
Eastern Europe has been as clear as the Estonian Prime Minister I spoke to just
a few minutes ago on the programme, all ban of Hungary, for example, said time
to give some territory up, time to talk. Yes, indeed. And that is no doubt going
to be problematic and something which I suppose will be a part of the
discussions today. That is why President Duda and indeed the other leaders who
he'll meet, President Biden, will be trying to be very clear. And that's why I
think, you know, overwhelmingly here we're seeing the message of please keep
sending more weapons to Ukraine. You know, just around the corner, there's a
massive sign on the wall. President Biden's motorcade must be driving past it at
some point saying, please send F-16s, you know. So that I think is going to be
more the focus. And I think the voices of those like Mr Orban will probably be
drowned out amongst the most that Jenny Hill, our Berlin correspondent Pavel
Pavlovski. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via
third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
sounds. They will be telling their grandchildren about what they remember the
last time a US president spoke to the.