TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 about why older women are sometimes referred to as hags and whether that
reflects attitudes in society. And the Home Secretary will be here to talk about
migration. I don't like the way you were looking at me as you said that thing
about hags. It's eight o'clock on Wednesday, the 8th of March. You're listening
to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson and Michelle Hussain. The headlines
this morning, the government has insisted its plans for tackling small boat
crossings are lawful and proportionate after the UN Refugee Agency said they
amounted to an asylum ban. A weekly injection for weight loss has been approved
for use on the NHS in England. The UN Secretary General is in Ukraine for talks
about the deal allowing crucial grain exports through the Black Sea amid fears
Russia could abandon it. The BBC News is read by Jane Steel. The UN Refugee
Agency has expressed profound concern about the government's new laws designed
to prevent almost all migrants arriving by illegal routes claiming asylum. It
says it amounts to an asylum ban. Labour has said the legislation will simply
make the problem worse. But the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said the
measures are necessary and will act as a deterrent. Here's our political
correspondent, Ian Watson. The Prime Minister never expected his plans to go
unchallenged. The clearest sign of that was the Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman's admission in a letter to MPs that there was more than a 50% chance
that the measures could be incompatible with the European Convention on Human
Rights. And the UK is also a signatory to the 70-year-old UN Refugee Convention.
But the UNHCR's representative to the UK, Vicki Tennant, told Newsnight that the
agency was very concerned by the new legislation. This is effectively closing
off access to asylum in the UK for people arriving irregularly. We believe it's
a clear breach of the Refugee Convention and remember, even people with very
compelling claims will simply not have the opportunity to put these forward. The
government is hopeful it can pass its legislation by the summer. But if there
are legal challenges, the Prime Minister has declared he's up for the fight. If
part of his motivation is to create clear blue water between government and
opposition, in this respect he has succeeded with Labour claiming that his new
system would be unworkable. But he knows that at the next election, voters are
likely to examine the reality, but not just rely on the rhetoric when assessing
whether he has delivered on his slogan to stop the boats. It's understood the
match of the day presenter Gary Lineker will be spoken to by the BBC and
reminded of his responsibilities following comments on Twitter about the
government's immigration plan. A number of Conservative MPs have expressed anger
after he criticised both the policy and the language used to introduce it. A
weekly injection which helps people lose up to a tenth of their body weight has
been approved for use by the NHS in England. The drug has been heavily hyped on
social media due to its popularity with celebrities. Here's our Health and
Science correspondent James Gallaher. Somagotide is also known by the brand name
Wagovi. It's a weekly injection and it mimics a hormone naturally produced by
the body when we eat. The drug makes people feel full, eat less and lose weight.
It will be restricted to those being treated at NHS weight management clinics
who also have other health problems such as type 2 diabetes or heart disease.
However, the NHS will only offer patients somagotide for two years and this
decision has been criticised. There's no data on very long term use, however
it's clear that once people stop taking the drug, their weight starts
increasing. Somagotide is seen by some as a breakthrough treatment that moves
past the usual mantra of diet and exercise. But there's also concern the mix of
weight loss drugs, which can be bought privately, and ideas of beauty and
celebrity culture could also have a damaging impact on those vulnerable to
eating disorders. Professor Jason Halford from the School of Psychology at the
University of Leeds has studied obesity for 30 years. He told us the likelihood
was that people would still struggle to be prescribed the drug. The issue
remains actually people living with obesity gaining access to this treatment.
The NICE guidelines are very helpful in the respect that they say that the drug
must be used in the context of specialist weight management services. The
problem is we don't have enough of those specialist weight management services
in the UK. Train companies have renewed calls for their last pay offer to be put
to members of the RMT union, who are scheduled to stage four strikes in the next
three weeks. The union announced last night it had suspended walkouts at Network
Rail to allow a vote by its members on a new pay offer. The RMT says it will
give updates in the coming days. The UK's aviation regulator has told Heathrow
it will have to charge airlines less per passenger for using its services. The
airport, which wanted the fees to increase, said the decision made no sense. The
Civil Aviation Authority said it was a good deal for consumers. Here's our
transport correspondent Katie Austin. Heathrow and its airline customers have
been in a bitter war of words about the right level of landing charges at
Britain's biggest airport. Right now the figure is about £31.50. The CAA has now
decided the charges must drop to £25.43 per passenger next year and stay around
that level until 2026. The regulator says it expects passenger numbers to return
to pre-pandemic levels. The figure is very different to the £42 Heathrow has
previously said it needed to fund improvements like a new baggage system. Today
the airport argued the decision would do nothing for consumers. But the airline
Virgin Atlantic said the CAA had not gone far enough. The United Nations
Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, will meet President Zelensky in Kiev today
to discuss extending a deal which allows Ukraine to export grain. Russia has
signalled it might let the agreement expire. From Kiev, here's our diplomatic
correspondent James Landale. Ukraine used to be one of the world's biggest
exporters of grain. So when Russia invaded and closed its ports last year,
global food prices soared and millions faced severe hunger. In July a deal was
brokered by the UN and Turkey, under which Russia allowed some grain to be
exported via the Black Sea. But this deal has to be renewed every four months
and Russia has signalled it might not allow an extension next week unless more
is done to lift curbs on its own agricultural exports. This is what Antonio
Guterres will discuss with President Zelensky today. For Ukraine this matters
because it needs to earn foreign currency and empty its silos ready for next
year's harvest. For the world it matters because without a deal global food
prices would rise, the world's economy would suffer and millions would face
humanitarian disaster. The founder of Russia's Wagner mercenary groups says his
forces have occupied the whole of the eastern part of Bukhmut. It's not been
possible to verify the claim. The city has been the focus of fierce fighting. A
BBC investigation has found the number of dog attacks recorded by police in
England and Wales rose by a third between 2018 and 2022. The dog population is
estimated to have risen by only 15%. The figures were obtained through freedom
of information requests. Emily Unier reports. The BBC asked all the police
forces in England and Wales how many offences they'd recorded over the past five
years involving dangerously out of control dogs causing injury. Of those that
responded, figures showed incidents had risen by more than a third over that
period, from nearly 16,000 in 2018 to almost 22,000 last year. The National
Police Chiefs' Council says it has a dangerous dogs working group tackling the
issue and it's seen an increase in the number of people reporting incidents. It
added that anecdotal evidence from rehoming centres suggests the number of dogs
with behavioural problems being handed in is increasing. A survey by the charity
PDSA in 2022 showed a small rise in dog ownership since 2018, partly because so
many people got pets during the Covid pandemic. Eurovision fans who've booked
accommodation in Liverpool for the contest in May are being warned that scammers
could be targeting them. Booking.com has confirmed to the BBC that some of its
hotel partners have been targeted by a cyber attack, which has put some
customers' data at risk. The BBC's Eurovision reporter Daniel Rosney has more. I
think this is a landmark moment, one because our players drove it and as I say
we're really proud of them but this is a real statement of intent by the
government that physical education and sport really matters. That in itself will
make a difference, plus the investment, plus the energy we at the FA will put
into driving this. The government has announced £600 million of funding to try
to create equal sporting opportunities for girls. Schools in England will be
required to make sports, including football, available and deliver a minimum of
two hours of physical education per week. England's lionesses welcomed the news
after winning Euro 2022, they had called for equal access. Jane, thank you very
much indeed. It is now nine minutes past eight. Stop the boats. That message in
block capitals on a red background on the Prime Minister's new lectern could
hardly be starker, simpler. The reality much less so. The government's latest
attempts to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats proposes to
designate pretty much everyone who arrives on these shores in that way as an
illegal migrant, to be barred for life from even seeking asylum. On arrival
they'll be detained for 28 days without any recourse to the law before, we're
told, being deported. That's where things get more complicated. Deported where?
Detained where? And what if the whole scheme is itself a breach of international
law? A possibility, a likelihood, written on the face of the bill itself as it
carries this warning. There is more than 50% chance that this may not be
compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights. Well, the woman who's
been working on the detail, a lawyer herself, is of course the Home Secretary,
Suella Braverman. I'm delighted to say she joins us on the line from our
Westminster studio. Good morning to you, Home Secretary. Good morning, Nick.
We'll send you back. That's what the Prime Minister declared four years ago. Why
should we believe it will happen now? Well, I mean, the problem is at an
unsustainable and unprecedented level. Last year alone, we saw over 45,000
people travel in small boats across the Channel, sometimes fatally. This cannot
carry on. It's costing £6 million a day to accommodate thousands of people in
hotels throughout towns and cities in the United Kingdom. And it's causing and
fuelling a criminal trade of people smuggling gangs. And we therefore need to
take robust, necessary and fundamentally humanitarian measures to deter people
from taking the journey in the first place. Sure. That's the problem that you've
spelt out there. And I asked you why it was different from what we were told
four years ago when we were told that the message to migrants was we'll send you
back. Let's just go a year ago. There was a new law passed by the Conservative
government to deter asylum seekers, we were told, because they'd be sent to
Rwanda. Since then 18,000 claims have been rejected. Can you tell us how many
people have actually been expelled? The National Anti-Borders Act was an
important step forward in streamlining our asylum laws and ensuring that newer
fences were created and new penalties were increased for people smuggling. And
we've had some good results on the back of that important legislation. So how
many were expelled of those 18,000? The problem has now exacerbated. The numbers
have got higher. The pressure has got more acute. How many were expelled? Under
the National Anti-Borders Act. I mean, we haven't, we have not removed anybody
to Rwanda. We have been removing people back to Albania. We have been removing
people back to their home countries where they've come from. I'm told the figure
is 21. Well, it depends how you're counting these figures. In the last few
months alone, we've relocated approximately 500 people back to Albania. Well,
let's accept it's a tiny fraction. Pursuant to the new agreement that the Prime
Minister struck with the Albanians. Let's accept it's a tiny fraction of the
numbers who've been expelled. I use that, it's not a trick question, but to
illustrate the point that intent isn't enough, is it? Words are not enough. It
is a question about whether you have a practical, workable policy. Now, this
year, how many people do you expect will come across the channel? And if you
automatically reject them, as you've promised, where on earth will they go? I
must just clarify, I mean, we did return thousands of people last year who
didn't have a lawful basis to do that, to be here. But in terms of going
forward. Under the National Anti-Borders Act, it was 21 people. But generally,
we return people systematically once it is established that they don't have a
legal basis to do so. And there were thousands of people who we did manage to
return last year. So, how many do you expect to come this year? And if you do
reject them all automatically, where will they go? On the basis of previous
years, we have to expect that we may see people, you know, in the region of
40,000 people or more coming this year. That's the forecast. Quite a lot more,
isn't it? Under the Home Office model, I think it's up to 80,000. It may well
be. That is a possibility. Could be 80,000. That is why this action is
necessary. We need to ensure that if you come here illegally, you will be
detained and swiftly removed. People need to know that coming here illegally on
a boat will not lead them to a life in the United Kingdom. So that's why I ask
you the practical question, removed where? Well, we will... Our partnership with
Rwanda is a core element of our plan. I'm very pleased with the High Court
victory that the government secured at the end of last year, upholding the
lawfulness of our agreement with Rwanda. We are now in the Appeal Court, so we
have to wait for the legal process to complete. That capacity is hundreds, isn't
it, not thousands? So by your own count, we may have 80,000 crossing. That's in
addition to a backlog of 140,000, by the way. So 80,000 people crossing this
year. You might, if you win in the courts, be able to deport, what, a few
hundred to Rwanda. Where will the other 79,000-odd go? Well, I just have to
correct you there, Nick. You're wrong. Our scheme with Rwanda is not capped at
200. That is a misunderstanding of our world-leading agreement with our friends
in Rwanda. It is an uncapped scheme. Do you expect thousands to go there? And
therefore, there is considerable capacity, if we need it, in Rwanda for people
to be relocated there to lead safe and secure lives. Considerable, do you mean
thousands, tens of thousands? Well, it is uncapped. So we will assess it on a
demands basis. But it is wrong to say that it is capped at 200. I think what
people are saying, sorry to interrupt you, just so you can clarify this. I think
what people have been saying is the current capacity is a couple of hundred. So
just for clarity, uncapped is, as it were, I hear you. But are you saying there
is the capacity, the possibility that Rwanda could take many thousands of
people? Potentially. It is an uncapped scheme. We will decide on the numbers who
are relocated there on a case-by-case basis as it evolves. Can I just address
this on numbers because it is really important. No one is saying that we now
need to build 40,000 new detention places to support people who are going to be
detained. That is not what we are doing. We are going to increase our detention
estate and our capacity. That will be necessary. And we have got plans which are
fairly far advanced in order to do that. But the running theme throughout this
bill is deterrence. We want to ensure that people understand that they should
not make the journey in the first place because they will be removed if they do
so. That will stop the people smuggling gangs. It will smash their fundamental
rationale and raison d'etre. It will deter people from making the journey in the
first place. And if you look at other countries such as Australia, once they
were able to relocate people away from the Australian territory, actually they
saw a dramatic fall in the numbers making the journey in the first place.
Deterrence is a big objective of these measures. So critical for that deterrence
to work is that the plan itself is legal. Now you have written on the face of
the bill, as they call it in the parliamentary jargon, it's literally written
there for MPs to see that there is, and I quote, more than 50% chance that this
may be in breach of international law. Now if MPs can read it and if you've got
to say it, that's what the people smugglers will say, won't it? They'll say,
this is never going to be law. Keep coming. I disagree. We believe that our
measures are lawful. That is a clear statement of our assessment. These measures
have been rigorously tested amongst an army of lawyers internally. And we are
very clear that we are complying with our international law obligations. Why did
you write on the bill that there was a more than 50% chance that it's not legal?
We've issued what is a quite technical statement, section 191B of the Human
Rights Act. Section 191B was designed specifically for instances like the one in
which we find ourselves, that being, where we are within the boundaries of the
law, but we are trying new arguments, we are testing novel interpretations of
the law, but we do not consider that we have crossed the boundary and we do not
consider that we are in unlawful territory. We very strongly view our proposals
as lawful. If you're law is right and you're wrong, and they're obviously saying
to you, look, we think you might lose in the court here. What's plan B? What
will you do? Will you then do what you've always wanted to do? You've talked
about it. Leave the European Convention on Human Rights. These measures do not
take us out of the European Convention on Human Rights. No, but what's plan B?
They will ensure that we are complying with our international law, whether
that's human rights laws, whether that's a refugee convention, whether that's
the European Convention against trafficking. There's a plethora of international
obligations to which we subscribe. My question to you is, what will you do if
you're wrong and the courts find this illegal, which you know is the very basis
of why you've been struggling here, is the argument you say you're having with
the people you say are in an activist blob. If they're right and you're wrong,
and this is found to be illegal, what's plan B? What will you do? I'm not going
to prejudge the situation. We've got a very extensive plan. We've got a 10 point
plan. So one element is this legislation necessary, proportionate and
humanitarian at its heart. We've got to break the model of the people smuggling
gangs through intelligence and enforcement work with the National Crime Agency
and our friends in France. We've got to bear down on our asylum backlog. We're
making good progress on the 100,000 cases which are waiting for a decision in
the Home Office. We've got to procure alternative accommodation. And again, we
have to make sure that we're not using hotels in towns and cities across the
United Kingdom. Understood. Now this isn't just about practicalities. It isn't
just about legalities. It is also about morality. You have often talked about
your father. You've spoken of your pride in the fact that this country gave him
refuge when Kenya kicked out foreigners in effect, said that Indians like him
were not welcome to stay and work. He came under a special scheme back in 1968.
And of course, we have special schemes, we know, for Ukrainians and for some
limited number of Afghans and Syrians too. Isn't there a danger, though, that
someone like him in Africa today, desperate, could make their way to Britain?
And under this law, those people would be criminalised, incarcerated and
deported? Well, my father's one of many millions of people who have found
sanctuary in the United Kingdom. And I'm incredibly proud of our great tradition
of offering security to many thousands of people. And most recently, hundreds of
thousands of people, whether they're Ukrainian, Afghan, from Hong Kong, or
Syria, they have been welcomed here through lawful routes. That's the key
distinction. If someone like him got on a boat, they would be criminalised,
incarcerated and deported. They've come here according to our rules, and they've
not jumped the queue, and they haven't been part of a criminal operation. They
haven't, you know, taken their lives across the channel, you know, put their
lives and the lives of others in jeopardy. That's really important. And this in
no way should diminish our tradition of offering refuge to hundreds of thousands
of people, very recently, whether my father or people more this year alone. But
let me just put this question to you that was put to you in the House of Commons
just a few weeks ago, because you often emphasise that you're in favour, you
say, of offering refuge, of meeting our international commitments. And in the
House of Commons just a few weeks ago in November, you were asked by the then
Chair of the Home Affairs Select Committee to imagine a 16-year-old orphan with
a brother or sister living legally here, escaping a war zone, escaping religious
persecution in Africa. And you were asked then, how could that person legally
make their way to Britain? And we do have, as I've just mentioned, the hundreds
of nearly 500,000 people in recent years alone have come here lawfully. There's
no scheme for Africa, though. Fleeing persecution, fleeing conflict. We also
have other schemes. We work with the UNHCR around the world, whereby people who
are fleeing those kind of circumstances can apply for humanitarian protection in
the United Kingdom. Is there a scheme for Africa? We have a family reunion
scheme. We have a community sponsorship scheme. We have several schemes. But
importantly, these measures will also increase the safe legal route. Forgive me,
Home Secretary, I ask you the question because you didn't have an answer when
you were asked about it weeks ago. So I sort of figured you might have worked
out an answer by now. I think it's right to say, isn't it, but please clarify,
that this 16-year-old African orphan who had a family link with Britain,
escaping a war zone or religious persecution, could not currently find a safe
and legal route to come to this country. You're wrong. You're wrong, Nick, with
respect. How is that? We have a... I mean, every case is determined on its
merits. It would depend on the country from which they were coming, what their
grounds for humanitarian protection were, their age, their family circumstances.
But as I've just mentioned, we do have a family reunion scheme. We do work with
the UNHCR, whereby people all around the world can contact and go via the UN
referral scheme and make an application for protection in the UK. We have
sponsorship schemes as well. And then we also have country-specific schemes
which have extended a high level of protection and refuge to many hundreds of
thousands of people. Interesting. We'll pursue that a little bit more, see if we
can get to the bottom of what the rights and wrongs of all that are. Let's just
end, if I could, on your approach to this. You'll know that you stir up
controversy. You've talked of an invasion of our shores. The Prime Minister said
he was up for the fight. You said this week that you were on the side of the
law-abiding patriotic majority, not those who would betray Britain. Are you
saying to people listening to this programme who have worries about this policy,
not the activists, that they're not patriots, that they were in favour of
betraying Britain? I think it's clear for anyone to see that the vast majority
of British people care passionately about this problem and want to see it fixed.
People are fed up with thousands of people coming here illegally, breaking our
rules, abusing our generosity and undermining our asylum laws. But if people
have to agree with this technique... They are fed up... This approach, are they
betraying Britain? Are they not patriotic? They are fed up of British taxpayers'
money being spent, £6 million a day on hotel accommodation in towns and cities
around the United Kingdom. I'm asking about your language, Home Secretary. It's
not an unreasonable question to say, are you describing people listening to this
programme who don't like what you're outlining, which automatically says that
anyone arriving on these shores can be imprisoned, can be criminalised and can
be deported, are you saying that those people are not patriots and they are
betraying Britain? I'm saying that these measures are on the side of what the
vast majority of fair-minded British people want. That is control over our
borders, a fair and compassionate framework which deters people from making this
illegal and sometimes fatal journey in the first place. You seem a little
cautious about your own language. Let me ask you about Gary Lineker's language.
He made comparisons with the language he said some were using. He didn't name
you, but people assumed that he might have been talking about you from the
1930s. Do you think the BBC should sack him? Well let me just go on to my
language. I mean, my role as Home Secretary is first and foremost to be honest,
to be honest with the British people and to the British people and if that makes
some people feel uncomfortable then we can have a debate about the substance of
the measures. When it comes to Gary Lineker, I'm obviously disappointed that he
should attempt to equate our measures with 1930s Germany. I don't think that's
an appropriate way of framing the debate. Our measures, as I've made clear, we
are working very hard to ensure that people stop dying on the channel. That's
what this is about, Nick. People are taking this treacherous journey in the
false hope that that will lead to a life in the United Kingdom. There are many
other routes that they can use to come here and that's what I encourage them to
do. You said last year we failed to control our borders. If there are still
people coming over the channel at the time of the next election, will you admit
that the Conservatives have failed to control our borders? Perhaps you'll
consider resigning? It's vital that we fix this problem. I think it will be very
clear by the time of the next election whether we've succeeded or not. The Prime
Minister has thrown himself at fixing this problem. We're working hand in hand
to develop these important measures and I'm very pleased with the fact that
we've now got some legislation and we will be scrutinising it through the
parliamentary process. So no votes by the time of the next election? It will be
very clear whether we've succeeded or not. No votes? This is an important issue.
I think this is one of the most important issues. That's why the Prime Minister
made it one of his five pledges to the nation at the beginning of the year. He's
promising what he can deliver and we will deliver what we can promise. We've
discussed it at great length and we're grateful for your time this morning.
Thank you very much indeed. Home Secretary Zoella Braverman joining us on the
line from Westminster. And on the line also is Chris Mason, our political
editor. So Chris, the Home Secretary is saying it will be clear by the next
election whether or not we've succeeded in controlling our borders. That's less
than two years away now. What are the advantages and the pitfalls for the
Conservatives of pursuing this policy? Well, the clear pitfall is that the
slogan is stark, isn't it? Stop the boats. And it doesn't require a line in a
government published spreadsheet to prove that that hasn't happened. If it
hasn't happened by the next general election, it will merely require a camera on
the cliffs of Dover. So to that extent, the promise is clear, but measuring
whether it succeeds is clear too. And I noticed the Home Secretary didn't quite
answer Nick's question directly there. Neither did the Prime Minister when I put
the same question to him yesterday afternoon. I think they feel that they've got
to be stark because their intention has to be clear. And who knows, maybe there
might be other people that they can blame if it doesn't quite work because there
is this expectation that it will become entangled in the courts. I think the
striking thing, listening to the conversation with the Home Secretary over the
last 15 minutes, is the bald truth of this whole issue. Yes, there is a three-
word slogan, stop the boats, but underneath it there is geopolitical,
diplomatic, practical, financial, legal and logistical challenges. And they are
huge. That's why this issue is so significant and has got, in the minds of many,
so, so much worse. It's why it would be a challenge for any other government,
Labour or otherwise, after a general election. I think Labour are desperate to
emphasise that they recognise it's a problem too. They have a different set of
solutions. And I think this is going to dominate political debate again today. I
wouldn't be surprised if Labour focus upon it at Prime Minister's questions on
the practicalities and the legalities of actually delivering change. There is a
central assumption in what they're saying, Chris, which is that they believe
they do this and that people are deterred. They choose not to go with the people
smugglers and therefore they never need significant detention facilities. She
just said there will be some, but it's not like we're going to be accommodating
40,000 people. Yeah, that's the crux of their assumption, grounded in the
Australian experience. Curiously, it is an Australian slogan that they're
borrowing as well. Isaac Levido, a strategist for the government and Australian
himself, it was used in Australia and was seen to be a deterrent as well as a
policy that provoked huge controversy. Government's also making the argument
that they're trying to find new sites for the accommodation of migrants. There's
going to be new ones in Wethersfield, in Essex and Scampton, in Lincolnshire,
two former RAF bases that are being transferred for use by the Home Office. But
yeah, absolutely baked into the assumption is the deterrence effect, because
otherwise the scale of the detention, were that to become legal, would be on a
vast scale, around about half the current UK prison population. So deterrence
absolutely baked into it. A long way to go yet with this. It'll be back in the
Commons on Monday, expected to be in the House of Lords after Easter, where
it'll encounter resistance. The hope is from the government that it'll become
law by the summer. But that, when it is, if and when that happens, when it's
practically in place, is the point where you'll get the legal challenges. As
we've heard in the last 15 minutes or so, there's an acknowledgement from the
government that they can't be certain that it will be deemed to be legal. So
plenty more debate and discussion on this at a time when those numbers of
channel crossings continues to rise. Chris, thanks very much. 29 minutes to
nine. Rob, sports news. Hi again, Nick. Chelsea are through to the Champions
League quarter-finals after turning a 1-0 first leg deficit into a 2-1 aggregate
win last night at Stamford Bridge. The question for Tottenham fans is whether
their team can do something similar this evening against AC Milan coverage. Of
course, on BBC5 Live, details of all the other football on the BBC Sport
website, and more besides, including the latest from the Indian Wells Tennis in
California and Golf Players Championship in Florida, our correspondence are in
place. Well, now, just how many women enjoy and participate in sport in the UK?
A decent enough question for International Women's Day today. And we'll get to
it in a moment with Dame Catherine Granger, former Olympic champion and now
chair of UK Sport. She's on the line now. Good morning, Dame Catherine. News
this morning of a £600 million government package to enable equal opportunities
for girls in school sport. It's being reported that the success of the England
women's football team at last year's Euros has been a driver for this decision.
How much difference do you think that this money will actually make? Good
morning, Rob. It's wonderful news. As you said, it's International Women's Day.
We've woken up to snow and also this brilliant bit of headline news. I think it
will make a huge difference. It's a big investment financially, but I think the
message it's also sending out is that every young girl deserves an opportunity
if she wants to play football to access the same sport as the boys get to play.
And it's come from some brilliant, brilliant individual female athletes who have
showcased their sport last year at the Euros and have managed to change
government policy. Yes. What will the money actually pay for? I mean, at the
moment, I'm not more aware than you are of the details of the actual decision.
So I think that the opportunity is that it should provide girls at school the
same opportunities that any of the boys get at school. So if football or cricket
or rugby or golf or any of the sports that they can do at school as opportunity
is given to the boys, then it should be the same for the girls. Not all good
news, though, is it? A recent study by Women in Sport found that a fear of being
judged and a lack of confidence were the main reasons for teenage girls opting
out of sport, more than a million of them doing so. And these numbers are always
hugely disappointing. I'm someone you know, I've known you a long time. I've had
wonderful, positive experiences through sport and you sort of hope that every
young person gets the same opportunity to benefit in some way. But we know that
a lot of people drop out and especially at that very crucial teenage years.
There's not a simple solution to it. I know a lot of different organisations
from UK Sport to the home countries to the government to schools themselves are
campaigning very hard to try and keep that because the physical health benefits
are huge, but also the emotional well-being, mental health benefits are enormous
as well from activity. So we really need to try and not lose people at that
crucial stage. Yes, let's wind the conversation. The most controversial issue
currently in women's sport is the eligibility of transgender athletes. Former
Secretary Nadine Dorris said last year that women's sport must be reserved for
people born of the female sex. That's not an uncommon view, is it? What's your
view? You'll know, you've covered the news long enough. A lot of people are
really concerned about this issue and there's a very heated debate on all sides.
The most important thing is there's a lot of answers still yet to be found in
this area and I think when the debate gets too polarised and too divisive it's
not helpful for anyone. So at UK Sport we published... So can you bring the two
sides together do you think in some sort of way? Well, at UK Sport we publish
guidance across all the five home countries, home nations and publish guidance.
So from a sporting point of view it was really important to say actually the
answer was it wasn't easy to balance inclusion, fairness and safety in gender
affected sports. So actually it's for individual sports to choose where they
want to share their focus and they're also governed by international
federations. So there's rules coming down on a sort of global level of where
sports should make their decisions. The final point on role models, it's
International Women's Day. So here are three sports women of influence on
societal issues. Serena Williams on equal pay, Naomi Osaka on mental health,
Megan Rapinoe on LGBT rights. How valuable is their input do you think? Oh I
think it's... I mean they've already... we talk about the Lionesses in this
country, those are three brilliant American sports stars who have made big
changes across the Atlantic and I think they have a platform, they're very
successful, they're recognised, they're respected and also very passionate about
issues that are important to them. And you know, the same here, we want our
athletes to be able to speak out on issues that make a difference to them and
they can make a difference on the field of play but equally off the field of
play and make this world a little bit better and that is a great message on
International Women's Day. Dame Catherine Grainger, thank you very much indeed.
That takes us to our tips for today. Fontwell 310, number one, forever blessed.
Lingfield 4 o'clock, number six, come to pass. An invitation perhaps to the
horse behind. Thank you Rob and now to Polly Weston. The Patch is the series
where we go to a random postcode to find a story you probably wouldn't have
heard otherwise. Today we're back with a new series and a postcode in rural
Norfolk, a village called Feltwell. The sky is filled with the sound of military
fighter jets because this area hosts thousands of US Air Force personnel.
Feltwell is home to a US military base few people have heard of but on it stand
three huge mysterious white domes. What do they do? That's the Patch, this
morning at nine. Thank you, quick look at the weather today. Further spells of
rain, sleet and snow will move across Wales, central and southern England.
Further north we'll see brighter skies but Chris Fox has been telling us all
morning, prepare for heavier snow to come. You're listening to Today on Radio 4
with Nick Robinson, Michelle Hussain and Jane Steel with the news. The Home
Secretary Suella Braverman has insisted the government's new policy on migrants
arriving by boat is necessary and proportionate. She told this programme that
people needed to understand that crossing the Channel illegally would not lead
them to a life in the UK. The UN Refugee Agency, the UNHCR, says it's very
concerned about the measures, describing them as a clear breach of the Refugee
Convention. Ms Braverman said she believed the measures were lawful. It's
understood the BBC will speak to Gary Lineker about his responsibilities,
following comments he made on Twitter about the government's migration policy.
The Match of the Day presenter described yesterday's statement by the Home
Secretary as beyond awful. A weekly injection which helps people lose weight has
been approved for use by the NHS in England, so Maglutide will be available only
through specialist services for a maximum of two years. Heathrow Airport has
been told to charge airlines less for its services next year in a move that
could feed through to ticket prices. The airport had wanted to put its charges
up to fund improvements and said the decision by the UK's aviation regulator,
the CAA, made no sense. Jane, thank you very much. Now the agreement to allow
grain exports out of Ukraine last year was important for the country, for other
countries that rely on it for food, for the global food market because it
brought more supply into it and it was a major achievement for the UN Secretary
General, who now thinks that that agreement is in jeopardy. Antonio Guterres is
in Kiev today amid signs that Russia might want the agreement not to be renewed.
Alexei Gontyarenko joins us, MP for Odessa, the port city in the south of
Ukraine through which many of those grain exports go. Good morning, Mr
Gontyarenko. Good morning. What other signals do you think about Russia's
intention on the continuation of the deal? Russia never wanted this deal. Putin
wanted as much chaos as possible. He absolutely consciously stopped the Black
Sea a year ago after the start of invasion to Ukraine and he did it with a
purpose. His purpose is millions of people starving, social unrest, food prices
peaking. All of this is in his agenda and still is. Last year he was made to
accept for this deal by the pressure from global south, from Turkey, from United
Nations, but he is looking for possibility to leave the deal. And now the moment
of prolongation is definitely the moment which he will try to use. But that
pressure, the imperative that pushed those countries to pressurise Russia on
this last year, that remains the case today. Why do you think that it might not
be successful this time? It does, but Putin can hope, for example, that
President Erdogan is now much more concerned about what's going inside Turkey,
coming elections, awful consequences of the earthquake and other things. So he's
blackmailing. Putin is weaponising everything, energy, food. So that is his
blackmail and he will try to get maximum from it. How many grain ships are
coming out of Odessa every day? To what extent has the deal been successful? I
wonder if you can compare the numbers today to what they were before the war. Oh
no, they're not comparable at all. Just two, three ships per day today are
leaving through the grain corridor. And for your understanding, there was a
moment last year when Russia left the grain deal, because it was in autumn. They
were looking all the time for some grounds for this. But Erdogan said that, OK,
we will continue without you. And in two days, Russia came back. By the way, it
shows how we should deal with them. The only thing they understand is strength.
But what is interesting, during these two days, more than 30 ships passed
through the corridor when Russia was not involved. And when Russia came back,
it's just two, three ships per day. Today, their line of ships is more than 150
staying in the line to get into the corridor. So Russia, we can't say the grain
corridor is very successful. Unfortunately, it works badly. In general, the
world gave Russia a possibility to close the Black Sea, which is a very big
mistake, I think. It's not only about grain, it's about all other goods. What
will be if other tyrants in the world will decide to close other seas? I don't
know, Baltic Sea, South Chinese Sea or other sea. What will be the consequences
for the whole world? That will be awful. Okay. While you're with us, I also
wanted to ask you about the US intelligence assessment that Ukrainians and
Russians opposed to President Putin's invasion were responsible for the attack
on the Nord Stream gas pipelines last year. Now, the Ukrainian government has
said that it was not responsible, but who do you think was? I don't know. Me
personally, from the beginning, I was thinking that it is Russia, just in order
to, again, to pick the prices, to weaponize energy. But I am not an
investigator. It's clear for me that I doubt that Ukraine even have, that
Ukraine has a capacity possible for such action. It's very unlikely for me. But
it was always an odd one, wasn't it? The idea that Russia would hit its own gas
exports. Oh, why? They could because the number of Russian gas, which was
moving, would decrease significantly. Still, there is other systems which can
transport Russian gas. So it could be part of Russian blackmailing. But I'm not
saying that's the fact. I just don't know. But what I want really to see is the
result of investigation. But in any way, it's good that Russia can't blackmail
with gas today, because that's what they were doing before. Oleksei Goncharenko,
MP for Odessa, thank you. It is 17 minutes to nine. Now, if you use social
media, you'll be very familiar with the idea that Gary Lineker talks about a
whole lot more than football. He often tweets about politics. Yesterday he
tweeted, this is beyond awful. This is just an immeasurably cruel policy
directed at the most vulnerable people in language that is not dissimilar to
that used by Germany in the 30s. You may have heard the Home Secretary just a
few minutes ago describing that as disappointing. Some Tory MPs are being rather
more robust than that. One tells The Telegraph today, Jonathan Gullis, the Tory
MP for Stoke-on-Trent North, that the broadcaster should stand up to their
presenter and remind him his job's to talk football and not politics. Katie
Razzle is the woman who has the enviable task of being the BBC's media and
culture editor and having to tread this tightrope. Morning to you, Katie. Let's
be clear, if you or I said something like this, we'd be fired. Explain to
listeners why Gary Lineker isn't. Well, you're absolutely right, Nick, and
hello. The BBC does make a distinction when it comes to impartiality between
staff and talent who work in news and those who don't. And clearly, Gary Lineker
is a sports presenter. News isn't his business. So the rules for him are
different, but that nuance might be lost on audiences. To many, he's one of the
most high profile public faces of the BBC and, of course, the highest paid as
well. And the BBC does say his high profile does give him additional
responsibilities when it comes to impartiality and what he says. But clearly, as
you say, he doesn't appear to hold back from expressing his opinions on Twitter,
and he has previously been attacked and been seen as controversial for posts on
things like Brexit and asylum seekers previously. You want to ask me a question?
I can hear an intake of words, Nick. Go for it. Says a woman who has presented
this programme on quite a few occasions. Yeah, it's a dilemma, isn't it, for the
director general? Because in a sense, if Lineker just says you can talk to me as
often as you like and I'm still going to carry on, they've got to decide from
the director general down whether they fire a guy who's very popular and very
good at what he does. Well, that is exactly right. Of course it is. And in a
sense, we can already see that Gary Lineker has been reminded of his
responsibilities previously by the BBC. And they say they're going to speak to
him again and I'll speak to him again about it. He has also actually been found
to have broken impartiality rules last year by the BBC's complaints unit over a
previous tweet that he put up to do with Liz Truss urging a boycott of the
Champions League final in Russia. And he said and her party will hand back their
donations from Russian donors, question mark. So he has already been found
wanting. It is also, I think, more complicated and perceptions are more blurred
because of what happened with the World Cup. Because if you remember last
November, the BBC opened the coverage and Gary Lineker opened the BBC's coverage
by describing it as the most controversial World Cup in history and very much
getting into the politics of Qatar's human rights record and its record on
homosexuality and all of that. So, you know, it does, I suppose it's hardly
surprising audiences might feel the lines are blurred between news and sport,
particularly when he's been overtly political on his public BBC. I hesitate to
do this because I've no idea what the director general thinks on this. And
you're going to ask me that I know. No, but if I were him, I think I would argue
that there is a point to this distinction. People don't want my scripts,
Michelle's scripts, our questions to be informed by their knowledge of our
political attitudes, which is why we are not allowed to say what we think and we
are not allowed to tweet what we think and quite often don't even say in private
what we think. Gary Lineker speaks on the BBC about football and pretty much
only about football, even in the Qatar case, it was essentially about football,
wasn't it? And the role of football as a symbol. So it is different, goes the
argument. Yeah, I think that's absolutely right. But I do think in a sense, this
puts more pressure on Tim Davie than it does on Gary Lineker. Gary Lineker has
been through this before, as has Tim Davie, but Tim Davie is the one making
impartiality a cornerstone of his leadership of the BBC. Clearly, it'd be less
problematic for the BBC and for Tim Davie if Gary Lineker didn't get involved in
this. But clearly, that doesn't look like it's going to be possible. So when he
does, lots of people, some people, including Tory MPs will call for him to be
sacked. And this will keep going. Katie, thank you very much. Walked that
tightrope very effectively. At 13 minutes tonight, let me just turn to one other
thing that the Home Secretary said to us in the last few minutes. I put to her a
question that she had faced in the House of Commons in a Select Committee
hearing and could not come up with an answer to. It was a question put to her by
Tim Lawton, a Conservative MP relevant for this, a supporter actually of her
latest measures, who said to her a few weeks ago, I'm a 16-year-old orphan from
an East African country escaping a war zone and religious persecution. I have a
sibling who's legally in the UK at the moment. What is a safe and legal route
for me to come to the UK? I said to the Home Secretary, you hadn't got an answer
then. Have you got one now? Every case is determined on its merits. It would
depend on the country from which they were coming, what their grounds for
humanitarian protection were, their age, their family circumstances. But as I've
just mentioned, we do have a family reunion scheme. We do work with the UNHCR,
whereby people all around the world can contact and go via the UN referral
scheme and make an application for protection in the UK. We have sponsorship
schemes as well. And then we also have country-specific schemes which have
extended a high level of protection and refuge to many hundreds of thousands of
people. In other words, there are schemes, she said. Well, I said we'd try to
get to the bottom of that because many of those involved in observing policies
here are sceptical. Let's join Madeline Sumption now, well-known voice on
immigration and migration policy from the Migration Observatory. Do you think,
good morning to you, do you think there is a way in which the sort of individual
I described could get asylum in Britain? It would be pretty difficult. There is
a route for people to come to the UK through the UN. It's a resettlement route.
And the UK actually, over the last 10 years or so, has probably resettled more
people than most other countries through that particular route. But it is very
small and there isn't an easy way. You can't just apply to it. People
effectively, people get picked, people who have already been identified by the
UN. And the numbers are so small that for your average person who is from
Afghanistan or from Eritrea and has fled and is trying to find somewhere to go,
it's not a realistic option just because it's so difficult and there isn't a
sort of transparent process to apply to become one of those people who gets
picked to be resettled. So just in a couple of words, if you could, if I think
I've got to flee, I'm being persecuted, I'm in a war zone, you couldn't come
here and claim asylum. It would not currently be possible. Correct. For most
people in that situation, there isn't a safe and legal route. Madeline Sumption
of Migration Observatory, thanks for clarifying that. It's now 10 to 9. The UK's
obesity problem is serious. It is worse than our immediate European neighbours
and it is worse in areas of deprivation. How much is the new weight loss drug,
semaglutide, that we've been talking about on the programme this morning, part
of the solution now that it will be available for NHS prescriptions in England?
Dr Chris van Tulleken is an academic from University College London, the
presenter of the Radio 4 series, a thorough examination and he also talks and
writes a lot about ultra processed food. And Alice Wiseman also joins us,
Director of Public Health for Gateshead. Good morning. Good morning. Alice,
first of all, just some stats, because I know that it's obesity levels are worse
in deprived areas. What's the population of your, percentage of your adult
population, which is obese in Gateshead? Yeah, so I mean, we have a significant
challenge with overweight and obesity in Gateshead with almost three quarters of
adults either overweight or obese. And we know that a third of our kids are
starting school overweight or obese. And it's about one in 10 who are actually
obese as they start reception school. So it is a real significant challenge. And
it is, as you've already said, worse in our most disadvantaged areas where up to
half of the children can be overweight or obese by the time they finish their
primary school. Okay, it won't be children who are prescribed this drug, how
much do you welcome it and think it'll make a difference in Gateshead? So I
mean, anything that's going to help people who are obese is a welcome
intervention. I think the challenge for me is that, that the drug that's
available, as you say, will reach a very small number of people. And actually,
the measures that we need to take need to be much wider spread. And, you know,
like I say, almost three quarters of adults are overweight or obese, actually,
we need population level interventions, we need primary prevention, we need to
try and stop people from requiring treatment, and create the conditions which
enable them to make healthier choices about food and activity, as opposed to,
you know, just treating the problem further upstream once it's already an issue
for someone. So I think it's, it's welcome, it will reach a small number of
people. And there is much more that we should be doing at the local, regional
and national level to address the issue of obesity. Will it definitely reach
people in Gateshead? And I ask that just because the gateway is the specialist
weight loss services. Do you have one of those in Gateshead? Yeah, so we have,
we do have referral into tier three weight management services. What we don't
have in Gateshead is a tier two, where weight management service, which is for
somebody who is at a lower level of overweight. And the reason that we don't
have that is partly because the funding that came through during COVID did not
continue, and was one of the things that was lost at the start of last financial
year, in terms of the budget decisions that were made at a national level. But
actually, also, we did provide weight management services in the past, and an
evaluation of those services showed us that they weren't particularly effective.
So what they were doing is they were reaching, I'm going to generalize here, but
middle class, middle aged women who were losing a few pounds, and then putting
it back on again. And actually, when we looked at how we prioritize a reducing
public health grant, we've had our grant cut by almost 25% in the last few
years, you know, it was one of the things that we needed to prioritize activity
elsewhere, as opposed to in a service that wasn't tackling the issue of obesity
at a population level. Chris Van Tulleken, how much is something like semi-
glutide part of the way we need to tackle obesity? For some people, it will be
wonderful. I completely agree with the analysis that's true of all healthcare
that it will benefit people who already are less disadvantaged. It will be a
wonderful, but limited treatment for some people. I mean, remember, it's to be
prescribed for two years, there's a huge amount we don't know. And we've read
all these headlines about it being used by Hollywood celebrities. It may well be
that it works much better in the populations where it's been trialed than in the
populations who are most vulnerable to the effects of diet related disease. So,
and, and it's interesting, and I've, and I've seen this from some of the
reporting we've done, the areas of high deprivation are so often also the areas
which they're sometimes called food swamps, are they, where they're full of
takeaways. That's what's on people's doorstep rather than places to buy fresh
food. It's like, we just cannot seem to get to grips with our diet issues. This
is the mainstay of the argument about the fact that what's emerged in this
discussion about semi-glutide is this very unpleasant anxiety that people with
obesity who live with obesity don't deserve this treatment. And there is a sense
that obesity is unique among all medical conditions that people with it are held
responsible by the medical profession, by the public and by themselves. And it's
completely untrue. And part of the evidence for that is that people with money
and resources don't eat the foods that drive obesity. So it is people of colour,
it is indigenous communities, displaced communities, low income communities,
disadvantaged communities who are, who are vulnerable. Chris, then how about
prescribing this more widely then? Well, so I think, you know, it's great to
have treatments for, for cancer caused by smoking, but that should never stop us
trying to prevent people smoking in the first place, the same history of
obesity. We need to regulate ultra processed foods, which we know are the cause
of pandemic obesity. There is no other cause. We need to regulate them
carefully. They're the only affordable accessory, accessible calories for people
who live in these food swamps and food deserts. So we can't have the price. Tax
the crisps. No, not tax the crisps, label the crisps and stop the marketing of
the crisps to children, but we can't tax them. Chris Van Tulleken, Alice
Wiseman, thank you. Please stop me eating crisps, would you? That would help a
great deal. It's coming up to four minutes to nine now. Where will the musicians
of tomorrow come from? A generation ago, children had access to free
instrumental tuition, but today it's largely faded out. In the past decade,
music has been deprioritised in most state schools in England. Now that question
is being raised by Soweto Kinch, the saxophonist, rapper, composer, who's got a
new Radio 4 series. If you've not heard it, it's on BBC Sounds now, and there's
a new episode coming up next Tuesday. It's called Rethinking Music, and he joins
us on the line. Morning to you. Good morning. How big a problem is it, Soweto?
Well, it's massive. If we don't have a radical rethink, the musical diversity,
creativity and everything that we're so proud of as a country just won't exist
in a generation's time. And a lot of the virtuosity and the music of which we're
most proud has emerged in spite of the underfunding, which you mentioned. And
you think it is in schools that the difference has to be made, rather than, for
example, lots of kids who go to choirs if their schools are not providing it for
them or go to orchestras? Well, I think it is, yeah, largely schools and public
provision that will make the difference. I think we often want to outsource to
the marketplace things that used to happen in schools, and they're not mutually
exclusive. You can have out of school classes, out of school lessons, and still
have that confirmed and affirmed by what's happening on your daily education.
And is that simply a question of money? I was asking the same question in
relation to PE earlier in the programme. Or is it a sense that people don't
realise this matters enough in your view? Well, I think that both those things
are compatible. There's a feeling that this is just an adjunct to serious core
subjects like English and maths, whereas in fact, it can really help people have
a wider and stronger appreciation for their core subjects. And so, yeah, I do
worry that we're often setting up binaries where, in fact, what we need to do is
just fund music provision better and watch the benefits accrue. And you're a
role model. You can be a role model for many kids. I know you've got White Juju,
a new piece coming out with the LSO. Oh, yes. Coming up soon. Now, you started
to play at school. And tell us a little bit about this piece. Yeah, I did start
to play at school and was a beneficiary, as I said, both of workshops outside of
school and lessons inside. I'm really excited about this performance of White
Juju, which is happening next Thursday at Printworks in London. And really, if
you're struggling to understand what White Juju is, it's the art of
misdirection. So when people might be talking about, for example, river
pollution or farming failure, you get everyone talking about the migrant crisis,
for example. And I wanted to explore in musical form, you know, that very
subject, how we can have our fear stoked and division stoked instead of kind of
having collective epiphanies. So music's got an important role. Can't let you go
without asking you about the controversy. I'm sorry to talk about the BBC again,
but there is a controversy about cuts to BBC Singers, the end of BBC Singers,
cuts to orchestras. Now, the claim made by the BBC management is this is a good
thing because the money is going into doubling funding for music education.
What's your view of it? Well, it's part of this false dichotomy narrative that
in order to do outreach and to reach communities, we've got to cut funding to
salaried musicians. I think there's more than enough money sloshing around in
our economy. It's how we apportion it. And the idea that you can't have
community engagement if you don't cut the standards or the salaries of well-
supported classical musicians. What are we telling these young people to pitch
for if it's not to have, as I said, you know, supportable and sustainable
careers in music? Soweta Kinch, who certainly has that sustainable career in
music, saxophonist, rapper, composer, that work, White Juju, performed next
Thursday. Thanks very much indeed for joining us. By the way, Hags, which Nick
mentioned earlier, it's a name of Victoria Smith's new book. She Will Be On.