TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Tina Ritchie. Rishi Sunak has predicted his deal
with the EU will allow Northern Ireland to become the world's most exciting
economic zone. But tonight he's warned his own MPs not to make a Westminster
drama out of the process. The police are searching 90 square miles of
countryside near Brighton for a missing baby after arresting the parents on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. A double rapist who changed gender
while awaiting to stand trial has been jailed for eight years. A judge has
accused the General Medical Council of an abject failure of scrutiny after an
unqualified woman worked as an NHS psychiatrist for more than 20 years. And
official figures suggest the number of people sleeping rough in England rose by
more than a quarter last year, the first increase since 2017. The Prime Minister
says new post-Brexit trading arrangements agreed with the European Union could
help make Northern Ireland the most exciting economic zone in the world. Rishi
Sunak has spent the day promoting the Windsor Framework and holding talks with
some of the main parties at Stormont. The Democratic Unionists, who were crucial
to restoring power sharing, are still examining the details of the agreement.
Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page reports. Rishi Sunak came to Northern
Ireland to try to sell his deal to politicians, businesses and the public. He
chose a Coca-Cola factory to make his pitch that a restoration of the Stormont
Executive could lead to a global economic powerhouse. Northern Ireland is in the
unbelievably special position in having privileged access, not just to the UK
home market, but also the European Union single market. And that is the prize.
The Democratic Unionist Party has in effect vetoed the operation of the power-
sharing devolved government for more than a year in protest against the trade
border with Great Britain. London and Brussels hope the Windsor Framework will
pave the way for devolution at Stormont to return. The DUP leader Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson said his party wouldn't rush its assessment of whether the deal would
remove barriers with the rest of the UK. Progress has been made. We continue to
have some concerns. We will examine the legal text and come to a decision. We're
reasonable people. But we want to ensure that what the Prime Minister has said
is matched by what is actually in the agreement itself. If Stormont does come
back Sinn Féin will hold the position of First Minister for the first time. In
the Irish Parliament in Dublin, the party president Mary Lou MacDonald said the
DUP should allow power-sharing in Belfast to resume immediately. Even by their
own logic, there exists now no justification for the DUP to continue this
reckless and damaging boycott of democracy. Businesses have broadly welcomed the
new agreement. Sarah Hards is managing director of AM Logistics in Lorne. The
amount of paperwork required to bring goods in from GB to Northern Ireland is
dramatically reduced and we're almost at pre-Brexit stages which is really good
news. Practicalities are being worked out and political strategies are being
considered. But it may be a number of weeks before people see if the Windsor
Framework is a firm stepping stone towards stability in Northern Ireland. A key
part of the framework is what's called the Stormont Break, which is a veto for
Northern Ireland over future EU law. The Prime Minister has described the break
as incredibly powerful. Our Northern Ireland political editor, Enda McLavity,
considers how it will work. The government in Westminster says MLAs will be able
to use this tool to flag concerns about new EU laws with London. Thirty is the
magic number of MLAs from two or more parties needed to raise an objection.
Unionists alone could do this as they have the numbers. The government has
confirmed that in a shift away from the normal petition of concern, which is the
Stormont tool used to protect minority parties, a cross-community vote is not
required before the break is triggered. The veto ultimately lies with London and
it is for the UK government to decide whether to suspend the law and pursue
further arbitration with Brussels. Crucially, both the UK and EU say the break
is meant to be a last resort and cannot be used for trivial reasons. It also
hinges on the DUP returning to the Stormont Executive and on more legislation
passing through Westminster before it could come into play. The Prime Minister
met Conservative backbench MPs this evening and urged them not to pressure the
DUP for an instant verdict on the New Deal. Speaking to the 1922 committee, he
said people did not want to see another Westminster drama. Our political
correspondent David Wallace-Lockhart has more details. Rishi Sunak was welcomed
to the 1922 committee in the traditional way, with MPs banging the desks as he
entered. Largely his party appear happy with his New Deal. One Brexit-supporting
MP told me they'd gone into the room opposing the new Windsor framework but that
Rishi Sunak had converted them. The Prime Minister will hope others follow suit.
He wants to give the DUP time and space to analyse the agreement. The European
Research Group of Eurosceptic Tory MPs is taking a similar approach. It wants
lawyers to go through the deal with an extremely fine tooth comb. Their
chairman, Marc François, said this could take two weeks. Getting the approval of
these two groups of MPs would be a great achievement and would certainly allow
the Prime Minister to avoid the Westminster drama he believes the public are
sick of. But there are rumblings of disquiet. Boris Johnson's former Brexit
negotiator, Lord Frost, has tonight said elements of the deal remain a bitter
pill to swallow. The parents of a missing two-month-old baby have been arrested
on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin and her
boyfriend, Mark Gordon, a convicted sex offender, were detained by police last
night in Brighton. They've been in hiding since the child was born earlier last
month. The baby has still not been found. Reporting from Brighton, our Home
Affairs correspondent, Daniel Sanford. All day, police officers have been
working their way slowly through allotments in North Brighton, searching for a
missing baby. Every shed and greenhouse was being checked, with temperatures
close to zero, in the hunt for the child who was born less than three months
ago. The baby's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, were arrested last
night after a police hunt that began in January. They were re-arrested today on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The Metropolitan Police's Detective
Superintendent, Lewis Baceford, who's leading the investigation, said the couple
were found on a road leading to the allotments and a golf course and the south
downs beyond, but the child was nowhere to be seen. The baby was not with them
and we have not found the baby yet. The police helicopter, sniffer dogs, thermal
imaging cameras and drones are being used to assist officers on the ground. We
currently have over 200 officers from multiple units across the Metropolitan
Police and Sussex Police involved in the search. Constance Martin comes from a
hugely wealthy family. Her father was a page to the late Queen, but she dropped
out of drama school in 2016 when she met Mark Gordon. He was convicted of rape
in the United States, aged just 14, and served 20 years in prison. He's still on
the sex offenders register, which may explain why the couple started hiding from
the authorities in September when Constance Martin got pregnant. Police believe
the baby was born in the back of a car in early January. On January 5th, the
vehicle caught fire on the M61 near Bolton. The couple took a series of taxis
over the next few days and were last seen in New Haven on January 8th, carrying
a blue tent from Argos. Detectives say they still hope the baby is alive,
perhaps being looked after by someone else, but they say they are extremely
concerned. The High Court in Edinburgh has handed an eight-year sentence to a
transgender woman for raping two women when still a man. Isla Bryson, who's 31
and from Clyde Bank, committed the crimes in 2016 and 2019. The judge said
Bryson had not yet accepted responsibility and posed a high risk of re-
offending. The case prompted political controversy, a constitutional stand-off
with Westminster and heated debate about where transgender inmates should be
held. Our Scotland correspondent Lorna Gordon reports from Edinburgh. Isla
Bryson attacked the two women in Clyde Bank and Glasgow in 2016 and 2019 while
known as a man called Adam Graham. After being arrested and charged, Bryson then
started transitioning while awaiting trial. After being found guilty, the double
rapist was initially sent to a women's prison, but days later moved to a jail
for men after details became public and attracted political controversy.
Bryson's lawyers said private and personal decisions on gender should have no
bearing on the court proceedings and that since being found guilty of double
rape, his client had been subjected to ill-judged, ill-informed and ignorant
comments. The judge, Lord Scott, said he had taken no account of anything said
outside court. He said that Bryson, while in some ways a vulnerable adult, had
preyed on the two women who were also vulnerable, raping them in their own homes
where they had been entitled to feel safe. Without any foundation, you claim to
believe that the two victims may know each other and have colluded in their
claims. You have constructed an alternative account of events which was rejected
by the jury. I will therefore ignore it. You see yourself as the victim in this
situation. You are not. Lord Scott said Bryson had continued to vehemently deny
the offences and that the seriousness of the crimes outweighed any mitigatory
circumstances. I am concerned to ensure that the public is adequately protected
against serious harm from you when you are released from prison. It is plain
that you present a particularly significant risk to any woman with whom you form
a relationship. Bryson's estranged wife, Shona Graham, said Bryson, who she said
had tried to stab and rape her, was claiming to be a woman to get, in her words,
an easy ride. You can't do a crime as a man and then you want to transition once
you've been charged with it. I don't see that. That's how you know it's all a
big joke to him. He's a joke. Isla Bryson is believed to be the first
transgender person identifying as a woman who has been convicted of rape in
Scotland. Their eight-year prison sentence will be followed by three years of
supervision by the authorities. The Bryson case had significant ramifications
outside the courtroom. The guilty verdict came after the Holyrood Parliament
passed a controversial law allowing people to change their legally recognised
gender through self-identification without a medical diagnosis. Opponents of the
legislation saw this case as justifying their concerns. The UK government then
stepped in and blocked the Gender Recognition Reform Act. Our Scotland editor
James Cook considers the wider issues highlighted by Bryson's crimes. Is Isla
Bryson a woman and who decides? The logic of gender self-identification implies
that only an individual can make such a judgement and the state should have no
role. But opponents of the principle say a rapist decision, taken after being
charged to renounce male identity, should not be taken at face value. The Bryson
case doesn't just pose abstract philosophical questions but vivid practical
ones. It prompted a change in Scottish Prison Service policy which now requires
all inmates to be placed, initially, in jails which accord with their sex at
birth. Yesterday, England and Wales moved in a similar direction, banning trans
women convicted of violent offences from female prisons. The case may also cast
a shadow over the outgoing First Minister Nicola Sturgeon's legacy of social
liberalisation, with her potential successors now debating whether to embrace or
reject the progressive cultural agenda which she espoused. A woman's been jailed
for seven years for pretending to be a qualified psychiatrist. Zolia Alamey,
who's from Burnley, used a fake degree certificate to get jobs in the NHS across
the UK and in the private sector. Manchester Crown Court was told she'd earned
more than a million pounds during her fraudulence career. Passing sentence, the
judge said, Alamey had moved around the country to avoid detection and
criticised the General Medical Council for its lack of scrutiny. Our
correspondent Nick Garnett reports. Alamey started a medical degree in New
Zealand but never bothered finishing it. However, that didn't stop her coming to
Britain and pretending to be a psychiatrist, treating a large number of
vulnerable patients during her career. She was able to register with the General
Medical Council using a fake degree certificate and a reference from an employer
in Pakistan. Manchester Crown Court heard Alamey had been convicted five years
ago of forging the will of an elderly woman in her care. At the time, her
employers still thought she was medically certified, but a newspaper reporter
rang the university in New Zealand to carry out a background check, which
revealed she'd never qualified. The police were called in. Detective
Superintendent Matt Scott of Cumbria Police thinks Alamey was able to carry on
practising for so many years that she began to believe her own deception. I
think it casts a shadow over all of the decent, qualified, good doctors and
medics throughout the UK. I just think that this woman has sold a lie and has
lived that lie and I think potentially, in my opinion, has believed that lie
herself at some point. The case raises questions over the monitoring of
qualifications by the General Medical Council. The judge, Hilary Manley,
described Alamey's GMC registration as an abject failure of scrutiny and called
on the medical registration body to carry out a thorough, open and transparent
inquiry. The GMC says since the case came to light, it has checked the
qualifications of more than 3,000 doctors who registered using the same method
as Alamey and found everyone else was properly qualified. Provisional results
suggest the ruling party candidate in Nigeria, Bola Tenubu, has an unassailable
lead in the presidential election. He's won nearly 40 per cent of the votes
counted so far. The main opposition parties have called for the poll to be
cancelled. They say the results have been heavily doctored and manipulated. The
Independent National Electoral Commission has rejected calls to cancel the
ballot and says opposition parties should follow agreed procedures to challenge
results. President Putin has told Russia's main intelligence agency, the FSB, to
intensify its activities against what he called increasing espionage and
sabotage by Ukraine and the West. He's also signed several new laws, including
one suspending Russian participation in the only remaining nuclear arms treaty
with the United States, and another which terminates treaties linked to the main
European human rights body, the Council of Europe. Here's Danny Eberhard. The
FSB is the main successor to the KGB that Vladimir Putin himself served. There
was nothing secret about his speech. It was televised, an exercise in political
messaging, projecting control. The agency, Mr Putin said, had to build a wall
against what he called sabotage groups entering occupied Ukraine, areas he
claims are now Russian. No doubt mindful of attacks like the one on the Crimean
Bridge, he instructed agents to keep a close eye on infrastructure. There were
warnings over internal security too, designed to chill wider dissent. Mr Putin
ordered continued vigilance against people he labelled scum, whom he accused of
using the internet to try to split Russian society. A doctor has told a court
that he felt extremely uncomfortable at the thought of the nurse, Lucy Letby,
being alone with a baby girl. Ms Letby is accused of murdering seven babies and
attempting to murder ten others at the Countess of Chester Hospital between 2015
and 2016. Dr Ravi Jayaram also told the jury that concerns had been raised with
management months before she was taken off duty. Our North of England
correspondent Judith Moritz reports from Manchester Crown Court. The intensive
care room at the neonatal unit at the Countess of Chester Hospital is where the
sickest babies are looked after. A tiny girl known as Baby K was taken there
after being born 15 weeks prematurely in February 2016. When she was less than
two hours old, she was temporarily left in the sole care of Lucy Letby. Doctors
on the unit had become concerned about the number of babies who were falling ill
or dying and the nurse's presence on each occasion. The consultant that night,
Dr Ravi Jayaram, told the jury that he felt extremely uncomfortable at the
thought of Nurse Letby being left alone with the child and went to check on her.
He said, you can call me hysterical, you can call me irrational, but that's how
I felt. I got up to check on Baby K to prove to myself that I needed to stop
being ridiculous. But he said he found the baby's oxygen levels had dropped and
Lucy Letby was standing by the incubator doing nothing. The consultant saw the
baby's breathing tube had been dislodged. Lucy Letby's defence team argued the
tube may have become dislodged on its own because of the baby's movements. Ravi
Jayaram told the court doctors had raised concerns with hospital management
eight months before Nurse Letby was removed from duty. Baby K was later moved to
another hospital where she died three days later. However, the prosecution is
not alleging that Miss Letby caused her death. Lucy Letby denies all the charges
against her. The owners and managers of 12,500 high-rise buildings in England
have been given six months to register with a new safety regulator or risk
prosecution. Verul's been introduced as a result of the Grenfell Tower fire in
2017. It'll make a named person responsible for the safety of each building. The
aim is to remove confusion over who's liable for maintenance. Our Home Affairs
correspondent Tom Symons reports. The public inquiry into the Grenfell disaster
is likely to criticise the management of the West London Tower block when its
final report is published later this year. The fire was followed by a building
safety crisis. Thousands of residents were told their flats might be at risk due
to the use of dangerous materials during construction. A new regulator was set
up to enforce stricter rules for buildings higher than 18 metres or around seven
floors. The requirement for a named person to register as legally responsible
for each high-rise block will allow the regulator to take action if the rules
aren't followed. The aim is to remove confusion and buck-passing from the
management of safety in both the construction and maintenance of buildings.
Owners or managers of more than 12,000 high-rises will have to register by
October or face investigation and possible prosecution. The number of people
estimated to be sleeping rough in England has risen for the first time since
2017. Government statistics show there were more than 3,000 people sleeping
outside on a single night last autumn. The figure is 26% higher than in 2021.
Our social affairs correspondent Michael Buchanan has the details. This increase
comes after four years of the numbers falling, but they included exceptional
measures introduced by the government to take people off the streets during the
pandemic. Most of those rough sleeping are from the UK, male and aged over 26.
Although all areas of England saw a rise, almost half of rough sleepers were
found in London and the south-east. The numbers in the capital, for instance,
increased by a third. Charities say they're seeing people having to sleep rough
due to cost of living pressures, including rising rent levels and stretched
support services, particularly in mental health. David Ingerslecht from the
homeless charity St Mungo's says that as these figures are a snapshot, the real
number of rough sleepers is almost certainly higher. What our team is seeing in
terms of the number of people who are approaching us for help when they're rough
sleeping is a sustained increase and an increased risk for rough sleeping. And
it's slightly harder to get people into accommodation because the supported
housing system that we can refer people into hasn't got the move on rates that
it needs. So it hasn't got the spaces coming up for us to get people in. This
rough sleeping count was started in 2010. Today's figures are three quarters
higher than then, though still markedly lower than the peak of 2017. The
government says it's spending around £500 million tackling the problem, but a
chronic lack of affordable housing means its promise to end rough sleeping by
next year looks forlorn. Government figures estimate that the number of
households in England living in fuel poverty increased by 100,000 last year to
three and a quarter million. Fuel poverty is measured by income and how well
insulated a home is. The report also shows in excess of seven million households
are now spending more than 10% of their income on energy, up from about five
million in 2021. The RMT union has announced its members on the London
Underground will strike on the 15th of March in a dispute over pensions, jobs
and conditions. They'll join Tube drivers belonging to the Aslef union, who've
already announced a walkout for the same day. Transport for London has urged
both unions to call off the action and work with them to reach a deal.
Sainsbury's is planning to close two Argos depots over the next three years as
part of an overhaul which will affect around 1,400 jobs. The retailer's chief
executive Simon Roberts says the business needed to become simpler, more
efficient and more effective for customers. Here's our business correspondent
Emma Simpson. Sainsbury's bought Argos five years ago and since then it's been
closing most of its standalone shops and replacing them with Argos outlets
inside its supermarkets. Now it's tackling the logistics infrastructure as well.
Five existing Sainsbury's and Argos depots will be consolidated into three,
meaning the closure of two warehouses in Basildon in Essex and Haywood in
Greater Manchester. The move will affect both Sainsbury's staff and third party
workers. Sainsbury's said it's also planning to invest £90m in modernising its
logistics operations as well as expanding its local hubs where orders are
fulfilled across the UK. Its CEO said the changes were needed in order to create
a simpler, modern network which was more effective for customers. And three
remaining Habitat showrooms, also owned by Sainsbury's, are to close in Leeds,
Brighton and London. Instead, there will be a new Habitat digital showroom for
customers who are increasingly shopping online. In the city, the 100 share index
ended the day down 59 points at 7,876. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed down
232 points at 32,657. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.203.
Against the euro, sterling is at 1.137. That makes a euro worth 88 pence. Three
locations off the English coast will be subject to the strictest possible
environmental safeguards after the government designated them as highly
protected marine areas. This means activities such as fishing, construction and
dredging will be banned when the rules come into force later this year. Some
environmental groups say they are disappointed that two other areas have not
been given the same status. More details from our science correspondent, Helen
Briggs. The waters off the British Isles have spectacular wildlife, from reefs
built entirely by worms to starfish, lobsters, eels and seabirds such as gannets
and kittywakes. To protect these natural wonders and the environment in which
they live, the government is setting up highly protected marine areas, or HPMAs,
at three locations off the English coast from July – at Allenby Bay in Cumbria,
Farns Deep in the North Sea and Dolphin Head off the coast of West Sussex.
Fishing will be banned, along with activities that damage the seabed, such as
mining and laying cables. But two other pilot sites have been dropped, including
off Northumberland's Holy Island, following concerns a ban on fishing could
damage the local economy. Dr Lisa Beatty from the Wildlife Trusts says the
government must designate more fully protected marine areas as soon as possible.
I'm totally dismayed that the government have today decided to only designate
three of the five proposed highly protected marine areas. They were a good first
step, but we really need to do more if we're to turn the tide on nature's
recovery and bring wildlife back. Scientists say 30% of seas worldwide must be
protected for nature by the end of the decade. But campaigners point out that
the three pilot sites cover less than 0.5% of England's seas. In Scotland,
meanwhile, ministers have committed to designating at least 10% of Scotland's
seas as HPMAs by 2026. Ellen Briggs reporting. And now for a first look at the
morning papers. Downing Street has suggested the new Brexit deal is not open to
negotiation, according to The Times. The paper has been told the DUP faces a
straight choice between accepting it or not. Business leaders are predicting a
boost to the UK's struggling economy on the back of the deal, reports the Daily
Express. The Daily Telegraph says it's obtained 100,000 leaked WhatsApp messages
between the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock and other officials during the
height of the pandemic. It says the messages reveal Mr Hancock rejected advice
to test all residents going into care homes in England for Covid. He later said
publicly that the strongest route for the virus to enter care homes was through
the community. Police searching for the missing baby of the runaway aristocrat
Constance Martin and her partner Mark Gordon fear the child has come to harm,
reports the Daily Mail. But officers are still holding out hope that the newborn
is safe and well, adds the Metro. A number of papers feature a picture of a
laughing Princess of Wales beating Prince William in a spin class challenge.
Princess of Wheels quips the Daily Mirror, while the Express goes with the
caption, Pedal Power. Football and in tonight's FA Cup fifth round matches, the
Championship side Blackburn Rovers have knocked out Leicester of the Premier
League, winning 2-1 away. Fulham have beaten Leeds by the same scoreline.
Manchester City won 3-0 away at Bristol City, while Brighton were 1-0 winners at
Stoke. A woman who represented herself in court using research from a trip to
her local library has won her case against British Airways for a refund. Jenny
Barber was due to travel to Japan in May 2020, but the trip was cancelled
because of the pandemic. She initially requested BA vouchers, but eventually
felt she was due her money back. Our correspondent Jenny Kumar takes up the
story. This David and Goliath court battle has thrilled consumer rights
champions. Miss Barber wanted her money back because the airline couldn't give
her the service she paid for. Restrictions on travel to Japan remained in place
until November last year. She says she spent most of 2021 trying to get BA to
give her a refund. When repeated approaches failed, Miss Barber went to a
library in Redditch to research case law to support a legal challenge. She found
legislation from 1943 that stated she was entitled to a refund. The case was
heard by magistrates last month and she was awarded more than £2,500. Miss
Barber said she found the process nerve-wracking. If you're kind of an ordinary
person who's not a legal professional going up against someone like British
Airways, it's scary and it's intimidating. I think, honestly, they're kind of
relying on that when they're not giving people their refunds. In a statement, BA
said they were the first UK airline to offer customers flexibility during the
pandemic by providing vouchers for future travel. Jenny Kumar reporting. The
headlines again. Rishi Sunak has said he's confident his new deal on post-Brexit
trade for Northern Ireland will address the concerns of his critics. He said the
biggest unionist party, the DUP, should be given time and space to examine the
agreement. Police in Sussex are searching for a missing baby after arresting the
child's parents on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The High Court in
Edinburgh has jailed a double rapist who changed gender to become a woman while
awaiting trial. The number of people sleeping rough in England rose by more than
a quarter last year, the first increase since 2017. And a woman who faked a
medical degree certificate so she could work as a psychiatrist across the UK for
more than 20 years has been jailed for seven years. BBC News. Read by Tina
Ritchie. Now from the BBC Weather Centre, here's Susan Powell. Good morning. A
big area of high pressure is dominating the weather across the UK this week.
It's currently centred just to the north of Scotland and it's not going to be
going anywhere in a hurry for at least the next four or five days. It will shift
around a little and as it reorientates, subtle differences to come in our
weather day on day. Probably the most significant ones will be in terms of our
wind direction. We've had a largely northeasterly wind direction through the
early part of the week. By the end of the week, it looks like we could be
sitting in a more northerly airstream and may come the back part of the weekend,
start to pick up some more wintry elements to our weather. However, for the next
few days under the influence of the high, yes, there'll be a lot of cloud
around, but there will also be a lot of fine weather. Overnight, a few more
showers possible out of the cloud across the northeast of England, the Midlands,
a few for East Anglia, but showers along the south coast tending to clear and
with clearing skies behind them, there could be some ice across southern most
counties of England. But first thing on Wednesday, largely clear skies across
western Scotland as they have been in recent nights as well. I mean, we're
anticipating quite a widespread frost developing here. As for Wednesday daytime,
again, very much like Tuesday, a lot of fine weather to come, a lot of cloud
around, bright spells coming and going for the majority. Western Scotland
probably getting some of the best of the sunshine, although southern counties of
England may be somewhat brighter than they were on Tuesday as well. The cloud
thick enough at times though to give some showers and again the north easterly
breeze taking the edge off the way temperatures feel. We've got highs, as you'd
read them on the thermometer, set to reach nine or 10 degrees, but out and about
it's going to feel closer to five or six. For Thursday, very little changes.
Perhaps the winds a little lighter on Thursday. It may not feel quite as chilly,
but by Friday and into Saturday, we start to switch around to a northerly wind
direction. And I think if anything, yes, the fine weather will continue, but it
will start to feel colder once again. Susan, thanks very much. Now on Radio 4,
we continue with our Book of the Week. As he tours Britain's graveyards, the
journalist Peter Ross reaches Belfast, where he finds a heady and controversial
blend of sacrifice and martyrdom among the stones. A Tomb With a View is read by
Andy Clark. Belfast, Easter Sunday. It was high noon and the crowds had gathered
for the parades. Three separate Republican marches were setting off at different
times from different junctions on the Falls Road. In each case, the destination
was the same, Milltown Cemetery, where the fallen would be honoured with
speeches in silence, bowed heads and unbowed hearts. These annual processions
commemorate the Easter Rising of 1916, the armed rebellion against British rule.
They honour too the so-called Patriot Dead. These include not only the rebels of
1916, but also members of paramilitary groups who would more commonly be
described as terrorists. If anyone was under the illusion that the deaths being
remembered belonged to a dark history now past, or that Ireland's political
violence was over, what happened three nights before would have provided a
stinging corrective. A police search for firearms and explosives on Derry's
Craigan estate led to a riot. Petro-bombs were thrown and at 11pm a masked
gunman opened fire on police lines. Lyra McKee, a young journalist covering the
unrest, was shot. She was taken to hospital, where she died. The new IRA
admitted responsibility. Here was yet another life lost before it had properly
begun. All those callow ghosts. I grew up on the UK mainland and followed the
Troubles through the lens of the BBC, so there was something bewildering and
unsettling about watching this Easter Sunday parade in Belfast where armed
rebels were celebrated and mourned. What unsettles is the seduction. There's a
dark romance to these ideas of sacrifice and martyrdom. They colour Belfast like
some hidden pigment. It's in those murals, Loyalist and Republican, which
brighten the gable ends of houses. It's in every drop of blood spilled on these
streets. Irish republicanism has been described as a death cult. Whether or not
that's fair, it's certain that the dead help keep the movement alive. In 1915,
the revolutionary leader Patrick Pearce gave a famous oration in which he argued
that, from the graves of patriot men and women spring living nations. He ended
with an attack on the British state. They've left us our Fenian dead and while
Ireland holds these graves, Ireland unfree will never be at peace. Those words
are carved into granite at one end of the Republican plot in Milltown Cemetery.
This area is the destination of the largest of the Easter parades. It's regarded
by some as a sacred site. The plot holds the remains of 77 Republicans, most of
them members of the Provisional IRA who were killed during active service. Bobby
Sands is one of three hunger strikers who died in the Mays prison in 1981.
They're all here. Milltown is a striking place, rich in Catholic iconography.
Entering through a grand sandstone arch, the visitor soon passes the marble
monument above the grave of John Burke, a shipping magnate who died in 1922. It
shows Mary and Mary Magdalene lamenting the crucifixion. The dirt of almost a
century has turned Christ and his mother a sooty grey, but the Magdalene has
somehow remained white and pure. These figures are everywhere in Milltown. On
one of the newer graves, someone had placed the statuette of the Virgin next to
a bar of Fry's chocolate cream. I'd come here the day before the parades to
speak with Joe Austin. He's the chair of the National Graves Association in
Belfast, the organisation which cares for the graves and monuments of those
who've died in the cause. Austin is a veteran Republican activist. He's been a
member of Sinn Féin for almost 50 years. It's sometimes said that a cemetery can
tell the story of a city. For Austin, Milltown tells the story of a struggle.
For Republicans, the honouring of the dead is very, very important, he
explained. Graveyards reflect the memory of those who died, but they also
reflect why they died, what they died for. The people buried here aren't just
names for us, he said. There's 77 buried in this particular plot. I would know
every one of them. I would know their families. I would know the circumstances
in which they died. These are people I've come through struggle with. The
Gibraltar Three, Moraid Farrell, Sean Savage and Dan McCann, are buried
together. Executed by SAS, says a marker. 6th March 1988. According to Austin,
what you have to understand is not only how they died, but how they lived. They
lived as active, committed IRA volunteers, he said. They knew what they were
doing. Would they be seen then as heroes, I asked. Yes, he replied. Everybody
who lies in these plots is a fallen hero to the community they come from.
There's no equivocation about it. I asked Austin whether the huge death toll of
the Troubles was worth it. Well, he said, that's like asking someone who was
involved in the D-Day landing if it was worth it. Many would find those
comparisons repulsive. Similarly, most people outside West Belfast would
probably find it hard to accept the description of IRA members as heroes. The
first burials in the Republican plot took place in the summer of 1972, and the
last in 1996. To be laid to rest there, it's necessary to have died as a result
of some form of violence in the cause, whether in a shootout or through the slow
suicide of hunger strike. The dead lie on either side of a central path around
40 feet long. No funerals have taken place since the Good Friday Agreement
established an imperfect peace. The flowers and flags and headstones, at a
certain point, run out. Our greatest ambition, Austin had told me, is that no
one else is ever buried here. Nevertheless, the space for future burials
remains. Soil for a bitter crop. It's perhaps the most toxic 15 feet of land in
the whole of Northern Ireland, gunmen's graves as yet unfilled. The oldest
burial ground in Belfast is Friars Bush. It's hidden behind a high wall and open
only by appointment. A peaceful two acres, a little overgrown. It first appeared
in the historic record in 1570, but it's likely much older. This is where
Belfast's Catholics were buried before Miltown was built. Indeed, the whole
reason for Miltown's existence was because Friars Bush became full to
overflowing. The graveyard's secluded location made it suitable for the secret
celebration of mass during the late 17th and 18th centuries, when Catholics were
discriminated against and persecuted. In 1869, with the opening of Miltown,
Friars Bush closed. From that point, only families who already had burial rights
were allowed to be interred in the graveyard. The painter Paul Henry, who grew
up in the area, recalled in his memoirs that by the 1880s, it was a rarity to
see a funeral. He recalled his childhood impressions with a Dickensian eye. I
often saw, he wrote, the old caretaker of the burial ground, a hunchback with a
face deeply marked with smallpox. Sometimes on a dark night I would hear the
rusty old gate clanging in the wind. And after nightfall, when no light shone
from the tiny window, it was the house of the dead. Tom Hartley, the former Lord
Mayor, is an authority on Belfast's graveyards. As a Catholic, his family,
including his parents and younger brother, are buried in Miltown. He has an
interesting take on death and the rituals we've developed to formalise it. For
tens of thousands of years, he said, human beings have been burying our dead.
We're part of an experience that's ancient, and it's so obvious that we fail to
see it. He believes we've come to regard burial and funerals as mundane. We
don't appreciate the importance of these acts to our civilisation. Somewhere,
tens of thousands of years ago, he says, somebody somewhere decided they would
bury their dead, and in doing that they unfolded a whole series of human
changes. He believes our ideas of history and art, our sense of place, even the
development of emotions such as grief, have emerged from how we treat our dead.
His thinking was formed, I suspect, when he was still a boy, not yet five. When
someone in the neighbourhood died, word would go round. A black bow tied on the
front door was a sign of a wake house. Hartley and his pals would gather outside
until one of them worked up the courage to knock. Mrs, they would ask, can we
see the dead? Invited in, they would troop up the stairs. The corpse would be
laid out on the bed. He remembers, with a child's eye view, that you would see
the feet first. There was a sense of stopped clocks, stilled air. The room would
be heavy with that aroma of candles. A circle of children around the bed. They
weren't being morbid. This was common. It was a very important mechanism in the
community, says Hartley. Even though you might be frightened and pushed up the
stairs by the ten kids behind, you saw a dead person. I think it's fundamental
to come into terms with the idea that someday you die. Belfast, Easter
Wednesday, 2019. The Church of Ireland Cathedral. It was high noon and crowds
had gathered outside for the funeral of Lira McKee. A reward of up to ten
thousand pounds had been offered for information leading to the conviction of
those responsible for her killing. But today wasn't about justice or its coarse
cousin, revenge. The people had come to celebrate and mourn. Inside the chairs
were filling up. One of McKee's friends laid out yellow scarves with black
stripes. Mourners had been invited to wear clothes which reflected her love of
Harry Potter. Yellow and black, the Hufflepuff colours, represent wheat and
soil. Across the aisle from me a young man wore an I stand with Lira t-shirt. A
little to my right was Father Joseph Gormley, the priest who'd anointed McKee in
hospital. I'd seen him on the news calling for the Easter parade through Derry
to be cancelled. The cathedral doors opened and a cold air blew. People turned
with pale faces. The coffin was beautiful, as these things go, carved with
Celtic knotwork and a cross. But there was no masking the horror, the brute
physical fact of it. Lira was twenty-nine when she died. No age at all. She'd
been a late developer. In her early school days she'd struggled with reading and
required extra support. But later she became precocious. There were journalism
awards and a book deal. A bright future, everyone said. There was a sense,
listening to the service, that what had happened was not only murder but also
theft. A thing of value had been stolen from the world. One couldn't help
thinking as her story was told, of all the stories she would never tell now. She
was buried at a quarter to four on a hazy afternoon. Once the gravediggers had
done their work and the mourners gone, the only sound was birdsong. The grave
was covered in floral tributes. One card read, Words fail me. That felt about
right. We carve words on stone to remember our dead, their names and dates and
some blandly appropriate text. There's a formality and finality to the
conventions of headstones which takes all the mess of grief and loss and reduces
it to something which can be said with hammer and chisel. Good wife of, sadly
missed by. But that wee card with its admission of the limits of language felt
real. Perhaps these are the truths we should engrave in straight lines and
elegant fonts. Words fail me. I don't know how I'm going to get through this. I
will never be the same again. Lira McKee lies in a corner of Carn Money
Cemetery, north of Belfast. She's wearing a flower in her hair. Andy Clarke was
reading A Tomb With A View by Peter Ross. The book was abridged by Anna
Magnusson and the producer is Aileen Macready. The Shipping Forecast is coming
up next. This is BBC Radio 4. Now the Shipping Forecast issued by the Met Office
on behalf of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency at 0015 on Wednesday the 1st of
March. The General Synopsis at 1800. High Hebrides 1043, expected Faroes 1039 by
1800 Wednesday. The Area Forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking north at Syra.
Northerly veering north-easterly 5 or 6, occasionally 7 at first, becoming
variable 3 or less later in south-east. Fair. Good. East south at Syra. North-
easterly veering east-early 2 or 3. Fair. Good. West south at Syra. East 40s.
Northerly 5 or 6 veering south-easterly 2 to 4. Fair. Good. West 40s. Cromarty
4th. Northerly 4 to 6 veering north-easterly 4 or 5, occasionally 3 in west
Cromarty. Showers. Good. Tyne west dogger. Northerly or north-easterly 4 to 6.
Showers. Good. East dogger west fisher. Northerly 4 to 6 veering south-easterly
3 or 4. Fair. Good. East fisher. German Bight. Variable 4 or less, but northerly
5 at first in north-west German Bight. Fair. Good. Humber. Thames. North-east
veering east 3 to 5. Fair. Good. Dover. White. Portland. Plymouth. North-east 4
to 6. Showers, except in Dover. Good. North Biscay. Northerly 5 to 7 veering
north-easterly 4 or 5. Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. South Biscay.
Northerly or north-easterly 4 to 6, decreasing 2 to 4. Showers. Good,
occasionally moderate. East Trafalgar. Northerly or north-westerly 3 to 5,
occasionally 6 at first in north. Fair. Good. West Trafalgar. Northerly or
north-easterly 4 to 6, veering south-easterly 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Fitzroy.
Sol. North-easterly 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in south-east Fitzroy, veering south-
easterly 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Lundy. Fasnet. North-east 6, decreasing 4 or 5.
Showers. Good. Irish Sea. North-east 4 or 5. Showers. Good. Shannon. Rockall.
East or north-east veering south-east 4 or 5. Showers. Good. Malin. North-east 3
to 5, veering east 3 or 4. Fair. Good. Hebrides. Variable 4 or less, becoming
east or north-east 3 to 5. Rain. Good, occasionally moderate. Bailey. North-
westerly 4 or 5 at first in north-west, otherwise variable 4 or less, becoming
south-easterly 3 to 5 for a time. Rain. Good, occasionally poor. Fair Isle.
Northerly or north-westerly, veering north-easterly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 in
east. Rain. Fair later. Good, occasionally poor. Faroes. West or north-west 3 to
5, becoming variable 4 or less. Rain. Fair later. Good, occasionally poor.
South-east Iceland. Westerly 4 to 6, backing south-westerly 3 to 5. Showers.
Good. We turn now to the weather reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree
Automatic. North-east 3. 27 miles, 1042, steady. Stornoway. North by west 2. 19
miles, 1042, now rising. Lerwick. North-west 3. More than 38 miles, 1040, now
rising. Wick Automatic. North-north-east 2. 14 miles, 1041, steady. Aberdeen.
North-north-west 3. Recent drizzle. 19 miles, 1040, rising slowly. Lookers.
North by east 2. 19 miles, 1040, now falling. Boomer. North-north-east 4. 1038,
rising slowly. Bridlington. North-east by north 4. 1035, rising slowly. Sandetti
Light Vessel Automatic. East-north-east 4. 11 miles, 1031. Greenwich Light
Vessel Automatic. North-east 5. 11 miles, 1031. St. Catharines Point Automatic.
East by north 4. 1031, rising slowly. Jersey. East 4. 7 miles, 1029, rising
slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. East by north 6. 1030. Scilly Automatic.
North-east by north 5. Recent rain. 22 miles, 1032, falling slowly. Milford
Haven. North-east by north 3. 35 miles, 1034, steady. Aberporth. North-east 5.
30 miles, 1035, steady. Valley. North-east by north 3. 16 miles, 1037, steady.
Liverpool Crosby. North-east 3. 9 miles, 1036, now falling. Valencia. North-east
by east 2. 13 miles, 1038, falling slowly. Ronaldswey. North-east 4. 1038,
rising slowly. Mallinhead. East-south-east 2. 24 miles, 1041, now rising.
Macrahanish Automatic. East-south-east 1. More than 38 miles, 1040, steady.
Here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland valid for the following 24 hours, issued by the Met Office at 2300 on
Tuesday 28th February. The general situation, a slow moving high to the north-
west of Scotland will give strong north-easterly winds at first over southern
waters. Then the winds will ease off as the high declines slightly during the
next couple of days. Cape Wrath to Rattrayhead including Orkney. North veering
north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Rattrayhead to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North or
north-east 4 or 5. Showers. Good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North or north-
east 4 or 5. Showers. Good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North-east 4 or 5,
occasionally 3 later. Showers. Good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. North-
easterly 3 to 5. Showers. Good. North Forland to Selsie Bill. North-easterly 4
to 6, mainly fair. Good. Selsie Bill to Lime Regis. North-east 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 at first. Showers. Good. Lime Regis to Lansend including the
Isles of Scilly. North-east 5 or 6, decreasing 4. Showers. Good. Lansend to St
David's Head including the Bristol Channel. North-east 5 or 6, decreasing 3 to
5. Showers. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead including St George's
Channel. North-east 4 or 5. Showers. Good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of
Galloway. North-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Isle of Man. North-east 4 or 5,
mainly fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch. East or north-east 3 to 5.
Showers later. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre including the Firth of
Clyde and North Channel. North-easterly 3 or 4. Showers later. Good. Mull of
Kintyre to Ardnamurchan Point. East or north-east 3 or 4. Fair. Good.
Ardnamurchan Point to Cape Wrath. East or north-east 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at
first. Showers. Good. Shetland Isles. North-west veering north-east 4 or 5. Rain
or showers at first. Good, occasionally moderate at first. And that completes
the Shipping Bulletin. I thought you were going to perhaps take me on a little
walk. I'm Simon Armitage and I'm off to my garden shed. I thought it might be a
big fancy shed that was actually a fancy studio. But it's not at all. It's quite
a modest shed. I've been chatting about poetry, writing and the countryside with
creative people including Ian McKellen, Pam Ayres, Simon Dobson and Lucy
Beaumont. I sometimes worry that characters are just dead people trying to speak
to me. Join me for The Poet Laureate Has Gone to His Shed on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds on Sunday afternoons at 4.30. Well that brings us to the close of play
for another day here at Radio 4. There's just time to mention what else is on if
you're going to be listening a bit longer. Starting on our sister station in
just a moment, the first in a series of six classic adventures with Tintin and
his faithful dog Snowy. Richard Pearce and Andrew Sachs star in The Black
Island, first broadcast in the 90s and based on the book first published in
1938. That's about to start on Radio 4 Extra. On Radio 3, Through the Night is
already underway tonight celebrating Chopin's birthday and the birthday of
Poland's classical music station Radio 2 with a night of Polish composers and
performers. And over on our very own Radio 2, BBC Radio 2, there's music and
chat live with OJ Borch. So plenty to choose from and of course you can just
stick with this frequency if you like, where you'll be able to hear the BBC
World Service starting with business matters in just a moment. Well we've made
it to March so I do hope you have a good start to the new month and indeed a
very happy St David's Day too. Thanks for listening. From me, Ron Brown, my
colleague Tina Ritchie in the newsroom and everyone here at BBC Radio 4, do have
a restful night. Good night. For more information on BBC Radio 4, the BBC, the
BBC World Service, the BBC Radio 4 Web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds.