TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. BBC
News at four o'clock. A parliamentary committee says it would have been obvious
to Boris Johnson that parties in Downing Street breached coronavirus rules. The
Cross-Party Privileges Committee's interim report found there were four
occasions when it believes the former Prime Minister may have misled the House
of Commons. But speaking in the past hour, Mr Johnson claimed he'd been
vindicated by the probe. There's absolutely nothing to show that any advisor of
mine or civil servant told me, warned me in advance that an event might be
against the rules. Nothing to say that afterwards they thought it was against
the rules. Nothing to show that I myself believed or was worried that something
was against the rules. So that for me is a pretty astonishing gap. Mr Johnson
also raised concerns about the impartiality of the inquiry into partygate by the
former senior civil servant Sue Gray. She's been offered the role of Chief of
Staff to the Labour leader Sikhir Starmer. The committee says its inquiry is not
based on Ms Gray's report. A prominent US lawyer has been sentenced to life in
prison by a judge in South Carolina for the murder of his wife and son. Alex
Murdoch was convicted yesterday of killing Maggie and Paul Murdoch on their
family hunting estate in 2021. The BBC understands that the Chancellor Jeremy
Hunt is expected to extend the government's energy price guarantee scheme for a
further three months. The move would keep the average household's annual bills
at their current level of two and a half thousand pounds until June. A man and a
woman have been remanded in custody by magistrates in West Sussex charged with
the manslaughter of a baby. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon will appear at the
Old Bailey later this month. And Royal Mail has announced that the price of a
first class stamp will rise above one pound from April. It'll increase by 15
pence to one pound ten, while second class stamps will rise by seven pence to 75
pence. BBC News. In half an hour, more or less, we'll be fact checking a
financial statistic that's been doing the rounds recently. Does the UK really
have the highest energy bills in all of Europe? And is it true that we only have
access to eight percent of the British countryside? Tim Harford will investigate
at half past four. But now it's time for Last Word with Kirsty Lang. Hello, on
Last Word this week, the BBC's voice of football for half a century, sports
presenter John Motsen. The pioneering New York publisher Marianne Mantel, whose
vinyl recording of Dylan Thomas's poetry paved the way for today's audiobook
industry. And Lithuanian-born pianist Sulimita Aronofsky, who fled the Soviet
Union and set up an international piano competition in London. But first, the
former showgirl from Yorkshire, who overturned 700 years of parliamentary
tradition by becoming the first woman to be Speaker of the House of Commons. Oh,
this is so time consuming. Come on, Mr Hughes, spit it out. Betty Boothroyd was
born and raised in the Yorkshire mill town of Dewsbury, the only child of
Archibald and Mary, who both started work at the tender age of 13. They were
active members of the Textile Workers Union and the Labour Party. The political
correspondent Julia Langdon, who befriended Boothroyd when she first became an
MP in the early 70s, takes up her story. Her mother used to take her to
political meetings. She saw Atlee in Leeds Town Hall, I think it was, and they
used to pack sandwiches and go off to political meetings. And she was imbued
with a very strong sense of public service. However, she still wanted to be a
dancer. And she did, as is famously recorded, she did give it a go. She came to
London and she told me she wasn't very good at it. But I don't think that's
true. I'm sure she was good. She was a tiller girl, wasn't she? One of the
tiller girls. She successfully passed the audition, but she only ever appeared
in Luton, well, the London Palladium briefly. But then she went to Luton in
Goldilocks and the Three Bears. Is it true that Dennis Healey was one of the
first people to spot her as a talent, as a political talent? Yes, he was judging
a competition and he picked Betty Boothroyd as the winner and said something
like, there's a comely, comely Labour lass from Dewsbury. I'm the Labour
candidate here in the Nelson Cone by-election. Oh, you're all alike. You're all
for yourself. We never do vote. I mean, you know that we are the only government
in peacetime that is attempting to control the cost of living. Are you going to
be voting for me tomorrow? I hope so. You hope so. So do I too, yes. With a
cheery smile like that, I'm sure you are. Despite those signs of early promise,
it took her quite a long time to get selected and finally be, I think she was
elected on her fifth attempt to become an MP in a by-election. She was elected
as Labour MP for West Bromwich. What role did she go on to play within the
Labour Party? She worked for Barbara Castle and Geoffrey De Freitas. She also
worked as a secretary on Capitol Hill. She went to the States for a year. So she
had a lot of experience when she did finally get into Westminster. Because she
was in the Whip's office, wasn't she? She became a Labour government Whip. Yes,
she did. She was appointed to the Labour Whip's office and Bob Mellish, the
Chief Whip, said to her, if you keep your trap shut, girl, you might get on. And
she followed his advice. What she did, which was quite shrewd, she got involved
in the procedural management stuff that goes on around the Speaker's table. By
that means, she eventually became a deputy Speaker, and that cleared her route
to the Speaker's chair. I have never known such grown-up people behave. I want
my voice to be recorded. Behave in such a crass, childlike manner. I think it is
time that members of this House grew up. I mean, just listening to some of the
archive of her when she was a Speaker, she didn't take any prisoners, did she?
She was pretty forceful. She was very forceful. She said to one recalcitrant MP,
to her is human, but Erskine May is divine. And Erskine May is the Bible of
Parliament. It's the Bible of procedure. But she was witty. After she finished
her parliamentary career, she became, amongst other things, Chancellor of the
Open University. And she was very passionate, wasn't she, about education? I
mean, given, I think her parents left school at 13, she failed the 11 plus, but
she really believed in people having a second opportunity. Yes, she did. And the
Open University mattered very much to her. She really cared about it. She saw it
as a route for people of any background to better themselves. And she spoke to
me very forcibly about it on several occasions. She never married, never had
children. Why do you think that is? Bad luck. She had lots of very meaningful
relationships, lots of boyfriends, and she had at least three serious proposals
of marriage, but they all came at the wrong time. And she had actually put
politics before her personal life. There was a musical based on her life, the
Betty Boothroyd musical, where I think Maxine Peake played her. She must have
been thrilled about that, was she? She enjoyed her celebrity. And she was very
pleased about the musical. And I gathered from Maxine Peake that she was
incredibly supportive and helpful in putting it together. I mean, it's
interesting, isn't it? You mentioned the fact that she was a celebrity. She was
sort of known all around the world when she was a speaker, wasn't she? Yes. She
wasn't the first speaker during the televised House of Commons, but because she
was a woman and because she was so stylish, she became very well known. And just
finally, I mean, is she a role model, do you think, for other women thinking
about political careers? Oh, yes, of course. She showed that by hanging on in
there, you can get elected, that it is possible for a woman to achieve the
Speaker's Chair. It was a terrific achievement and a great life. And she
deserves all the credit she's had. You know, you elected me in the springtime
and I shall retire in the autumn. I think it is a very fitting seasonal
conclusion to my period office. And therefore I say to all of you, in a phrase
you know so well but has never been more true, time's up. LAUGHTER CHEERING
Julia Langdon on Baroness Betty Boothroyd, who's died aged 93. Now, here is the
first recording that led to a multi-billion dollar industry. One Christmas was
so much like the other in those years around the sea town corner now. Out of all
sound except the distant speaking of the voices I sometimes hear a moment before
sleep. Dylan Thomas reading A Child's Christmas in Wales. That recording was
made in the early 50s by Marianne Mantell, an entrepreneurial young publisher
who was straight out of university when she hit upon an idea that would pave the
way for audiobooks. Matthew Rubry, Professor of Modern Literature at Queen Mary
University in London, is the author of the untold story of the talking book. Two
22-year-old friends, Marianne Mantell and Barbara Holdridge, were both kind of
working in dead-end jobs. So they had this idea of going out and making
recordings of poetry, saw that Dylan Thomas was in town giving a live reading
and sort of spontaneously decided, let's go and let's ask him to read poetry for
us. Now Dylan Thomas was famously difficult to pin down because he'd go off on
these mega drinking binges. How did they manage to get hold of him? He was a bit
of a rock star at the time in terms of giving live readings of his poetry.
Marianne Mantell and Barbara Holdridge went to this live reading but could not
get to him because he was just surrounded by so many adoring fans. They passed a
note back to him and they didn't even sign their full names on it because they
wanted to make sure they were being taken seriously as business executives. But
then they did get to their manager who said get in touch with this hotel. They
still had difficulty pinning him down because he had such a bohemian lifestyle.
He was out really late drinking every night. So I think they got in touch with
him around 5am one day when he just got home from a night out and were able to
convince him to come make their first album. So Marianne and Barbara make a
vinyl recording of Dylan Thomas reciting five of his poems and at Child's
Christmas in Wales. How successful was it? It went on to sell over 400,000
copies by 1960. So I think eight years after the company brought out this
recording as their first album. So that's a remarkable number of sales for a
spoken word recording of literature. And they went on to record all sorts of
other great literary names, didn't they? W.H. Auden, T.S. Eliot, Hemingway, Ezra
Pound even. Palace in smoky light, try but a heap of smouldering boundary
stones. Anaxiformingus, aurunculea, hear me? Cagnus of golden prowse. These two
record label founders had exquisite taste and they went on to record a number of
sort of event albums too. They recorded Shakespeare plays for instance and they
had legendary actors like Laurence Olivier and Vanessa Redgrave. And they also
sort of made unusual recordings. So J.R.R. Tolkien famously recorded himself
speaking Elvish. Even as I stepped over the threshold, a single clear Elvish
voice rose in song. I love the fact that their first sound engineer was Peter
Bartok, son of the Hungarian composer Isabella Bartok. The talent, whether it's
on their record albums or in the recording studio, is just phenomenal. What
about Marianne Mantel's early years? She was born in 1929 in Berlin and her
family only moved to the US because they were fleeing Nazi Germany. So she ended
up growing up or spending a part of her life in New York, going to Hunter
College in New York and studying the classics there. So she graduated from there
with a degree in Greek literature and that was where she and Barbara got to know
each other very well. Now you first came across the name Marianne Mantel while
researching a history of audiobooks. How pivotal was she in getting what is now
a multi-billion dollar industry off the ground? And did she and Barbara Cohen
get the credit for it that they deserve? I think they were both pioneers of the
audiobook industry. I think they are getting credit now, though I think because
audiobooks had such a low reputation for a long time, it's only in the last
decade or so that they've really boomed in popularity. When I started
researching audiobooks, I thought they emerged sometime around the 1990s when
people were still listening to books on tape or books on compact discs. So I was
pretty surprised that it went all the way back to 1952 in this pivotal recording
of Dylan Thomas. So I think they were, they deserve entire credit for launching
the audiobook industry, recognizing that these recordings of literature could be
both commercially viable and culturally significant at the same time. And also
that technology was going in their direction, wasn't it? Yeah, they really took
advantage of long-playing records, which had only been on the market for a few
years. So before 1948, you really couldn't record a full book or a major part of
a book just because records were too short. After this time, you can suddenly
start recording longer passages, over 20 minutes on a disc. I mean, it's quite
an extraordinary story, isn't it? Because, you know, there we are in the early
1950s, a time of great sexism when women are being pushed back into the kitchen
after the war years. Is it the case that they were the first two women to found
a record label and there were only 22? They were the first woman to start such a
major label, as far as I know. And it really stood out at the time because the
record business was male-dominated. Women were largely still confined to
domestic roles. So the press really made a lot of them as sort of two
unconventional figures, entrepreneurs who were successful in such a male-
dominated industry. Do you take this old whore death for thy lawful wedded wife?
Repeat after me. I do, I do, I do. Ernest Hemingway reading second poem to Mary,
recorded by Marianne Mantel, who's died aged 93. Now, if there was ever a voice
that was synonymous with football in England, it was John Watson. For 50 years,
he commentated for Match the Day, becoming affectionately known by his fans as
Motti. He commentated on literally thousands of games from the early 70s to his
retirement in 2018. And remember, in those early years, the BBC held all the TV
rights. But for Motti, the most important match he ever reported on was the
giant killer, the FA Cup tie between non-league Hereford and First Division
Newcastle in 1972. It was his first commentary for Match of the Day. It changed
my life. Newcastle winning 1-0 with five minutes to go. Radford. Now Tudor's
gone down for Newcastle. Radford again. Oh, what a goal! What a goal! The
footballer Ricky George was playing in that match for Hereford United and went
on to score a goal in the replay. He and Motti were lifelong friends, but their
friendship had been sealed earlier as teenagers, when Ricky was playing for
Tottenham, and John was starting out as a rookie reporter on the local paper.
John had just joined the Barnet press as a junior reporter. Once he was in the
area, because that's where I live, we saw a lot of each other socially. So by
the time that Hereford-Newcastle game came round, we were already good friends.
He was very famous for reeling off statistics while doing his commentaries. Is
it true that he had an extraordinary recall or memory of every match he'd ever
seen? Yes, he did. And I think he got that from his father, who his father was a
Methodist minister and was used to going around the parish, learning about
people and then actually keeping that information in his head so that when he
spoke in the church, he could bring people up. So I think John picked that up
from his father. This part of Buckinghamshire is absolutely snowbound and
there's a bit of a gale hurtling around me now as well. In the sheepskin coat, I
mean, it's sort of entered folklore now. I bought it for the warmth because you
couldn't buy a sheepskin full length coat. It was only a jacket you could get in
the shops. So I started having these made to measure. I didn't set out to make
that a trademark, honestly, but it hasn't done me any harm. I grew up with John
Motson because I used to watch Match of the Day every Saturday night and it was
always, always his voice. The footballer and commentator Mark Lawrenson worked
with Motty for many years. I would probably be at the ground about two and a
half hours before the commentary. He didn't want to be near me. He just wanted
to go and do whatever he did, which was fine by me. So I just go in the press
lounge with everyone else and chew the fat. But you have this A4 piece of
cardboard that you wrote out all both teams on. I think you had a green by row,
black by row, blue by row. If my memory serves me right, you'd have notes of the
referee. And we wouldn't, we wouldn't see each other until probably 10, 15
minutes before the game. I didn't want to go on the game because normally they
were freezing cold places. I wouldn't even speak to him. I just take my seat,
get my headphones on. And then he'd look at me and he said, you're right, Leroy.
And I said, yeah, all good, John. And we were off and running. He has actually
Gascoigne got a yellow card. Oh, dear. Oh, dear me. He's going to be out of the
final if England get there. For the tackle on number 14, Berthold, Gascoigne has
had his second yellow card of the competition. We were in Stuttgart for the
World Cup in Germany. His producer of the day, Karen Graham, was with him. She
said he was doing all his notes and he said the sun was across from us and it
was boiling, but it was right in his face. He didn't even raise his head. He
just stuck his arm out to point to the sun and say, can you do something about
that? That was John. I remember him describing the Hillsborough tragedy as it
unfolded. It must have had a big impact on him. Did he ever talk about that? He
did. He was left to actually commentate on what was going on once the game had
been abandoned. It did affect him. I think it disillusioned him for a while as
far as his love of football was concerned, because it would have been an
avoidable tragedy. He did get to know a couple who very sadly lost their son. He
spent a lot of time with that couple and I thought that was an incredibly
generous thing to do. But it did affect him big time. I understand that you and
Motti shared a great love of horses. Is that right? I'd always been interested
in horse racing and he became interested as well once he went to Cheltenham. He
went every year without fail. He was offered the chance of a sixth share in a
horse called Earth Summit way back in 1992. But he turned it down because he was
about to move house and decided that he couldn't afford to invest in a horse. So
when John turned that share down, I took the share that Motti should have had.
Of course, the horse won the Grand National. Instead of him being upset and
sulky about it, what he did without even telling me was he backed the horse to
win the Grand National months and months before the race itself. He won well
over £5,000 and to my amazement, he gave me half the winnings. I was speechless,
but he'd done that as a gesture of friendship. In his long career commentating
on more than 2,500 games, Mottson covered nine World Cups, 29 FA Cup finals and
nine European Championships. He also became a bit of a darling on the after-
dinner circuit, but he was a bit nervous of doing it on his own to start with,
so he asked his oldest mate to join him as a double act. He had a few anecdotes
to tell. I used to encourage him to do that. We had a great time, but if it
hadn't have been for him, I would never have done anything like that. And we did
actually share a programme on BBC Radio 5 Live and that was another amazing
thing. It only happened because of him asking me to join him. Just before he
went to bed, he had a glass of whiskey and he'd order a cheese toastie. Once he
had a cheese toastie, I knew he'd had a good day then. Mark Lawrenson and Ricky
George paying tribute to John Mottson, who's died aged 77. This week, last words
also go to Margaret Thornton, who enjoyed success late in life as a romantic
novelist. The Blackpool author only began writing in her 50s after retiring as a
teacher. She published 28 novels, many of them based in her hometown. And Sir
Bernard Ingham, the Yorkshire-born journalist who went on to become Margaret
Thatcher's chief press officer for her entire 11 years in office. Well, she
couldn't have been better from my point of view. She knew what she was doing.
She didn't change her mind and she let me get on with it. But finally, the
pianist Sulamita Aronofsky, who defected from the USSR in the early 70s and
fought tooth and nail to found an international piano competition in London.
Sulamita Juraetienne was born in Kaunas, Lithuania in 1929, the only child of a
doctor and his wife. The pianist and composer Jonathan Powell was one of her
students and says that from an early age, Sulamita showed great promise at the
piano. By 1940, 1941, she was in the junior department of the Leningrad
Conservatoire as a young pianist at age 11 or 12. In 1941, she was evacuated
with the rest of the Conservatoire to Tashkent during the siege of Leningrad.
And Sulamita told me stories of how people would trade practice rooms for water.
By the late 40s or early 50s, she was in the Moscow Conservatoire studying with
some of the great luminaries of pianism of that era. And she had applied to be
in the class of Alexander Goldman Viesel. And he had been born in 1875 and was a
friend of Tolstoy and had played chess with Tolstoy. I was very lucky because
the time when I was studying was probably a golden era because after the war, it
was still very, very special in terms of professorial stuff and the ability of
people to dedicate themselves to the arts. By say the late 50s, early 60s, she
was performing and teaching in Vilnius and made a series of recordings for
Lithuanian radio that have only recently been discovered. And they were actually
found by a researcher in a box marked to be destroyed because she had defected.
But they'd be kind of forgotten about. And during the 60s, her first husband
died of leukemia. Maybe it was that and other aspects that thought she could try
to find a life elsewhere. In 1971, she was allowed to visit family members in
the US. Her return journey brought her via Britain, where she chose to defect.
But tragedy struck within a year when she was badly injured in a car accident,
leaving little hope of resuming her career as a concert pianist. Her old pal,
Vladimir Ashkenazi, put word about and found her a position in the Royal
Northern College of Music. And so Sulamita lived in the north of England for
quite a while. And she always claimed to me that she had a Yorkshire accent.
What was she like as a teacher? Because she was your teacher, wasn't she? She
was phenomenally demanding. And yet, when you've done something properly, she
was incredibly generous. I think that the goal is the same. One wants to achieve
a certain development, the progress of a student. But of course, it's more than
half a century ago. So things have changed in terms of how we interpret things
now. She was also extremely generous with her time. You would sort of pay for a
lesson, but then they could go on for four or five hours and you'd be playing in
her house until after midnight. And she said, I realise it is quite late. Would
you like a lift home? The first prize of our competition goes to Eugene Murski
from Uzbekistan. So, Sulamita Aronofsky will probably be best remembered for
founding the London International Piano Competition. And she did this in the
face of great odds, didn't she? Because there wasn't very much support for the
idea initially. Why was it so important for her to get that off the ground? I
think it's partly because there wasn't a piano competition in London. And it
seems a bit daft that there wasn't. And also, I think there was a bit of
personal rivalry with Fanny Waterman. That were the founder of the Leeds Piano
Competition. And I once asked her about Fanny and she said, you know, she was
very good with small children. Damned by faint praise. It lasted for 15 years.
Do you think that without Sulamita at the helm pushing it through, it couldn't
carry on? Was she that key to it? She was it, basically. She was asking around.
She certainly asked me if I knew anybody who'd be keen to take it on. And I just
think because it was so identified with her, that it is rather impossible to
imagine it without her. She was extremely single-minded and it seems could put
up with any form of adversity. And was very warm and very caring. I remember
doing two concerts in one day. And she said, are you crazy? Now you come back to
my house and I'm going to feed you and make you go to sleep. At the same time,
she had a great sense of humor. When she was in Manchester, she had a problem
with a neighbor complaining of people playing like Tchaikovsky concerto at 11 at
night. And a man came around and said, it's like living in the Royal Festival
Hall. And she said, yes, but you do not need to buy a ticket. And I said, well,
I'm not going to buy a ticket. I'm going to go to sleep. And she said, it's like
living in the Royal Festival Hall. And she said, yes, but you do not need to buy
a ticket. Jonathan Powell on his former teacher and friend, the pianist,
Sulamita Aronofsky, who's died aged 93. Last words also went to football
commentator, John Motsen, the pioneering audio book publisher, Marianne Mantel,
and the indomitable politician and speaker of the House of Commons, Betty
Boothroyd. Don't forget, you can listen to the stories of hundreds of
interesting lives lived if you search out the Last Word podcast on BBC Sounds.
Thanks for listening. Last Word was presented by Kirsty Lang and produced by
Neil George. Explore the world of arts and culture on Front Row. The atmosphere
changes. The hair starts to stand up on the back of your neck. The biggest news
and interviews. It was an absolute dream of mine to perform on a stage.
Alongside live discussions, debates and the latest reviews. She's a series of
contrasts, which I thought were quite fascinating. I loathed it. I can't
recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed
and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for Front Row. You are a national treasure. No, I'm not.
Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you can listen to
past episodes on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, it's Tim Harford. Hello and welcome
to More or Less, your steadfast guide to the most bewildering numbers. This
week, I know how much 5 grams of sugar is, but is 5 grams of cocaine a lot?
Curious listeners are asking for a friend. How much of our rivers and
countryside is openly available to anyone to swim, paddle or stroll? New figures
have recently been released about deaths in England and Wales. Is the long
period of chronic excess mortality finally over? But first, something has gone
viral. Which is bad if it's a virus, but apparently it's good if it's a tweet.
Although we prefer our viral tweets to be true. So let's take a look at this
one. It says, Why is there such a vast difference in average energy costs? And
then it lists 11 countries, most of them in the EU, and each with a sum in
Euros. France and Belgium are both 650 Euros, Spain is 620, Germany, Denmark,
the Netherlands, Austria and Norway are all somewhere around 550 Euros, Finland
is 476, Poland is 174 and the UK is at the bottom of the list with a number way
higher than any of the other countries, 2,960 Euros. It's more than four times
the number for Belgium and France, the next most expensive countries. Now it's
not at all clear what these numbers are supposed to represent. Except that the
question is about energy costs, so something something energy bills. What is the
tweet actually claiming? And are we really paying that much more for our energy
bills than other countries in Europe? Reporter Josephine Casley is with me.
Hello, Jo. Hello. And Jo, you've been trying to work out where this comes from.
I have. But first in terms of who's been sharing it, academics, activists, even
Tim Burgess of the Charlatans and a Labour MP. And it's been used to blame all
the things that people like to blame for things. So Brexit, green policies, the
government, and of course the BBC for not covering it. Well, we're covering it
now. But who posted it originally? Well, that's not really clear. Variants of
this tweet have been going around since December. The earliest one that I found
is from mid-December. It's a map of northern Europe with numbers on most of the
countries. And the post reads, comparative energy prices, what's going on? So
the numbers from the viral tweet were taken from that map? I think so, although
not all of them match exactly. For instance, Spain isn't on the map at all, but
it is in the tweet. And there seem to be some possible copy and paste errors.
But honestly, that's the least of the problems with this. So that map had a
watermark on it for EPEX spot, which is a clue as to where this comes from,
because EPEX spot is a wholesale electricity market, meaning that it's a place
where energy suppliers and producers go to buy and sell electricity. Now, I
asked EPEX spot and they told me that this is indeed their data, but it's not
what we pay as consumers. It's what big energy suppliers paid for electricity.
And the numbers in question were taken from the wholesale prices in one
particular hour in the early evening of December the 12th. If you keep up to
date with energy sector trade publications, you'll know that that was a wildly
expensive hour for the UK because of a killer combination of cold weather and
not enough wind. So these numbers are from one hour. It's a particularly
expensive hour for the UK. And they're from the wholesale market where energy
companies buy the electricity they sell to us rather than the prices we actually
pay. Exactly. So in summary, that tweet was total rubbish. OK, well, let's bin
that and move on. Do we have any more reliable sources that can tell us how the
UK's electricity bills compare to other countries in Europe? This is really
tricky. There's no definitive up-to-date list of prices and bills out there. But
one of the best sources that we do have, which is publicly available, is a
project called HEPI, which is funded by the Austrian and Hungarian governments.
Oh, it's good to see those two getting back together, I think. So they publish
monthly figures on the tariffs that are available if you switch provider on the
first day of the month. They get the information from price comparison sites,
energy companies and regulators, and they take account of measures like price
caps, although they don't take account of social tariffs that are targeted at
particular groups. They look at the prices in capital cities, but they say that
this is usually representative of a country as a whole. For the UK, Northern
Ireland has a separate energy market, so the figures only apply for England,
Wales and Scotland. So this reflects the tariffs available, but not necessarily
what people are actually paying? Yes, that's right. I spoke to Raffaella
Grigoriou, who is HEPI's data analysis manager, about how Great Britain compares
to other European countries for its electricity prices. It used to be higher
during summer in July and August 2022. It used to be the most expensive country,
but the price has been reduced since then. In general, the price ranking of the
countries is very unstable during the crisis, which was obviously not the case
before the beginning of the crisis. So in the summer, Great Britain had the most
expensive electricity prices, according to HEPI's data, which covers the 27
countries in the EU, plus another six European countries. Right, but since then,
the energy price guarantee has been brought in in Great Britain. Yes, so since
then, we're no longer the most expensive. I asked Raffaella to talk me through
their more recent data. As of January 2023, Great Britain is 15th in the ranking
in terms of expensiveness, following Italy, Germany, Denmark and Ireland. If you
take an average for 2022, we're the third most expensive after Denmark and
Italy. Which is a long way from what that viral tweet implied, which is that
Great Britain was four times more expensive than any other country in Europe.
Still, electricity isn't cheap here, it seems. No, it isn't. But electricity
isn't the only component of energy bills. Gas is another important factor. So if
we look at gas tariffs for January this year, we are... Let me count quickly. It
is one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, 15th. So around the middle,
given that we have 33 countries. That's January this year. If we look back at
the average for all of last year, we're also 15th most expensive out of 33 for
domestic gas tariffs. Now, HEPI doesn't include one-off cash refunds and
discounts in their headline figures because it makes comparing countries harder,
like the £400 discount that we got here. But they have done a bit of analysis on
this and when they take refunds into account, for electricity, Great Britain
moves further towards the cheaper end of the ranking. Everything we've talked
about so far has been in cash terms. Can we look at it relative to how much
people earn? Yes. So HEPI do look at it another way as well, which is to
estimate gas and electricity bills as a proportion of disposable income. The
most expensive one, as average 2022 price, is Portugal. Then it is Norway,
Bulgaria, Denmark, Greece, Cyprus, Italy, Spain, and then it is Great Britain.
And this is for electricity market. So we're ninth out of 33 countries for
electricity. But according to HEPI's data, our gas bills as a share of
disposable income are below the EU average. So to summarise, that tweet was
nonsense. Electricity here isn't four times more expensive than the next most
expensive country and neither is gas. According to HEPI's data, in cash terms,
Great Britain does have more expensive electricity than most countries in
Europe, but not all. For gas, it's the 15th most expensive out of 33. But if
your yardstick is how much we spend out of our disposable income, it looks a bit
cheaper. Still above the EU average for electricity, but below the average for
gas. Thank you, Josephine, and thank you to Raffaele Gregoriu. A few weeks ago,
we speculated that the state of the NHS might become the theme of this series.
And despite a strong showing by Latin grammar, we were right. In our first
episode, we looked closely at two issues. The first was a high number of what's
called excess deaths in the UK. For the second half of 2022, 26,000 more deaths
were recorded than we would expect in the last half of a normal year. That's 9%
more deaths than is usual. The second was how many avoidable deaths might be
associated with the increasing struggles in the NHS, which were particularly
evident in data showing extremely long waits for treatment at accident and
emergency departments. Both of these issues were looking bad when we came on air
in early January. Excess deaths were rising, and December had seen dire
performance data in the NHS as it tried to deal with large flu and Covid waves.
But since the middle of January, it looks as if things have started to improve.
In recent weeks, excess deaths have been declining, and after some truly
shocking figures from December, waits for emergency NHS treatment have been
shorter. So, have we turned a corner? We decided to go back to the person who
first helped us make sense of this data, Stuart MacDonald, friend of the
programme and an actuary at LCP Analytics. I asked him to remind us how bad the
end of 2022 really was, starting with data from England. So, through 2022, we
had this fairly consistent pattern of excess deaths from around Easter onwards,
and a slow burn problem, not particularly eye-catching, a few percent of excess
week after week after week. And then that situation got really very bad as we
got through mid-December, and some of the factors we've discussed started to
play out. We were seeing thousands of excess deaths arise each week. And what's
happened to excess deaths in January? So, January started very badly indeed,
with thousands of excess deaths in each of the first three weeks, between 3,000
and 4,000. Since then, the situation has improved significantly, excess deaths
falling week on week, and in the very latest week, just published by the ONS,
deaths actually below the normal level. And this data for excess deaths, that's
describing the situation in England and Wales. What about Scotland and Northern
Ireland? That's right. The numbers that we've talked about so far are for
England and Wales. The picture actually is very similar for Scotland and
Northern Ireland. So, significant peak in excess deaths in late December, early
January, and improving markedly over the last few weeks. And between 3,000 and
4,000 excess deaths a week. And this is bad. I think it's worth making a
comparison to some of the worst weeks of the pandemic, where I think we had
excess deaths of around 10,000 a week. So, it's not as bad as that. But, I mean,
these were really acute crises. And the fact that we're even in the same
ballpark is worrying. But you're saying that excess deaths are now, well,
they've gone away. So, we're now actually below the baseline. So, have we got
through this phase of chronic excess deaths, then? Can we put all that behind
us? Well, I can't say with absolute certainty, but I'm afraid I remain fairly
pessimistic. If we look at the baseline that we're comparing to, then this is
the time of year when flu seasons normally occur. So, our flu spike and COVID
spike fell in December. Whichever baseline we use, there is an assumption that
flu season would be happening around now. So, the baseline is essentially
inflated. And the actual is benefiting from the fact that, A, we're not having
flu at the moment. And B, we've just had it. And so, some of the deaths that
would normally be happening now have been accelerated. So, just to be clear what
we're saying here, normally when we make these comparisons, we're making them to
a baseline. And that baseline in February normally has flu in it, a lot of flu
deaths. And we don't have so many flu deaths right now because, well, because
we've already had them. Had them in December, we had them in early January. So,
if I understand what you're saying, that rather flattering comparison is masking
the fact that there actually still is an underlying chronic problem. We're just
not able to see it in the excess death figures at the moment. I think that's
exactly right. And what I would expect to see happen, it's always dangerous to
make predictions, but over the next few weeks, I would expect a similar pattern
of little to no excess, maybe even negative excess. But as we push beyond the
point where flu seasons tend to occur as we get into April and beyond, I think
there's a very real possibility that we see a similar pattern to last year,
where the number of deaths expected each week, according to the baseline, falls
away, but actual deaths observed stay at these relatively elevated levels,
winter levels, and we see a return of the excess. Our thanks to actuary Stuart
MacDonald. We're outdoorsy types here at More or Less. We love anything from
strolling along a country lane to kayaking down the whitewater rapids on the
river. And it seems like our loyal listeners take a keen interest too. I'm just
watching the first episode of Grace and Perry's Full English, where someone
states that we only have free access to 8% of the countryside and 3% of the
rivers. Is that accurate, please? Heather. Dear Tim, whilst listening to One to
One with Matthew Paris yesterday, I heard the interviewee state that we the
public only have access to 3% of British rivers. This seems a very low number,
unless I misheard. Is this correct, as I have never had any problems walking
near them? A loyal listener, Steve Hynde. Our Right to Roam correspondent, John
Bithrey, is here. Hello, John. Hello, Tim. Yes, let's wade into this. Both our
listeners are referring to interviews with a chap called Nick Hayes, who's
campaigned for a long time for more public access to Britain's countryside and
waterways. Now, if we take the issue of access to the countryside first, the 8%
figure Nick Hayes mentioned refers to the amount of land in England where we
have what are called open access rights. That means places where we can do
things like walk, run, climb, watch birds, watch other people watch birds and
enjoy a few other gentle pursuits without having to stick to particular paths.
In general, we're talking about mountainous areas, moors, heaths and common
land, as well as parts of the glorious English coastline. A lot of this open
access is laid down in law in the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, often
known as the Right to Roam Act. So this is separate to our ability to walk along
footpaths and other public rights of way? Yes, that's right. We have an
extensive network of footpaths and bridleways enabling public access to private
land. But in general, you have to stick to the footpath unless you want
landowners with pitchforks coming after you. Pitchforks? I'm not sure that's the
tool of choice these days, John, but both of us are talking like city folk right
now. So the 8% of land in England where we have this open access, where is it?
Well, a lot of it is concentrated in the north of England in national parks,
such as the Lake District, the Yorkshire Dales and the North York Moors. The
glorious Peak District is in the heart of the country, but then further south,
the national parks are out on or near coastal areas. For example, the Broads,
the New Forest and Exmoor. Then there's Dartmoor, which was recently at the
centre of a pretty high profile row over wild camping, something that's not
automatically permitted under the Right to Roam law, but was an assumed right on
Dartmoor until a recent ruling in the High Court. So we like to ask whether a
number is a big number on, more or less. Is 8% a big number in this context? In
terms of sheer area, 8% of England is about 4,000 square miles. But 4,000 square
miles, that's half the size of Wales! It is indeed, Tim, but depending on where
you live, you might have to travel quite some way to reach a really large open
stretch of countryside where you can ramble at will. Things are better in Wales,
where 22% of the countryside is open access. Campaigners for greater access, and
there are a lot of them about, also point to Scotland, where people can access
the vast majority of land with far fewer restrictions. In Northern Ireland,
there isn't a defined Right to Roam in law and rights of access are generally
much more dependent on what individual landowners are happy to allow. Let's move
on to the second question then, and this issue of rivers. Do we have free access
to only 3% of rivers? Well, this is arguably the trickier figure, Tim. I asked
around about the source of this 3% figure and several lines of inquiry led me
back to the organisation British Canoeing, which, as the name might suggest,
promotes that most fun of all the fun paddle sports. I gave British Canoeing a
call and asked them how they'd come up with that 3% figure and they said they'd
got it from a report on access to waterways for recreational purposes that was
written back in 2000 by academics at the University of Brighton. But what's the
3% figure referring to? It's 3.47% to be exact, and that's the proportion of
non-tidal stretches of rivers in England that have what's called a statutory
right of navigation. Now that is one where a public body, such as the
Environment Agency or the Canal and River Trust, have designated under law
stretches of rivers or canals which can be used by the public for activities
such as boating, canoeing or swimming. So what on earth's going on with the
other 97% of stretches of river in England? Well, this is where the water's
muddy, Tim. Campaigners argue that all of our major rivers have a public right
of navigation as an ancient right, regardless of what any public body might say
today, so people can exercise these rights to do all the activities currently
officially restricted to particular sections. They also argue there are rights
in what's known as common law to swim or canoe in rivers if that's happened for
a long time without objection by landowners. And in a more practical sense,
there are lots of places where landowners have given permission, or at least not
objected to, swimmers, canoeists and others using the waters. And then there are
also those who argue that if you can walk to or along a river, then you also
have the right to access the water itself. But a lot of this is pretty
theoretical and not tested in law. And then there are the tidal stretches of
river in England and they don't feature in this calculation at all? Yes, that's
right. And I've had trouble getting a figure for tidal sections of rivers, but
we're looking at many hundreds of miles of stretches of tidal rivers in England.
In general, they do have a statutory right of navigation, but even then there
are restrictions. For example, since 2012, you need permission from the powers
that be to swim in the Thames in central London. Apparently, we have David
Walliams to thank for that. Damn you, Walliams! I wouldn't be too harsh on him,
Tim. He swam down pretty much the whole of the Thames for charity and then spent
the next day throwing up. Hmm. Sounds like access isn't the only problem with
our rivers. But overall, John, this all sounds a bit unclear. It is. I think we
can safely say that the 3% figure is at the very lowest end of how we define
access to rivers in England. But coming up with a more accurate figure for
what's going on in every stretch of England's 36,000 miles of river is a very
tricky task because of all the legal and practical issues involved. Thank you,
John. And thanks also to the aptly named Ben Seal from British Canoeing and
solicitor Nathan Wilmot from the Outdoor Swimming Society. You're listening to
More or Less. A couple of weeks ago, Jared O'Mara, formerly the Labour MP for
Sheffield-Hallam, was found guilty of fraudulently claiming £24,000 in expenses.
The money was stolen to pay for Mr O'Mara's cocaine habit. Reportedly, he was
taking five grams a day. This led to the following exchange on Twitter. Peace. I
can't help but notice how many media types are referring to Jared O'Mara's five-
gram-a-day cocaine habit. As if everyone has the frame of reference to
understand whether that's a lot or a little. It's the Tim Harford rule of data
communication. Explain what the number means and if it's a big number. Looking
forward to the next More or Less, explaining what's a reasonable level of
cocaine consumption. Our editor Richard Vardon saw this exchange on Twitter and
thought it would be a wonderful idea for the programme, which might surprise you
if you don't know our editor. Normally at this moment I'd be joined by our
cocaine correspondent or our Class A reporter, but funnily enough we've had no
applications for these roles. Nobody on the team wanted to embellish their CV
with this story. So we've instead had to turn to an expert. OK, so my name is
Harry Shapiro. I'm the director of Drugwise, which is an online drug information
service. I have to say I am a loyal listener. Well, welcome to More or Less. I'm
hoping you're going to be able to supply me with some information about Jared
O'Mara's drug habits because I have to say I am clueless. So it was reported
during his trial that at one stage he was using up to five grams of cocaine a
day. Now I know from measuring salt and sugar that's about a teaspoon. I've got
no idea whether it's a lot of cocaine. Is it a lot of cocaine, five grams a day?
Yeah. I mean, I think if you spoke to also to anyone in the drug treatment
services, you see people and most people I think would agree that five grams a
day is, you know, at the top end of daily cocaine use. I mean, there are lots of
sorts of caveats around all of this, as you might expect. So when we talk about
five grams a day, do we really mean every single day? Because, you know, people
go on cocaine binges and then they have a rest and all the rest of it. But if
you're just looking at pure quantity, yes, I would put that under the heading of
heavy use. Heavy use, but not completely implausible. It is conceivable that
someone might. Oh, yes. Yes, yes, absolutely. Yeah, totally feasible. I'm
curious, do we know how much the typical cocaine user does regularly use? Well,
at the risk of being facetious, it's how long is a line of coke? It just
depends. I mean, I've been experimenting with flour. Yeah. What's this about
flour? What have you been doing there? Oh, right. No, I just I just tried to,
you know, I think TS Eliot talked about measuring life out in coffee spoons. But
I was just having a look at what five grams of flour actually looks like. And
it's about a couple of level teaspoons. It doesn't actually look that much. Of
anything. But, you know, you are dealing with a powerful drug, so it is a lot.
So if you break down five grams into lines, you're looking at 0.1 to 0.2 grams
per line. So five grams works out at something like 25 to 50 lines of cocaine a
day. So if you did take five grams of cocaine a day, every day, what shape are
you going to be in after a few weeks or months or years? What's it going to do
to you? Well, apart from any physical risk attached to that, so you could eat at
that sort of level, you could easily have a stroke or heart attack. From the
mental health point of view, your mental health would be deteriorating. You'd
become very anxious and ultimately quite paranoid and pretty much impossible to
deal with. So you'd have to be very careful. And it's a lot more difficult to
deal with than it is to deal with. And it's a lot more difficult to live with or
to work with because you literally would be all over the place. Thanks to Harry
Shapiro of Drugwise. And if you can think of a stranger topic about which to
ask, is that a big number? Well, let us know. There's a new drama on BBC One and
iPlayer. It's called The Gold. And if you can't handle it, then it will find its
way to someone who can. The show's about the Brinksmatt robbery in 1983, when
six men broke into the Brinksmatt depot near Heathrow Airport. Inside, they
discovered 6,800 ingots of gold collectively weighing three tonnes. And that was
worth £26 million at the time. If you're wondering if that's a big number, it
is. We're looking for six robbers and three tonnes of gold. Money like that will
end up in surprising places with surprising people. And the show comes with a
big claim, which pops up on the screen at the beginning. If you've bought gold
jewellery in Britain since 1984, it's likely to contain traces of Brinksmatt
gold. As much as I'd like to believe that, something we know on More or Less is
that all numerical claims that glitter are not gold. So I asked Rob Eastaway,
all-round maths whiz and author of Maths on the Back of an Envelope, to help us
work out if this is in any way plausible. Let's round that up and be generous
and say there's a million gold rings gone into circulation. Now, the thing is,
how many people have bought jewellery since 1983, 84? And I would reckon the
majority of adults, for one reason or another, might well have acquired a gold
bit of jewellery. I mean, that gold was not all turned into jewellery, surely.
Gold gets turned into lots of things, from electronics, lots of Indian
electronics, to fillings. Gold teeth, I gather, are still quite popular. Is that
jewellery? But actually, did it stay in the UK? I mean, whether innocently or
guiltily, it will have leaked out of the UK to other people. I'm going to leave
Rob Eastaway with that dramatic cliffhanger. If you want to hear the full story,
you'll have to wait until Saturday, when it will be released on BBC Sounds and
in our podcast. Because that's all we have time for this week, and indeed, this
series. You can, of course, subscribe to our weekly podcast on BBC Sounds or
elsewhere, and you can send us your questions and comments to give us something
to think about before our return, when the weather's a bit warmer. Our email
address is moreorlessatbbc.co.uk. Until next time, goodbye. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds.