TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 about small boats. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson
and Justin Webb. It's seven o'clock on Tuesday the 7th of March. The headlines
this morning, the government says it's pushing the boundaries of international
law with legislation it's introducing today to stop migrants reaching the UK in
small boats. Nursing and ambulance union bosses are due to meet the health
secretary to try to break the deadlock over NHS pay in England. And a Roman
shrine has been found in Leicester, metres from where the remains of Richard III
were discovered a decade ago. The BBC News is read this morning by Tom Saunders.
The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has accepted the government is pushing the
boundaries of international law with new legislation it's introducing today to
stop asylum seekers crossing the English Channel in small boats. It's thought
the measure is putting a legal duty on ministers to remove anyone who enters the
UK illegally would take precedence in law over the right to claim asylum here.
Here's our political correspondent Ian Watson. Just five years ago, fewer than
300 migrants crossed the Channel in small boats. Last year, more than 45,000
undertook the hazardous crossing and as the numbers grew, so too did the
political pressure on the government. Introducing a new law to stop small boats
was announced as one of the Prime Minister's priorities in January. Writing in
Today's Sun newspaper, he says a new law will send a signal that anyone entering
the country illegally will be swiftly removed. This new duty to remove would be
given precedence over existing legislation on asylum and human rights, though
there'd be exemptions for under 18s and those with serious medical conditions.
The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said the government's pushing the
boundaries of international law to solve the small boats crisis and ministers
are expected to acknowledge that there's a risk of a clash with some aspects of
the Human Rights Act. Critics have questioned whether there is the capacity to
detain a high number of people prior to removal. Labour says the government's
approach is unworkable because there are too few agreements with other countries
for the return of refugees and that more should be done to tackle the criminal
gangs who ferry asylum seekers across the Channel. Talks begin this morning
aimed at averting further NHS strikes in England. The Health Secretary, Steve
Barclay, will meet unions representing nurses, ambulance workers,
physiotherapists and midwives, which have all put industrial action on hold
while negotiations are underway. The talks won't include junior doctors unions,
which are planning to strike next week. More from our health reporter, Jim Reid.
What are described as intense negotiations are expected to start around 11 this
morning and run through until Thursday evening. Health unions agreed to suspend
the strikes planned for this week after ministers made clear there would be more
money on the table for some NHS staff. Discussions will focus on pay, with a
one-off bonus likely for the current financial year and the possibility of a pay
rise above the current offer of three and a half percent for the next financial
year, which starts in April. Government sources said the Health Secretary
believed both sides were committed to reaching a fair and reasonable settlement.
Unions, though, have warned that industrial action could resume if there's no
progress by the end of the week. WhatsApp messages leaked by the Daily Telegraph
suggest the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, was in favour of threats to
block funding for a disability centre unless the Conservative MP lobbying for it
voted to extend Covid restrictions in England. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock
said the newspaper had given an entirely partial account of events driven by an
anti-lockdown agenda and insisted what it was accusing him of doing never
happened. Howard Johnson reports. These latest messages leaked by the Telegraph
concern a vote to bring in a tougher tier system of Covid restrictions in
England at the beginning of December 2020. The measures faced a potential
rebellion from some Conservative MPs. In one exchange, Mr Hancock's political
aide, Alan Nixon, suggested to the then Health Secretary that pressure could be
put on backbenchers whose re-election hinged on central government funding.
During the discussion, the Bury North MP, James Daly's campaign for a disability
hub in his constituency was mentioned. Mr Dixon proposed that funding for it
should be off the table if he rebelled. Mr Hancock replied, yes, 100%. The idea
wasn't taken forward and Mr Daly tells the Telegraph he was never threatened.
But the former Tory party chairman, Sir Jake Berry, has called the exchange
absolutely disgusting and urged Mr Hancock to come to Parliament today to
explain the messages. Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky says he's
instructed his military commanders to bolster the defence of the besieged
eastern city of Bakhmut. After months of bombardment, Russian forces now
surround it on three sides. In his latest nightly address, Mr Zelensky said his
most senior generals had all advised against a withdrawal from the area, which
he promised would never be abandoned. I told the Commander-in-Chief to find the
appropriate forces to help our troops in Bakhmut. There is no part of Ukraine
about which one can say that it can be abandoned. There is no Ukrainian trench
in which the resilience and heroism of our warriors would be disregarded. The
occupier kills for the very fact that we are Ukrainians. The UN Children's
Agency, UNICEF, says the number of pregnant women and girls suffering from
malnutrition has risen by a quarter in the last two years in countries such as
Somalia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan. It fears recent wars and the Covid pandemic
have made it harder for people to get the food they need. UNICEF is urging the
international community to do more to support failing nutrition programmes.
Experts are due to consider whether a controversial new treatment for the skin
condition vitiligo should be offered on the NHS. The topical cream can return
skin's natural colour and remove whitened patches, but carries potential side
effects including acne and has been criticised for trying to mask or correct
vitiligo. Here's our health reporter, Michelle Roberts. Vitiligo affects all
races but is more noticeable in people with skin of colour because it causes
loss of pigment. Experts say living with the skin condition can be
psychologically devastating. UK officials are about to assess a new type of drug
to treat vitiligo that's already been approved in America to see if it should be
offered on the NHS. It's a cream called ruxolitinib that must be prescribed by a
doctor because of possible side effects. While a new treatment that can restore
pigment would be welcomed, some say vitiligo is something to be embraced
instead. One of the world's most recognisable models, Winnie Harlow, describes
her vitiligo as one of her greatest gifts. An interim report has suggested that
a pilot may not have heard a radio call from another helicopter shortly before a
mid-air collision on Australia's Gold Coast in which a British couple were
killed. Two other people died in the crash in January. One of the two
helicopters which were being used for sightseeing trips managed to land with
heavy damage. People heading to France by ferry or Eurostar are being asked to
check before they travel as industrial action hits transport and public services
again. French unions are fighting plans by President Macron to push back the
country's pension age from 62 to 64. Our correspondent in Paris, Hugh Schofield,
has the latest. This is the sixth day of strikes and protests since mid-January
and unions say it'll be the biggest one yet with more than a million people
turning out, they hope, for demonstrations in Paris and other cities. With the
government showing no sign of backing down on its pension plan, the talk is of
escalation, of bringing the country to its knees in the words of one union
leader and in the days ahead there'll be calls to extend the strikes in key
sectors like power generation and gas terminals. So far, for all the noise and
sporadic disruption, the campaign has caused little damage to the economy.
Archaeologists have discovered a Roman shrine beneath a former graveyard next to
Leicester Cathedral. A dig had been organised ahead of construction of a new
visitor centre for people coming to see the tomb of Richard III, whose remains
are found less than 50 metres away. Our Midlands correspondent, Phil Mackie,
went to the site. There was a constant clattering of picks, trowels and
wheelbarrows as the team of 10 archaeologists from the University of Leicester
worked to finish excavating the site before it was handed over to the builders.
They uncovered hundreds of artefacts, but the most exciting find was a broken
altar base. It was found in the basement of a large Roman building and probably
formed part of a pagan shrine. The find at least partially explains a local
legend that the cathedral had been built on the site of a Roman temple. They
also unearthed coins dating to the first and fourth centuries and fragments of
Gaulish pottery. More than 1,100 sets of human remains were recovered because
the site was used as a graveyard. All have been removed for further study and
will eventually be reburied. Phil Mackie reporting. Tom, thank you. It is now
nine minutes past seven and still they come, despite the new laws which
ministers promised would stop the flow of asylum seekers prepared to make the
treacherous journey across the Channel. Yesterday saw at least two boats
bringing 84 people to our shores. So far this year, almost 3,000 people have
made the journey, which according to Home Office modelling means the total this
year could reach 85,000, almost double last year's figure and three times the
figure the year before that. Today, the Prime Minister will unveil the latest
new legislation designed to stop people making the crossing. How does that
promise look from the other side of the Channel? Let's talk now to Jean-Paul
Moulin, Regional Councillor for the Haute-de-France region, a northern French
region, who oversees international relations for the region. He's also a former
permanent envoy to the UK. Morning to you, Jean-Paul. Morning. You have heard a
lot of words from a lot of British politicians, you've met with them too. Does
this sound feel any different? It is different. It's true that for the first
time the mood of the Channel is better. But we've seen over the last 20 years so
many new ideas, so many laws. It's true in France we have 20 immigration laws
over the last 20 years. And since David Planguet and Nicolas Fertuzzi met back
20 years ago, we've seen lots of words and not enough action, in my opinion not
enough collaboration. We need to work together much more. And I think in France,
yes, more money has been poured into the French police by the British
government, but we are not working together enough. And is that what you think
is different, that Rishi Sunak will be more willing to cooperate when he meets
with his French counterpart on Friday, more willing than his predecessors?
That's what we hear everywhere. And it's true that in embassies, the sherpas,
everybody is, I mean, the mood, the atmosphere is better. But where is that
going to lead? Because we, in defence, we've got a joint force. We cannot do
that with the police. And the data sharing is not strong enough. You know,
collaboration, we need actually border force and power from the same ships
working together. Otherwise, you know, we will have more and more migrants. And
since Brexit, unfortunately, the reality is that, you know, there's dangerous
crossing and all these lines, you know, that are in danger, you know, everything
has increased. Now, you mentioned former Home Secretary David Planguet and
Sarkozy before he became president, who was the Interior Minister for France.
The key to their agreement was to process on each other's side of the channel to
say, your officers can come here, our officers can come there. Is that what you
think is necessary now again? I think, you know, everything has got to be
reviewed. And with the use of famous Dublin, you know, agreement about, you
know, where the Islamic seekers have got to apply, it doesn't work. It doesn't
work because, you know, it doesn't work in France. We've got as many as Alliance
Seeker applications, you know, in this side of the channel as we have in the UK.
And that's, those numbers are increasing all the time. And then we've got the
nations, the people, the nationals who are trying to cross. It's true that
Afghanistan and Albanians, you know, are definitely, you know, huge numbers. And
you have to define that how it works. Jean-Paul, just answer those and you will
have heard from them when you've met with politicians. You will sometimes read
it in the newspapers. Those who say, oh, well, look, this suits the French,
doesn't it? They're perfectly happy for migrants to come so long as they head
over the channel somewhere else and don't bother us. Is that the reality? No, I
mean, you know that perfectly well, Nick. I mean, you've been, we've been, we
met together in Calais years ago. It's the same, it's a disaster for the
population over here. And people actually do mind, you know, they can see that
the system is not working and the impact on their daily life, you know, on the
traffic, on the, you know, for all the people, well, you're driving lorries and,
you know, bringing food over to the UK or pharmaceuticals, whatever, all the
systems that doesn't work makes life, you know, really complex. Plus, you know,
they can see that, you know, we don't have a camp, you know, like the jungle, as
it was called back years ago. But we still have lots of people there on the
shores. Plus, you know, the traffickers who are everywhere. You can see them in
the streets. You can see those fancy cars, you know, from time to time. You can
see that they are around. And those traffickers are the ones that we need really
to tackle. Jean-Paul Mouleau, thank you so much for talking to us again. Nice to
have you back on the programme. 14 minutes past seven. We heard on the programme
yesterday from Zoe Billingham, the former head of the police watchdog, about
what she called an epidemic of flashing. We were marking the day that Wayne
Cousins was sentenced to 19 months in prison for two counts of indecent exposure
in Woodland and at a McDonald's. It raised the question, of course, about
whether those offences, if they'd been properly followed up, could have been
stopped. Indeed, the man who went on to kill Sarah Everard could have been
prevented from that much more serious crime. At ten past eight, we're going to
hear from recent victims of indecent exposure. Let's talk first, though, to an
MP who has successfully steered new laws onto the statute book to cope with
sexual aggression against women. Vera Hobhouse is on the line, the Liberal
Democrat MP for Bath, whose bill to make upskirting illegal became law back in
2019. Good morning to you. Good morning. What more could we do in the case now
of indecent exposure, if that is something that it is decided we want to focus
on? Well, let me first make three points. It must be absolutely devastating for
Sarah Everard's family to learn that if only the police had properly
investigated Wayne Cousins' previous sexual offences, Sarah's murder might have
been prevented. And on top of their grief, that must be a terrible knowledge to
live with. And secondly, this is finally the moment when we need to understand
that all sexual offences need to be seen in the round and all sexual offence
reporting needs to be taken seriously, because if it doesn't, offenders will go
on and commit more and potentially more serious crimes. And really, the focus of
the police needs to go away from the victim to see whether they're credible when
they report and needs to go towards the offender. They get away with all sorts
of things and feel emboldened, really, if they don't get properly investigated.
And really, that then leads to women to not have any confidence in the system
and sexual offending is being normalised. And as you've just said, you know,
flashing is an epidemic and it happens and nothing gets properly investigated.
Where are we if these attacks on women continue to be normalised? So what we
need to do is really a complete culture change where the police, the Crown
Prosecution Service, the courts take any sexual offence and that is upskirting,
that is flashing. But that starts really with a misogynistic text messages and
WhatsApp groups where men can just sort of get away with this type of attitude
towards women. And does it, I mean, you mentioned the credibility of the victim
being called into question by the police. Is it also that the nature of the
offence is just not taken seriously as a serious thing in itself and as
something potentially that leads to other attacks and physical attacks? Well,
indeed, and I think the traumatising effect that any of these offences have on
women has been completely underestimated. That's something that we said during
the upskirting debate. Women are deeply traumatised. It's a proper offence and
it leads to ultimately the feeling in women that they're very vulnerable, that
they're not being listened to, that what they feel is a proper attack on them
and their freedom, their liberty, their way of life is not seen as such. And
therefore, the shift towards listening to women who have been victims of such
attacks has to be completely changed. The police are sort of starting to
understand that. I had a three hour session with the Avon & Somerset police in
their violence against women and girls unit and they have started to understand
that, but also to sort of look at offending as a pattern and going back over
certain cases where you can link an offender to offences and possibly prosecute
together. That is where things have to change. It is an epidemic of sexual
violence against women. It's got to change. It often happens right under our own
eyes and it's not taken seriously enough. Vera Hobhouse, thank you. We'll be
talking more about this at ten past eight. Eighteen minutes past seven now.
House prices may be falling, but the estate agents Foxton say their profits are
up for the last year. So what explains all of that? Sean can tell us. Yeah,
we'll have a look. Profits doubling, Nick, to £12 million over the last year,
but now mortgage costs higher than a year ago, still inflation, price rises very
high, and as you mentioned, the house prices fall in. How does that affect the
mood of those buying, of those renting? I've got Foxton's Chief Executive Guy
Gittings with me. Morning, Guy. Morning, Sean. You predominantly have a focus on
the London market in particular. What can you tell us about the biggest changes
you're seeing, whether it's in sales or rentals? Well, if we start with sales
first, obviously the market is still in a little bit of a state of flux
following the September's mini-budget and obviously the increase in Bank of
England base rates and what that meant for people's borrowing. As soon as that
happened in quarter four, we saw buyer numbers really dramatically reduce for
the last quarter of last year. But I think to everyone's surprise, this year,
January, February, has seen quite a strong rebound in applicant numbers. And
actually, that strong rebound in applicant numbers is reflected in today's
Halifax report, which has just been released 20 minutes ago. I haven't read
through it in its entirety, but what it is saying that for the UK, that monthly
change on price was plus 1%, which may surprise a number of people. For London,
it was minus 1% year on year. I don't have the monthly change number for London.
So that's sales and house prices. I wonder, in your results this morning, you
talk about rentals and high rental prices continuing into 2023. Have you been
seeing more of your tenants struggling to pay their rent, not paying their rent?
We as a business register somewhere near half a million lettings applicants per
year. So it really is a market that is justified and a market that is dictated
to by supply and demand. The main issue actually isn't affordability for the
majority of the market. It's actually the stock-led issue and people need
somewhere to live and they need to live in a certain area. And unfortunately,
this unhealthy supply and demand balance, which has been caused by policy
changes over the last four or five years, is only going to make matters worse
over the next few years ahead. I mean, for sure, this dramatic shortage of
supply in the rental market is not changing for the next 12 months minimum. It
could even be two or three years ahead as we recover from the dramatic changes
that we saw post-pandemic. So how does that play out into the lives of those
customers who can't find what they need? They're going to have to move, sadly,
and this isn't healthy, we absolutely don't welcome this, but people are going
to have to move further out. They're going to have to compromise on what they're
living in and they're going to have to compromise on their lifestyle. You say
sadly, but people leaving London to go to other parts of the country? I think
there's a general churn that there is still only a finance stock level supply.
So there's still people living in these properties because there's such huge
demand for them. But people who are being priced out of an area that they once
wanted to live in are going to have to compromise, as I've said, on the property
type or on their location. Guy, thank you. Guy Gittins there, Chief Executive of
Foxton's Estate Agents. Sean, thank you. 22 minutes past seven is the time. It
has long been a local legend that Leicester Cathedral was built on the site of a
Roman temple. Well, it seems to be borne out, or at least somewhat borne out, by
a finding made in an archaeological dig being made in preparation for a new
visitor centre next to the cathedral. Matthew Morris is the Archaeological
Excavation Director for Leicester Cathedral, who unearthed Richard III's remains
back in 2012. We've been leading an excavation at Leicester Cathedral as part of
a massive restoration project. And in the area that's called Cathedral Gardens,
which is the former churchyard for the cathedral, where we're building a new
heritage learning centre, we've found over a thousand burials, which wasn't that
surprising. But underneath it, we found evidence of the Roman town. And what
that is revealing about the site's history is proving really exciting. And what
is it revealing? So we found a Roman cellar. And within the cellar, we've
recovered part of a Roman altar stone. And the cellar itself has had painted
walls, so we think it's used for more than just storage. So we think we might
have a shrine room or a cult room, probably part of a Roman townhouse, or a
larger building at any rate. And that's really exciting, because there's really
a, there's already a folk tale, a tradition that there was a Roman temple under
the cathedral. And now we might be moving towards there being an element of
truth in that story. An element of truth, not the full temple, you don't think,
but something approaching it? Yeah, I mean, using the word temple conjures up
rather grand images. And I think this is a much smaller structure, a much more
private structure within a house, probably used by only a small group of
individuals. But it does raise interesting questions about whether there was an
element of truth that has lasted since the Roman period all the way through to
when that folk tale started, which we don't really know when it started. We know
it gained wide acceptance in the 19th century when workmen found a Roman
building under the church. But until now, this is really the first evidence that
there might have been something relating to Roman worship under the church. And
what kind of worship are we talking about? I mean, you mentioned the word cult.
What, do we have a kind of sense of what it was that they might have been
worshipping down there? We're not going to know exactly. Unfortunately, our
altar stone, all the important bits have broken off it. We've only got the base.
But where cellars like this have been found elsewhere in Britain, they've often
been linked with them. Fertility cults or mystery cults, so worship of gods like
Mithras, Bacchus, even the Egyptian god Isis. And are you going to be able to
find evidence that definitely tells you that that is the case, or is that going
to remain a mystery, do you think? I think it's always going to remain a
mystery, to be fair. When we move into the full analysis of all the results, we
might come to some new conclusions. But going on what we've got at the minute, I
think it's always going to be a mystery. So what happens now to what you found
and indeed to the site? So the excavations are now finished. We'll be moving
into the analysis stage now. Workmen have moved back onto the site. They're
building this new heritage learning centre. It's all supported by the Heritage
Lottery and lots of other public donations. So construction work is now
beginning. And the new centre, which will become the new public access to the
cathedral, will open next year. Matthew Morris, archaeological excavation
director for Leicester Cathedral. Thank you very much. That's all right. It's a
pleasure. 25.7 News, Rob with the sport. Thanks, Nick. Football headlines this
morning include the 3-2 win for Brentford against Fulham, which took them to
within three points of the Premier League's top six. Brentford manager Thomas
Frank said he and his players must be allowed to dream of European football next
season. Tonight it's Chelsea against Borussia Dortmund in the Champions League.
A place in the quarterfinals awaits the winner. Chelsea 1-0 down from the first
leg. And boxer Connor Benn has revealed that he contemplated suicide following
his positive dope test towards the end of last year. He says he's innocent, but
the authorities' investigations continue and a ban could result. He said he'd
had night terrors and panic attacks, adding, I didn't think I was going to make
it through. So a 2-1 series win only for England's white ball cricketers in
Bangladesh. They were beaten in the final one-day international by 50 runs.
Identifying this series as part of World Cup preparation, when England don't
actually have any more fixtures until about a month before the start of the
event in October, I mean, it feels perhaps like a bit of a stretch. But speaking
immediately after the match yesterday, Captain Joss Butler certainly found
plenty of positives. I think, you know, the way we bowled, I think has been
great. We've managed to take 10 wickets in every game. I think having Joffre
Archer and Mark Wood back available and bowling alongside each other has been a
real plus. Madil Rashid continues to perform fantastically well and was player
of the series. And I think with the bat, you know, Milan and Roy scoring
brilliant hundreds, you know, to win us those first two games, that's probably
the area we missed out on today. Yes. Joffre, of course, the leading wicket
taker today with three. I suppose what you don't want is for him to be exhausted
by a long spell in the test side. Yeah, look, it's great to have Joffre fit
again and representing England. I think we're all delighted to see him out there
playing. And, you know, he's an absolute superstar. So I'm sure he'll have a big
say in the Ashes series that's coming up, which is really exciting. And I think
hopefully he'll come through that and be fit and raring to go for the World Cup
later in the year. You're about to embark on a T20 series now in Bangladesh. In
the debate about the relative relevance and popularity of the 20 over format
compared to the 50 overs, where do you stand? No, I think that both within their
own right, really fantastic formats of the game. I think that should be a real
strength of cricket, actually, to have sort of three different formats that all
challenge the same kind of football. And I think that's a really good thing. It
will challenge players in different ways. You know, when I look at the players
that I admire around the world, the guys who are able to adapt their game to all
three formats, I think is a real impressive thing. T20 is always a lot of fun.
So we're really excited for that series. And you're world champions, aren't you,
in both formats, 20 and 50 over. England's stronger side in the T20s than in the
one-day internationals. Is it possible actually to make a comparison? No,
certainly probably not in this day and age where the schedules sort of don't
allow you to necessarily always play what you know your perceived best 11. But
look, we know we're a good white ball team. We're a team that wants to always
try and get better as well. So we'll be looking to do that. And in a sense, I
suppose, final question, you're still playing too much cricket, really, aren't
you? Maybe. Yeah, there's lots of cricket, but you've got to be a little bit
careful to say you're playing too much. There's amazing opportunities all around
the world now in cricket, which is fantastic. The growth of the game is a good
thing as well. Yeah, I think there's pluses and minuses to all the cricket side
at the moment. Well, Josh Butler, captain of England's white ball squad,
congratulations on winning the series and thanks very much for coming on to
today. Thank you. Cheers. Well, now our racing tips rating has soared from
useless to outstanding with two winners yesterday. Back to useless probably with
these. Sandown 150 number two, Magistrato, and also for the meeting at Sandown
335, number three, West to the Bridge. Rob Banks with details of tonight's File
on 4. Now here's Livie Hadock. As Rishi Sunak announces plans to ban migrants
from re-entering the UK if they cross the channel in small boats, File on 4
investigates what's happening to unaccompanied children when they arrive on
British soil. More than 400 teenage asylum seekers who were staying in emergency
hotel accommodation have disappeared since arriving here. 200 are still missing.
Raising concerns that some of them have been targeted by gangs and are being
forced into crime. So what's being done to find them? That's File on 4 with me,
Livie Hadock, tonight at eight. Quick look at the weather now. Today the south
will be cloudy with spells of rain, sleet and snow gradually clearing away. Snow
showers across northern Scotland, northern Ireland and north-east England, but a
lot worse to come. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with the ever optimistic
Nick Robinson and Justin Webb. The time is 29 minutes past seven. Tom Sanders
has the news. Home Secretary Suella Braverman has accepted that the government
is pushing the boundaries of international law with new legislation it's
introducing today to stop asylum seekers crossing the English Channel in small
boats. It's thought the measures would take precedence in law over the right to
claim asylum in the UK as ministers would have a legal duty to remove anyone
arriving in the country illegally. Labour and refugee charities say the
proposals are unworkable. Talks begin this morning aimed at averting further NHS
strikes in England. The Health Secretary Steve Barclay will meet unions
representing nurses, ambulance workers, physiotherapists and midwives. Planned
industrial action has been suspended until the negotiations conclude. Ukraine's
president has instructed his military commanders to move troops to the besieged
eastern city of Bukhmut. Russian forces have been bombarding it for months and
now surround it on three sides. Last night, Volodymyr Zelensky said his most
senior generals all advised against withdrawing. The UN Children's Agency UNICEF
says wars and the Covid crisis have led to a sharp rise in the number of
pregnant women and girls suffering from malnutrition in countries including
Somalia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan. It says the figure has risen by a quarter in
the last two years and the international community needs to do more to support
failing nutrition programmes. Unions in France have blocked fuel depots at the
start of a day of action against plans to raise the country's state pension age
from 62 to 64. Huge demonstrations are expected in cities including Paris, while
ferry services and Eurostar trains to and from the UK are facing disruption.
Roman Shrine has been discovered beneath a former graveyard next to Leicester
Cathedral. Archaeologists made the find during a dig to prepare for construction
of a new centre for tourists visiting the tomb of Richard III, whose remains are
found close by. In 2012, it's thought the shrine explains in part a local legend
that the cathedral had been built on the site of a Roman temple. Tom, thank you.
28 minutes to eight is the time. President Zelensky of Ukraine says the fight
for Bukhmut goes on. There will be no withdrawal. It was a pretty defiant
message last night in the face of continued Russian efforts to take that eastern
city, but also encouraged perhaps by some public disorder on the Russian side.
The head of the Wagner private army saying that they're not getting the
ammunition they need from Moscow as they seek to gain control of Bukhmut.
Yevgeny Prigozhin saying his army's lack of ammunition could be ordinary
bureaucracy or a betrayal. It does feel as if the Russian military is struggling
to project strength and cohesion. There are reports too, for instance, of tanks
from the 1960s being pressed into service. On the other hand, they do have a
huge numerical advantage when it comes to bodies to throw into the fight. So
what is happening in Russia and is Ukraine wise to continue to fight for an
entirely destroyed city that doesn't appear to have any strategic importance?
Let's talk first to our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg, who is on the line. From
the Russian perspective, Steve, and as much as you can know these things with
any degree of certainty, what is going on? Yeah, it is difficult to know from
here what is happening on the battlefield. It certainly seems as if, you know,
after months of fighting, Russia is close to taking Bukhmut, but hasn't taken it
yet. And from what Evgeny Prigozhin was saying yesterday, in the last few days,
he's talking about big problems ahead. I mean, we've heard from Prigozhin a
mixture of complaints and warnings and public accusations against the Russian
leadership, and what could even be interpreted as veiled threats. Basically, his
message goes something like this, that his mercenaries, the Wagner Group, he
says, are vital to the Russian war effort. As he puts it, they're the cement
holding everything together. And he says they're not getting the ammunition they
need, and which was promised to them, as you mentioned, he's suggested that's an
act of betrayal. And he's made it pretty clear in recent weeks who he believes
is betraying Wagner and the Russian cause, and that is the Russian military
leadership. Because for months now, he has been involved in a very public feud
with the Russian defense minister, Sergei Shoigu, and the chief of the general
staff, Valery Gerasimov, about how they've been conducting the special military
operation in Ukraine, and as he sees it, for not giving him and his Wagner
mercenaries sufficient credit for their contribution. But when he speaks
publicly, Prigozhin, Steve, is he speaking with the approval, do you think, of
Vladimir Putin? Is he speaking in a sense for Putin against those other people
you mentioned? Well, Prigozhin was always Mr Fixit for Mr Putin. He was always
Putin's man. But there is some evidence to suggest that Wagner is being, to some
extent, sidelined now. You know, he continues to complain he hasn't been given
the ammunition he needs. He claimed yesterday that his representative was denied
access to the headquarters of the Russian military command. The main evening
news bulletins on Russian television made no mention at all of Wagner when
talking about the battle for Bakhmut. There was no mention in yesterday's
defense ministry summary of the situation on the battlefield. And there were
reports last month that Wagner had actually been deprived of the right to
recruit convicts for its ranks. Now a large part of Wagner members are inmates,
so that would be a big blow to the group. Okay, Steve Rosenberg, thank you. Let
us turn to Ivana Klimpush-Tsintsadze, who is a Ukrainian politician and
journalist, former Vice Prime Minister for European Affairs. Good morning to
you. Good morning. Why fight on for Bakhmut? What is the point of it from the
Ukrainian side? Well, I'm not a military analyst, but my understanding of these
actions is that this way Ukrainian military are trying to deplete, to exhaust
Russian forces that have been using their, a lot of the human resource to try to
take Bakhmut. And they have been using the same, Russians have been using the
same tactics as they have been doing in many wars, including the Second World
War, when cannon fodder basically is being thrown at the positions of those who
are, they are trying to attack. And that's exactly what was happening. My
understanding is that many of the international observers, military analysts,
and also our military are saying that the rate of the losses of the Russian
Federation is times, times bigger than Ukrainian ones. So my understanding is
that this is the, because Russians have made it so symbolic for themselves, that
this is the way to try to ensure that they are looting as much as possible. Even
if that is true, though, they of course have more people and more people that
they're willing to waste, as it were, the cost of human life feels so much less
to them, or at least to Russian military commanders. Is there not a risk that
you also lose significant numbers of people in this fight and that it is
possibly unwise for that reason? Well, you're absolutely right that Russian
Federation does not count for human life and does not care for human life. And I
would hope, again, I'm not part of the decision making in the military, in
military field, but I would hope that based on the values that Ukrainian state
is operating and that Ukrainian society is operating, that our political
leadership and military leadership will make very calculated decisions on this
particular stronghold that we've been holding up till now and that they will
decide towards the preservation of human life. Because yes, definitely we do
not, we care about every single life and we do not want to just let our people
die for Bashmut if we, for example, withdraw and then we can... Sorry to
interrupt, just to sum it up then, in spite of what President Zelensky was
saying last night, you were saying there are circumstances where you might say
that's it, we are now withdrawing. Oh, I'm sure so. I am sure so. I really think
that it will be done on the basis of the wise analysis and deep analysis by the
military and if it's necessary to withdraw to preserve our troops, they will do
so. Ivana Klimposch-Tinsadze, thank you very much for talking to us. It's coming
up to 7.39. Let's take another look at the papers. The Sun, the Mail, the
Express, all enthusiastically backing what they expect to hear from the Prime
Minister later today on dealing with migrant crossings. No entry is the front
page headline in the Sun. We'll push human rights law to the limit in the Mail.
Suella, back law to stop boats or betray Britain. We'll be talking about that in
some more detail in a few minutes' time. The Telegraph still leading on its
revelations about those WhatsApp messages. The latest is the suggestion from one
of Matt Hancock's advisers that they could manipulate one of their MPs to vote
for some lockdown restrictions that they were worried about by threatening to
withdraw support for a learning disability hub in Bury. It is, on one level, a
fascinating, shocking story about what people are willing to do other than they
didn't actually do it. So the threat was never made. The hub was never
cancelled. It reminds me, as an old Westminster, of the words of Captain Renault
in Casablanca. Shocked I am to find gambling in this casino. To the Times and to
Foreign Affairs, and a really interesting piece they've got from Syria, from
their Middle East correspondents, or on Syria, from their Middle East
correspondents. The Arab states wanting to normalise relations with the Assad
regime are, he says, heading for a confrontation with Western allies. They
remain opposed to lifting the sanctions on Syria. So these efforts to improve
relations with Syria are being led by the United Arab Emirates. And the trigger
for the latest diplomatic moves, he says, are the series of earthquakes last
month. So the UAE sent half of its aid pledged to Syria. Saudi Arabia also sent
plane loads of aid. In the Arab world, there's a consensus growing that the
status quo is not workable, according to Saudi Arabia's foreign minister, and
that relations between Gulf Arab states and President Assad must be improved and
are going to be whatever the West thinks. Papers are still energised by
yesterday's news that Boris Johnson wants his dad to have a night at the
Mirror's front page. Has the headline, No honour, a discredited ex-PM make his
discredited dad a sir? Can anything better sum up the establishment's sense of
entitlement? Can anything better sum up Boris Johnson? Ask the Mirror on its
front page. And the cartoon is Moreland in Tide. The Times has a very
disgruntled-looking King Charles, obviously at an investiture ceremony, while
one of his flunkies is reading out an honours list in which every name has
Johnson at the end of it. And finally, Richard Layard, the economist from the
LSE, who's written so much about happiness in the past, is doing it again, I
suppose in the run-up to the budget, really, and saying that this has got to be
the approach, human happiness should be the approach of economists. Does it make
sense that as our incomes grow, our comforts increase, we feel more stress and
mental health deteriorates? He asks we have to move from an ultra-competitive
culture to one that helps people enjoy their lives more and to feel happier. The
time now, the happy time, is nine minutes to eight. So if you're unhappy you've
just missed your train, it is in fact 19 minutes to eight. I do apologise. And
if you don't know that music, you soon will and you've now got time to listen to
it, indeed. It's from this year's Eurovision. The final in Liverpool is just 67
days away. An estimated 160 million people will watch around the world, but just
6,000 will get a ticket to the show and they go on sale today. Let's hear from
our Eurovision reporter, yes the BBC does have one, called Daniel Rosney, who's
in the studio with us, and Adam Jowett, who's a super fan of Eurovision, from,
not from Liverpool, but just over the water in Birkinghead, joins us on the line
as well. Morning to you both. Good morning. So Daniel, tell us what you have to
do to get a ticket. So these tickets will be very much in demand. It is the
first time the UK has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest in 25 years and it's
grown a lot since 1998. So you need to be registered on ticketmaster.co.uk to
buy the tickets at midday. You won't be able to buy them on the Ticketmaster
app. It's important to say that. There will be nine shows available to purchase
and there'll be roughly 6,000 for each of those shows. So they are nine. What's
the difference between the final and then? So there is the three televised
shows, two semi-finals and the live grand final. Now most listeners will be
unfamiliar with the semi-finals and that's probably because the UK doesn't take
part in it and that's to do with how much the BBC pays to participate. And then
there are six preview shows which you can also go to and they double up as
rehearsals. They are full run-throughs of the shows. They're often cheaper and
easier to get tickets for as well. But this will be a bit like trying to get one
of those golden tickets from Willy Wonka. It very much will be, yes. It's going
to be very hard. Well, Adam, you're hoping to get one. Yeah, yeah. I'll be
trying anyway. You've been before, haven't you, to a final? Yes. Yeah, so I went
in Tel Aviv. I went to the semi-finals and I went to one of the rehearsals for
the final. So, yeah, fingers crossed for today. But I do appreciate how
capacitive it is. Is it better than sitting at home giggling at Graham Norton's
commentary? You know, I think there's definitely value in watching it at home,
particularly the grand final. You know, at the end of the day, Eurovision is a
televised event. It's made for television. However, seeing it live in the arena,
seeing it come to life, that is really something special. And I think it's
something that, you know, as a fan, it's amazing to see. And the Eurovision bug
has already infected all of the city of Liverpool and, in a sense, quite a lot
of Merseyside. Absolutely, yeah. You know, everyone's really excited about it
here. You know, even people I know who aren't particularly that invested in
Eurovision around here are really excited to see what's going to happen in the
next couple of months. I think it's because it's one of the first big events to
happen in the city for a while. The last thing I can remember that was on this
scale was probably the European Castle Culture in 2008. So, you know, this is
the first big event that I will have in recent memory and everyone's really
excited. And if it's not an indelicate question, Daniel, as the BBC's Eurovision
reporter, do you get a ticket? I hope so. But I will be trying it midday like
everybody else, just in case. But your job, not only talking about the ticket
and the builder, because there's also a big Eurofest, isn't there? Yeah. I mean,
this is a huge event for the city, for the country. Yeah, it's very much an
event outside of the arena as well. So there is a two-week cultural fest that
will be running simultaneously in the city of Liverpool fest that will be
running simultaneously with Eurovision. And that's one of the main reasons I've
been told Liverpool won the bid. It was a bidding process that cities had to
apply to host. And there will be the English National Opera. They'll be giving
their take in Eurovision songs. There will be a simultaneous rave between
Liverpool and Kyiv, because let's remember, we're hosting it on behalf of
Ukraine. And that is very much part of the identity of this year's slogan, which
is united by music. There are 24 projects been announced by Liverpool Council so
far. 19 were, sorry, the 24 projects in total, 19 will be collaborations with
Ukrainian artists, but only four have been announced. I mentioned it, I should
give Liverpool just a little Philip in this Eurovision. Yeah, that's why we did
it, really, losing seven. Daniel Rosny and Adam Gert. Thank you. It is 14
minutes to eight. Time for Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning is
Chief Rabbi Sir Ephraim Mervis. Good morning. Last week, readers of the Jewish
Chronicle were surprised by a news report that King Charles is to be anointed
with a rare brand of kosher-approved oil at his coronation in May. The article
explained that the oil had been carefully sourced from an organic olive farm in
the Lower Galilee, in close consultation with my office. It's a lovely story, or
at least it would be if it were true. In reality, the oil is coming from the
Mount of Olives and has been consecrated by Christian faith leaders in
Jerusalem. Each year, ahead of the Jewish Festival of Purim, which takes place
today, Jewish newspapers have a tradition of writing a satirical story, offering
readers the chance to have a bit of fun debating what is satire and what is real
news. It's part of the broader tradition of the Purim Spiel, historically a
satirical play or parody which has seen renewed popularity in the social media
age. The Purim Spiel illustrates the essence of Purim, a major theme of which is
the importance of revealing the hidden. Recalling the sinister plot for the
genocidal murder of the Jews of Persia 2,500 years ago, the Bible reveals how
the plot was ultimately exposed and averted. Famously, the name of God, who was
central to all that transpired, does not appear in the book of Esther, teaching
us that, though truth is often hidden, we must be relentless in our pursuit of
it. The innate human instinct to reveal what is hidden runs deep. Children love
a game of hide-and-seek and adults enjoy seeing a great mystery solved. There is
something particularly primal about our desire to discover truth. Public
confidence that we can achieve this is what creates the trust which is the
bedrock of any functioning society. But there is a further aspect of this
message. The name of the heroine of the Purim story, Queen Esther, literally
means hidden. At the moment of maximum peril, Esther revealed her latent
potential. At risk to her very life, she courageously intervened to save her
people from annihilation. We seek to emulate her example to this day and find
within ourselves hidden reserves of courage and resilience to discover and
nurture our latent talent in order to enhance our fragile world. And by peeling
away the superficial layers of our characters, we aim to reveal our true selves
and live accordingly. Purim reminds us that it is always easier to create doubt
than to foster trust. It is always easier to hide who we really are than to take
a risk. But as Maimonides taught, the purpose of knowing truth is to live by it.
And that was Thought for the Day with Chief Rabbi Sir Ephraim Mervis. It is 11
minutes to eight. No entry. Those are the words. That is the symbol on the front
page of The Sun this morning which proclaims that small boat migrants will be
banned from today. To make the point, that word written in capital letters.
Inside the paper, the Prime Minister has written promising that new legislation
designed to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats, which is being
published today, will apply retrospectively. It will mean that almost everyone
stopping off one of those boats will be barred from claiming asylum and barred
for life. For many years now, words, laws have not proved enough to stop people
making a treacherous journey. Is there any reason to believe it will be
different this time? Well, let's put that question to Catherine Woollard,
Director of the European Council on Refugees and Exiles, and first to Tim
Laughton, a Conservative member of the Commons Home Affairs Committee. Morning
to you both. Morning. Tim, why might this be different from all those promises
and all, indeed, that legislation we've seen before? Well, it has to be
different because it's completely unsustainable that we've got people coming
across in increasing numbers in the most dangerous way to try to get into the
UK. I think we all agree that this is not appropriate for them to come across in
this way. We need this and other legislations as a much more complex deterrent.
And one thing we found, the Home Affairs Select Committee I sit on went to
Calais recently. One thing they said to us is when the government announced the
Rwanda scheme last year, there was a surge in migrants, young migrants in
particular, approaching the French authorities about the possibility of being
able to stay in France because of what they'd heard about the Rwanda scheme. Of
course, the Rwanda scheme didn't take off. It's still going through the courts.
It needs to happen. The message that comes out from this legislation is do not
attempt to get across the Channel in that way because you will not have an
asylum claim considered. You'll be barred from attempting again in the future.
So find other ways. If you think you have a genuine case to come to the United
Kingdom for safe passage, then don't do it that way. And that's the message of
this call. Let's put that to Catherine Wollard. Very clear then that the
legislation is intended to be a deterrent to say don't make the journey. There's
no point. From what we know about the proposals, they look like the latest in a
long series of costly, unworkable, what we might call fantasy options. They are
likely to create considerable suffering and we suppose that's part of the
intention. But that doesn't serve as a deterrent because people still try to
come to the UK because of where they're escaping from. What is different this
time, we're told, though, is that there will be a ban for life from virtually
anybody who steps foot on these shores, having got off a boat. Whether you think
it's morally right or wrong, and we'll come to that, might it not work? No, it's
unlikely to work. We see already the UK has one of the harshest asylum policies
in Europe, but people still want to come. And that's explained by what they're
escaping from, rather than the situation that they face when they come to the
UK. OK, Tim Lawton, let me put that to you. There are push factors that people
are escaping terrible hardship. There are many pull factors. They may have
relatives here. They may think there's work here. The English language may be an
appeal. So really, you really think this law will change things? Well,
Catherine, as I just said, that we have some of the harshest asylum laws here,
and there are people genuinely escaping danger. And they are the people that we
have a duty of care to, and they're the people that are losing out most of all
by being queue-bumped by people who are not genuine asylum seekers. Of those
people who came across last year in small boats, 45,700, about a fifth were from
Albania. They're not being persecuted in Albania. They're not escaping danger in
Albania. They are opportunist economic migrants, the vast majority of them. And
they are taking places away, taking up expensive hotel places and other
accommodation from genuine asylum seekers that we're going to have safe and
legal routes, which is an important part of the legislation to be announced
later today. They are the ones who are losing out. And Catherine Wallace has
really got to come up with some practical solutions, because if she can't, she
is condoning the fact that 45,000 people took a very dangerous journey, the most
dangerous journey across the sea by paying ruthless people smugglers. So what
are you going to do about it? Well, let's put that to her. It's Catherine
Wallard, by the way, of the European Council on Refugees and Exiles. It is a
question often heard, I'm sure the Prime Minister will say it today. If not
this, what would you do? Well, first of all, investing more resources in the
UK's asylum system. And we see a record number of pending asylum decisions. The
backlog is extremely high. And it's also a myth that the UK is doing more than
other European countries. As a European network, we see that actually there are
far more applications in France and Germany. But they're also making far more
decisions and they're doing that far more quickly than the UK. But will that
stop the flow of people? Again, you may think it's good in itself, because it's
better that people don't sit in camps that might feel very much like prison
camps in the future. But the quicker it is, the more efficient Britain is at
processing. Some will worry that just more people will come. There'll be another
incentive to come here. Well, what it means is that people who come will be more
quickly able to work and support themselves, for instance. And given that over
70% of those arriving in the UK are actually refugees, they're receiving
positive decisions in their asylum process. This is a historical high. So the UK
does have its obligations to support these refugees. Tim Lawton, do you accept
that we not only have international obligations, but if we stop these boats,
there are people from countries like Iran, like Afghanistan, like Syria and
Somalia, that would struggle to find any legal routes to come here? We
absolutely have international legal obligations. And we've been very generous
over many, many years. And last year, we granted visas to over half a million
people, including those escaping real danger from Syria, Afghanistan, Ukraine
and such. So it's just not true to say we're not being generous. And we have one
of the most generous programs. We're looking after refugees not coming to the
UK, but closer to home, who just want to go back to their countries when it's
safe to do so. We're supporting them, refugee camps and other supports across
the world. So I just don't accept that we're not being generous. And of course,
we need to invest in the asylum system to speed up the whole process. But what
is really slowing down the whole process is people coming here with no
legitimate claim for safe haven in the United Kingdom, not escaping real danger,
costing the taxpayer a huge amount of money and really costing genuine asylum
seekers their places in the queue. We want to give safe haven to as swiftly and
as effectively as possible. Let me put that to Catherine Woollard. The argument
made is that a democracy can choose to help people from troubled parts of the
world, as we have with Ukrainians, as we have with people from Hong Kong, as we
have to a certain extent with people from Afghanistan. Is that not the way a
country should behave, rather than saying anybody who tries hard enough will get
here? And in the words of Tim Lawton, Q-bump? Many of the people crossing the
channel are actually from major refugee crisis situations, Syria, Iran, Iraq,
Afghanistan, as you've already mentioned. We should note that it's not illegal
under international law to cross a border to seek protection. What does look
clearly unlawful are the proposals that are coming today. The Refugee Convention
explicitly prohibits penalising people based on the manner of their arrival. And
that's because most refugees have no choice about how they reach a place of
safety. And in one word, you don't think this will work in the government's own
terms? It's not going to achieve the objectives that the government wants. And
in doing so, it will also create considerable suffering. Catherine Wollard, Tim
Lawton, thank you for joining us. To the weather in three minutes. To Hayton,
Chris Fawkes. Thanks, Justin. And we've got a band of rain working across the
south of Wales, the south Midlands, East Anglia, southern counties of England.
On the northward edge of this, the backside, so to speak, of the weatherfront,
we are seeing some of the rain turn to sleet and snow. It's even brought a
slight covering across parts of Oxfordshire and Suffolk, for example. So that
kind of thing around today will stay quite damp and cold for these areas. Across
the north of Wales, the north Midlands into northern areas of England, a cold
and frosty start. We'll see some sunshine coming in through the day, but also a
few snow showers. And those snow showers are going to be frequent across the
northeast of England. All the while, there'll be quite a cold northerly wind.
For Northern Ireland, there'll also be a mixture of sunshine and a few snow
showers. Most of the snow showers will be across northwestern counties today.
And in Scotland, well, we're going to see some further significant accumulations
of snow. Five to ten centimeters over the hills in the north. Could see two to
five centimeters at lower elevations here, and also for eastern Scotland,
whereas the southwest should stay largely dry with some sunshine. Now, wherever
you are today, it is going to be a cold day. Temperatures around three to five
degrees Celsius overnight tonight. It looks like we'll see some snow pushing
into southern areas of England, southern Wales, perhaps the south Midlands as
well. Something like two to six centimeters falling quite widely, but we could
see in excess of 10 centimeters over high ground. So there is a risk of seeing
some disruption as we head into Wednesday across these southern areas of the UK.
And then a quick heads up on Thursday and Friday, we've got some extremely heavy
snow heading into parts of northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland. We
could see around five to 20 centimeters at low elevations, but up to 40 over
high ground is the kind of weather that's likely to strand vehicles. That's
latest. Thank you for that warning, Chris. Later this morning, real issues and
radical new approaches. Welcome to the Spock. When we're in the midst of it,
we're going to make decisions that are different than the decisions that we
would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold thinking for a better
world. We struggle to recognize or remember that these inequalities come from
somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a life. I'm Helen Lewis with
a new series of close up conversations. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC sounds. I'm Sir David Attenborough returning to our
TV screens this weekend. You're listening to today. We're just.