TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Ukrainian culture has become a symbol of defiance. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. On from our own correspondent after the
bulletin, as the Russian invasion of Ukraine enters its second year, we take
stock, looking back for clues, trying to make sense of how it happened. We read
the same books, watch the same films and listen to the same songs. Some of my
closest friends married Russians. So how then can people have such close links,
do such horrible things to each other? I still don't know the answer. Three
Russian missiles came slamming to Earth with the kind of impact that
reverberates in your body. I listened for any reaction in the hotel. No one ran
for the door. Small bundles of belongings are squeezed into the cabins and the
windows steam up. The doors slam and the train begins to slide from the station,
carrying the refugees towards safety, but further from home. That's from our own
correspondent with me, Pascal Harta, after this bulletin of BBC World News. The
Ukrainian media say a senior general has visited troops near Bakhmut, which has
been the focus of months of intense onslaught by the Russian military and Wagner
mercenaries. General Alexander Siersky's trip to the eastern city, much of which
has been reduced to rubble, coincided with reports of advances in the area by
Moscow's forces. Most of the population has fled. The European Union has
announced additional sanctions against Russia's Wagner group for what it says
are human rights abuses in several African countries. The mercenary organisation
had already been sanctioned by the EU in 2021. It plays a key role in frontline
fighting in eastern Ukraine. Jonathan Schroeden, a military analyst in
Washington, says European countries want its activities to be curtailed quickly.
Wagner has been involved in gross human rights abuses pretty much everywhere it
has operated, but in Africa specifically, it's been accused of things like rape,
torture, extrajudicial killings and executions. So from a moral perspective,
this is a company that, you know, wherever it goes, instability tends to follow.
Israel's national security minister has condemned protesters opposed to the
government's planned legal reforms as anarchists. The proposed changes would
give ministers the power to appoint Supreme Court judges. They would also end
the court's ability to review or annul legislation on constitutional matters.
Here's Yousaf Taha. Itamar Ben Gewir accused demonstrators in Tel Aviv who
started a fire on a major road of going on an illegal rampage. He said police
should show zero tolerance to rioters. The organisers say that around 300,000
people participated in Saturday's nationwide rallies, making them the largest
yet. The leader of the opposition Labour Party, Mirab Mihaly, told the rally in
Rohevo that the protest would not stop until the government stopped threatening
democracy. The former Prime Minister Ehud Barak said the proposed changes would
turn Israel into dictatorship. 21 protesters were arrested for blocking a
highway and clashing with the police. World news from the BBC. Many newspapers
in the United States have dropped the long-running Dilbert cartoon strip after a
racist outburst by its creator. Speaking on his YouTube channel, Scott Adams
described black Americans as a hate group. Keith Adams reports. Dilbert has been
a mainstay of the funny pages of America's newspapers for decades, a put-upon
office worker and a talking dog who take aim at the fads of corporate culture.
But the racist comments by its creator, Scott Adams, on Wednesday have now led
to a purge of the comic strip from publications. Responding to a poll which
purported to find that most black Americans do not think it's OK to be white, he
said white people should, as he put it, get the hell away from black people. The
comments have sparked outrage and the artist has himself acknowledged that his
views have destroyed his career. A US Navy submarine has docked in the South
Korean naval port of Busan. The arrival of the nuclear-powered USS Springfield
was announced on social media. Correspondents say the presence of the submarine
is probably intended to serve as a warning to North Korea, which has repeatedly
carried out weapons tests in recent months. A Russian Soyuz capsule has docked
with the International Space Station, the vehicle which has no crew will bring
back two Russian cosmonauts and an American colleague. They've been stranded
since the capsule that was intended to bring them back to Earth began leaking
coolant. But their departure from the ISS has been delayed until September.
Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the Berlinale, have taken the
unusual step of awarding the top prize to a documentary. The winner was on the
adamant, a French documentary about a floating daycare center for people
suffering from mental illness. In another surprise, the Berlin Festival's award
for Best Leading Actor went to its youngest ever winner, eight-year-old Sophia
Otero. She plays a transgender character in the film 20,000 Species of Bees. BBC
News. Hello. You're listening to From Our Own Correspondent here on the BBC
World Service. I'm Pascal Harda. Welcome to the programme. The war in Ukraine
has now entered its second year. Now, it seems extraordinary that just over a
year ago, right up until it happened, even many of the most seasoned Kremlin
watchers didn't believe Vladimir Putin would do it. It was all for show, they
said, the massing of Russian troops, a huge and expensive bluff by a president
who wanted to send a strong message that Russia deserved to be feared and
respected as it was in days of old. When its soldiers defended Stalingrad
against the Nazis during World War II to the cost of 750,000 Russian lives. So
in the year we've had to let it sink in that it wasn't a bluff, what sense can
we make of it? Olegarin finds that for some Ukrainians in the Donbass region,
the initial sense of shock at Russia's invasion has turned into a sense of
inevitability. The sound of an explosion shook me from my sleep. It was just
after 5 in the morning, on the 24th of February last year. I was in eastern
Ukraine in a quirky hotel called the Europa, which had a different European flag
hanging outside each room. I heard the thunder of feet as fellow journalists
headed for the door, some charging off to film, others trying to get away to
safety. Then, as now, no one could be sure where that might be. By 2 that
afternoon, Victor had signed up to defend his country, thinking the war would be
over by summer. The 39-year-old husband and father, who has a wispy beard, used
to run an online shoe business. Now he's part of a mortar team. We met recently
in a bunker on the outskirts of the embattled eastern city of Barmut, where the
enemy is close and the cold bone deep. Since the invasion, he hasn't been able
to visit his wife and two sons. The youngest was just six months old when he
left. He was so little when I went to war, Victor tells me. Now when I make a
video call home, he sees my face and doesn't know who I am. Victor believes this
war won't end with Vladimir Putin. With or without him, Russia will keep coming
here, trying to take our land, he says. We have to finish this now so that our
sons and daughters don't have to fight in the future. And there's another reason
why he's staying in the line of fire. For the brothers in arms, he has lost. He
doesn't give numbers, but says there are many, very many. Grief, too, cuts to
the bone. Just ask any Ukrainian. My Facebook is like a cemetery, our local
producer told me. I have lost six friends in the past year. Like him, they were
young men. Ukraine has legions who will never grow old. A few hours' drive from
Barmut, I met the commander of a tank unit. Over a platter of cheese sandwiches,
he rattled through the latest developments on the battlefield. But his armor
cracked when I asked how difficult it was to fight for so long. It's hard, he
told me, when a 152-caliber shell explodes 10 meters away from you. It's hard
when you are pressed against the wall by the blast wave. It's hard when you take
a soldier to the hospital, picking up his severed arms and legs. The horrors
here extend well beyond the battlefield. Anastasia used to be a mother of two.
Last September, Russia made her a mother of one. She was in the local park with
her twin boys, Ruslan and Denise. They were nine then, energetic, outdoorsy, and
always side by side. Suddenly, as they played, there was shelling and a wave of
shrapnel. Denise was hit. At the hospital, Ruslan fell on the floor, Anastasia
says, and started kissing the doctor's feet. He said, I beg you, save my
brother. Who will I go for walks with? Who will I celebrate my birthday with?
But Denise did not survive. Anastasia weeps endlessly as she tells me about that
day. Ruslan stands nearby in silence, dry-eyed. His grief is locked inside. That
piece of Russian shrapnel will follow him through life. When I came back to the
east this month, I checked into a hotel in the town of Drushkivka. A few nights
after I arrived, three Russian missiles came slamming to Earth about a kilometer
away with the kind of impact that reverberates in your body. I listened for any
reaction in the hotel. No one ran for the door. One year on, terror is the new
normal here. Among Ukrainians, there is unity and determination, but some have
annoying fear. I don't think we are even in the middle of this war. A Ukrainian
journalist told me, fresh from the front line, they have a lot more men. And
even if their weapons are not sophisticated, they still kill. Ola Garen. So what
happens next? The signs are ominous. On Tuesday, Vladimir Putin took to the
stage to make his annual State of the Nation address in Moscow. He blamed the
West for escalating the war, accusing the US and its allies of seeking limitless
power. That was to be expected. These are standard talking points, repeated
endlessly on Russian television news. But what he said next was a blow. And
according to the US President Joe Biden, a big mistake. Mr Putin announced the
suspension of the last major nuclear arms treaty with Washington. He also said
that Russia would deploy a new intercontinental ballistic missile. All this
raises the stakes well beyond Ukraine, with all NATO countries. Over the past
year, Mr Putin has repeatedly done the unthinkable. Anticipating his plans and
how much Russians are willing to sacrifice for him has been the problem from the
outset, says Steve Rosenberg. I admit it. I was wrong. Up until the 24th of
February last year, I had believed, or perhaps I'd wanted to believe, that
despite all of its problems, post-Soviet Russia had undergone an irreversible
transformation. One that would rule out a future conflict with the West. Walk
around Moscow, and what did you see? American coffee shops, British retail
chains, Swedish furniture stores. As long as Russians were flocking to Ikea and
hanging out at Starbucks, surely world peace was guaranteed. And then there were
the holidays. Paris, Rome, Barcelona. Post-communism, Europe was a popular
destination for Russian travellers, and the continent of choice for oligarchs
and officials selecting schools for their kids. Surely, over time, that would
help cement Western values in Russian society. True, there were worrying signs.
An increasingly authoritarian Kremlin, Russia's annexation of Crimea from
Ukraine, and anti-Western rhetoric was on the rise. But as long as Russians
could access the internet and alternative sources of information, surely I
thought they would distinguish between reality and propaganda, and realize that
despite what their leaders were telling them, Russia was not a besieged
fortress, and that the West was not plotting to destroy their country. Well, one
year after Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the American
coffee shops have gone, the IKEA stores have shut. Holidays in Europe are pretty
much a thing of the past. Yes, the internet's still working here. And although
many websites, like the BBCs, have been blocked, it is still possible to access
alternative voices online if you're prepared to search for them. Truth is, most
Russians are not. For many here, state media suffices. Which brings me to what
has shocked me most about Russia the last 12 months. The first thing is the ease
with which so many Russians accept the propaganda on state TV, and then repeat
it almost word for word. Many people here have said to me, Russia didn't invade
Ukraine. The West started this. Russia never starts wars. It only ends them. In
Belgorod, near the Ukrainian border, Olga, who runs a church choir, recently
told me this. Russians are peace-loving and generous. A Russian will give you
the shirt off his back. He will never attack you. He will protect you. After the
death and destruction Russia has wrought, I'm sure the people of Ukraine would
disagree with Olga. Then there's the aggression. On the same trip to Belgorod, a
market seller told me that Ukrainians need to be re-educated, remade to force
them to like Russia. But the comment that shocked me most was from a Muscovite
called Viera. I interviewed her last September at a pro-Putin rally near the
Kremlin. I'd rather my son was killed fighting in Ukraine, said Viera, than see
him getting up to mischief at home. Look how many young men here have no job and
spend their time getting drunk. A few weeks later, President Putin himself
echoed that sentiment when he spoke to the mother of a pro-Russia fighter killed
in the Donbass. We all have to die sometime, the president said. What's
important is how you spent your life. Some people die from vodka and their lives
pass unnoticed, but your son really lived. Is that the choice now for Russian
men? Die from alcohol or die on the battlefield? What does that say about the
state of Russia after 23 years of Putin in power? It was after speaking to Viera
that I realized how naive I'd been. Swedish furniture, European holidays,
Western values. Some Russians embraced them, but in the grand scheme of things,
they barely scratched the surface. Most Russians couldn't care less about
hopping off to Paris or London. They're too busy struggling to survive in
Varonius or Penza. For some of them, Vladimir Putin's special military operation
has proved a financial boost, a chance to earn the kind of money they could
previously only have dreamed of. Last November, President Putin ordered a one-
off payment of 195,000 rubles, that's just over $3,000, for mobilized troops and
contract soldiers. Others here see war as a path to gaining respect from their
peers and from their state. I will never forget what a woman called Vialia told
me about her husband, a convicted killer. In prison, he had been recruited to
fight in Ukraine by the private military company Wagner. He had told Vialia the
motherland needs defending. From whom, Vialia had replied, no one's attacked us.
Her husband explained, now I'm a prisoner, but I will return a hero. Steve
Rosenberg, you're listening to From Our Own Correspondent on the BBC World
Service with me, Pascal Harta. For Ukrainians, coming to terms with the present
reality is an everyday ordeal. Many ordinary people with no military experience
or ambitions at all have become soldiers on the battlefield. Even if you're
nowhere near the front line, long-range weapons can still strike from hundreds
of kilometers away. Going to the supermarket, going to work, studying at home,
are all fraught with danger. Everyone has had to draw on an inner strength they
perhaps didn't know they had, says Vitaly Shevchenko, as he looks back on a year
of devastation in his homeland. It has begun. I can hear explosions. The whole
house is shaking. My mother told me over the phone from Zapparizia through her
tears. It was early in the morning, and the Russian invasion had just begun. I
tried to calm her down the best I could, then I switched on my computer to check
the news, and I saw Vladimir Putin announcing the start of his special military
operation. He sounded confident and relaxed, but it was easy to see the
unspeakable devastation that was about to be wreaked upon the innocent. I grew
up in Ukraine, and that's where I lived until 2009. Together with most people in
Russia and the rest of the former Soviet Union, we read the same books, watched
the same films, and listened to the same songs. Some of my closest friends
married Russians. So how, then, can people have such close links, do such
horrible things to each other? One year after the war started, I still don't
know the answer. War brings out the worst in people, but also the best. For
years after he was elected, President Zelensky wasn't really taken seriously by
many. A comedian by profession, we thought he was in it only for the laughs. But
after the invasion, he found his inner warrior and is now widely regarded as a
resolute fighter for democracy. I was fortunate enough to be able to evacuate my
parents from eastern Ukraine, and they were made to feel welcome back in
England. But I'm painfully aware that others can't leave their homes or don't
want to. Take my friends from Zaporizhia, Yuri, a keen photographer and a
Depeche mode fan, when we last had tea in his kitchen with his white cat hiding
under the table, little did we know that Yuri would have to leave all that
behind to defend his city. All my schoolmate Natalia, when we went boating on
the River Dnieper one summer evening, we had no idea that next year she would be
cowering in her tiny flat, listening to the sound of explosions. Ovietshislav, a
historian and member of the Zaporizhia City Council, who I first interviewed
shortly after Russia invaded in 2014, he spoke to me from a hospital bed after
being wounded while defending Donetsk airport. Eight years later, he volunteered
again and was killed fighting. Now there's a street named after him in
Zaporizhia. It used to be named after Mikhail Lermont of the famous Russian
poet. I'll take my friends from Russia, whose lives have been turned upside down
by the turmoil. One, a university worker, left Moscow for Turkey, together with
her son. Her husband left Moscow for a village, fearing mobilization into the
army. So where are we one year into the special military operation? Ukraine's
infrastructure has taken a battering, and so has Russia's standing in the world.
But Ukraine and its culture are becoming more popular. I've heard from an
American truck driver learning Ukrainian. In a sleepy English village, I've seen
a poster explaining the significance of Sonia Shnik, or sunflower, a symbol of
Ukraine. President Putin said he wanted to protect Russian speakers in Ukraine,
thousands of whom are now switching to speaking Ukrainian instead, refusing to
watch Russian films or listen to Russian music. He said he wanted to protect
Russia's legacy. Russian monuments are now being torn down in Ukraine. He said
he wanted to demilitarize Ukraine. It is now full of cutting edge Western
weaponry. I last visited Ukraine 10 days before war broke out. People in the
southern freewheeling port city of Odessa seemed determined to make the most of
their lives despite the persistent warnings of an imminent offensive. Launching
it, President Putin said he was ready for anything. But I can't help thinking he
was not prepared for the courage and resolve shown by Ukrainians in the face of
a ruthless invader. That was Vitaly Shevchenko. A year ago, on the platforms of
train stations in the capital and in eastern Ukraine, throngs of people fled the
Russian invasion. Husbands and fathers, brothers and sons, nearly all men of
fighting age were required to stay behind. But frantically, women and children
crammed onto trains, often to unknown destinations. Sarah Rainsford spoke to
people who didn't know how long they would be away from home. Recently, she's
been in Poland, which welcomed the largest number of Ukrainian refugees. But the
mood has changed. When the evening train from Kiev pulls into eastern Poland, it
can be hard to spot the refugees now. Among the passengers stepping onto the
platform are young Ukrainians with a connecting train to Prague. They're mostly
smart women with wheelie bags who could be from anywhere, until you ask them,
and they tell you they've come for a few days break from all the air raids. But
other Ukrainians are still fleeing as refugees. I met Olga and Alexander at an
abandoned Tesco supermarket that's been turned into a transit hub for Ukrainians
arriving in Poland. They'd just been registered and allocated camp beds in a
corner near a family with a French bulldog. The couple's story was one of
occupation and separation, injury, and death. It's the kind I've heard hundreds
of times this past year, the kind I never imagined I'd hear before last February
the 24th. When Russian soldiers surrounded Olga's village, her husband was in
Kiev, and they ended up apart for many weeks. She had no power from day one and
no running water. But when I asked how the Russians had treated people there,
Olga told me it wasn't like butcher. That's the key of suburb that's now
associated with torture and murder by the invading troops. She sounded
apologetic, as if she'd got off lightly. But under occupation, her elderly
mother died of gangrene without proper medical help. Olga had to wrap her body
in a blanket because there were no coffins and drag her to the cemetery on a
sledge. Her eyes fill with tears, but she blinks them back. She wants to talk.
And when she does, I discover that her own house was destroyed, and she was
nearly killed too. When her street was shelled, a neighbor landed on top of her,
badly hurt by shrapnel. All of this was back in March. In May, Ukrainian forces
managed to free Olga's village, and she and Alexander were reunited. So I asked
the couple why they were leaving Ukraine now, so many months on. And they said
they were scared that Vladimir Putin was planning something even more wretched
to mark the first anniversary of his invasion. The lady next to them in the
shelter told me the same. She'd also brought her son out of Ukraine because he
was about to turn 18, and she couldn't bear to see him called up to fight. All
the best, most handsome lads in our town have been taken, she told me. And she
meant killed. Her name was Olga too. We spoke in Russian because that's her
first language. Another reminder that when President Putin says he's invading
Ukraine to save Russian speakers from persecution, in reality, they're fleeing
his shelling and his bombs. At the start of the war, we were reporting from near
the Donbas region in the east, when no one knew how quickly the Russians might
advance. The goodbyes on the station platform there were heartbreaking. I
remember fathers with their hands pressed to the glass of the evacuation trains,
women and children mouthing silent words on the other side, grown men hugging or
turning away quickly to hide their tears. Today, the panic and shock I saw then
have been replaced by depression. A weary realisation that life inside Ukraine
won't get much better any time soon. That's why Olga and Alexander, and the
other Olga and her children, have got out. And from Poland, they all had tickets
for a free train further west to Germany. These days, the evacuation is
organised by volunteers. Among them, I met an exuberant Frenchman called
Sebastian, who was once in the foreign legion and is now in a tabard doing crowd
control. His family made him leave his passport at home so there'd be no risk of
him slipping across the border into Ukraine to join the fight. The volunteers
helped the crowds to board, along with Arnold the Bulldog and a lot of pet cats
in cages. Other small bundles of belongings are squeezed into the cabins and the
windows steam up. The doors slam, Sebastian waves and cheers, and the train
begins to slide from the station, carrying the refugees towards safety, but
further from home. And a full year into this war, none of them can be sure when
they're coming back. Sarah Rainsford. And that's all for this edition of the
programme. I'm Pascal Harder, the producer was Polly Hope, and we will be back
with more of the stories behind the news headlines next week, here on From Our
Own Correspondent on the BBC World Service. This is the BBC World Service
exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is
Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to
disadvantaged children, children in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes.
These kids probably have gone through some of the worst traumas and they don't
have access to counsellors or therapists. Ash and the Seagulls aren't
therapists, they're clowns. So they do what they do best to help, escapism and
fun. Give them something to wake up excited about, give them something to go to
bed giggling about, otherwise what is the point? When the Greek government
allowed children in refugee camps to go to school, the kids who'd been working
with the Seagulls did far better than the other kids. If they can believe
themselves to be limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into the next
challenge of their life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying Seagulls.
Child's Play. Tuesday at 9.30. And 20 GMT. On this week's cultural front line,
artists from inside Ukraine respond to the first anniversary of the Russian
invasion. Filmmakers Alisa Kovalenko and Elizaveta Smith. Comedian Hannah
Gottschura on the importance of humour. Laughter is something you can never take
from a person. So in that sense, we're also laughing in the face of our enemy.
And author Andrei Kukov shares the impact of the invasion on his writing coming
up on the cultural front line. BBC News with David Harper. Votes are being
counted in Nigeria's most competitive presidential election in decades. The
process was chaotic but largely peaceful. In some areas, people queued up into
the night to vote. The contest is a tight race between three front-runners to
replace President Mohammedu Buhari. A top Ukrainian general has visited troops
near Bakhmout, which has seen the focus of a months-long offensive by Russian
forces. General Alexander Siersky's trip to the eastern city comes amid reports
of Russian advances in the area. The European Union is bringing more sanctions
against the Russian mercenary group Wagner for serious human rights abuses in
Sudan, Mali, and the Central African Republic. Israel's national security
minister has condemned protesters opposed to the government's planned legal
reforms as anarchists. Itamar Benghveer accused some of the demonstrators in Tel
Aviv of going on an illegal rampage. He said police should show zero tolerance
to rioters. Many newspapers in the United States have dropped the long-running
Dilbert cartoon strip after a racist outburst by its creator. Speaking on his
YouTube channel, Scott Adams described black Americans as a hate group. A US
Navy submarine has docked in the South Korean port of Busan. Unusually, the
arrival of the nuclear-powered USS Springfield was announced on social media.
Correspondents say the submarine is probably intended to serve as a warning to
North Korea, which has repeatedly carried out weapons tests in recent months.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has said that a long-delayed trade deal
between the EU and a group of South American countries can't go ahead unless
they follow European environmental policies. French farmers fear competition
from the Mercosur countries if they are not subject to the same environmental
standards. Conservationists in Cameroon say the world's biggest species of frog,
which is threatened with extinction, is making a comeback. The Goliath frog
grows to the size of a cat and can jump about three meters. BBC News. Hello. I'm
Tina de Healy. Welcome to the Cultural Frontline, the program that looks at the
world we live in through the work and voices of artists. On this week's program,
to mark the first anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, we hear from some
of the artists continuing the cultural life of the country. Coming up, comedian
Hannah Gottschohora on the importance of laughter. I see it as an act of
rebellion because what our enemy wants us is to be depressed, isolated, and lose
all hope. And I think comedy helps to keep us united, keep us in high spirits.
And writer Andrei Kukov explains why Ukrainian culture has become a symbol of
defiance. Ukraine gained independence in 1991, following the collapse of the
Soviet Union. Nine years ago, after the pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych
fled the country following protests, Russia annexed the Crimea Peninsula, and
pro-Russian rebels seized two regions in the east of Ukraine. Then, on the 24th
of February last year, Russia launched a full-scale invasion. In Kiev today, a
frightening new dawn for Europe and Ukraine. This city of three million awoke to
sirens and an invasion. Images from Ukraine's northern and southern borders
showed Moscow's forces streaming in, frenzied international diplomacy, and the
threat of sanctions failed to stop it. Over the past 12 months, many Ukrainian
film crews have continued to work. And as the global industry gathered at the
Berlin Film Festival last week to promote their projects, filmmakers from
Ukraine were determined to be there. One of the official selections at the
festival, the documentary feature We Will Not Fade Away, tells the story of
teenagers growing up in eastern Ukraine against the background of war. Its
director, Elisa Kovalenko, joined me along with another Ukrainian director,
Yelizoveta Smith, whose film School Number 3 is about a school in the Donbass
which was destroyed during the war. And I began by asking Elisa what life has
been like for her during the last year. I decided to join a volunteer Ukrainian
army. And after I back to the editing of my documentary film, so I had lots of
up and down, and many things happened. And I changed my life and changed life of
all of us. Yelizoveta. I started to volunteer on the third day of the war. At
first it was very emotional. And I did maybe too much and slept not enough, and
it's not enough. But now it's more like part of normal job. And also I came back
to shooting documentary film about in three weeks after the start of invasion.
And I'm filming all year and volunteering. You've both made work exploring the
war through the eyes of school-age Ukrainians. We will not fade away set in the
Luhansk region in the east of Ukraine and then in the Himalayas. Elisa, why did
you want to tell that story through the eyes of young people? It's very
important to show this young generation and their daily life. Because many
people cannot imagine how teenagers are living there. For them it's much more
tough to realize their dreams, to develop themselves, especially in coal mining
region where economically it's actually a very poor region. And these teenagers,
they really have to fight for their dreams. Elizoveta. I start to volunteer in
Donbass in the school that was bombed. I was working with children. And at that
moment I realized that I want to spend more time with them and to film them.
Because they are, of course they have a very hard experience of war that made
them much more adult than other teenagers at the same age in other countries.
But at the same time, they're the same teenagers. They're getting in love for
first time. They're playing guitar. And this feeling of sharing this teenager
time even during the war gave me all energy to make this movie. This is a
question for both of you, but Elisa, you first. How do you feel the war has
impacted your career? Is the mission to document the war, as so many Ukrainian
artists are doing, one that you welcome? Actually, at the beginning of this
full-scale invasion, I collapsed completely as a filmmaker. I couldn't film
anymore. And I felt useless completely. That's why I decided to go to fight on
the front line. Because I wanted to act. I wanted to do something. And when I
back to the editing of We Will Not Fade Away, it was so hard to back to normal
life and believe again in this power of documentary films. So it took really
time to believe in this again. What made you believe again? The importance of
material. When I watched it after four months on the front line, I was crying.
And I watched the rough cut because all places where I filmed, they were all
destroyed completely or occupied it. So I think it's actually important that we
are showing documentary films where you can share emotional experience. And it's
not about news. And you can read some news. And you can forget a few days later.
But with documentary films, you can really have this very deep experience,
emotional experience. It's important at our cultural front line, as we call it.
So yeah, I still believe we should make films. And we should show it to white
audience. And the world will know about what we are going through. Elisabetha?
Only after some time, it was possible to come back to work. And my first
experience was quite shocking because as a producer, I went with the film we did
with Maxim Nakaneczny, director to Cannes Film Festival, to show it. And I saw
that huge distance between Ukraine, that is inside the world, and for example,
France, and industry that is living totally different life. At this moment, I
understood how important for us to have our own voices on this field of culture
front line, not only from other people who are doing about Ukraine films, but
for Ukrainian filmmakers by themselves. The Ukrainian film subsidies that would
normally support the industry have now been redirected towards the war effort.
And part of the reason you're in Berlin at the moment is trying to raise money
for new projects. What are you working on next? Right now, I'm working on two
projects. Both of them are about the war. One is character-driven project about
a refugee that is a human rights activist. As a refugee in Germany, in Berlin,
she gets a cochlear implantation and learns how to hear the world again. And
another film, we're doing the big documentary film about war. It's
observational. We're trying hard for independent grants and international
partners to continue filming. Elisa, what are you working on next? During my
time on the front line, I film a little bit just to save some memory. It was
like a video diary, which I wanted to keep for myself or for my son if I will
die. It's very observational things. I film my friends in the trenches, grass
and trees, trembling and wind. I also recorded some conversations with my son.
But after I watched it once with my colleague, the director, and we realized
together that there is something very special in this material. Because staying
on the front line, actually, it's not about action every day. It's also about
this endless waiting and waiting under bombs and looking into the same horizon,
wheat fields, trees. And I would like to make it more in an experimental way,
the film which opens another look on the life on the front line. Elisa Kovalenko
and Yelizaveta Smith. Broadcasting worldwide, I'm Tina Dahili. And this is the
cultural front line on the BBC World Service. Andrei Kukov is one of Ukraine's
most famous and prolific writers. His novel, Death and the Penguin, is a
worldwide bestseller, and his books are full of black humor and intrigue. He's
also a diarist who's been sharing his thoughts and experiences on life in
Ukraine for the BBC. And to mark this first anniversary, he's written a piece
especially for the cultural front line. I seem to have been living in a war for
years now, hiding from shelling and reading news from the front. I have indeed
been living in the war since the annexation of Crimea and the start of the
troubles in Donbass in 2014. That primary war took place 800 kilometers from me.
I traveled to the eastern front line to understand this war, to listen to it,
the thoughts of soldiers and civilians. At that time, I did not yet know that
the war would come to Kiev, Odessa, and even Transcarpathia, where my wife and I
found temporary shelter in the spring of 2022. Since then, I have not been able
to write prose. I can only write about the war and only the truth as I see it.
For a year now, I have been living this war, breathing war, dreaming war. For a
short time, I was able to quietly rejoice that among my relatives, friends, and
acquaintances, nobody had been killed. That is no longer true. The faces of lost
friends come to mind day and night. War makes everything military. This war has
made Ukrainian poetry and prose military. Ukrainian rock is military now too.
Ukrainian poets, such as Halina Kruk, would like to write about love, but they
write about war or remain silent. Or they write about love for their loved ones
killed by the war. Russia wants to erase Ukrainian culture, alone with its
prominent figures and milestones. That is why since February 2022, Russian
rockets have fallen on the Museum of the Best Ukrainian Primitive Artist, Maria
Primachenko, and on the Museum of my favorite Ukrainian philosopher and poet,
Rehory Skovoroda. That is why Russian shells have turned hundreds of churches,
synagogues, and mosques into ruins. That is why in Kharkiv, Cherniv, and dozens
of other cities and towns, libraries, universities, and schools have been
destroyed. Culture is the live blood of a nation. If culture is destroyed, the
nation can be assimilated. The Ukrainians can be told that they are Russian and
that their language and culture should also be Russian. In the spring of last
year, the Russian military shot the Ukrainian writer and children's author,
Volodymyr Marvakulenko. He became one of more than 30 writers, poets,
translators, and publishers killed by the Russian military. In Ukrainian
bookstores, you could now make a separate shelf with the works of murdered
poets, writers, and translators. But I don't think anyone will do this. These
deaths cannot be an excuse for a market employ. They are an occasion for memory
and understanding of history, the history that has led us directly to where we
are today under the hail of Russian missile fire. A year of full-scale war with
Russia has changed Ukraine beyond recognition. Ukraine is wounded and blooded.
It is difficult for Ukraine to breathe. It is difficult for the country to
publish new books. It is difficult to put on new theater performances or make
new films. But Ukraine does breathe. It does try to speak and convey to the
world the truth about what is happening on its territory. Film directors are not
afraid of minefields and shelling. They should documentaries write on the front
line. They capture today's tragedy and edit films to the sound of explosions in
the towns closest to the front line. Due to the destruction of the energy
infrastructure, we have learned to see better in the dark. We have reverted to
reading by candlelight. Some writers are looking for old typewriters to be
independent of electricity. Others are writing by hand now. Theater performances
and concerts go on and people want to attend. Ukrainian culture is at once a
fortress and a symbol of our defiance. As long as Ukrainian culture is alive,
Ukraine is invincible. Writer Andrei Kukov. Ukrainian comedian, Hannah
Goshuhura, has been performing stand-up for almost six years. Originally known
as Anna, which was the Russian version of her name, she now goes by the
Ukrainian version, Hannah. Hannah is currently taking her comedy across Ukraine
in a countrywide tour visiting 19 cities. She last spoke to the cultural front
line in May 2022, so we wanted to catch up with her and find out what life's
been like for her as a comedian over the past nine months and the popularity of
comedy during this time. It's getting increasingly popular during this invasion
and more people come to the shows, more people watch YouTube videos, and yeah,
we are getting more audience now. You were touring when the war started and
you're currently touring across Ukraine. Hannah, tell me about the reaction of
audiences, especially in the east of the country, to you performing there. Oh,
in the east of the country, everyone is happy when we come. Everyone is excited
because it's closer to the front line, so not much is going on there. And people
are just excited to have some kind of relief, entertainment, something positive.
I'm myself from Zaporizha. The atmosphere there is much more depressive because
it's a front line city than in other parts in Ukraine. So people do appreciate
us coming and they're happy to have some outlet for them to come and laugh and
have a good time. You did a show in a bomb shelter in Kharkiv earlier this year.
What was that like? There was a massive rocket attack on infrastructure and
Ukraine was without power for 30 hours. So during this time, we had no
electricity, no, almost no cell phone connection. Well, in Kharkiv, we didn't
have any. And we had a generator and people still came and we were so excited
and grateful that they actually came because it was a pitch dark everywhere.
Nothing is open and no public transportation. No, nothing, still people came.
And there were some people that live in the shelter permanently. So they were
like involuntarily on the show, I guess. But I think everyone enjoyed it. It
felt surreal that we live in this situation. You're known for your observational
material. What jokes are going down well at the moment? What are you joking
about? About our daily life and how it's changing. I do jokes about that we got
so used to bombs and rockets that although we know it's a life and death
situation, we're still treated as like annoyance. Like, do you need to bomb us
right now? I have an appointment or I have to go do my nails. Couldn't you wait
for two hours? For me, the invasion feels absurd sometimes and a joke about
because although the tragedy and death is our daily routine, but we're still,
like the hooker bars are open and you can run away from a rocket on electric
scooter with much a lot in your hand. I don't have an electric scooter, but if
you have a rocket, it's much a lot of a lot. Another thing I joked about is that
I'm scared that if rocket hits my building and the wall will come down, everyone
would see how I live. And then my mum would say something like, well, I told
you, you need to clean. Does writing and performing comedy help you to cope with
what's happening? Yeah, definitely, it helps me to find some funny stuff in not
so funny things. It's not like the war is funny. It's just trying to make any
light of one of the darkest moments. Well, in my life, for example, for me,
comedy can be a pretty powerful weapon to fight back against propaganda and
invasion. It helps us to keep going because it's incredibly important not to
lose hope, not to get into apathy because it's easy to feel depressed with this
tragedy and death happening every day. And also literally we collect funds from
our shows. 20% of all profit goes to the Ukrainian army and we also do complete
charity shows to support our army. How, Hannah, have the curfews affected your
shows? Well, now we have to do them earlier. And for example, on Sundays in our
club in Kiev, we have usually two shows, one earlier and one later. And the
early one starts at 4 p.m., which is pretty early. And it's always a bit more
tense than the evening show. It's harder to get the audience to relax and laugh
earlier. Why do you think that is? I don't know. Maybe when the sun is up,
everyone is still a bit in the work mood or just not ready to have a pint or
something. And how important is it for you to continue to perform despite what's
going on? I would say it is essential to be able to perform and to be able to do
it. And I think that's essential. I see it as an act of rebellion because what
our enemy wants us is to be depressed, separated, isolated, and lose all hope.
And I think comedy helps to keep us united, keep us in high spirits. You want us
to stop our life and just lay down and cry. And that's the reason why we are
trying to do more shows and more content in English right now. We are trying
with our standup community to do this more, to get attention from international
community, to get our voices heard, and so people can hear it from us, from
people living here in this situation, what is going on. There is this idea that
laughter is something you can never take from a person. So in that sense, we're
also laughing in the face of our enemy. Hannah Kocahura. Over the past decade,
the club scene in Kiev has been growing, with thousands of people attending
raves known for their raw energy and vibe. One of the people at the centre of
this scene is Pavlo Delhachoff, co-founder and manager of the experimental club,
Otel. He told the cultural front line about the impact of the war on the club
and what's happening there now. On the very day that wars begin, we have
converted it to the volunteer centre, the very first day, like an active face of
defending Kiev. After the invasion, a lot of DJs, a lot of promoters have left
Ukraine. And so we have a new blood here, new blood of DJs, a lot of new names.
Due to martial law, we have started early because of curfew. So you can attend
till 10pm and then you need to close. And now we don't have the ability to make
a party at night. So we have more daytime events now. And now, for example, this
kind of party is limited by hours. It becomes more, I don't know, more fast,
more high BPM music, because you have a lack of time to have some kind of
electronic music experience. And now even a little ability to attend your
favourite music or your artist or some kind of genre is a gift. In a city that's
struggling with this martial law, limitations, with this lack of activities. In
my venue, there's a term that if you want to make a public event, you'll have to
gather some money for defence, volunteer needs, some kind of humanitarian help.
There's a war. You need to be helpful right now. What can you do the best? And
for example, me, I can do a concert, I can host promoters, I can gather people,
gathering the money for our defences. Cancelling in Russian culture is taking
place right after the war start. But some of this part of this cancelling has
started eight years ago after invading to Donbass and Crimea. But I don't have a
strict policy to not play Russian music, because for example, we have a rap
concert and some of them use Russian language in there. But after the war start,
the kids converted themselves to Ukrainian and they've begun to record the songs
in Ukrainian and this is also in, for example, hardcore metal music. And it's a
very interesting process, because these Russian languages and all these cultural
things are tricked deeply into the people's minds and now they have like a, who
am I? What is Ukraine for me? What language do I use in an everyday life? I
think there will be more Ukrainian-speaking artists because of getting rid of
all this Russian music, which we have pretty high amount before the war. So
there will be a purpose for Ukrainian-speaking artists. So I think it will be
very good and very good possibilities for artists to express themselves to
Ukraine and to the world. Founder and manager of Club Hotel Pavlo Derhacov. For
more arts and culture on the BBC World Service, do go to the Arts Hour, where
this week, Nicky Beatty is joined by Australian film director Baz Luhrmann, who
discusses the making of his BAFTA-winning, multiple Oscar-nominated movie Elvis.
That's it for this week's programme. We'll be here same time next week with more
stories of artists changing the world and the way we see it. Until then,
goodbye. This is the BBC World Service. And on The Inquiry this week... One year
after the start of the war in Ukraine, Putin seems poised to launch a new
offensive. The question is where he might attack. This week, we're asking, what
is Putin's plan now for Ukraine? The Inquiry at bbcworldservice.com.