TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You're listening to Today with Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson. Good
morning, it's eight o'clock on Friday the third of March. The headlines this
morning, energy firms have told the BBC they expect the government to maintain
some of its support for household bills beyond April rather than scaling it
back. A couple are due to appear before magistrates after a baby's body was
found in woods near Brighton. Sir Keir Starmer's decision to offer senior job to
the former civil servant who led the Partygate inquiry has provoked fury among
some Conservatives. And the end of an era, Ken Bruce prepares to sign off at
Radio 2. The BBC News is read this morning by Jane Steel. The BBC understands
that a number of energy companies are preparing for the government to maintain
some level of support for home energy bills beyond April when the current
assistance was due to finish. However the separate £400 winter discount will end
this month as planned, so most households will have to pay out more. The
Treasury says it is reviewing the situation. More details from our business
editor Simon Jack. Typical households are due to see their energy bills rise
from £2,500 to £3,000 per year on April the 1st as government subsidies are
scaled back. However as wholesale energy prices have fallen dramatically since
last autumn, the cost of those subsidies is tens of billions of pounds lower
than initial estimates. The government has been under intense pressure to use
that unspent kitty to maintain support at or near current levels. The BBC has
learned that some energy companies are already preparing bills for April which
assume that will happen. The clearest indication yet the government will bow to
that pressure. But an additional £400 discount for all energy customers paid in
£66 monthly instalments from October last year is not expected to be renewed
beyond April so most customers will still see their bills rise albeit by not as
much as feared. The Treasury has said it was reviewing the situation but would
not respond to what it described as speculation. A man and a woman are due to
appear before magistrates today after the body of a baby was found in woodland
near Brighton on Wednesday. The couple face a number of charges. This report
from Aruna Iyengar. The Crown Prosecution Service said Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon had been charged with gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth
of a child and perverting the course of justice. The body of a baby was found in
some woods near Brighton on Wednesday following a two-day search. Yesterday
police said it was too early to say when the infant died but it may have been
some time ago. They said it was not yet possible to determine the sex of the
baby. Miss Martin who's 35 and Mr Gordon who's 48 were arrested in Brighton on
Monday after being missing for several weeks. They're due to appear at Crawley
Magistrates Court later today. Several prominent conservatives have expressed
anger that the former senior civil servant Sue Gray has been offered the role of
Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir Starmer. Ms Gray led the investigation
into lockdown parties in Downing Street which was highly critical of the former
Prime Minister Boris Johnson among others. Here's our political correspondent
Damien Grammaticus. Last year Sue Gray was being held up by Boris Johnson and
his ministers as the most impartial of civil servants while she investigated
lockdown parties. Her conclusion was that those at the top were responsible for
failures of leadership and judgment. Last night Paul Holmes, a vice chairman of
the Conservative Party, said she should be blocked from taking the post she's
been offered as Chief of Staff to the Labour leader after resigning from her
job. Nadine Dorries and Jacob Rees-Mogg, both ministers under Mr Johnson, said
they now thought her report was a left-wing stitch-up and someone speaking for
Mr Johnson said the validity of her findings had been destroyed. But the Shadow
Culture Secretary Lucy Powell told this programme it was the right move for
Labour. I'm sorry we don't have that clip at the moment. The Conservative
Party's deputy chairman has said he sympathises with people who've taken part in
recent protests outside hotels housing asylum seekers. Lee Anderson told Radio
4's Political Thinking podcast that it was human nature to be concerned about a
sudden change to a community. Some of the demonstrations have resulted in
arrests for violent behaviour. This report from Jack Fennec. Government data
released last month showed there were more than 37,000 asylum seekers being
housed in short-term accommodation in September last year, mostly in hotels. A
protest in Liverpool last month was triggered by allegations that a man had made
inappropriate comments to a local teenage girl. Lee Anderson told Nick
Robinson's Political Thinking podcast that such stories had left people
understandably worried. They're just normal family people from some of these
towns and villages that are upset that overnight two or three hundred young men
have arrived and when you live in a community you expect to be safe and you
don't like sudden change. That's how humans behave. Some recent protests outside
hotels housing asylum seekers have been linked to far-right groups. The anti-
extremism organisation Hope Not Hate said the far-right were peddling myths
about people housed in hotels and that a Conservative MP should not be
amplifying these messages. You can hear the full interview with Lee Anderson
tomorrow at 5.30pm here on Radio 4 and on BBC Sounds. The chief executive of HS2
has told the BBC that various options are being considered to control the
spiralling cost of the high-speed rail project. Mark Thurston said these could
include delaying its completion. One estimate has previously suggested the final
price could exceed a hundred billion pounds. More details from our transport
correspondent Katie Austin. Mark Thurston said work on the first stretch between
London and Birmingham was 40 percent complete. But he told the BBC the impact of
inflation had been significant and the organisation was looking with the
government at ways of mitigating this. From making savings in the supply chain
to the project's timing. Mr Thurston insisted delays did not typically save
money in the long run but that a number of options were being looked at. His
comments follow speculation the government could seek to delay or axe parts of
the railway to save money. A spokesperson for the government said ministers were
committed to delivering the project from Euston to Manchester but they added
regular reviews were carried out of its scope and schedule to ensure it
delivered value for money. Henry Murrison is the chief executive of the Northern
Powerhouse Partnership, a business-led think tank which works to boost the
economy at the north of England. He told us he didn't think the stretch of line
to Manchester would be axed. I remain confident because the current Chancellor
and the most likely woman who will replace him, Rachel Reeves, are big
supporters of this project and that's because it will increase productivity. The
challenge is we have already cut elements of the project off so the most, the
bit of the project that had the biggest return on investment, the new line as
far as leads has already been cancelled. There's now no plan to get trains to
Leeds but an open-ended commitment to do so. A prominent lawyer in the United
States has been found guilty of shooting dead his wife and son at their mansion
in 2021. Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch committed the killing in South Carolina
to distract attention from financial crimes. He's due to be sentenced later
today. There's been intense interest in the case across the US as our North
America correspondent David Willis explains. The scion of a wealthy southern law
family whose name came to represent a legal dynasty dating back nearly 90 years,
Alex Murdoch's dramatic downfall has captivated this country as his six-week
trial has played out on cable TV. He admitted embezzling millions of dollars
from his clients in order to feed an addiction to prescription painkillers but
denied killing his wife Maggie and younger son Paul at the family estate in June
2021 in what the prosecution maintained was an attempt to cover up his financial
crimes. But a video taken by 22-year-old Paul only minutes before his death
undermined Alex Murdoch's assertion that he wasn't anywhere near the crime scene
at the time of the killings. In the past half hour the property company
Rightmove has said its annual operating profit went up last year. It grew by 7%
to 241 million pounds. The chief executive Peter Brooks Johnson told us that
despite a dip in the market in early January confidence had continued to build.
The Cambodian opposition leader Kem Sokha has been sentenced to 27 years in
detention and banned from politics for treason. Kem Sokha was once considered
the main challenger to the long-term Prime Minister Hun Sen. He was accused of
colluding with foreign governments but has always denied wrongdoing. The
broadcaster Ken Bruce will present his final show on BBC Radio 2 today. Ken
Bruce has fronted the mid-morning programme for more than 30 years but as our
media correspondent David Sillitoe explains his career with the BBC goes back
even further. It was 1992 when Ken Bruce took on the mid-morning slot on Radio
2. Hello chums, everything alright this morning? He was even then a veteran. His
BBC Radio career goes back to 1977. However, just before midday he will a few
days earlier than he was hoping be saying his final goodbye. I'll just be a
quick goodbye. I will not be tugging at heartstrings mainly because I don't want
to tug at my own. I'll just be saying right that's the end of this particular
era of my life. Of course it's not retirement. He's heading off to greatest hits
radio and his replacement has already been announced. Vernon Kay will be taking
over in May. And you can hear an interview with Ken Bruce on this programme
shortly. Yes, Gary's been speaking to him. The time is now ten past eight. The
22 people who died in the Manchester Arena bombing were aged from eight to 51.
Their families and friends now have a third and final report from the official
inquiry. This time including the security services knowledge before the attack
took place of the person involved. This time much of the proceedings were behind
closed doors because of the nature of that material. The families did not hear
what was said. But they know there were failings. The inquiry chair said that
there was a significant missed opportunity to take action that might have
prevented the attack. In a two minute statement released afterwards the MI5
Director General Ken McCallum apologised. He said gathering covert intelligence
is difficult but had MI5 managed to seize the slim chance it had the families
might not have suffered their appalling loss and trauma. Martin Hett was one of
the victims. He was 29 and his stepfather Dr Stuart Murray has been speaking to
me in the last few minutes. Beginning with his sense of how this phase of the
inquiry was handled for the families given that it was dealing with national
security. They were very, very open I suppose in many ways. They kept us
informed of what was happening. I guess the frustrating part was we always knew
all along that it was going to be an element of closed doors because that's the
reason and purpose of a public inquiry rather than a coroner's inquest as such.
So a public inquiry is done so that the judge can hear important evidence in
closed doors that may be of risk to national security. Did you get any sort of
briefing within the process, you as families, from MI5? From MI5 we didn't get
much, no. We asked if our legal team, one member of the legal teams could be
there just to hear the evidence and ensure that our questions and concerns could
be put to the witnesses but we weren't allowed. That's right, so there was no
access even in the form of a legal representation. How does that leave you
feeling? This is only one part of the entire process, three phases overall and
this was one aspect of it. But given that we now have a conclusion that there
was at least one missed opportunity, how do you feel about it? I think to see it
in black and white was a hard day for us all to see that there were two pieces
of evidence, one of them significant and could have led to a chain of events
that actually stopped the whole event. I think seeing that was difficult just to
digest in a short space of time. And as the headlines say a lot of families are
very angry and upset, as I was initially. But I think as you sit back and
reflect and having Fegan in the background with her strong accepting apology
stance about things, it's helped us, me, sort of rationalise things and see that
everybody was trying to do their best, you know, we do make mistakes. And that
the security officers and the people in MI5 were probably doing their job,
they've stopped lots of things. And so you and your wife Fegan do feel able to
accept the apology from the MI5 Director General? Yeah, yesterday I found it
hard, I guess we're human, I found it really hard initially. We hadn't actually
seen it, I spoke to Fegan and said, you know, everybody's angry, you know, this
is really hard. She told me her view and it makes you see that we have to, you
know, these people are suffering enough. If they made a decision, that's an
awful decision to have to live with that might have saved many lives. I don't
need to do any more, they're suffering enough. So it's the ideology and the two
brothers that caused all this. So I feel that that's what we need to remember in
the background. It's that that's wrong, not the people who are doing their
everyday job. This is the inquiries found everything that's gone wrong. Now
we've got to try and put it right. Dr Stuart Murray, thank you. 17-year-old
Chloe Rutherford also died that night. She was killed alongside her boyfriend,
Liam Currie, aged 19, whose mother, Caroline Currie, said this immediately after
the end of the inquiry. All we as families have asked for from day one is the
truth, acknowledgement of failures and a determination to make sure that those
failures are fixed. So that next time, because there will be a next time, but
hopefully next time there won't be as many families going through the utter
heartbreak we have had to endure for the last five years, nine months, one week
and one day. We didn't get that acknowledgement from anyone other than GMFRS
until the Chairman's reports were published. Shame on you all. In this volume of
the report, the Chair has recognised that there was a significant missed
opportunity by MI5, which had they taken action could ultimately have changed
the course of what happened that night. He also identified a lack of information
sharing between the police and the security services. We hope lessons really
will be learned this time. However, there were some heroes that night and to
name a few, Sergeant Cam Hair, Inspector Mike Smith, Chief Inspector Mark Dexter
and civilians Bethany Crook, Ronald Blake and Darren Costa. This is where the
medals should have gone. We have sat through eight weeks in the Old Bailey and
over two years here at the Inquiry. We've read countless statements, listened to
hours of evidence and we can only hope that one day the whole truth will come
out and others, including the fugitive brother and parents, face justice because
we will never believe they were in this alone. Forgiveness will never be an
option for such evil intentions and those that played any part in the murder of
our children will never ever get forgiveness. From top to bottom, MI5 to the
associates of the attacker, we will always believe that you all played a part in
the murder of our children. We will spend the rest of our lives trying to
protect our boys because as we found out through this process, once you leave
the safety of your home, you are on your own. So many people being paid that
night to protect our kids and yet so many failed in their duties. Professionals
that had responsibility but clearly had other priorities. Security staff that
even when told of the danger, failed to act appropriately. Once again, we'll
never forgive you. Nothing can bring Liam and Chloe back. Nothing. But we won't
let them be forgotten. We've set up a charity in their names as a lasting legacy
to show that from such absolute heartbreak, something positive can rise. We will
continue to campaign to be allowed to register the personal detail on their
death certificates and we won't rest until all those who played a role in their
deaths are brought to justice. Caroline Currie, the mother of Liam Currie who
was 19 and who died with his girlfriend Chloe, who was 17. Kevin Jones is a
Labour MP and a member of Parliament's Intelligence and Security Committee. Good
morning to you. Good morning. Can and will your committee now pick up on the
Inquiry's conclusions relating to MI5? Well, first of all, it's heartbreaking
listening to those interviews and our sympathies and thoughts, obviously, with
the families. We did a review in 2018, our report, which covered not just
Manchester but the other four terrorism attacks that year. Sir John has produced
two reports yesterday, one which is in the public domain, the other one which is
closed for intelligence reasons. We will receive that report and then consider
whether or not there's any intelligence that has been highlighted in that that
we were not given. We know one piece that we didn't receive because MI5 already
told both the Inquiry and ourselves that that didn't come to light until after
our report was concluded. That was a failure to pass on some information from
countering policing to MI5. But, I mean, we've been told that by MI5 and our
conclusion, I think Sir John's conclusion was that would not have affected the
events, tragic events that took place in Manchester. There's a very significant
conclusion that Sir John reached, which is that he rejected the services expert
conclusion that no one other than Salman and his brother Hashim Obeidi were
knowingly involved in the attack. And he also said it became apparent that MI5's
corporate position did not reflect what the relevant officers did, thought or
would have done at the time. So there was a difference between the officers and
the corporate position, if you like, that the service was taking. That is
serious, isn't it? That's specifically what I'm wondering if you think you need
to get to grips with. Well, we will. We will be looking at the closed report.
It's, we're the only committee of parliament that can look at classified and
closed material. And I know that's frustrating on behalf of the public and the
families that that information can't be put in the public domain. But having
been on the committee for the last five years and reading reports I do every
week, there's good reasons why that can't be. And Sir John recognises that in
his report in saying that he wouldn't want to do anything which would help those
that wish to harm us. And do you therefore support the position, the position
the families ended up in was that they were not allowed to have even one member
of their legal team inside the closed door session so that they could have
complete confidence that the questions they wanted answered were being put to
MI5? Would it really not have been possible for someone presumably signing the
Official Secrets Act, you know, taking whatever other precautions are necessary
to be there in that part of the inquiry? Well, the inquiry was for Sir John and
how he ran it was for him. It's not for me to decide that. But what I would say
is the information you're talking about is not just covered by the Official
Secrets Act, it's of a highly classified nation. And I know that's difficult to
explain to the families. And I think if I was in their position, I'd perhaps
take the same stance. But as I say, the information that the committee does see,
we don't want to do anything. And Sir John said that in his report that would
actually help our enemies. OK, and from what you saw out of the inquiry's
conclusions, what is the most pressing to you? For example, there was an
instance within this dealing with Salman Abedi when an MI5 officer recognised
that crucial intelligence could be oppressing national security concerns. They
did not promptly write a report about it. Yes. The issue is here is at the time
MI5 were looking at 3,000 subjects of interest. These are people who
intelligence was received on, who were active investigations. Within that, there
are three tiers. There's first tier, those who are actively involved in a plot.
Secondly, people who were linked to the main plotters and then peripheral
individuals. Abedi was actually on a subject of interest twice, but he was in
the third category. And that shows the difficulty of managing those subjects of
interest. But also at the same time, they were dealing with 20,000 closed
subject of interest. Now that's 40, according to Sir John's report yesterday.
And one of our recommendations and Sir John's is that the security services need
to look at how they manage those closed subjects of interest. And I've got to
say, progress has been made on that by the security services. It'd be a crucial
thing to establish on that, wouldn't there, is that whether it's a resources
thing, whether it's because it's, you know, once you've got to that number in
the many thousands of people you're following and others who are on the closed
previously of concern list, you don't have the resources to match that or
whether even when you are dealing with things, it's not being dealt with
properly. No, I think it's a judgment call and it is about resources, but that's
not the main point. It's about judgment call about where you actually target the
people who are involved. It's a judgment call about where you actually target
resources. And remember, throughout this period, the security services did
disrupt 30 plots and 27 of those were actually Islamic plots. So I think, you
know, it is a judgment call. And can we improve that system? Yes, I think we
can. But that is the amount of information and different leads which the
security services are on to deal with. MP, thank you. It's coming up to 24
minutes past eight now. It is the end of a radio era today. The most popular
radio programme in the country, the mid-morning show on BBC Radio 2, waves
goodbye to its host for the past 31 years, Ken Bruce. Like almost every big name
who leaves broadcasting house, Ken's departure isn't without controversy. A
headline in The Telegraph yesterday said, Radio 2 will come to regret what it
called this shabby betrayal of its older listeners. Oh, Gary, Gary Richardson,
first worked with Ken on Radio 2 in 1988. And he went to talk to him about his
long career at the BBC. He's been presenting the mid-morning show for 31 years.
It's the anonymity, the ability to just be one part of yourself and communicate
only in one way with somebody who's just listening to you. So it's a very direct
communication. And that's the thing that appeals most. Hello, chums. Everything
all right this morning? Oh, wonderful. It's a Monday again. Your audience, over
8 million people, the biggest on radio. What's made you so popular? If I knew
that, I would have done it a lot earlier than this. And I don't think you can
ever analyse why something is popular. It becomes popular without you either
noticing or trying. And I think the more you try, the less it will happen. A
good relationship between broadcaster and listener is something that just grows
and develops naturally. What's the hardest part of the job, though? Getting up
in the morning, really. Once I'm in, once I'm up and heading to work, I'm fine.
And then I come in, I'm on here at 9.30, finished at 12. And I've often said I
always feel better at the end of a programme than I did at the beginning. I'm
sort of sorry when it's finished. One of the most popular parts of the programme
has been Popmaster. And our first contestant today is Gary from Woking. Hello,
Gary. We're going to do a mini Popmaster now. I've got three questions for you.
These are all questions from the early 80s. Who had a hit with this? Do I have
to answer now? Steve Miller Band. Well done. Which American band is this? Is
that Chicago? Good, thank you. Well done. Name of the song? Hard to say, I'm
sorry. Everybody Needs a Holiday. Yes, you're absolutely spot on. Thank you. Um,
for a bonus, when were they formed? What year? I think 1978. No, 1967. Get away!
There you are. There you are. The last one, three parts. What was the film, who
sang the song and who was the star? Film was Arthur, star was Dudley Moore and
the singer is Christopher Cross. Okay, you can have a bonus now. Who were the
two co-stars? John Gielgud was in the film and it was Bo Derek, wasn't it? No,
that was 10. That was 10, of course it was. Still, still Dudley. Liza Minnelli.
This has become a film quiz, not a pop quiz now. Ken, well done, you did very,
very well on that. Tracks of My Years was another big feature and we've asked
you to pick two. I love Marvin Gaye and Heard It Through the Grapevines. Go, the
best introduction I think ever in popular music. Beautiful voice, a glorious
ability to rise above the notes and just take you along with them and
interpretation of a great song. Your second track is? Sir Duke by Stevie Wonder.
This one is him paying tribute to great names of the past and great different
styles of music and so you get everything, you get Stevie Wonder with his soul,
you get his funk and you get a bit of Big Band thrown in there as well. How sad
will you be on your very last programme? Well, just be a quiet man. How sad will
you be on your very last programme? Well, just be a quick goodbye. I will not be
tugging at heart strings, mainly because I don't want to tug at my own. I'll
just be saying, right, that's the end of this particular era of my life, but
there'll be another, a big continuation. So I love daily broadcasting. It's what
I've done for years and years. I've been on BBC radio every day, five days a
week since 1977. And so it's going to be a difference. It's going to change me a
bit, but I still want to be on the air every day. As the second hand ticks up to
the 12, you'll be a bit emotional. No, I'll be looking at the clock thinking,
get out on time. You'll be a bit emotional, Ken, I know you. Maybe a touch, but
you know, I'm a hard-bitten old Scot. Do you know what you will say yet? No, no,
I don't. But it will come to me at the time. I might jot a note or two, but I
don't like to write anything in sentences. I just like to write a couple of
ideas and I'll say what comes to mind in the moment. Do you know what the last
piece of music is you'll play? I do now, but I'm not going to reveal that until
the last moment. OK, well, today presenters have to ask the same question 15
times now. What is the last piece of music? Last piece of music will be, oh, I
do like to be beside the seaside, sung by Basil Rathbone. OK, you've done that
very well. You did say that you would love to have stayed until the end of the
month, but you're not. What can you tell us about that, Ken? Not a lot. I mean,
it's entirely within the BBC's right to ask me to step away a little early.
Gardening leave is a known concept in broadcasting and in many other areas. But
for the sake of 17 days, which was all that was remaining, I would have finished
on the 24th anyway. So it seems a shame. But you know, you just adapt your
timetable. Instead of three weeks, it's one week and that's been fine. Yeah,
interpreting that answer, you would have loved to have stayed, really. Well, my
belief is that if when I'm given a contract, I work to it and complete it. I
haven't had, over the last 46 years, I haven't had very much time off ever. And
so I've tried, attempted to turn up whenever I'm required to turn up. So my
natural feeling as a broadcaster is to, you know, if I've got 17 days to do, I
want to do them. A lifetime on radio. What's been the very best moment so far?
Talking to you, Gary. And after that? I can die happy now. I can't actually pick
a moment because there have been, I've loved everything. I love every day, just
a normal day. Meeting special people, it's actually more, you know, somebody
like James Taylor or Carole King when they came into the studio. These were more
nerve-wracking than anything. So I didn't enjoy them in the moment because I was
thinking, I must get this right. Don't say something stupid to James Taylor, for
goodness sake. But I love just doing a normal daily programme and trying to make
myself laugh and other people. Ken, enjoy the new job and very well done on a
great career at the BBC. Thank you. Thank you, Gary. It's been a pleasure. I
never thought I'd be on the Today programme. Oh, at least we could have. We
should have got him to read the racing tips before he said goodbye to the BBC.
But we wish him well. Yeah, no, absolutely. I had the sense as I was listening,
why do we do news? We could just play music, couldn't we? Would you like that
better? But then we wouldn't get the sport, of course. But if you were going to
do your last track and this was your last programme, we don't know what Ken's
going to play. What would you play, Nick? Good God, I can't say that off the top
of my head. OK, well... Would we get to play a track before? I don't think we...
If you wanted to. You've got three and a half minutes. Right. Well, I do the
sport. You have a think about it. Let's do the sport. The second One Day
International between England and Bangladesh has been underway since six
o'clock. England batting. Let's get the latest from Kevin Howes. Morning, Kevin.
Gary, good morning. 183 for three in the 34th over, shaping up really nicely
this for England, especially for Jason Roy. It seems every time Jason Roy walks
out to the middle as the opener, his place in the team is under question. But a
12th ODI century for Roy today, a second in five games for England, 104
deliveries, 12 fours and a sixth equal third highest number of One Day
International centuries as well for England now. He's going along really nicely,
just past the 100 mark. They're offering more than just good support. It's Josh
Butler. He knows these conditions really well, this Butler. 38 of 38. England
187 for three in the 34th over. Roy 117 not out. Thank you, Kevin. Let's speak
to former England coach Paul Farbrace. Morning, Paul. Good morning, Gary. Milan
was on the programme yesterday. He'd scored 114 today, just 11. Why the contrast
with Butsman? It's a tough game, isn't it? And it's interesting hearing Kevin
talking about Jason Roy, how well he's played. You know, I keep reading for the
last 15 months, Jason Roy is under pressure for his team. He's equal most 50th
for England, as Kevin said, third in the hundreds list. Look, it's a tough
pitch, Mirpoor. It's a gritty surface. It doesn't matter how much grass you
leave on it. It's a tough place. And it's the sort of place where when you get
in, you've got to cash in and score big runs, which is what Jason's done. And
unfortunately, David couldn't just quite get in today to go on and get a big
score. You mentioned the pitches. It's good preparations for the World Cup in
India, because they will be similar. It's a huge series, this one for England.
And that's why I'm pleased that, you know, some of the fringe players are
getting a chance to play and get used to those conditions. But we've had a lot
of players play in the Bangladesh Premier League over the last few years. And
again, that's really good practice for these players. And it will be sensational
for the World Cup, because they will be tough pitches at times. And for the
World Cup, very difficult for selectors and captains to think, who are we going
to pick? I mean, Brook's done so well. Root, Berstow will be back. And who
knows, maybe Stokes. What are your thoughts on that, Fimey? I think it's a
fantastic challenge for the selectors. I'd love to have been in that position
when we started back in 2015. But you look at the squad that England can pick
from now, that's why England are the favourites to go and win this World Cup,
even in tough conditions, because they've got such a good group of players. Paul
Farbrace, thank you very much. Other bits and pieces, golf. World number one,
John Rahm, will have a two-stroke lead going into the second round of the Arnold
Palmer Invitational Tournament. England's Aaron Rye is three off the lead. Five
games in Super League this evening, and Sports Extra will have commentary on St
Helens against Leeds. Warrington made it three wins from three, defeating
Salford 36-20. Here are the racing tips for you. One horse running at a course
that I haven't written down, but it's running at 345. It's number five, number
four, Moe Viddy. That's made no sense at all. It's a horse called Moe Viddy. And
Newbury, this is right, 430, number three, Gaelic Geordie. Just can't get the
staff, can we? Now, the song. The song, what would you choose? It's too much of
a cliche to do my way, isn't it, Sinatra? That's much of it, so I'm going to
say, Gary, Jungle Books, I Want to Be Like You. Thanks, Nick. Michelle? I'm
going to keep my powder dry and say not an exact track, but I'm pretty sure it
would be something by Simon and Garfunkel, but partly, yeah, just there's so
much to choose from. We'll listen out for those. She really is a sort of bridge
over troubled waters, isn't she? We'll listen out for your Jungle Books song at
five to nine this morning. Oh, yes, thank you. Yes, here are your cards. I can't
even fucking him off, Gary. There we are. It's tough here, you know. So, now,
let's move on and hear what Laura Laverne has coming up for us in about 30
minutes. My castaway is the artist Sonia Boyce, who put childhood fears to
creative use as an adult. I was always convinced that the wallpaper was moving,
that I could see things in the wallpaper. And I do think that wallpaper or
repeat pattern has a kind of otherworldly quality about it now, but as a child,
I was just always a bit scared of the wallpaper. Sonia Boyce, my castaway, do
join us to hear her Desert Island Discs this morning at nine. The weather. It's
going to involve a cloudy start for many of us brighter in the north. The cloud
will break through the day. You're listening to The Today Programme on BBC Radio
4 with the bridge over troubled water, Michelle Hussain and Nick Robinson, and
at 24 minutes to nine, Jane Steel's got a summary of the news. Some energy
companies have told the BBC they expect the government to maintain a level of
support for household bills beyond April when the energy price cap is due to
rise. Ministers are under pressure to use the money saved from the lower than
expected wholesale costs to limit any potential price hike. The Treasury says it
is reviewing the situation. A number of Conservative MPs have raised concerns
about the senior civil servant, Sue Gray, being offered a job as chief of staff
to the Labour leader, Sikir Starmer. She led the inquiry into government
lockdown parties. The shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, told this programme
any suggestion Ms Gray was not impartial was utterly ludicrous. Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon are due to appear before magistrates today after the body of a
baby was found in woods near Brighton on Wednesday. The couple face multiple
charges, including gross negligence manslaughter. Scotland has become the first
country in the world to ban hospitals from using the anaesthetic desflurane
because it's a powerful greenhouse gas. It will only be used in exceptional
circumstances. Thank you, Jane. It's now 23 minutes to nine. Energy companies
are preparing for the government to do a U-turn to keep subsidising bills after
April when that help is due to be withdrawn. That's what our business editor,
Simon Jack, has been reporting for us this morning. A few weeks ago, Martin
Lewis, the founder of Moneysavingexpert.com, warned on this programme that
allowing bills to rise again would be a national act of self-harm. Martin joins
us on the programme once again. Morning to you, Martin. Good morning. We're all
having to guess, aren't we, by the behaviour of the energy companies who plan
their pricing some weeks ahead. Do you share Simon's view that this pricing
decision suggests that this U-turn is in the offing? I do. I wouldn't say it's a
done deal. I've been saying all week I think there was a better than 50% chance
that the campaign we'd been running, I wrote a letter to the Chancellor three
weeks ago, it's now backed by 110 major charities, including the likes of Which?
and Citizens Advice and Alzheimer's and the Samaritans and many others. It's
backed by Energy UK, which is the trade body of the energy industry, saying, you
know, don't do this. It's not good for individuals to put prices up. It's not
good for people's mental health. It's not good for consumer confidence, which
means it's bad for business. And it would also keep the inflation rate down if
we don't put prices up. It's a bit of a no-brainer. So it's been a tough slog to
get it through. Now, I was saying earlier in the week, reading the runes, it was
a better than 50% chance that the price wouldn't go up. What happened yesterday
that was interesting, and I don't know what Simon's sources are, so this may be
different information, is there used to be a rule that said energy firms had to
notify 30 days in advance of a price rise. That rule's now gone. And it now says
they have to notify within reasonable time, which is ill-defined. So it could be
another week. It could be another two weeks that they can wait until they have
to do something definitive. But what happened yesterday was that was the
deadline for them telling the prepayment meter providers and the people you top
up the providers what the new April rates would be. And what I have heard is
that I don't know all the firms. Some of the firms have kept it at the current
rates. That's right. That's what basis. Yes, I was reporting that. And he was
also saying that one of the companies had said they wouldn't have done it unless
they'd effectively been given the nod to do it. Let me just tell you what. I'm
not sure that's correct, Nick. Oh, go on then. Sorry. So the point about it is
that for the firms, it is easier to keep it at 2,500 and increase it to 3,000
than to reverse it the other way around and have to back pay. Now, I'm hearing
they have not been told that the rate is staying. They have been told that there
is an attempt to keep the rate at 2,500. So we're not at the smoky gun stage
that this is definitely happening. But I would say we're at an 85% likelihood
that the price won't be going. Got it. Got it. Maybe slightly nuanced
difference. Help us out here, Martin, because sometimes when these stories come
up, even I'm baffled by graphics, Ari, because there's prices going up or down.
There are caps, there are discounts and all the rest. Just in simple terms, if
there's someone listening at home today and thinking, roughly, what's going to
be happening to my bill come April, either if there's a U-turn or if there
isn't, just give us a sort of headline, would you? If there's no U-turn, you'll
pay 20% more than you do now. If there is a U-turn, you'll pay exactly the same
as you do now. And how long do you think, when you say the government should
extend its support, how long do you think they should carry on doing that for?
Because at some stage, we've got to get back to paying what it costs, haven't
we? Well, my letter was deliberately tactical, asking them to postpone the rise,
not to cancel it. Why? Because it's an easier political ask. The government's
concern about this campaign has always been, what if wholesale prices spike
again? So I said, postpone the rise until July. Now, that was deliberate because
there are two levels of pricing. You have the price cap, which is set by Ofgem,
the regulator based on wholesale prices. And that sets what energy retailers can
charge. And then you have the price guarantee, which is, if the price cap is too
high, this is what you'll pay and the government pays the difference. At the
moment, the price cap, the Ofgem one, is higher than the price guarantee. So we
pay the price guarantee. All the predictions are, from July onwards, the price
cap will be lower than the government's price guarantee. So we will pay the
price cap. There won't be any more subsidy. So in practical terms, the current
prediction is, in April, it'll either go up 20% or not go up. If it hasn't gone
up, then we'd still expect to see a drop of 10% to 12% from current prices from
July onwards. Because wholesale rates has gone down, there's a big time lag
before we feel the benefit of wholesale rates going down because of the way the
price cap system works, which is why my letter was about postponing it till
July, because after that point, frankly, the energy price guarantee is unlikely
to have any impact on us anyway. It no longer exists in reality, even though
it's in the background until next April. Just a last one, quick one, if you
wouldn't mind, Martin. Some people would say, look, give money to the poor to
pay their bills. Don't subsidise the bills of everyone, because there are
enormous demands on the taxpayer at the moment. Pay nurses more, for example, or
pay more for schools and all the rest of it. Isn't it time to move to more
targeted support? Well, I was one of those people who criticised the energy
price guarantee because it wasn't targeted and it helped people like me and you,
Nick, who probably don't need the help compared to other people. But the problem
with that is that the issue of energy is not just for the poorest. There's many
on middle incomes who would struggle to pay bills, which we would have had over
this winter, of £4,000. The mechanism the government put in place is the energy
price guarantee to subsidise prices. It's not going to change that now. We do
also have, to be fair to the government, the £900 payment for those on benefits
coming this winter, the money for pensioners and the money for those with
disabilities. So, you know, I tend to work with the situation that we are now
and try and improve that as best we can. It's not necessarily what I would have
designed if I were designing the structure of how you do energy help, but I
can't see any other one coming in. So we better stick with this one and work
within the one we've got to make sure that many people, not just the very
poorest, but many people who are really struggling get help too. Martin, thanks
again for coming and joining us. Martin Lewis, the founder of
Moneysavingsexpert.com. It's 16 minutes to nine. Guys and Dolls is back on the
London stage. The first performance of a production at the Bridge Theatre is
tonight. That's the theatre set up by the former Artistic Director of the
National Theatre, Nicholas Heitner, who's here in the studio with us. Good
morning. Morning. It's good to be here. Why Guys and Dolls? There's never a bad
time for Guys and Dolls. Many people think, I think I probably do now as well,
that it's the best of all the great Broadway shows. Really? Best songs, best
jokes, best characters. It's a sensational show. And you are going to do it, I
don't know whether you call it an immersive experience, but there's that bit in
the Bridge Theatre in the middle and the action will take part with some of the
audience standing around. Yeah, we have a configuration where 400 people can
stand, move with the action, be part of the action. The people who pay the least
are closest to the action. But there's also then 650 that's theatre so
intimately designed that they can hang over the action seated. So I hope you get
the best of both worlds. And it means that the audience that choose to take the
standing seats can actually be part of it. And I think there's a hunger for that
now. And you make a choice, don't you, in which productions? It's not every
production at the Bridge Theatre that you do in that way. So why this one? Well,
we've done a couple of Shakespeare's that way. The audience responded so well to
those that I wondered what it would be like to do a great musical that way,
musicals which traditionally take place behind a proscenium arch with an
orchestra in a pit. It felt like the spirit of this show, the joy that it
generates, would sit very well with an audience that was able actually to insert
itself inside the show. So where does the orchestra go? The orchestra is in one
of the galleries, in one of the sitting galleries that surround the action.
We've taken some seats out. So the audience is there, almost like a big band in
a dance hall. So they're part of it, too. I wonder, Nick, whether you think that
there is post-pandemic, with all the financial pressures that many theatres are
under, there's more of an impetus to do something that's particularly perhaps
more of a spectacle for the audience or immersive or to bring back favourites
that people might know from film. And the bar for bringing in a completely new
piece of work is higher. Yeah, that may be so. I think both coexist and there's
still very adventurous work going on for which there is a responsive audience.
The National Theatre is doing a lot of new work. We've done almost entirely new
work since the theatre's reopened. I think what there is a real hunger for is
the kind of theatre that insists that it's live, that we all spend so much time
in front of screens these days that when we go to the theatre, I think we want
something that absolutely insists on us being there in the same room at the same
time. And although I'm a big fan of plays unfolding quietly behind a proscenium
arch, there's something about the all-embracing nature of these experiences
which call themselves immersive, which are ultra theatrical. And I think I'm
detecting that that is what the audience is responding to. What do you think
then of something like ABBA Voyage, which is not theatre, which is a way to do a
pop concert? Good? Do you know, to my shame, I've not seen it, but I've not
heard a bad word about it. All the people that I would trust, I'm dying to see
it. I'm hearing on the grapevine that it was so amazingly expensive to make that
it's not really a great threat to those of us who use real actors on the night.
Real actors are cheaper. Yes, that makes sense. But also, if you look at the
West End stage now, there are quite a few things that have been films which then
end up on the stage, whether it's Legally Blonde, Mrs Doubtfire, Back to the
Future. Is that again because these are safe ways to get an audience in? Well,
I'd never like to prejudge those things. Quite often, great stuff comes from the
act of adaptation. Stephen Sondheim did it. Stephen Sondheim's great show, A
Little Night Music, was based on an Ingmar Bergman film, and that never gets hit
over the head with being somehow inferior. Yeah, there's always been an audience
for it, particularly in the commercial theatre, for something that it feels safe
with. It recognises, and these things have always co-existed and been in
dialogue with adventurous new stuff, so it's not really a problem. Well, good
luck for tonight and that first performance of Guys and Dolls. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Thanks. Standing in the pit at the bridge is a great treat. I
did it for Caesar, Julius Caesar stood next to that moment and the
assassination. It's a fabulous. I came to Midsummer Night's Dream, but I chose a
seat. I complained I'd not been bought a seat, but I was delighted after.
Thanks, Nick, and thank you very much for coming in. It is now 11 minutes to
nine o'clock. Now, here's a question for you. What sort of society do we want to
live in? It's the sort of question normally asked by theologians, politicians,
not by people like me and Michelle, not by broadcasters. But Jon Snow, presenter
of Channel 4 News for more than 30 years, does ask that question in his new book
written since he retired from presenting TV news in 2021. When Jon came into the
studio yesterday, we talked about the state of us. That's the book's title and
also the state of news. He told me it was the Grenfell Tower tragedy which had
moved him to write. Because I actually met somebody who died in the tower and
she was 12, Firdaus, really bright girl. I met her with Bill Gates, can you
imagine? And she absolutely flowered in his presence. She read beautifully. This
was a poetry contest. It was. And Bill was, for some reason, involved in judging
the prize. And I think she affected both of us very, very strongly. So when you
heard the news that she had died in the tower. I cried. It was utterly
devastating. She was a child of such promise. And you suddenly thought, my God,
you know, there would have been so many more people of great promise and people
of strong character and the rest. And they were dead. And you got to the tower
as it was still burning. Very much so. Very much so. I was lucky enough to have
a bicycle because the whole place seized up. And with a bike, you can get
anywhere. And I got there pretty soon after the news broke. Now, what's
interesting is some people were angered because they thought it showed that
private companies had abused their position. Others talked about deregulation by
politicians. You focus in this book on inequality. Why so? Because it was such a
collision. I mean, you had the richest borough in the United Kingdom hosting
this appalling event, which is very much down to negligence by the council. I
mean, the place was inadequately equipped to deal with fire. Escape routes
weren't clear to those who lived there. We'll find out from the findings of the
public inquiry. But no, it was a devastating collision between wealth and
poverty. You say in the book that it sometimes suits people in privileged
positions to talk about poverty rather than talking about inequality. Why so?
It's much easier to think in terms of bringing relief to poverty than it is to
consider changing what it is that has produced the poverty. And I think that's
why people are more comfortable talking in those terms. You make the argument
that journalism can make a difference to inequality. How so? I think if we tell
the truth about what we're actually looking at, we can have an impact. An
impact, I hope, contributed to an understanding that this was a truly desperate
and very now crisis, because there isn't a limit on the number of places across
the country that are potential disaster points. Did you want to go further in
your reporting? Was there a temptation to say, as you do in the book, in
retirement, this is what I think about the world. This is what I think should
change. This is what I think is wrong. I hope my reporting objective did treat
the thing responsibly. And I don't think there was much difference between my
reporting and what I've written in the book. The reason I ask you is you and I
know, as presenters, as reporters, who are constantly being told by listeners
and viewers, they know what we think. They know whose side we're on. We know
what party we're in and all the rest of it. There is now partial television and
radio reporting. And you don't yearn to have that freedom? No, absolutely not.
I'm delighted that I've got through my entire career without actually being
found guilty of any misdemeanor in terms of balance and the rest of it. I mean,
you think I'm a lefty. I think you're a righty. I mean, it's rather healthy that
the two of us can sit in a studio and have a reasonable discussion. Does it
matter? I don't really know. I think it's right that people with different
views, everybody has a view. It's no good thinking that journalists don't have
views. We do. We have views and the viewer and the reader and the rest of it
know what our views are. And in many ways, that's a democratic and good thing.
And the media should be made up of a varied approach to news and information.
People do think I am a bit of a pinker or a lefty. Well, let them do so. I hope
that I'm a good reporter. You'll know that after Glastonbury, people said, oh,
that John Stowe, he danced around and said, F the Tories. Well, that's what they
say, I said. I have no evidence I ever did say that. But, you know, if these
worthy people found me saying such a thing, I regret it. You worry a bit, it
seems to me, in the page of this book about the future of this organisation, of
the BBC. Why so? The BBC is such a remarkable organisation that I fear that
there are people who don't treasure its existence. And amid the march to, you
know, privatisation and all the rest of it, you just pray that the BBC remains
what it is, which is beholden to nobody, owned by us all and regulated very
well. And I've never worked for the BBC, so I'm not grinding an axe. I think it
is an absolutely extraordinary organisation. And I think it's, well, I've
travelled a lot in the world, I've never met a broadcasting system that in any
way even begins to rival the BBC. John Stout, author of The State of Us. Thank
you very much for coming into the Today studio. It's now five to nine. Merriam-
Webster, publisher of dictionaries, has come up with a list of words for which
there are no English equivalents. That's after an appeal they did on social
media for contributions. And one of those they discovered was a Finnish word for
getting drunk in your underwear. Kalsarikanit, I think is how you say it.
Anyway, thank you for joining us. Kalsarikanit, I think is how you say it.
Anyway, Susie Dent will be able to do this much better than me and bring us
other words as well. Lexicographer, author of an emotional dictionary and of
course, on Channel 4's Countdown. Morning, Susie. Good morning, Michelle. What
are the other words of that kind that we should know of? Oh, there are so many.
I mean, some are words for sort of universal emotions, but they're expressed
just so pithily like the French have, retrouver, which is the joy at reuniting
with someone after a long time apart, which is just gorgeous. And then I tweeted
one yesterday, actually, which is the German Vorführer effect, demonstration
effect. And that's when things that are broken suddenly start working magically
when you're showing them to someone like, you know, the washing machine that's
broken down, technician comes around, suddenly it works perfectly. Or the
opposite, something that has worked brilliantly stops working at the crucial
time. We've all had PowerPoints that fail in front of a large audience. And I
mean, German, as you would expect, just because it enables these wonderful
confections, Verschlimmbresserung, which is the attempted improvement that
actually makes things worse. And I think we can all sympathize, or at least, you
know, we all recognize those, Age, Otori from Japanese, which is the misery of a
bad haircut. I think we really need something like that. And then there are
others which are just inextricable from their culture. So Japanese, again, they
have this wonderful aesthetic of Sibui, which is this quiet, unobtrusive beauty
that gets better with age. If you think of a finely honed piece of wood, for
example, or possibly the most specific that I've come across from a
correspondent on Twitter told me about, and excuse my pronunciation, I think
it's Polunkusuma, which is an old Finnish measurement of around seven
kilometers. But the reason I love it is, it is apparently the average distance
that a reindeer can run without having to pee. That literally means reindeer
pee, which is amazing. Some of these kinds of words, perhaps not that one, but
others you think of Schadenfreude or Högge, which I hope I'm pronouncing
correctly. But, you know, they do, once we become more familiar, they often then
do become part of the English language, or at least English usage, I should say,
rather than the English language. Yeah, no, and they will be included in the
dictionary as well. And English obviously is a sort of hoovered up and plundered
languages, every language it's encountered, really. But, you know, you're right,
there's, you know, coup de foudre, love at first sight. I think a lot of people
might recognize another French one, L'Esprit d'Escalier, which is staircase
witch, that's having the perfect answer or retort to a conversation five minutes
ago, just as you're walking out the door or down the staircase. But, you know,
of course, I would also say, given that I'm steeped in English lexicography,
that the historical dictionary has lots of words that could fill, you know, gaps
that we perceive to be there. Words we've forgotten. Yes, like you mentioned
Schadenfreude, a sort of near opposite of that is confelicity, which is joy in
someone else's happiness, which is just beautiful. Or one that I always try and
spread is apricity, which is the joy of the sun or the warmth of the sun on a
winter's day. So there are those hidden in the corners of the dictionary that
would be wonderful to bring back. But, you know, sometimes you just have to bow
to the beauty and the majesty of other languages. And that's all to the good.
Can I share one from Urdu with you, which is the word jungli, which is, comes
from jungle, it's a person with no manners who behaves badly, essentially, which
I've always thought was particularly evocative. Brilliant. I'm writing that down
as we speak because I'm trying to collect them all. There's another lovely one
from Italian, which is so specific. It's umarell, which is coined by a writer
for the men who gather around a construction site and offer their own commentary
for an entire morning. Useful. Thank you.