TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Just say, open BBC Sands to get started. It is a position that puts citizenship
fundamentally and improperly at risk. The fact is she is British and this
country should remain responsible for its citizens just as we expect other
people to. The British Retail Consortium says disruption to fruit and vegetable
supplies in the UK is expected to last for a few weeks. Tesco and Aldi have
today announced that they are restricting the number of tomatoes, peppers and
cucumbers customers can buy. Morrisons and Asda are also imposing limits. More
than 30,000 health workers who are members of the unison union are to strike
across England on the 8th of March. They include nurses, ambulance staff and
hospital porters. The Royal College of Nursing has held talks with the
government today aimed at ending their pay dispute, but unison says there can be
no pick and mix approach to resolving industrial action in the NHS. Palestinian
officials say at least 10 people, including an elderly man and several
militants, have been killed by Israeli forces during a raid in the occupied West
Bank. Witnesses describe hearing explosions and gunfire as troops enter the city
of Nablus. The Israeli military said its forces were looking for terror
suspects. And a strike by Welsh rugby players, which could have led to the
cancellation of the team's Six Nations match against England on Saturday, has
been avoided. Members of the squad had threatened to boycott the game because of
a dispute about their contracts. BBC News. You're rolling. OK, so the first bit
is really easy. Your job title. I'm Dr Tanya Gergel and I'm the director of
research at Bipolar UK and also an honorary senior research fellow at University
College London. Was that OK? Yeah, no, that was great. Thanks. This is Tanya. We
met at work at King's College London. She's seriously impressive. Bright,
compassionate, quick, very, very funny. We became friends and I'm about to
interview her in a small BBC studio about the most personal of personal
subjects. I've got emotional before when I've interviewed people, but I've never
really interviewed a friend like this before. Yeah, and I've done interviews
about this before, but I've never done it with people that I feel close to.
Yeah, yeah. We're all in uncharted waters really, aren't we? Tanya is a
philosopher and an internationally respected medical ethicist. And she also
lives with a serious mental illness, an unusual mixed type of bipolar disorder
which brings severe depression and mania at the same time. It's a terrifying and
very dangerous condition and Tanya tells me that the only treatment that works
for her is ECT or electroconvulsive therapy. How many times roughly do you think
you've had an ECT treatment? I suppose one thing I should say is that the number
of treatments I've had is very, very unusual before I say the number because I
wouldn't want... The thing about you is unusual. I think I've sort of lost
count, but when I've tried to work it out, I think it's probably close to...
it's... Close to 200, I would say. Close to 200 ECT treatments. I wasn't
expecting that. And she was first ill in her early 20s. So ECT has been a
regular feature of her life for almost 30 years. When I'm severely unwell, I'm
very strongly compelled towards taking my own life. I say that when I am
severely unwell, I want to be treated with ECT that is the only treatment that
works. And it's saved my life on a number of occasions. The seriousness of
Tanya's illness, contrasted with the matter-of-fact way she describes ECT,
brings me up short. The word controversial is almost always part of any
statement about this treatment. What are you thinking when I say ECT? One flew
over the cookies nest. Shock therapy. Bodies convulsing. Darkness. Cruelty and
punishment. And maybe you're the same. Floating around in my own family history
is a much loved aunt who had ECT. And the secrecy even shame around it then. Yet
my capable, intelligent, brave friend describes ECT as saving her life, bringing
her back from the brink back into her life as a scholar, a wife, a mother to two
girls. Tanya and I talked about making a radio programme about ECT. And then,
just over a year ago, she became ill again. But this time she kept audio
diaries, in which she recorded her mania. I just feel good. I don't feel tired.
I want to stay up. If I stayed up all night, I could probably master the Bach
piece I've been trying to play on my marimba if I stayed up all night playing.
And her terror. Just before bedtime on Tuesday evening, and the one thing that I
thought I had going for me earlier on was the presents and their voices had
lifted. But as I was getting ready for bed, they became strong. So strong that I
couldn't fight them off. I want so much to be able to step outside of my head.
Even if just for a day. Just not to be trapped inside this mental prison.
Listening to the audio recordings, I've found very difficult and I haven't
actually listened to that many of them. Yet you've been able to, bravely, offer
some of those tapes for us to use in this programme. I know why I think that
might be important, but why do you think that's important? I debated with myself
a lot about whether to make those available to other people. And I've also
talked to my family about it because I wouldn't do it unless they felt
comfortable, of course. One of the things I think when talking about ECT and
saying, well, it's a treatment for very severe illness or life threatening
illness, it's so difficult for people to understand what that actually means. So
with Tanya's blessing, here we go. I want to test my own preconceptions about
ECT. How do I know if the frightening and distressing images so many of us have
are the right ones? Well, Tanya's going to show me what it's actually like.
We're going to meet the ECT team at the hospital where she's cared for. And I'll
hear about the first patients who, like Tanya, depended on ECT to restore them
back to health. But first we need to go back to the 1960s to find out about my
auntie Joyce. So I'm sitting at my mum's dining table. She's called Kath in
Skipton in North Yorkshire. Yeah, mum, I told you about my friend Tanya, who has
ECT, and it made me realise that we never really talked about auntie Joyce, your
older sister, who also had ECT. We never really talked about that, did we? No,
we didn't, because it wasn't a subject that was discussed in my generation.
People were just compartmentalised, if that's the word, as just having nerve
trouble. Trouble with your nerves. Now we realise that it was more than that.
This is in the 60s that she had ECT, wasn't it? Nobody talked about the ECT.
Absolutely not, no. And why was that? Why did nobody talk about it? Because
people didn't talk about mental health, Sally. Even my mother would keep it low
profile from me. And the difference between me and my sister was probably, I
reckon, about eight years. She was eight years older than me. And we almost
looked up to her because she had a medical background, because she was a nurse.
All I remember was my mother, Gran, used to go to my sister's when she was
having this treatment. And she would have to be there for when the children came
from school, because she knew when my sister came from a treatment that she
would be out of sorts. And you talk about the treatment. Did you know what the
treatment was? I just knew it was electric treatment. That's how Joyce described
it to me. They're going to try this electric treatment. What did you imagine was
happening? Well, I imagined they were putting electric currents through a body.
It was almost as if it was a last resort that they would try this, to try and
give us some kind of quality of life. I can't remember what she was like when
she was ill, because it's when I was very little. What was she like? What was
her illness like? Well, to be fair, Sally, I never really saw her when she was
ill, because she used to lay low. Until the time came that she had to go again
for more treatment. But in between times, I can only think that, yes, it was
like a slur. Now, remember, her house was always open to everybody, wasn't it?
Kids and dogs and cups of tea in the kitchen. And you were very close to her and
looked up to her and everybody did. But growing up as a kid, I had no idea about
how ill she was. Well, really, Sally, neither did I, because she didn't want it
to be an issue. Since I've been aware of Tanya having ECT, I've talked to people
about it and the reaction is often, do they still do that? And there's clearly a
difference between when Auntie Joyce had it and now when Tanya's having it. And
I just feel like I need to get to the bottom of it for Auntie Joyce as well as
for Tanya. Do you know what I mean? I do know what you mean, Sally, and I'm
really pleased that you are doing this delving and trying to get some answers
for the family, for me and for her son. There was always this shadow in us about
this treatment. I can't imagine what it must have been like for Auntie Joyce, a
remarkable woman taking care of everybody else while experiencing episodes of
crippling mental illness. So I started to delve. ECT involves passing an
electrical charge through the brain to induce a seizure, which typically lasts
between 15 and 45 seconds. Seizures were first induced chemically in America in
the 1930s by a Hungarian neuroscientist called Laszlo Meduna. And then Tanya
told me about someone who's not only written about Meduna, but was also his
contemporary and actually met him. My full name is Maximilian Fink, but I am Max
Fink. I'm a physician, professor of psychiatry and neurology. I graduated
medical school in 1945 when I was 22 years old. And at this age of 100, I am
surprised I'm still here. Max Fink is known as the grandfather of American ECT.
He told me what first set Laszlo Meduna on his trial. One of his patients had
been a catatonic. That means he had been mute, had to be soup fed, he had to be
washed, etc. And this man, after he had four or five seizures, suddenly woke up
and said, where am I? Who am I? Meduna was inducing seizures with chemicals, but
the real breakthrough came at the end of the 1930s when neuroscientist Ugo
Chiletti and Lucio Beany developed a way to induce seizures using electricity.
Max explained what happened. These two men had a patient who came into the
hospital and was, in retrospect, a catatonic. Their first choice was by
accident, an excellent accident. They made a box that attached it to the
electrocurrent in the room. And then they put two electrodes and put it on the
head of the human and the electrodes were charged and suddenly he had a seizure.
They went ahead and gave him a few more seizures. Nothing happened until about
the fourth or fifth day. And he was calm. It was very easy to manage. They then
treated a number of other patients. And that was the beginning of
electroconvulsive therapy. Fast forward and now every year globally around 1.4
million people have ECT, 2000 of those in the UK. Here it's approved for
treatment resistant, severe and sometimes life threatening depression. A course
is usually between eight and 12 treatments and crucially the guidelines say that
if it works for people, they can choose to have it. Incidentally, Tanya is a
world leader on the ethics of decision making and consent in mental health, even
published in the Lancet Psychiatry. And she champions individual control and
autonomy for people over their own care. We know Tanya is unusual to have had so
much treatment, but the fact is she consents to it. So today I went to the
hospital and signed the consent form for ECT. I will feel cut off from everyone.
Cut off by some uncrossable gulf that I'm watching them from the other side.
Critics of ECT point to the fact that it is sometimes given without consent in
the UK, apart from Scotland, ECT is regulated and monitored by the ECT
accreditation service, ECTAS, which is part of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists. They report that more than half of patients do give consent for
treatment and when they don't, it's generally because they're too ill and
they're detained, being cared for under what's known as a section. A year ago,
when her illness returned, Tanya went to hospital for her ECT by choice as a
voluntary outpatient. Now she's well, she wants to show me what modern ECT looks
like. Tanya, we're here now at Northwick Park in North West London at the Mental
Health Centre. What's it like for you now being here when you're not here for
treatment? It's very strange, but then at the same time, being here with you is
very different. It's nice to come in a different persona. And you've talked to
me a lot about the team here. Are you looking forward to seeing them again? I'm
really looking forward to seeing them. Yeah, they've helped me through the
periods of my life, which have been the hardest and I've got to know them. We've
become very close. Thank you. And this is the point I think when I'm coming for
treatment where I start to, I don't know, you just feel like a little bit
apprehensive. It's a little bit strange, a little bit surreal being here, these
circumstances. This is the ECT suite. Hi, how are you? Nice to see you. Good,
good, good. I'm Cathy Queen and I'm one of the ECT nurses here in clinic. I've
been doing ECT from as long as the 1980s. A long, long time. And you know Tanya
very well. Oh, yes. I've known Tanya, I think, since how long, Tanya? I must be
about 15 years. Yes, absolutely. I'm Angelie, I'm the ECT manager and lead nurse
for the K So shall we go through to the ECT suite and can you, Cathy and
Angelie, can you show us how it all works? Yes, they come this way. Thank you.
So this is it. This is the room. I would just think this was a regular treatment
room. There's a bed in the middle, standard medical stuff, lots of light coming
in through the windows. I mean, there is equipment here that I don't know what
that is and presumably that is something to do with the treatment, is it? Yes,
so that's the anaesthetic machine we've got there. Difficult airway trolley,
crash trolley. We've got our ECT machine here that delivers the treatment. And,
Angelie, I'm looking at the bed and I was expecting to see restraints and I
can't see any. No, so most of our patients are consenting and we wouldn't be
restraining anyone to have ECT here. This button here is what delivers the
treatment. So you literally press it and hold it down? Yes, so I'll hold it down
until it stops making a sound to indicate that the treatment is finished. And
then once I've done that, I will start monitoring the visual seizure. So it will
be like, you know, the little quiver of the lip or the eyes flickering or the
toes. So, yeah, very quick, couple of seconds and then the treatment is
finished. There's a muscle relaxant as well that is administered at the same
time as the general anaesthetic so that actually your body doesn't really
convulse. There's no major convulsion of the body because there's a muscle
relaxant. Yeah, the convulsion is not very strong. So the treatment's given.
There's a seizure. Angelie, what happens then? Tanya will start to wake up. How
long does that take? So it varies for each patient, but it's only a couple of
minutes that they're in here in the treatment room for. Tanya, when you're lying
on the bed and you get the anaesthetic, what's going through your mind? What
does that feel like? Strangely, I find it quite relaxing. I mean, when I'm very
unwell, experiencing more psychotic symptoms, I sometimes then I'm very afraid.
But it's not fear of the physical procedure. It's fear, actually, of just
everything. I always remember Kathy always, you know, holds my hand. Like she's
just done now. And so the people are like, hold my hand. I usually picture my
family and have a nice picture in my head and then just go off to sleep. And it
is actually quite a nice feeling. You know, think of something. It's a nice
holiday. And I think that helps. Let me come to Angelie. I'm just wondering what
reaction people have to you when they say, oh, what do you do? And you say, I'm
an ECT nurse. The first thing that people tend to ask me is, oh, my gosh, does
that still happen? So it's just about explaining to people, you know, it's not
the way that the movie's portrayed. It's not how it used to be. It's on under
general anesthesia now. What is it about what you see happen that makes this
what you want to do? I think one of the main things is just seeing how quickly
patients get better in such a short space of time. And the feedback that we get
is just amazing. And they say things like, ECT has just completely changed my
life. It's turned things around for me so quickly. I'm so happy to have my life
back. It's that kind of feedback that just keeps you going and wanting to work
in ECT and just be part of breaking down that stigma that is very much around.
How do people react to you, Cathy, because you've been doing this since 1982.
How do people react to you when you say that you're an ECT nurse? I explain it
as it's no different to being medically unwell. And if you were going into a
hospital before to have a toenail removed, you have a general anaesthetic and
ECT is extremely safe. It's been really eye opening. Thank you both. And thank
you, Tanya, for bringing me here and letting me explore that. The use of muscle
relaxants and anaesthetic, along with the dignity and respect shown to patients
at Northwick Park, really changed my perceptions of ECT. Plus there's no denying
that there are stories of recovery. I'm just waking up from my sleep after
today's ECT, which was number nine. And I don't know if I feel a bit different.
I don't know how I've known on previous occasions whether this has been, in
quotes, the one and whether suddenly the psychosis has lifted. Tanya's voice is
different now. I can tell she's getting better. But Tanya is just one person and
an extraordinary one at that. I wanted to know how typical is her experience?
I'm Professor George Kirow. I work for Cardiff University and I'm the ECT lead
for this area. So I organise the ECT delivery for patients in the Cardiff area.
Usually the recovery is gradual, but sometimes it can happen just after one
session. These are experiences that we remember and everybody who is there
remembers them. You see the patient before the ECT, mute, looking at one point
or mumbling something. And after the seizure, so that's say half an hour after
the seizure, they've woken up. The patient is having a cup of tea and chatting.
Now, these are not that common. We see this once or twice a year maybe. So not
every patient would react that quickly. But if you see that, you're converted to
ECT. I think it was fairly immediate that I felt better. This is Sue, a retired
social worker in Cardiff. For over two years she'd been dangerously ill, in and
out of hospital and repeatedly suicidal. And then just before Christmas she had
ECT for the first time in her life. And the delusions that you described as
well, did they? They debated, yes. Yes, I've got any of those anymore. And you
said almost immediately after the first treatment? I recall, yes, it started to
work fairly quickly. The suicidal thoughts disappeared. And plans for suicide
disappeared. So that was a big one. And just lighter in myself. Not sort of
burdened with depression and negative thoughts really. How much were you getting
back to yourself, if you like? I'm pretty much there. I've started playing
badminton with a friend. I've been casting a play. I'm socialising with friends.
I would say I'm 90% there. My husband, his way of putting it is I've been
returned to factory settings. And would you agree with that? I would actually. I
would. George, the programme that we're making is about the group for whom ECT,
you know, they describe ECT as a life saver for them. Which groups of people
does it work best for? Yes, this is a very easy question because there is a
particular group of people that really get well with ECT. Somebody with very
severe depression, so severe that they can develop delusions, psychosis. They
start imagining things that are wrong. The evidence is that 80, 90% of such
cases should get better. And this is the experience that I get in this place.
Many critics of ECT talk about very serious side effects. Some even say brain
damage. What are the known side effects? So there is no evidence that ECT causes
brain damage. This has been shown in a variety of studies. It does not lead to
dementia either. This has been shown in large populations to this. What it does
is it does cause memory problems. What I usually tell patients is that they'll
have problems remembering things that happened around the time of ECT and maybe
a few months back. Things like meetings that they've had, visits that they've
had, phone numbers, PIN numbers. These things can be forgotten. It is to do with
the so-called autobiographical memory. So things that have happened to us, we
could forget them spanning a few months back. I listened back to an earlier
recording just now. I found details of a day trip that I was supposed to go on
and couldn't because I was having my first ECT. It was at some museum or
something. The strange thing was that even though it was not very long ago, I
can't remember this at all. It's as if it never existed, never happened. I
realise increasingly with each day that my memory of recent events is just
disappearing. You said to me several times, remind me of this, we've come back
to talk to something and you said, oh, I can't quite remember that. You've had
nearly 200 treatments, you reckon. How do you think it's affected you? There are
so many times when I'll be there with my family and I'll say, oh, I've never
been to the Brecon Beacons. I'd love to go. And they were like, well, actually,
we were there. We were there for a couple of days just before Christmas last
year. Even when they tell me, even when they show me the photos, it's as if I'm
seeing photos as if I've been photoshopped into something that I really have no
memory whatsoever of being there. Do the memories ever come back, the ones that
you've lost? Some do, some don't. So there's memory loss and there are certainly
people who have had bad experiences of ECT. I asked Max Fink, is there anything
that can redeem ECT's reputation? No, I don't think so because it has a blemish
that is encrusted. And then there's the name itself. It will be fine in 40 years
when this present generation is gone. There is no way that you can separate
electroconvulsive therapy, shock therapy, from a name that would be less
provocative. Max Fink, who celebrated his 100th birthday just a few days after I
spoke to him. In this programme, I've been trying to solve the conflict in my
own mind between what I thought I knew about ECT and the reality. I wonder
whether the fact we don't definitively know how it works has a big part to play
in why we're so scared of it. Perhaps its reputation can't be salvaged and it
doesn't work for everybody. But it does for people like Sue, maybe my Auntie
Joyce and certainly Tanya. I did a six mile route, which is the longest run I've
done in a while, and I was looking ahead of me at the trees and at the sky,
enjoying the feeling of space and freedom and power and strength. It felt like
me in a way which things just haven't done for so long. That's something which
is quite incredible. The Shocking was presented by Professor Sally Marlow and
produced by Fiona Hill. And details of organisations which offer information and
support with mental health or feelings of despair are available at bbc.co.uk
forward slash action line. That's bbc.co.uk forward slash action line. In a
moment, Katie Rasle asks what are the lessons for the media in reporting missing
person cases? But first, with a look ahead to the wall tonight, Razia Iqbal.
Thanks on the programme tonight. Russia's president has had a busy day hailing
Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine, saying they were defending the fatherland
and also cementing a diplomatic relationship the rest of the world is worried
about with China. We'll find out why strength and ties between Moscow and
Beijing is concerning to the West and how exactly China is supporting Russia.
Also, we'll learn what recommendations from the football fan led review have
made it into the white paper on football governance. And who's likely to drink
and like olive oil in their cappuccino? Starbucks thinks the Italians will. Do
join me in half an hour. Razia, thank you. And on Radioform, here's Katie Rasle
with The Media Show. Today, what does the tragic story of Nicola Bully tell us
about the media? Yesterday, the broadcast regulator Ofcom wrote to ITV and Sky
News after the Bully family issued damning criticism of them. This afternoon,
the police and crime commissioner for Lancashire launched an independent review
that will look at the police's investigation as well as their interaction with
the media. I'll be talking to a journalist who's been covering the case and
getting the perspective of a former police chief constable. We're also taking a
look at the conflict in Ukraine one year on and asking how it's changed
journalism. I'm joined by journalists in the studio and also in Ukraine amongst
them. The BBC's Oleg Errin. Hello, Oleg. Where are you? Tell us where you are
right now. Hi, Katie. We're in the east in a small town called Drusch Kivka. And
that's about half an hour from the city of Bapmut, which people will have been
hearing about in the headlines in recent weeks and months. It's the center of a
fierce battle now between the Ukrainians and the Russians. Well, very welcome.
Thank you so much for sparing us the time on the media show. And also with me is
Rohit Kachri from ITV News, John Sweeney and Katarina Melofieva. And more from
you all in a moment, because I want to take a look first at the reporting around
Nicola Bully's disappearance. Let me just play you a clip of Andrew Snowden,
police and crime commissioner for Lancashire, who was speaking this afternoon.
It has got very personal. It's got very vitriol. And it has felt that sometimes
that certain elements of the media have been determined to to to expose whatever
information they can and undermine the police investigation. And I think Ofcom
do need to look at that. And there will be reflections for policing around how
they have handled elements of the investigation. But I think there should be
some reflection from the media around has their focus always been in all
elements of the media on finding Nicola or creating stories that will simply.
Create that click through to their websites. Well, that was Andrew Snowden,
Lancashire's police and crime commissioner. And I want to bring in the Guardians
North of England correspondent Josh Halliday and Andy Trotter, a former police
chief constable. And you might remember his role during the seven seven London
bombings when he was a spokesman for the British Transport Police as part of his
role there. Welcome to you both. Thanks for coming on. Andy, I'd just like to
get your reaction first to what the police and crime commissioner said there. I
think Andrew Snowden is absolutely right. There clearly must be a review of what
happened there. Equally, I support what he says about that reflections not only
from the police but from the media. This clearly didn't go well from a number of
perspectives. And I think one of the things I think we should be looking at is
how can we make sure this doesn't happen again? I say that more in in some hope
because if we go back over various events in the past few years, we've seen this
sort of thing happen in the past. It's made much worse now by tick tock by
social media, etc. But we've seen this sort of thing with the investigation of
the murder of Joanna Yates of Milly Dowler. We've seen the media descend on a
scene and cause lots and lots of issues. Having said that, when I was working
for the media relations on behalf of the chief of the chief police officers, we
did have debriefs with the media afterwards to find out what happened. How can
we make it better next time? And I think we've all got to look at how we can
improve those relationships, look at each other's needs and try and ensure that
we plan for the next big event that we don't see what we saw up in Lancashire.
And Josh, I had a day you covered the story at the beginning and again at the
end for the Guardian. What's your take? Well, I think Gandhi is absolutely right
about what he says. I think there will be lessons to be learned from a lot of
organisations. From this case, the police will be conducting an internal review
of how they handled it. There will be a fair few external reviews of the
police's handling of it as well. I know that it's prompted quite a bit of soul
searching internally in media organisations as well, just in the past couple of
days about how we deal with families in the middle of these extraordinarily
traumatic events. We do have codes of conduct and guidelines that the vast
majority of journalists adhere to. But we're living in a world now where this
isn't like five years ago or ten years ago, there was social media, the social
media element, but it's hyperfast now, it's hyperaccelerated. The advent of
TikTok has again changed things from just a couple of years ago. I think this
was an extraordinarily difficult case for the police to deal with from a number
of different perspectives and reasons. But I think there will be lessons to be
learned from quite a wide ranging number of organisations. And in terms of how
you and your colleagues at the Guardian approached the story, I mean in terms of
the ethics around it, just whether you would approach the family for comment
without being intrusive, how do you do that sort of thing? Did you do that sort
of thing? Well, the starting point for us always is what the police guidance is
on whether families wish to speak. And usually the police will tell you that a
family doesn't wish to talk. If that's the case, we'd almost certainly stay away
and not contact the family, respect their privacy. But there have been cases
where the police have told the media that a family doesn't want to talk and it's
turned out not to be right. The family were keen to talk and that comes down to
a kind of breakdown in the relationship between the press and the police. That's
kind of happened over the last 10 years that we might come on to a little bit
later. But in each case, we will use our discretion guided always by our codes
of conduct and our kind of own individual moral compass as well. A lot of the
time at the Guardian, we're quite fortunate that there's not this huge pressure
to be first knocker or the first to get this exclusive interview. We handle
things a little bit more judiciously and sensitively and hope that in the end
that our readers value that. And I think that's personally the right way to go
about these things. And Andy, Josh, I do want to come on to what Josh raised
there, the relationship between the press, the media and the police. But can I
just get your perspective specifically when it comes to the family complaint
about Sky and ITV News that they'd approach them after the discovery of Nicola's
body when they'd ask for privacy? I mean, what's your take on that? Well,
clearly, I don't know the facts of what actually happened, but we've heard the
complaint from the family. And of course, Ofcom have a role in this. And so
we'll see whatever Ofcom have got to say. I think the investigation of print
media is a bit different. I mean, The Guardian is a very responsible newspaper.
There are others who are not, who don't conform to those sorts of codes of
conduct. And as I say, we've seen this on a number of occasions before. So let's
hope there's some mature reflections on this so that we can really start to work
together to see how we ought to do this, because this is clearly going to happen
again. And none of us want to see what happened repeated on a future event.
Yeah, it's worth saying that ITV have said as a responsible broadcaster will
cooperate fully and respond in detail to Ofcom's request for information. And
they expressed sincere condolences to the family and they said they wouldn't be
commenting further. And Sky News told us that they send their deepest
condolences to the family of Nicola Bully at this difficult time. And they
confirmed they'd received Ofcom's letter and they're going to work closely with
them to answer the questions. Now, Andy, in terms of what Josh was just raising
there, do you think the changes made, you know, people have been saying the
changes made after the Leveson inquiry have had a chilling effect on relations
between the police and the media. And in fact, Andrew Snowden, the police and
crime commissioner, said this afternoon he referenced Leveson. He said there was
potentially a disconnect between the police and the media. I wonder what you
think about that. Yes, to some extent, that's true. I think we should be careful
of not painting some golden image of what happened pre-Leveson. I mean, one of
the reasons Leveson was brought in was because of corrupt relationships between
some police officers and the media. And quite clearly, there was some major
problems, particularly in London at that time. There were also very good
relationships, and certainly I was in the met at the time between ourselves and
the Crime Reporters Association. And we would talk regularly to them on and off
the record because there were trusted people that we could discuss background
with appropriately and properly so that they were clear about what the issues
were. And do you pick up that that's changed now? Do you pick up that actually
the police are more cautious about speaking? Yes, they're a lot more cautious.
And the guidance that came out from Leveson was tougher. I wrote the national
guidance for the police after Leveson, but it does encourage the police to talk
with the media. It's worth a read. It's available online. And I do want the
police to talk to the media, but it must be on the record from named sources,
saving very exceptional circumstances if there's a legitimate reason for some
background briefing. Because we were dealing with some unfortunate and
relationships that shouldn't have happened. But I think we've lost the good
things. We've lost the fact that the police and the media did talk a lot more to
each other. There's a lot more understanding. Clearly, a lot of those
journalists have moved on. And clearly, a lot of people have moved into this
space calling themselves journalists. So we've got to be very cautious about how
we do this so we don't exclude other people. But I do think things could have
been a lot better on a number of cases of late if there'd been a better
relationship between the police and the media. The media have a job to do. It
helps the investigation and they have a role to, on behalf of the public, to
oversee what the police are doing. It's vital that relationship is healthy and
open. And I would like to see it improve. Josh, you were nodding there. Andy was
talking about on the record briefings being important, but are off the record
background briefings also important to get from the police in order to inform
how you do your reporting. Even if you're not reporting what they say, it
actually informs the way you frame something. Yeah, I mean, these are absolutely
crucial to help the media both understand the context of a story before anything
is published to understand how to frame the story. And three, also kind of guide
our approach to contacting people who might be involved in the story. But from
my experience, and this is kind of over the last decade, but increasingly in
recent years, it's almost impossible to speak to press officers these days
because you'll pick up the phone and they'll say, that's great. They'll hear you
out and then they'll say, can you put that in an email? And that's the end of
the conversation. There isn't that kind of grown up adults off the record or
background conversation that can really help and help the police as well as help
the media. Another interesting thing Andy was saying there is that the College
of Policing actually has media guidance for police forces. And I was reading it
yesterday actually for the first time. It's incredibly sensible. It encourages
police forces to have this open and transparent dialogue with the media and
speak to journalists on a background, non-attributable basis. Not as in give
them information that's not for use, but can help them understand a story. But
it just doesn't happen. And I don't know whether this is because this kind of
culture isn't accepted by senior management in some police forces. I spoke to a
friend who recently worked in a large police force yesterday who said that the
difficulty is getting senior management on board with what benefit there is of
speaking to the media about a lot of investigations. Right. So it sounds like
the guidance is actually in the right place and people's complaints about
Leveson potentially are wrong. It's more at the next level, the individual
police force level that it's a problem. And I have to say thank you to you both
for coming on, but I wanted to bring in Rohit Khatri here because you're sitting
in the studio and ITV have been singled out. I know you haven't been involved in
the coverage at all, of course, but I just wonder what your take was. Well, I
mean, you know, people were talking about it in the newsroom. I mean, obviously,
you know, it feels uncomfortable, but, you know, everyone was very sad. Everyone
was really thinking about the family after the grief they've gone through. And,
you know, we're aware that, you know, Ofcom and our own managers are looking at
the details of what happened. I don't know what happened, but, you know, it's
very clear that, you know, everyone I know at ITV News is incredibly, you know,
their thoughts are with the family. Well, you're staying with us, of course,
because we're now going on to talk about Ukraine. The conflict there is back in
the news as the one year anniversary of Russia's full scale invasion approaches.
And with me to assess how Ukraine has changed, war reporting are, of course,
Rohit Khatri speaking to just then global security editor at ITV News, who has a
film called Ukraine One Year On coming out tomorrow, Thursday on ITV. We've also
got John Sweeney, an independent journalist who's been reporting from Ukraine
since the start of the war and Katarina Malafieva, freelance journalist and
producer and, as you heard at the top of the programme, Oleg Aaron, senior
international correspondent at BBC News. And Ola, if I could start with you, you
know, you've covered conflicts all over the world. What unique challenges has
the Ukraine war specifically posed, do you think? I mean, I would say nothing
compares to this, both in terms of the scale and the implications and the
challenges. We were here last year in the East at this time, just before the
invasion happened. And we were expecting it, although I have to say it was on a
bigger scale than I had imagined. I thought President Putin would invade in the
East and focus on that. But in fact, he came in from three sides. One of the
biggest difficulties here is the size of this country. It is absolutely vast.
Just Western Ukraine on its own is almost as big as Germany. So you spend a lot
of time on the roads, on very bad roads often. You work at this time of year in
very severe code. We spent a night last week with a tank unit quite close to a
frontline and we were filming at about five in the morning and it was minus 15.
So, you know, that presents difficulties for the equipment, but actually also
for the people. And I think there is another issue which we felt in our team
this week. You know, we've been working with local Ukrainian producers since the
beginning of the war and with a very wonderful Ukrainian driver. And it's not a
stretch to say we're sort of a family here at the moment. And it's very tough to
see the impact on our Ukrainian colleagues. I mean, it's tough for us to see the
destruction and the loss of life, the absolutely needless loss of life. But it
is far harder for those who are from this country. And we were filming the other
day in a burnt out town, bombed out just one of many destroyed towns on
Ukraine's long frontline. And that was actually the hometown of our driver. And
he came in with us that morning. He hoped to go and see his apartment, the ruins
of his apartment. He knows it's destroyed. But when we were doing our filming,
the situation got a little bit too insecure and we had to leave and he couldn't
go back. But he had come in, you know, clutching the keys in his hand. So I
think for all of us, and I'm sure all of the journalists, John and everybody
else would say the same, you get very emotionally connected with this story and
you end up going back to town time and again. And they look worse every time.
And I'd like to bring in Katerina Malefieva because you are in a sense exactly
what Ola is talking about. You're a Ukrainian freelance journalist. You're in
Kyiv at the moment. How do you fulfill that dual role of living in and reporting
on the war? Particularly, I think you have suffered a really awful loss
yourself. Well, indeed, it's been quite a hard year. And at the beginning of the
invasion, I sort of felt that I was prepared for this simply because I was
covering the conflict in Donbass since 2014. I mentioned before that I'm
originally from Donetsk and I've been working almost nonstop for these nine
years. I can definitely tell you the difference because I also tried myself
before as a foreign journalist and I reported in other conflict like Nagorno-
Karabakh, in Armenia and Azerbaijan. And I can feel the difference within myself
that when you report on a conflict, in a different conflict, you don't feel that
attached as you are right now. And as Ola was saying, I've also been working
quite extensively in the East. I've also just returned from Chasip Yar and from
Droskivka. There are enormous conditions of working in minus 10, minus 15. And
it's hard because when you come back to Kiev, where I stayed at best two months
in the past year, you cannot completely relax or recuperate because every time
when I come back to Kiev, there is either a missile attack or blackout. And my
life is also affected by this as well. And also indeed, I think you're suffering
your own grief too, I think. Is that right that your mother was killed in the
conflict? My mum died in Donetsk on the 16th of March last year and I was not
able to attend the funeral because of the war. And my father is still there. So
I was not at the funeral. I was not able to say her final goodbye. And what is
more, it was one of the horrible situations because there was no people who were
even able to dig a grave because at that time Russia started recruiting local
population who are officially Ukrainians, maybe just holding a possessing
Russian passport because of the necessity for their life's survival. And there
were no men forced to do that. So indeed, I would say that you think about this
conflict and you think that only I can't imagine even anything harder. But every
time I speak to people, like I spoke to a girl today in Buche whose father got
missing, who survived the occupation, 17 years old girl. And I was thinking
there is no day when I wouldn't be wondering or grieving together with these
people because it's just simply shocking testimonies of the civilians who
suffered this war. Yeah. I mean, Rohit, you were here in the studio, you're
nodding. What's the war been like from your perspective? Well, as Ola says, it's
really the scale of it. And when you think of Katerina's heartbreaking story,
what you then have to do is multiply that millions of times to get a sense of
what is happening in Ukraine. I think for many of us covering it, what was so
shocking was watching this develop at first. You know, me and I think John and
Ola as well were there before the invasion and there was still uncertainty about
what would happen. You know, a lot of people seem to be in denial when we're out
there. And then on the 24th of February, you know, it began and everyone sort of
worse thoughts, their emergency plans kicked into high gear. But, you know,
we've been doing long stints out there, sometimes six or seven weeks in one go.
And when you cover this story and when you return perhaps half a dozen times
over the course of a year, you know, that the people that you know, the people
that you work with, but also the people who you are reporting on, who you've
returned to, they, you know, you become incredibly close to them and you become
very invested in their stories. But of course, you are just an outsider and
there are, you know, tens of millions of Ukrainians who are suffering many, many
times worse than, you know, me or Ola or John. I mean, let me bring in John
Sweeney, because I think, John, you've been there certainly for a very long
period, if not the whole time. And unlike Rohit or Ola, you're actually flying
solo, you're crowdfunding your reporting. Yes. I think so I first went to the
wars in Rwanda, Burundi in 88. And then I've been to Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria,
Angola, bits of Cambodia. Presumably you weren't crowdfunding any of those
trips. So this is different. I was looking for the observer and the BBC, but
this time the thing that's very striking about this war is it really is good
versus evil. It feels like what I read about the Second World War. It feel like
to be in Kyiv a year ago, it felt exactly like what I read. But, you know,
stories of Malcolm Muggeridge and Graham Greene wandering around Soho during the
Blitz, laughing at the Nazi bombs because there was nothing else you could do.
And this real, real sense, and this is why this is a very different war. This
is, you know, this war, Vladimir Putin has ripped up the 1945 settlements. And
this is a war of innocent and peaceful democracy invaded by a fascist
dictatorship. It's interesting, isn't it? Because there is, of course, no
pretense of impartiality in your reporting. You know, you make clear opposition
to Vladimir Putin. It's interesting. We've had people on the program before,
John Simpson, for example, you talked about there being a deficit of
impartiality when it comes to this war. I disagree with my great and good
friends and old warhorse John Simpson, because in due impartiality, which is a
very BBC concept, essentially means fairness. But it's perfectly proper. And I
don't think that I have ever, ever crossed the line on this, that I have always
been fair to the Russian army and the Ukrainian army and the Russian army kills
children and the Ukrainian army tries not to. It tries to kill Russian soldiers
who shouldn't be here. So the most single most striking thing about this war is
the fact that it is a war of good versus evil. And I just want let me just
interrupt you for a second, because I would like to bring in all again from the
BBC at this point. Is that how you see it? Do you approach it as a war, as a
conflict between good and evil? I mean, I approach it by reporting what we see
on the ground. And I think there is a difference between reporting and taking a
position. We may all have our private views on this and they are private. You
know, we're not here to advocate. We are here to simply say what we see. In
saying that, what we see is devastating enough. And I think it leads to very
clear conclusions. And I think you have to be factual in your in your reporting,
but you also have to bring your your judgment and your common sense to bear. So,
for example, in the first few weeks and possibly months of the war, we were
continuing to say in our reporting, Russia denies that it targets civilians.
Well, at a certain point, that became not just redundant, but ridiculous,
because we were seeing every single day the evidence of our own eyes that Russia
was targeting civilians. So I don't think you have to parrot the Russian
position every time when you know that the evidence is stacked up so high that
that it's doing the opposite. But that said, I think it's important to try and
bring an understanding of the perspective in Russia. And one of the things that
I think has added immeasurably to our coverage over the year has been the
amazing work of my colleague Steve Rosenberg in Moscow. He is putting the
evidence. He has brought us an insight not just into Putin and his circle, but
also into the feeling of ordinary Russians, some of whom back the war, some of
whom are silent, some of whom don't. So I think you try and get balance in that
sense, but I don't think it's for us here on the ground in Ukraine to be trying
to give some sort of unreal balance about what the Russians are doing. What we
see and what we see is devastating and the evidence there every single day.
Yeah, you know, accuracy and balance aren't necessarily the same thing. And the
whole point of us being there, the whole point of us spending these long stints
there is to find out on behalf of our viewers what is happening. We don't need
to caveat that by saying, well, the other side say this, if what we're seeing in
front of us is so emphatically clear and so often it was in so many towns, you
know, right across the country. And Katarina, just in terms of the kind of
access you're able to get, you know, how easy is it for you to, for example, get
access to President Zelensky or other senior figures in the government? That's a
good question because I would rather say that Ukrainian, the office of the
president of Ukraine has a full monopoly on the certain permissions and access.
So basically, there is a ban on the interviews with the commander in chief with
Valeriy Zalozhny, because the only way to get access and have an interview with
him is to ask permission of the president. This is something that you want here.
It's getting also higher to report in certain areas like there was quite
difficult to report in Hirsan initially when it was liberated. So those
journalists who managed to get into Hirsan on the second day of the liberation,
like myself, they did of their accreditation, but then later on returned simply
because they were before the president as well. And with regards to reporting on
the bus, it's hard to arrange the access to artillery whatsoever because there
are hundreds of journalists. Right now there are about 186 journalists,
according to my information, who are reporting and there are like several
brigades and several press officers who can facilitate your access. So it's
very, very hard. Very quickly, John. Access. How does that work? I know quite a
few friends from the Ukrainian army, so I've had a fair bit of access of
actually, I was at Zalozhny's press conference. Another thing we haven't looked
at is, for example, the role of people like Tucker Carlson, who says that
Ukraine is neo-Nazi and it's a waste of time supporting Ukraine. He's the single
most watched US cable TV host, and he's talking dark nonsense. So there is a
problem in that all of the good reporting that flows from this, there is a kind
of wider information wall, which the Russian side fight incredibly darkly and
dishonestly. And I feel we've got to fight that too. And that is a moment where
we're going to have to end the show, unfortunately, because we have run out of
time. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via
third party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
sounds. Far northwest of Scotland will see cloud increasing and a few
scatterchars towards dawn. Southern areas of the UK will be cloud.