TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a prison officer? The
Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Wednesday mornings at 9. BBC News at nine
o'clock. Rishi Sunak has defended the government's new legislation to try to
stop people crossing the English Channel in small boats. Charities have
criticised the illegal migration bill as inhumane and impractical, while Labour
says it amounts to Groundhog Day politics. But the Prime Minister insists that
changes, which will mean people entering illegally won't be able to claim asylum
and can be removed and barred from re-entry, will make a difference. Full
control of our borders will allow us to decide who to help and to provide safe
and legal routes for those most in need. Now I understand there will be debate
about the toughness of these measures. All I can say is we have tried it every
other way and it has not worked. The RMT union has suspended all industrial
action at Network Rail after receiving a new pay offer. Members have been due to
walk out on Thursday and Saturday of next week. Strike action planned in March
and April by RMT members who work for the train operating companies has not been
called off. Manchester Crown Court has been told that a gunman was carrying two
firearms when he killed a nine year old girl, Olivia Pratt Corbell, in her
Liverpool home last August. Thomas Cashman, who's 34 and from Liverpool, was
said to be in ruthless pursuit of his intended victim at the time, another man
called Joseph Nee. He denies murder and four other charges. Israeli forces have
killed at least six Palestinians in a raid on Janine in the occupied West Bank.
The Israeli military says one of the dead is a militant suspected of killing two
Jewish settlers in Huara last week. The Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu said an abominable terrorist had been eliminated. Palestinian
officials have condemned the raid. Organisers of this year's Eurovision Song
Contest in Liverpool say tickets for all nine shows sold out in less than two
hours, leaving many fans disappointed. Tickets for the televised grand final
went in just 36 minutes. BBC News. In half an hour here on Radio 4, Jemel
Khalili will be speaking to an engineer whose fascination with metals has taken
her from academia to the House of Lords. The live scientific is at half past
nine. But first, here's James Gallagher with a special edition of Inside Health.
First thing I did when I had lost all the weight was half hour flight in a Tiger
Moth. It was bought for my 60th birthday as a present and I was too heavy to do
it because there's a maximum weight limit. I was way over that and that's why it
was so significant that I was there because I had lost all this weight,
something I'd never been able to do without the semaglutide. Then you flew. I
was flying in more ways than one and boy did I enjoy it. Well, you heard Jem
mention it, semaglutide. It's a weight loss drug and it's been called a new era
in tackling obesity. And we know excess weight increases the risk of type 2
diabetes, heart disease and some cancers. And at the same time, the usual
medical mantra of diet and exercise, diet and exercise has failed to turn the
tide. By 2035, half the world's population, yes half, is projected to be either
overweight or obese. And against that backdrop, a seemingly simple jab that
sheds the pounds is making huge waves. Game-changing weight loss drug to be made
available on the NHS. Hollywood's worst kept secret is coming to a pharmacy near
you. Maker of fat loss drug says shortages will be fixed. Those are just some of
the recent headlines about semaglutide. You might know it by its brand names
though, Azempic and Wagovi. Now today we're assessing what they can do, whether
they can work and why some doctors think this drug is about as controversial as
they come. It's important because semaglutide is not just some promising drug on
the distant horizon, it's already here. There's so much to unpick and it's a
topic that, let's be honest, reflects back on our own opinions about obesity as
well as society's failings. So who better to kick us off than our resident GP,
Dr Margaret McCarney. Margaret, so thanks for coming in. Thank you for having
me, James. So have you been following as closely as I have all the headlines
around Hollywood's little secret, the skinny jab? Yeah, well we clearly read
different types of newspapers there. I have to read all of them. But yeah, I
mean the hype about these new drugs is astonishing. I've seen so many pictures
of supposed transformations. Yeah, and I think that there's a huge expectation
and pressure. There's waiting lists I'm seeing on online pharmacies all over the
place. Well this is the thing, isn't it? I mean, we've had Boots, High Street
Chemists, announcing that later in the year you're going to be able to walk into
there and be able to get it after a consultation. You've got people in private
clinics selling it, National Health Service is considering whether it should
give it to people to help with weight loss. I mean, there's a lot to digest.
There certainly is. And when I was looking through various private clinics
websites, some of them are saying things like, you know, we've just managed to
obtain a supply, so there definitely are shortages. And we certainly got letters
through the post, my GP surgery, saying that there were shortages. So just
remind me, what exactly is this drug? Okay, so I think it's probably better if
we talk about a family of drugs that have been used up till now for people with
type 2 diabetes and have issues within that, you know, their conditions not
being well controlled on the medication they're already on. So we are using some
of these drugs just now in NHS practice under specific circumstances. But what's
happening is the reach of these drugs has been broadened to include treatment
for people who want to lose weight or who are obese. And this is new, this is
different, because when it's been used in type 2 diabetes, a side effect of it
has been weight loss. But this would mean using these medications specifically
for weight loss in people whose condition is obesity. We're going to unpick it
all. But how controversial do you think this is as a discussion? Maximum, I
think it's 10 out of 10, James. Well, Margaret, stick around, because we're
going to chat to Jan, who's taken the drug in a minute. But first, we've been on
the streets of Cardiff to ask, would you take it? Definitely. As you're getting
older, the weight starts to affect everything else, like your bones and
everything, like your knees and your feet and legs start hurting. 25 years ago,
I could run. I can't run now. Especially my job, sitting down all day. I'm a bus
driver. You tend to eat a lot of rubbish. You're sat down in the same position,
so you're not getting no exercise. And then the weight's piling on. Eating late
at night as well doesn't help. He's out the house 14 hours a day. Some days I
could be doing a 16-hour shift. Last thing I want after that is a gym. I need my
bed. I would never, ever consider taking it. It's too dangerous. If I was obese
and the NHS recommended it, I may consider it. No, I wouldn't be interested in
taking a drug that did that. I'd rather manage it myself, thank you. Seeing
something so easily accessible as just being able to lose weight to look like, I
don't know, like Kim Kardashian or whoever it is that you want to look like, is
quite worrying. How much testing have they done on people who are obese, and are
they still OK? Are they going to be OK in five, 10 years? Well, it's a good
question, isn't it? Fortunately, we can turn now to Jan, who we heard from right
at the beginning of the programme. She was on those trials of somaglutide,
having injections every week for 15 months, that given alongside dietary and
exercise advice. And over the 2,000 or so people that took part, on average,
people lost 15 kilograms over that time while they were taking the drug. If
you're still in pounds and stone, that's about two stones worth of weight loss.
So we can chat now to Jan. Hello. Hi. Hello. It's lovely to be here. So you're
one of the few people in the world that has actually taken this drug,
somaglutide, for a little while, aren't you? I have spent my whole life dieting,
basically. I would lose weight. I'd then put it back on, I'd start another diet.
I did all the sort of commercial ones with the groups, even down to when I was
six years old, I was on a diet trial in a hospital. That must be quite a burden
to carry your whole life. And I don't mean that literally, I mean just
psychologically. Yes. I mean, for, I think it was 12 weeks, I was inside a
paediatrics ward, being sort of my food was monitored, I was being exercised.
And it was all looking at, if you can stop a child being obese, then you stop
the adult being obese. So yes, from age six, basically, I've had a weight
problem. I mean, you know, at school, I was very active. I was just big and
active. So like I was on the netball team, I was a house captain. So it didn't
hold me back, but it was something that I battled with constantly. And let's
fast forward in time. When did you get involved in the trial? It sounded really
good. So I was very enthusiastic and it was a blind study. So it could be that I
wouldn't get the medication, but it was also the whole approach to lifestyle,
exercise, nutrition and went and joined the trial. And fortunately, I got the
medication, the semaglutide. So it was weekly injections. Was it working?
Basically, I knew within a few weeks that I was on the medication because I
started changing around food. Like I'd go into a coffee shop and I'd order a
coffee and I wouldn't be staring at the muffins and the millionaire shortbread
and thinking, I need one, I need one. I could actually look at them and think,
that looks nice. I don't want one. I don't feel hungry, which was a miracle,
basically. Was that the first time in your life that it had been like that? Yes,
totally. It was my body was saying, you don't want it. It wasn't me using
willpower, thinking I can't have it. It's not good for me. Or I've had my 600
calories today. I can't have that because that's another thousand calories or
it's six points or it's a yellow or whatever. I went back for my appointment
with UCLH and they were like, oh no, no, we can't say whether you're on it. We
don't know even who's on it. So my comment was, well, I'm on it or I've been
abducted by aliens because I have concluded claim after 62 years of life, I've
completely changed around food. It allowed you to do things that you wouldn't
have been able to do before. Yes. The classic being the flight. I'm Stephen
O'Rahilly and I'm Director of the Medical Research Council's Metabolic Diseases
Unit at the University of Cambridge. Stephen, welcome to Inside Health. Hello.
These drugs, how do they work? What is it that they're doing inside our bodies?
Well, they mimic a natural signal and there are two sorts of natural signals
that our body gets to help us understand what our nutritional situation is. And
one is the long-term signals that come from our fat cells and the others are
shorter term signals that come from our gut and come from our pancreas. And
they're hormonal signals, i.e. they're little small molecules that float in the
blood and are made by the gut and made by the pancreas and go to the brain and
actually keep the brain informed about what you've just eaten and how much
you've eaten. Now, what these drugs do is that they dial into this system and
they actually soup it up to supernormal levels. And so the nice thing about them
is they're quite safe because they're actually acting on normal systems. They're
just turning the volume up to max. So are they working on what the gut's doing
or what the long-term fat stores are doing? Well, what they're really working on
is your appetite. And they're working on the bit of your brain that senses
whether when you're hungry or satiated and they're changing that electrical
signalling in the brain to make you feel less full. And it really is pretty much
as simple as that. I mean, there's no magic metabolic effects of these drugs.
They only work by changing what you eat. They really do work quite powerfully on
that. They make people much less hungry. They make meal sizes much smaller. And
if you dial the dose right, if you overdo it, you get nausea and sometimes
vomiting and diarrhoea. But principally, these drugs are dialing in to human
appetite. And do things start to balance out over time? Because we know how the
human body responds. If fat reserves start to disappear, then that sets off a
whole other load of hormones. Do you get a bit of a tussle between the drug and
the rest of the body screaming, no, I'm actually losing weight here? Yeah,
indeed you do. And that's been what's stymied many, many dietary interventions.
Lots of people can lose weight when they decide to go on a diet. And they do so
really well and they can be helped by professionals and they get their weight
down. But the depressing thing about many of the studies are that after two
years, those pressures that the body's put on to put the weight back are
immense. And more than 90% of people tend to end up back at the weight they were
before they started on their dietary journey. The thing about these drugs is,
and we know so far about them being prescribed for over a year and a year and a
half, as long as you keep taking them, the weight stays off. Well, so far on
this Inside Health special on somaglutide, we've heard what the drug is doing
inside the body and the undeniable, quite frankly, evidence that while you're
taking it, the weight comes off. But Margaret McCartney, you're still here with
me in the studio. The real issue is what happens when you stop taking the drug?
This is the big problem. So the trials up till now have shown benefits for many
people who are taking it at the time this weekly, subcutaneous injection. And it
definitely is a really effect, you know, there's no question about it. But then
when you stop it, many people put that weight that they lost back on again. So
the problem is then this becomes a drug that's not just taken to lose weight and
keep the weight off. It's a drug that seems to need to be kept taken in the
longer term in order to ensure that that weight doesn't return back again. And
that's, for me, a big problem. Is there a health benefit, though, in losing
weight, even if it's just for that short window of time while you're taking the
drug? Does that leave a lasting benefit or is it only while you're losing the
weight? You could see that perhaps if you had, say, a hip replacement that
needed to get done, and you were outwith the weight criteria that the NHS puts
on you, you can see how that might work for you, that you might just want to,
you know, even a temporary weight loss might be something. Or maybe some
fertility treatments have weight categories. You can see how that might be
something that's appealing to some people, even if they know that the chances
are the weight will go back on when they stop it. But in terms of the risk
factors and so forth, blood pressure, lipids, etc, these seem to return back to
where you were to start off with once you've stopped taking it for that group of
people that seem to put the weight back on again, unfortunately. So there does
seem to be a benefit, but the benefit is mainly there when you're using the
drug. The problem is what's going to happen next. I lost 28 kilograms, which is
roughly about four stone. Let's fast forward a little bit further. The trial
ends, you stop getting the semaglutide. All of a sudden I was promising the
world to anybody who would give it to me. Was that tough? In a way, yes. I was
quite upset because the weight was going back on and I had started looking at
food again. I was going to say, were you back in the coffee shop? You've got
your coffee and now the Muffet's calling. They were calling more because those
sensations, those feelings were returning. And to me, it was going in the wrong
direction again. And then there was a decision to have an operation, wasn't it?
To have a gastric sleeve? Gastric sleeve, because that would then increase my
natural gut hormone production. And by the fact that they would reduce half the
stomach, it would mean that I would have a lot less space to eat. So you'd feel
fuller, faster again? Yes. So Jan, no regrets? Absolutely none whatsoever. It's
the best thing that ever happened to me. Jan's a happy customer. Jan's a happy
customer. Well, the NHS does already prescribe somaglutide for some cases of
type 2 diabetes. That's under the brand name of Azempic. So what about purely
for weight loss? Is that something the NHS should be doing? This time you need a
higher dose of somaglutide and that's marketed as Wagovy. I'm sorry, there's so
many different names, but you've probably heard a random mix of them in the
news. Now, all the evidence has been considered by the National Institutes of
Health and Care Excellence, and that gives us advice to the NHS in England,
Wales and Northern Ireland. But they're not considering somaglutide for anyone
and everyone. They're only considering it for people with high body mass indexes
who need specialist services by the NHS, weight loss clinics. And they're not
looking at giving it forever, only for a maximum of two years. We've already
heard how weight goes back up once you stop. So there's been criticism that
obesity is not being seen as a lifelong condition. And there have even been
warnings that being forced to stop after two years could cause psychological
harm. So back on the streets of Cardiff, is this something our taxes should be
spent on? Yeah, I think it should be available through the National Health
Service because financially it would help everybody. I'd much rather see more
education from school time upwards, re-healthy eating, being able to cook
properly, etc, etc. I don't think it should be made available to anybody because
you will get people that might not necessarily need to lose weight, but would
take it anyway. I think as long as it's prescribed by a doctor and not something
that I could just order myself on Instagram because I'm feeling particularly
self-conscious today, then I think that that's a good thing. So Margaret, the
big discussion in the UK in terms of NHS provision has been around whether
people should have it for basically around about two years. Is that moral to do
it for that length of time? Do you know what I mean? Because if you're basically
saying that you might lose weight for two years, then it's all going to come
back on and everything reverts back to normal. So I'm almost like, what's the
point? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So certainly not everybody will gain the weight back on
again, but a majority of people will. And I completely get that because it's
kind of a bit unfair, I think, in some ways, because people particularly that I
think are using this treatment are people that have tried pretty much everything
else. It's not their fault. We know there's a huge amount of weight stigma goes
on. You know, there's a huge amount of blame and shame attached to it. I mean,
it's really pretty awful for many people who are wanting to lose the weight and
have struggled usually for years and years and years. And if you get something
that ends up working for you and you've gone through the treatment pathway,
you've complied because it's not just about the injection. You still have to
follow diet and exercise guidance. You're meant to have a calorie deficit every
day. You're meant to be doing more exercise. You know, it's a big commitment.
And then for the NHS to go and withdraw that again, it does seem to me to be a
bit unfair than to leave people at the end of it. And I do worry that if the NHS
calls a halt to funding, then only people that can afford it may end up getting
it privately. And what makes me really upset about this is we know that there is
a very clear deprivation quality to this, that deprivation is a real risk factor
for obesity. So we're talking about the most vulnerable people in our society
already. This begs the question, if you need to stay on the drug for basically
forever in order to keep the weight off, do we know what happens when people
stay on? It for a very long time. So we absolutely don't. It's a new drug. We
don't have that very long term data. And in my view, everyone that's on it
longer term like that should really be in a trial. They should be followed up so
that we know exactly what's going on and also what's not going on because many
of these people will end up, I think, taking it for years and years and years.
Do we not get a clue from people with type 2 diabetes who are being prescribed
it for that? They must be on it for a longer time. We must have seen some of
that data. Yeah, but again, you know, I think it's a different set of
circumstances, perhaps from weight loss. And certainly, you know, that there are
concerns about rare side effects. You know, for example, it does increase the
risk of gallstones, for example, and in animal studies they've detected, and
it's not human studies, but in animal studies, they've detected an increased
risk of thyroid cancer, for example. We also know things like it can produce a
decrease in muscle mass in some people, which again is important because muscle
is useful as you're getting older in particular. So, you know, all these things,
they have to be looked at really carefully. I am Navid Sitar, I'm a professor of
metabolic medicine at the University of Glasgow. Navid, welcome so much to
Inside Health. Hello, thank you. There are still some uncertainties. So there
are a number of ongoing trials which are looking at the safety of the drugs
prescribed at higher doses that cause sufficient weight loss in terms of are
there any other hidden signals of harm that we didn't know about. So those
trials are going to start to report out towards the end of this year, next year,
the following year. So in about two or three years time, once that data comes
forward, I think that will spur on the even wider usage of these drugs beyond
weight loss. The other big issue, of course, with these drugs, they're very
expensive. Now, clearly the NHS cannot afford to be giving this drug to millions
because we simply can't afford it. So over the next few years, I think some of
these things will resolve. We'll have better trial evidence about safety, and I
think hopefully the cost will come down and then we will gradually start using
these drugs in more and more people is probably the vision that most people see.
Naveed, I can't quite figure out in my head whether it's something to celebrate
that medicine has produced a drug that can help people lose weight, at least
while they're still taking it, or if it's actually the opposite, that we've
tried and failed so badly to tackle obesity throughout society that we now need
to start turning to drugs. I know, I think that's a brilliant point. And I think
many of us have been wrestling with that. I mean, to be honest with you, I would
love it if we had a society where we did not have an obesogenic environment. We
did not have so many dense calories easily obtainable at cheap cost all over the
place. I would love that. I would also love if more people were able to walk to
work, cycle to work, have more activity and enjoy that. But we don't. By 2035,
half the world's population is going to be overweight. So it's a reality of
industrialisation, of cheap sugar, cheap fat, putting in lots of calories all
over the world. And that has fed into human biology of being tempted by food and
overeating. And that's a problem because effectively the NHS is a bit of a shit
show at the moment. Many of our patients have four or five conditions as a
result of their excess weight. And at the moment we pay lip service to it, we
treat the downstream disease and we don't treat the obesity. And that's a big,
big problem. So as the cost of these drugs come down, we should be using them in
more and more patients. Navid, it sounds to me like you want a lot of people on
these drugs for a long time. No, I don't. No, I don't want individuals to be on
these drugs for a long time. But what we should be doing, and it's a paper we
wrote in The Lancet with some world leaders, is that we should be looking at the
evidence base of tackling weight, both by lifestyle and by some of these drugs
earlier in the course of many diseases. I mean, even at the start of diagnosis
of some of these conditions, can we prevent that individual developing their
second, third and fourth or fifth condition, many of which are currently linked
to excess weight, to almost change the paradigm and prevent many developing
multiple conditions at the same time? Navid Sattar there. Now, what we've been
talking about so far is the health impacts of obesity and whether the NHS should
pay for semaglutide. But there is another dimension to the story, because if
you've got the money, you can just go buy it. The drugs available in private
clinics and high street pharmacies often needing only an online consultation.
Now, how this collides with celebrity culture and ideals around beauty also
raises issues, doesn't it, Margaret? I think that medicine as a profession
should be particularly humble when it comes to the issue of weight, because
medicine has a long and very dirty history when it comes to promoting treatments
for weight loss that just simply do not work at best or are actively harmful. I
don't think we've really covered ourselves in glory. You know, there have been
drug after drug that's been licensed, put out into the world, we've been told
that will help you lose weight and then has been withdrawn. So I think we have
to be really careful because there's a huge pressure from society on medicine to
come up with some kind of solution to this. You know, if we're thinking about
the obesogenic environment that we're all said to live in, shouldn't that be
worthy of better exploration rather than expecting individual people to first of
all become obese through the environment and then to accept a medical
intervention to treat it? What's the difference? Don't be controversial. What's
the difference between this then than something like a statin or blood pressure
medication, which are again often, you know, a symptom of lifestyle? Yeah, so
it's different because obesity is such a stigmatised condition, I think, and
it's such a visible condition. So many people have many risk factors that they
manage to keep quite quiet about that most people wouldn't know. But because
obesity is visible, I think it makes it much more difficult for somebody to
exist well in society when there's so much obesity bias and stigma about. And
then you've got a layer on top of that, Margaret, the celebrity culture that
seems to have come with it. Huge number of celebrities loving the amount of
weight loss they've had. Then you've got all the ones that have had remarkable
amounts of weight loss. And then you're sat there kind of going, have they been
taking that? Have they been taking the drug as well? I mean, it's really thrown
weight loss into like the A-list celebrity world. Yeah. And again, it's a real
shame because there's not that element of privacy, I suppose, for many people
that are perhaps thinking about using this drug or are using that drug. And I
think that's again, it feeds into the stigma about obesity as well. But I think
the other problem is that we're not talking really about health a lot of the
time here. We're talking about aesthetics. Yeah, we're talking about the way
that we look and that's not healthy. And I know that there are many people who
are carrying excess weight who do feel as though their life is impaired because
of it. And I want them to get the best possible treatment. But also, I don't
want young people to be thinking that they should use something like this in
order to look in what they would consider to be a better way because society is
the problem. It's not them. So really, we have to be very careful whose problem
it is that we're treating. Yeah. One of the things that I'm kind of worried
about with all the discussion around this is whether it suddenly drives up cases
of eating disorders. Yeah, I think you're absolutely right to be concerned about
that. And I really do worry about the vulnerable people in society who will see
this and they will think, well, there's another way that I could try and make
myself look thinner. So, you know, I think when it's rolled out into a drug for
purchase, something that's just on your shopping list, quite literally, I do
really worry that this then becomes a societal issue. There are big moral and
ethical issues in there. Margaret, I've got a little bit of an article that I'm
going to read to you. I might increase your blood pressure, but I just want your
reaction to it anyway. Is this a cure for obesity? I honestly wonder about the
sanity of our media that are promoting that kind of message. You know, it's
clearly not a cure for obesity. Margaret, thank you so much for coming to the
studio today. There are just so many issues and ethical dilemmas around this
drug, aren't there? And I think we're all going to have to tackle them as a
society. And it's going to get even bigger because today we've been talking
about semaglutide and the way it tricks the brain into thinking we're full. But
there are more weight loss drugs on the horizon. Here's Professor Stephen
O'Reilly on where he thinks we're heading. I see it as the beginning of an
exciting era where we can really help people who have struggled for a long time.
And we're not talking about cosmetic. We're talking about the serious health
implications of being obese and reducing those are really what those of us who
work in the area have been interested in doing. Stephen, I'm curious, is
semaglutide the one or is it more symbolic in showing that a weight loss drug is
possible? I think it is, in inverted commas, a breakthrough, although there are
others coming and very soon there'll be a posse of these agents competing with
each other for prescribing. And I think there are many naysayers who said it
wasn't possible. Drug development for obesity has been very challenging. There
have been effective drugs that have been dangerous and there have been safe
drugs that haven't worked. Now we have a pretty safe drug that looks like it
works. And if we take blood pressure as an analogy, we now have much better
outcomes with people with a very high blood pressure than we ever had before.
And we have that largely because we can use two, three different types of drug
age, which work in different ways and get everyone's blood pressure down so they
don't have strokes and they don't have heart attacks. So that's our main aim is
to stop people having awful side effects of their obesity. And if we can do that
effectively and safely, I'm very excited by the possibilities. Just paint me
your vision of the future, Stephen. Where are we going to be in 20 to 30 years
time, do you think? I really hope we do two things. We need to improve our
obesogenic environment for all sorts of health reasons, but not only obesity, to
prevent obesity happening. But there will be obese people and they will become
ill unless we treat them appropriately. And I think that in 10, 20 years time,
carefully and treating obesity properly as a medical condition, we will be able
to improve people's longevity and their lives and their health. It's life
changing and I feel it should be available on the NHS to people who have battled
with their weight for years. People who say need to lose weight because they
need to have an operation and their BMI is too high. Also, it should be for
people who can't afford to buy it as well, but it needs to be done properly. I
was monitored. I had nutritionists. I spoke to regularly, I had people who would
help me with the exercise programme and what I was doing and steps and things
like that. And also there was the medical side of checking for side effects,
doing blood pressure, monitoring the whole person. That's what made a success,
having the whole package, the wraparound package, not just once a week, stabbing
myself with an injection. Jan, thanks so much for your time. You're welcome and
hopefully this will help a lot of other people out there. Well, what do you
think? Is a weight loss jab necessary or a sign that we've given up making our
lives and society healthier? Who should get it and for how long? I mean, it is a
surprisingly complicated subject, isn't it? I'd love to hear your thoughts.
InsideHealth at bbc.co.uk is the email address. Thank you for listening. I'll
see you next time. Inside Health was presented by James Gallagher. The producer
was Erica Wright. And if you're expecting to hear James discussing how ballet
and other types of exercise might help people with Parkinson's disease, that
will be in next week's episode. Now I'm ready at four for a look ahead to the
world tonight at ten. We're joined by James Kamarasamy. Hello, Amanda. The
government has published its illegal migration bill. We'll be asking whether the
legislation will do what it says on the prime minister's lectern and stop the
boats or whether it will get bogged down in arguments over its own legality. The
RMT union has suspended industrial action on the railways. We have the latest.
Also, the US Congress has opened the door to a ban on TikTok. We hear from
TikTok. US intelligence agencies say a pro-Ukrainian group sabotaged the gas
pipeline linking Russia and Europe. Plus former New Order bassist Peter Hook on
the 40th anniversary of Blue Monday and Alan Little on a different cultural
milestone – a century of BBC radio broadcasts from Scotland. Thanks, James.
That's the world tonight in half an hour. Now on Radio 4, it's time for the Live
Scientific. Here's Jim Arcalile. Basically, I like breaking things. Not my
words, but those of today's guest, an engineer whose fascination with metals and
skill for handling both research projects and people took her from academia to
the aerospace and marine industries to the House of Lords. Julia King began her
career as an academic and spent 15 years happily investigating the structure and
strength of materials, specifically alloys. She says there's something brilliant
about loading a big lump of metal into a machine and watching it go bang. Her
work on the properties of alloys used in large engines, like those in aircraft,
eventually led to Julia leaving academia and joining Rolls-Royce. A decade
later, she made the move back to university life, taking on senior positions at
Imperial College, then Aston University. And it was around then that she was
approached by the government to look at the UK's transport sector. Her report,
The King Review, published in 2008, made waves for its assertion that it was
entirely possible for the UK to decarbonise road transport within 25 years. So
just a decade away from now. In 2015, she became a crossbench member of the
House of Lords, where she currently chairs its Science and Technology Committee.
She also sits on the UK's Climate Change Committee, assessing government plans
on how we can best adapt to our changing world. Professor Dame Julia King,
Baroness Brown of Cambridge, welcome to The Life Scientific. Thank you. It's
lovely to be here. Well, I mentioned in the introduction, you've had an
incredibly varied career, moving from academia to industry, back to academia,
and then to the House of Lords. If it's not an unfair question, where would you
say you felt most at home? Gosh, it's an impossible question, actually. I felt
most at home in everywhere I've been, I think, except that like quite a lot of
women, and actually quite a lot of men I meet, I've always had imposter
syndrome, which is that I don't quite believe I deserve to be here, and you need
really nice people around you who remind you that actually they think you're
doing quite a good job. Julia, if you have imposter syndrome, I think there's no
hope for the rest of humanity. I alluded to the power of science and engineering
in tackling the world's problems. Well, just recently, your Science and
Technology Committee issued a report warning that the government's ambitions for
the UK to become a science and technology superpower by 2030 were in danger of
becoming an empty slogan. Why do you say that? Well, one of the very important
parts of that is simply the shortage of scientists and engineers we have in the
UK. All of the firms I talk to are crying out for more scientists and engineers
at every level, at technician level, at graduate level, but actually I was with
a whole lot of start-up companies earlier this week, and they were all saying,
well, we'd like to be employing more PhDs, but we just can't find them. And that
for me is a real crisis. We've got to persuade young people in the UK that there
are really brilliant, exciting careers in science and engineering, and we've got
to persuade them to stick at science at school so they can go on and do that,
whether it's through apprentice routes or through graduate routes. And we know
that for young people from deprived backgrounds, we know that actually having
qualifications in science is one of the most important routes to social
mobility. So we have really got to address this issue in schools. We can't be a
science and technology superpower without the workforce to deliver that. Well,
Julia King, let's go back, explore your childhood, your education, see where it
all started. You grew up in London in the 1960s, but your parents split up when
you were very young. Yes. I was brought up by my mother and my brother lived
with my father, and I used to see him. It was a very friendly situation. But it
meant that I gravitated to being the person in the house who mended things. So
my mother was very artistic. She wanted to be an actress. She was a linguist. I
gather she was a fantastic dressmaker as well, and that's something that she
taught you. She was a very enthusiastic dressmaker and brilliant at finding
wonderful remnants in shops. And I did an enormous amount of dressmaking. And
actually, it's kind of really interesting when I got to university and you start
learning about composite materials and you start looking at how the properties
of materials vary with direction. And of course, dressmaking exploits that.
Those beautiful bias cut dresses of the 1920s and 30s, exploiting the fact that
on the diagonal, the fabric has a much lower modulus. And so we'll stretch much
more. A property that we now exploit, of course, when we build composite
structures. We exploit those different properties along and across the fibers.
And actually, when I visited quite recently the Siemens turbine blade factory in
Hull, where they make the enormous blades that go on the offshore wind turbines,
there were men and women making these blades by laying up the pieces of
composite. And I mean, it looks just like laying the pattern onto a piece of
fabric to make a dress. So these are skills that you'd be surprised where you
might find use for these skills in later life. You attended a state grammar
school for girls in Hammersmith. What sort of student were you? I was very
swotty. I loved school. And I was able to spend a long time in both the physics
and the chemistry labs, really right through school, and do things kind of do
things beyond what we were actually learning about. I was given a fair amount of
freedom. We had absolutely brilliant physics and chemistry teachers. Given that
you then went on to a career in engineering, I understand that when you're
planning what to study at university, engineering as a subject, as a discipline,
wasn't even mentioned at school. No, it was a very, very good but very
traditional girl's school. And I don't think anybody thought girls would go and
study engineering. So no, they were very keen. I went to study sort of natural
sciences or physics or chemistry. But I don't think engineering ever got a
mention. Well that's what you ended up doing. You went to Cambridge and you
studied natural sciences there. And it was when you started your PhD, Julia
King, that you were able to really explore this growing fascination with metals,
specifically alloys, combinations of different materials, including one or more
metals that give them useful properties. Of course, alloys have shaped human
civilisation throughout history, from bronze to steel to cast iron. Is that
something that appeals to you, just how versatile these materials are? How
versatile they are? Absolutely. I mean, steel is just such an important material
from so many things around us, from the humble paper clip to many parts of your
car to the structures of buildings to, as I say, the critical to our energy
system. It's around us and it can be used in so many different forms. It can be
quite soft and very easy to deform. It can be incredibly strong, depending on
what alloying elements we put into it, depending on how we work it, how we
deform it as we're changing its shape, depending on how we treat it thermally.
We can get all of these different microstructures, all of these different
combinations of properties in basically iron with a small quantity of other
elements added to it. I just think that's sort of brilliant. It offers such
extraordinary excitement and prospects to me. And your PhD work specifically was
about stresses and fractures in metals. And I think you used the example of a
pressure vessel for a nuclear reactor. Yes, I was looking at the kind of steels
we might use for reactor pressure vessels for what was then the next generation
of nuclear reactors. And obviously you're particularly interested in safety.
It's hugely important. There are layers and layers of safety in a nuclear
reactor, but the pressure vessel is one of those layers of safety. And the walls
of a pressure vessel can be around about a metre thick. So you've got these
huge, thick steel vessels. And of course they're inspected to see whether there
are defects within the material. But you have to make assumptions. There may be
quite big defects in these very thick vessel walls. And you need to know that if
there's an emergency shutdown, for example, with sudden shocks to the... sudden
thermal shocks and loading on the vessel, those defects are not going to cause
the vessel to fracture and for you to lose that critical layer of safety in your
nuclear reactor. So I was looking at how these materials might embrittle in
service and how that would reduce their performance, for example, in some
extreme situations. Well, that work led to a fellowship with Rolls-Royce and the
start of a relationship that would then span decades. But you started out
working on plane engines, more specifically looking at the detailed microscopic
structure of metals to see what extreme conditions they could withstand, how to
manage any cracks that might appear in those engines. That's rather different,
something else that you don't want to fail on you. Yes, the same, in a way, the
same kind of thing. The relationship between the properties you get and what we
call the microstructure of the metal. But this time in nickel-based alloys and
the nickel-based alloys that are used in the turbine part of the gas turbine. So
where the hot gas comes out of the combustor, it comes out over the turbine
blades, but the turbine blades are held on by something called the turbine disc.
That's made of a nickel-based alloy. At take-off, that can be rotating at faster
than 10,000 rpm, and so that sees very significant alternating loading, loading
that goes up and down. And that's the kind of loading we call fatigue loading.
And things can fail in fatigue at much lower loads than they do if you just try
and pull them in tension. You know, I mean, the typical example is the
paperclip. If you just try and pull a paperclip, you can't break it. But if you
do some fairly extreme fatigue loading on it by bending it backwards and
forwards, then you can make it break. Now that's a rather extreme demonstration
of fatigue. But actually, if you have very high frequencies, then quite small
load ranges can start to grow cracks, and those cracks can then grow until
something fails catastrophically. And that's absolutely something you have to
design aero-engine components, particularly the discs. You have to design them
to make sure that doesn't happen during service. And you've got to be able to
demonstrate to the safety authorities that you've done your design to absolutely
huge safety factors to make sure people will be safe. And actually, the
performance of engines in service shows that, indeed, that is the case. But as
we're trying to reduce the amount of fuel engines used for the environment, but
also to make operating airlines cheaper, we want to make the discs lighter, we'd
like to make them potentially thinner or smaller, then we're pushing up the
loads that we're putting on those discs. And the danger is that smaller and
smaller defects can initiate the cracks that could cause failure. So you need to
make sure you understand how those cracks grow, but also how can you optimize
the microstructure of those discs to be resistant to the growth of those cracks.
And I spent a lot of my time looking at how we optimize microstructures to get
the very best performance out of these materials and to make them as safe as
possible. So how do you go about improving the structural quality of these
materials? Are you adding extra elements, chemical elements, into the material
to make it less likely to fatigue? Absolutely. But it's not just the chemical
elements. Very importantly, it's also the structure of the grains and indeed to
some extent the grain boundaries. And one of the interesting areas that I spent
a lot of time looking at was that in looking at how things fracture, it's an
area we call fracture mechanics, we tend to look at how things fracture when the
size of the defect or the size of the crack is large compared to the size of the
microstructural features, so particularly the grains. So if the tip of a crack
is sampling a lot of grains, then it kind of sees the average of the material.
And there, if you're looking at fatigue, then in nickel-based alloys, what you
tend to see is that you can make cracks grow particularly slowly if the grains
are very big. And that's actually because of the way nickel-based alloys, with
the precipitates they have in them, the way they deform, means you get very
angular growth through the different grains and that inhibits growth. But
actually, when you're moving to higher and higher stresses because you're
wanting to get better fuel efficiency and things, you start to have to worry
about defects that are of the same size as the grain or in fact sometimes even
smaller. And then the frustrating thing is that those defects grow faster if the
grains are large and slower if the grains are small. So they behave exactly the
opposite way to long cracks. So if you're trying to optimize a microstructure
for them, then you may actually need to... One of the microstructures we came up
with was something we called a necklace microstructure, where we managed to get
thermal treatments that would give us a large grain with a necklace of small
grains around it. So you would actually get reasonably slow growth if you had a
long crack, but actually also the necklace grains would inhibit the growth of
small cracks. So kind of getting a kind of compromise. Compromise, best of both
worlds. Best of both worlds, absolutely. Well, there you were, sponsored by
industry, but working as a young researcher at Cambridge. Then in 1980, you left
for the University of Nottingham to take up a lectureship. And after seven years
at Nottingham, you went back to Cambridge. But in 1994, you made a jump, a big
jump from academia to industry, joining your old friends at Rolls-Royce. So you
were initially head of materials with the aerospace group. Was that a difficult
decision to make, to leave university life, going to industry? I don't think it
was for me, really. I think I'd always been telling my students and my research
students that it was really good to be doing research that had a proper
application, that to be taking the science and seeing it make a difference, and
that meant seeing industry use it. So I kind of felt that I'd been advising
everybody that that was a good idea, and I ought to go and find that out
properly for myself. But I did have one or two colleagues who thought it was
a... One very senior colleague actually wrote me a note saying he thought I'd
taken the poison chalice. I never quite worked out what he meant by that. But I
think it was something he obviously personally would have felt rather anxious
about doing. There is that attitude in academia, isn't there, that if you go out
into industry and apply your science and engineering in industry, somehow you've
moved across to the dark side. Yeah, moved across to the dark, absolutely. But
one of the things I'm really passionate about now is that I think we need much
more porosity between academia and industry, and indeed between academia and
policy and things, that it's so beneficial if people have a chance to work in
different environments and to understand the different pressures, the different
timescales, and indeed to understand how challenging it can sometimes be in
industry to apply what seem to be brilliant ideas when you're in academia
because they don't fit into the way things operate, or they challenge huge
investments in systems that are already there. So making sure our research can
be used is just so much better if people have experience of different
environments. So I would like to see far more programmes that enable staff to
move. Well certainly for you the transition seemed to be very smooth, and it
sounds like you were promoted through the Rolls-Royce ranks pretty rapidly,
picking up an ever wider remit. Yes, and the good thing about moving into being
Head of Materials at Rolls-Royce is that, although I didn't know how Rolls-Royce
worked, I did know a lot about materials. And you gain respect very quickly for
knowing about your subject. Well you left Rolls-Royce and you initially joined
the Institute of Physics as CEO. Now this is the learned society, the
professional body of physicists in the UK and Ireland. In fact that's where I
first met you I think, going back 20 years. And it's there at the IOP that you
take up the challenge of lobbying the government to address the lack of physics
teachers at schools and to improve the physics curriculum. Do you feel you made
headway? I certainly think we did. I think you quite often hear reference back
to the research we did at IOP in those days, which looked at the number of
physics teachers in schools across the country, and in particular the number of
physics teachers qualified to degree level teaching physics. And I can't
remember what the data were, but you know I think it was the first time we'd
shown that typically a private school had something like four or five degree
qualified teachers teaching physics, and a state school was lucky if it had two
with much larger numbers of pupils. So looking at the real shortage of physics
teachers in the state sector, and the real impact that was having on both
opportunity for young people in the state sector, but also of course on how many
scientists and engineers we were actually training in the UK. It's interesting
isn't it, because for a lot of people they think, well why physics teachers?
There isn't the shortage in the same way of chemistry or biology teachers. Is it
because people with physics degrees are graduating and going off into industry,
or is it just not enough people studying physics at university? Well the physics
teacher problem we have today, I think almost even worse than we had in those
days, is because we're not getting enough people studying physics at university.
And the government has been missing its targets for recruiting physics teachers
by such a long way, it's terrifying in recent years. Well just a couple of years
later you went back to university life as Principal of Engineering at Imperial
College London, and then as Vice-Chancellor of Aston University, which is a role
that you stayed in for ten years. Going back to university is one thing, but
this is a senior managerial role. How did you find that? Well first of all,
Imperial was great. It was incredibly stimulating. The staff and the students
are absolutely stunningly good, and were in many ways very exciting to work
with. Some of them were very awkward as well, but it was exciting to see the
work they were doing. And having done that for a couple of years, I really got
the bug and thought, well it's great running a faculty, but I'd really like to
run my own university, because there are things about how the university
operates that I'd like to be in control of, because I think some of them we
could do a bit better. And Aston University, when I went to see it, there was
just something about it that pulled at some heartstrings, I think, because it
was a university that I felt had rather lost its confidence in some ways, and
was sort of veering towards focusing on teaching, whereas actually it had some
real strength in research. So for example, it has a brilliant photonics group,
it has some excellent work in the climate change area, in sustainable energy, it
has a very good business school. It had a number of key areas where the research
needed building up. But it also appealed to me because we were able to take
students from a whole range of less advantaged communities and give them a real
opportunity to go out and get good jobs and get into that social mobility that
we need around so much of the UK. And that part of it I'm really passionate
about as well. Now then, Julia King, around the time that you take up this role
with Aston University, you're also approached by the UK government to conduct a
review into how to decarbonise the transport sector. The hugely influential
Stern review on climate change had just been published, led by the economist
Nicola Stern, which essentially said our approach to climate change wasn't
working and we needed to look at how each of the major economic sectors could
contribute. Do you remember being asked to take on this review of the transport
sector? Yes, it was one of those telephone calls you never expect to get. So it
was hugely exciting. So it was, oh gosh, yes, of course I'd like to do that.
Well the report, known as the King review of low carbon cars, was launched in
2007, published in full in 2008, and it did have a big impact. But I mean, here
we are 15 years later. I mean, I know electric vehicles are becoming more and
more popular, but other things like hydrogen fuel cells probably haven't taken
off in the way we might have hoped. I mean, do you still think this target,
2033, so 10 years from now, is still a realistic one? I do. I mean, we can see,
you know, how, in a way, how the fact that the technology and the cost of
technology in batteries has come on so fast, much faster, costs of batteries
have come down much faster than we thought they would at the time of the King
review, and have now made that really the dominant technology for light duty
vehicles. But I think, you know, there will still be a role potentially for
hydrogen in specialist vehicles and vehicles with different duties, vehicles
that have to go a very long way. And of course, it really also is rather crucial
that we don't just end up with one low-carbon vehicle technology, because the
problem we have now, part of the problem of climate change, is that, you know,
we've got all of these cars, and they all use fossil fuels. By the time we get
to 2050, we may have not just the less than a billion cars we have in the world
today, we may have two billion cars in the world. We don't want them all needing
to use lithium-ion batteries, otherwise we just create the same kinds of
problems again. So I think, you know, that we do want to be encouraging multiple
technologies, and some of them may be more relevant in different parts of the
world than others. Clearly this interaction with government, with science and
engineering policy must have whetted your appetite, because in 2015 you became a
crossbench peer, Baroness Brown of Cambridge. Yes, it's a great place. I mean,
you meet some really fascinating people, and of course you get a chance to
comment on legislation, because we are a revising chamber, we're there to make
legislation better, to ask the government to think again, not to disagree
permanently with the government that the voters have voted in, because we're an
unelected house, but to try and make sure that legislation doesn't have
unintended consequences and things. And of course you look at the House of
Commons, and there's probably a handful now of people with science or
engineering backgrounds in there. I did a quick tot up, and so it won't be the
right number, of my colleagues just on the crossbenches in the House of Lords,
and I think there must be around 20 of us who are scientists, engineers or
medics. So there's a real concentration of science and engineering in the House
of Lords that you just don't get in the elected house. And that's why I think
there is something important about the House of Lords. It does mean we have the
chance to make sure that scientists and engineers have a real look at
legislation and a real think about the implications of it. And I think that's
really important. Well, we've talked a little bit about your interest in
addressing climate change through science, and today you sit on the UK's
independent Climate Change Committee, as well as chairing its sub-committee on
adaptation. What exactly do those roles involve? Well, I was on the Climate
Change Committee, which in the legislation is the committee that looks at
climate change mitigation, which means reducing our emissions, reducing our
greenhouse gas emissions. I was on that from when it started until the beginning
of 2021. And so I now don't sit on that, but I do chair the other committee
that's part of the Climate Change Committee that the legislation introduced,
which is the Adaptation Committee. And that looks at the risk that the changing
climate poses to us and how well prepared we are for that in the UK. So it's
more than aiming for achieving net zero, even if there's a question mark on
whether we will achieve that. But even if we do, we need to be ready and society
and industry will have to have put in place these adaptations. Absolutely. I
think, I think, you know, net zero is is hugely important and absolutely
essential. But I think people have slightly got the idea that if we can get to
net zero by 2050 globally, then we don't have to worry. That's the problem
solved. And what we need to remember is the climate goes on changing until we
stop putting greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. And so, you know, the climate
is going to go on changing at least to 2050, even if we're on this path to net
zero. And it'll be much worse if we're not. So it's not just about doing the
mitigation, the reducing the emissions. We must mitigate and we must adapt as
well. Is there sufficient understanding and acceptance of all this among
policymakers, do you think? I think it's beginning to come. Whereas I felt that
the adaptation committee was a bit of a lone voice in the past few years trying
to say to the government, this is really important. I have felt the last the
last sort of 18 months or so, we're seeing a lot of people, National
Infrastructure Commission, others coming in and saying, look, this is a real
issue we've got to deal with. And of course, it's a very important issue to deal
with as we make the changes we need to achieve net zero, because we need to do
things like double or even treble the size of our electricity system by 2050,
because we're going to be very dependent on electricity to decarbonize our
society. So we're going to be hugely dependent on electricity. We've got to make
sure we have an electricity system that in the extreme weather conditions we may
get in 2050, doesn't leave a million people in the north of England and Scotland
without electricity for a week because their cars will run on electricity, their
heating will run on electricity, their communications will be reliant on
electricity, you know, their lives will be reliant on electricity. A week
without it won't be an acceptable situation for them. So we're going to make
sure we're designing our infrastructure. I mean, it isn't even working properly
in today's climate. It's got to work properly in the climate of 2050. Well, it's
been a real pleasure. Dame Julia King, thank you very much for sharing your Life
Scientific. Thank you. The Life Scientific was presented by Jim R. Killealy and
produced by Lucy Taylor. Now just before the world tonight, let's take a look at
the weather. Tonight the south will see a spell of rain, sleet and snow move in
from the west. Northern Scotland and Northern Ireland will have snow showers.
Elsewhere, it will be a cold and clear night with widespread frost. Tomorrow,
the south will be cloudy with a further spell of rain, sleet and snow spreading
in from the southwest. Northern areas will be mainly dry and bright, but
Northern Scotland will see those snow showers continue. On Thursday, central and
northern areas have a risk of significant and disruptive snow and further south
it will be wet and windy. On Friday, the north will be largely dry and sunny,
but the south will be cloudier with outbreaks of rain and hill snow for a time.
10