TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a potential
risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum story, series 2 of I'm Not a Monster.
Listen on BBC Sounds. BBC News at four o'clock. The Home Secretary Suella
Braverman has set out details of the government's new legislation to crack down
on asylum seekers crossing the Channel. She told MPs that under the measures,
migrants arriving in small boats would be detained, deported and banned from
ever claiming asylum in the UK. The Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper said the
asylum system was broken and it was the Conservative government that had broken
it. Our Home and Legal correspondent Dominic Casciani says Ms Braverman's bill
could face a legal challenge. She's had to make a statement about whether or not
it complies with the UK's Human Rights Act and in that statement it doesn't say
that it does. And the wording is that there is more than a 50% chance that it
may not comply with those human rights standards. Now that's her lawyers behind
the scenes telling the Home Secretary that they don't think it will withstand
the legal challenge. A court in Manchester has heard how nine-year-old Olivia
Pratt-Corbell shouted to her mother that she was scared moments before she was
shot at her home in Liverpool last August. Thomas Cashman has gone on trial
accused of Olivia's murder. He denies that he was the gunman. Hundreds of
thousands of people in France are protesting against government plans to raise
the retirement age by two years to 64. President Macron said the increase was
needed to keep the pension system financially viable. The deadline for people to
voluntarily plug gaps in their national insurance record to help boost their
state pension entitlement has been extended until the end of July. It had
previously been set for the start of April. In general, people need 35 years of
qualifying national insurance contributions to get the full state pension. UEFA
will refund all 19,000 Liverpool fans who bought tickets for last season's
Champions League final. There were chaotic scenes before the match in Paris with
fans penned against fences and tear gassed. Tickets for all nine shows at this
year's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool have sold out in just 90 minutes.
The organisers say tickets for the grand final went within 36 minutes. BBC News.
In half an hour, Janet Street-Porter and Felicity Ward will be sharing their
favourite books with Harriet Gilbert. And of course Harriet will have a
recommendation for us as well. A Good Read is at half past four. But first on
Radio 4, here's Joshua Rosenberg with the first in a new series of Law in
Action. Welcome back. Russia's invasion of Ukraine, just over 12 months ago now,
must be one of the greatest failures of international law that we've seen for
many years. But that hasn't stopped international lawyers from thinking about
how to deliver justice once the war is over. We'll be hearing from one of them
in just a moment, and the Attorney General, Victoria Prentiss, will be telling
me what the UK government is doing to help. Also this week, why journalists are
worried about slaps. As long as we have libel laws making it almost irrational
for a journalist to continue with an investigation, we have a big problem in
this country. But we begin with Ukraine. A special tribunal should be created to
punish Russia for the crime of aggression against our state. This will become a
signal to all would-be aggressors that they must value peace, or be brought to
responsibility by the world. That was President Volodymyr Zelensky addressing
the United Nations General Assembly last September. As you heard, he's calling
for a special tribunal that could put Russian leaders on trial for the crime of
aggression. That takes us back to the Nuremberg Tribunal, which tried Nazi
leaders after the Second World War. The Allied judges shared with the President
of the Court the reading of the fateful words of the Nuremberg judgment. Mr
Francis Biddle speaks for the United States. War for the solution of
international controversies, undertaken as an instrument of national policy,
certainly includes a war of aggression. And such a war is therefore outlawed by
the pact. We now have a permanent international criminal court that can try
individuals for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Why do we need another
court for that crime of aggression? One of the first international lawyers to
call for a new tribunal was Professor Philippe Sands, KC. His idea is now
gaining ground, and it was discussed by government lawyers at a conference on
accountability in Ukraine this past weekend. I asked Philippe Sands what was so
special about aggression. The crime of aggression is a leadership crime. It is
not one which can be, if you like, subjected to soldiers on the ground, in
Butcher or Mariupol or the other places where we've seen some of these dreadful
images. Proving a connection between what happened on the ground in Butcher and
decisions taken or eyes turned away in Moscow is very difficult to prove. So in
short, yes, in principle, the president of a country can be responsible and held
to account before the International Criminal Court for war crimes or crimes
against humanity taking place on the territory of Ukraine. It will turn on
matters of proof and evidence. It's going to be very time-consuming. By
contrast, the crime of aggression has been referred to as something of a slam
dunk. It's not complicated to prove that when Mr. Putin and Mr. Lavrov and Mr.
Shoigu and the top commanders of the FSB, the Russian intelligence services, and
the top commanders of the Russian military and the finances who decided to pay
for this war, when they came together in February 2022, they knew or ought to
have known that they were engaging in a conflict which was not justifiable under
international law. And that's not difficult to prove. There will be issues of
evidentiary challenge in relation to who are the leaders, but that's much easier
than proving liability and responsibility for war crimes or crimes against
humanity. And your idea is to have a one-off court, a bespoke court. What are
the options? You need a special criminal tribunal to deal with it, limited to
the crime of aggression, no other crimes, in cooperation hopefully with the
International Criminal Court, and dealing with what crimes? Obviously,
everything that happened after February 24, 2022, but also, I think, in relation
to the invasion and occupation of Crimea and events that have occurred in the
Donbass in the period before February 2022. At one end of the spectrum, you have
a full international tribunal created by treaty, the Nuremberg type of model, or
an agreement between Ukraine and international organization. It could be the EU,
it could be the United Nations. And at the other end of the spectrum, a sort of
internationalization of the courts of Ukraine. Set up a Ukrainian office in The
Hague and give them a couple of international judges and prosecutors, and
they're up and running. And I think the answer lies somewhere between the two.
Ukraine is very committed to a full international tribunal. The concern with
some countries with that model is that it would set a precedent that could
ensnare them in the future. And that's where I think the negotiations are going
to lie in the coming period. Could it ensnare them in the past? After all, the
UK supported the US-led invasion of Iraq 20 years ago, which led to the downfall
of Saddam Hussein. That was said to be preemptive self-defense, anticipatory
self-defense. Or maybe if the law of aggression had been enforced then, Bush and
Blair could have been charged under these proposals. Maybe if we go down the
road of aggression, it might be possible to go back and charge them 20 years on.
This particular special criminal tribunal will relate only to the situation in
Ukraine. That said, it will concentrate minds and it will be said, well, if you
can create a special criminal tribunal in relation to the invasion by Russia of
Ukraine today, why can't you do it in relation to the invasion of some other
place by some other country tomorrow? And of course, the answer is you can. It
will set a sort of precedent. And it is, I suppose, theoretically possible to
create a tribunal later this year in relation to what happened in Iraq, but I
don't think there's any prospect of that happening. But I think the significance
of this moment is the following. For more than 75 years after the Nuremberg
moment, when the four allies, Britain, France, the Soviet Union, America came
together and said, never again, things didn't pan out quite like that. And we're
now at a moment of inflection, I think, where the very same territory on which
the horrors of 39 to 45 took place are happening again, at least in part. And I
think that's concentrating minds. And for me, the answer to the sort of ring
fencing of a Ukraine special tribunal is it's the same territory, it's the same
principles, it's essentially the same countries, and you're essentially
reactivating that which happened 75 years ago in relation to a new situation.
And I think it's also worth mentioning that there is the issue of immunities
under international law, that there is a well established principle that a
serving head of state or foreign minister or defence minister is entitled,
generally under international law, to claim immunity, and that hurdle will have
to be crossed. But for most of the people who are participants at the top table
in relation to Russia and Ukraine, there's no entitlement to immunity. And so I
don't think that issue should deflect us from the main issue of principle, which
is preserving and taking forward the 1945 moment in essentially the same
territories. Philippe Sands, Professor of the Public Understanding of Law at
UCL. As he said, there are different ways of bringing justice to Ukraine. The
prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has been gathering evidence over
the past year, and a lot of thought has gone into setting up a special tribunal.
The UK Government's senior law officer is the Attorney General Victoria
Prentiss, and she was in Ukraine this past weekend for the Conference on
Accountability. It took place in Lviv, near the birthplace of Sir Hirsch
Lauterpacht, who formulated the concept of crimes against humanity that
underpinned the Nuremberg Tribunal. But the Attorney General's first stop was
Bucha, a village near Kiev that was occupied by Russian troops a year ago. After
they left, more than a hundred bodies were found buried in a huge pit. We
visited on a lovely, sunny, bright winter day. The pit had been covered over.
There was a memorial where you could lay a wreath, and I did so with the
Prosecutor General. And in the church, they choreographed an exhibition of some
of the more horrific photographs. It was both a very moving experience, but also
quite a hopeful one, because the Ukrainians have about 70,000 open case files of
war crimes at the moment. They are very unusually in a war situation prosecuting
during the war. And several of the people who had committed those particularly
horrific crimes have already been convicted. And as a result, it did feel like
there would be some sort of accountability for what had happened. And of course,
that is very important. But it was also noticeable that that was felt by the
community in Bucha, and they were proud of what they'd done. I'm rightly proud.
It's extraordinary in the course of a year. These are Russians who presumably
were captured by the Ukrainians in Bucha and places like that, arrested, put on
trial, convicted, and sent to prison? Yes, not all the trials are taking place
in person. Some are in absentia, which is possible under Ukrainian law. You went
with Sir Howard Morrison, British lawyer, former judge at the International
Criminal Court, and the government has asked him to help the Ukrainian
authorities bringing justice to Ukraine. His main role has been training
Ukrainian judges. Sir Howard has enormous experience of prosecuting war crimes
all over the world in all sorts of fora. He has a very intensive training
session. The importance is not just accountability in the long term, but the
hope is that by prosecuting in real time, you affect behaviour of troops on the
ground now. They can see what happens if they go outside the bounds of what is
permissible in war, and they know that the consequences will follow. Another
reason why you went to Ukraine the other day was to attend an international
conference. Tell me about that. It was a fantastic conference organised by the
Ukrainians called United for Justice. It took place in Lviv, a city which has a
great deal of resonance for many international lawyers. It's where the
Lauterpacht family came from. I know that you've been talking to Philippe Sands,
and many of your listeners will have read his extraordinary book, East West
Street. I was very pleased to go and visit the house where the Lauterpacht
lived, and which is described in that book. So it's a place that is full of
history for those of us that are interested in international law. And the
conference was well attended. The president of Ukraine and his wife were there,
and it was a great honour to meet and talk with them. Merrick Garland, my
counterpart in the United States, was also present, and people from all over the
world. You mentioned Philippe Sands, and he has been pressing for the past year
for an international tribunal to try Russian leaders for the crime of
aggression. Is that something that was discussed? Yes, it was certainly
discussed. We discussed at many levels in this conference, and one of the
takeaways I have from it is this concept of a web of accountability. So at the
moment, the vast amount of prosecutions are taking place on the ground in
Ukrainian courts with Ukrainian judges. We are supporting them in every way we
can, both financially with prosecutorial help. 99% of the prosecutions of these
dreadful crimes will take place in Ukraine. But then I'm sure, and I think many
people around the world are sure, that there will have to be a moment of
international accountability. And the way that we set up that tribunal, whether
it's separate to the International Criminal Court or working with the
International Criminal Court, is very much still to be discussed. This all seems
a long way off. Putin is still in power, his generals are still there. Can you
actually foresee justice being brought to Ukraine through the international
legal order? Yes, definitely. I have absolutely no doubt that we must do this
and that we need to put our energy and effort into it. I think it will be
difficult. I think that these are sensitive issues for states around the world.
But I am absolutely convinced, having stood on that pit in Bucha, that it really
matters. These are sensitive issues, because once you start talking about the
crime of aggression, people wonder whether that might operate retrospectively to
deal with past conflicts. Do you know how the international community feels? How
does the present government feel about creating a new crime of aggression? Well,
these are the issues that we've got to work through. I think it's right that we
work gently and sensitively with the international legal community to try to
make sure that there is real buy-in for whatever system we come up with. I'm
sure that there will be a place for the International Criminal Court. I'm
absolutely certain of that. The International Criminal Court has a place, you
say, but there may also be a place for some sort of special tribunal to try
Putin and his people for the crime of aggression? What we have to do now is work
through these legal issues carefully and sensitively and taking into account
people's different legal traditions. You have a very close personal interest in
all of this, don't you? You studied international law under Sir Elie
Lauterpacht, and you have a Ukrainian living with you in your family. Yes, we're
thrilled to have had Vika, a Ukrainian young woman, living with us for nearly a
year now. I know that we will love her forever, and Ukraine is very important to
me and my family, and we can't wait till the end of the war. Victoria Prentiss,
the UK government's senior law officer. You're listening to Law in Action with
me, Joshua Rosenberg. Almost a year ago now, the government launched a
consultation in England and Wales on protecting free speech. It was aimed at
what are called SLAPs, an acronym that's meant to stand for Strategic Lawsuits
Against Public Participation. Last July, ministers said they were moving
decisively to stamp out SLAPs. The government says that these lawsuits are
increasingly being used to intimidate journalists, authors and campaigners,
stifling legitimate criticism, and preventing the publication of critical
stories and books. But so long as we have a law of defamation, shouldn't people
be able to use it in appropriate cases? Maybe that's a question for the
solicitor's regulator rather than Parliament. Clearly, lawyers must always act
ethically. It's an issue I've been exploring with Richard Moorhead, Professor of
Law and Professional Ethics at Exeter University. Also joining the discussion
was Dan Needle, a solicitor who until recently was Head of Tax at the London
office of one of the world's largest law firms. He now works with journalists
and others to improve the public understanding of tax law. As a result, he
received what he regarded as a SLAP from lawyers acting for the former
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nadim Zahawi. I asked Dan Needle to define a SLAP.
A SLAP is somebody, typically someone very wealthy and or powerful, abusing the
legal system to shut down investigation, discussion or debate of something that
they've done. The area I'm most familiar with is libel. So yes, it would be a
letter which says, if you write X about our client, then we will pursue
proceedings against you. It will probably contain assertions of fact that may be
incorrect, exaggerations of the legal impact of the claims. It probably won't
mention the defences to libel that exist. And it may well contain threats that
try to prevent the recipient publishing or even referring to the letter. Why
would an investigative journalist take any notice? Why do these SLAP letters
prevent somebody from investigating or reporting? Because the mathematics are so
horrendous. So if someone very wealthy wants to pursue a libel claim against
you, Joshua, for them, the amounts of money involved are trivial. For you, best
case, it takes up a year or more of your life. You eventually get to recover
many of your costs, but you're probably several hundred thousands of pounds out.
That's the best case. Worst case, it takes up all that time and you end up being
one, two, three million pounds out of pocket. And Richard, from an ethical point
of view, a lawyer sending a letter like that, a ridiculous deadline, an
unjustified assertion, the lawyer must know that that's improper. Well, you
would think so, although plenty of lawyers fall into that trap, doing things on
clients' instructions, taking a chance based on what the client tells them. In
the heat of the moment, I don't think lawyers are sufficiently thoughtful about
the restraints on action which they should be deploying when they're taking
cases for their clients. And SLAPs is a particularly current example of the
problem. How do lawyers get away with that? I mean, Richard, it must be
unethical. The SRA have indicated that those kinds of threats, claimed privacy,
claimed confidentiality is made improperly, it's misleading. It would be
unethical. There'd be a finding of misconduct if that was proven. The SRA is the
solicitor's regulator, solicitor's regulation authority. Yeah, that's right. And
they concentrate on the kind of what they call excessive or oppressive behavior,
putting private confidential on letters which are not, are using intimidating or
threatening language, excessive correspondence, oppressive deadlines. The other
is bringing cases which aren't properly arguable or in some sense meritless or
spurious or legally flawed. Or brought in an excessive manner are essentially
the problems. Let's move on to what the law should do about SLAPs. The
government has been speaking about legislation. Earlier this year, the House of
Lords Communications Committee recommended that the maximum penalty that a law
firm should have to pay for sending a SLAP should be increased from £25,000 to
£250 million. £250 million and an individual solicitor could be fined up to £50
million. Richard, that's a bit steep, isn't it? £25,000, which is the SRA's
normal fining limit, is very low when you're looking at, you know, well-
resourced law firms. Asking for higher fining levels, reasonable, saying it's
going to be £250 million, that's not what's likely to happen. We know that the
government wants to do something about SLAPs, but should we be concentrating on
regulation by the Solicitor's Regulation Authority rather than going down the
road of trying to define a SLAP in legislation and trying to have penalties that
would be imposed on solicitors? So, I mean, I think SRA regulation will deal
with the most egregious cases, but that will be rather limited in number. And
the kinds of firms that, if you like, do this kind of litigation, will get quite
used to working around modifying their behaviour sufficiently, not to garner
scrutiny from the SRA. Legislation of SLAPs is one approach to the problem,
which may also help, if you like, strengthen some of the resistance against
these kinds of suits. The courts would need to be persuaded to be much more
interventionist than they are. The other thing which I think should be thought
about is taking this out of the court system into some kind of regulatory
ombudsman-like system, which would take an awful lot of the problems away from
the journalists. The lawyers wouldn't be able to shift costs onto them. They
wouldn't be able to tie them up in knots with pre-litigation procedure. And I
think that would solve the problem. Dan, your activities in exposing SLAPs have
prompted the regulator to issue guidance and express its concerns. Do you think
that as a result of the knowledge we now have of SLAPs, that it's not necessary
to go down the road of legislation and that it would be possible if the
regulator works out what a SLAP is and how to handle it, for this problem to be
kept under control? I'm afraid not. I think as long as we have libel laws that
create that mathematical problem of making it almost irrational for a journalist
to continue with an investigation, we have a big problem in this country. And we
need some very radical reform of libel law to stop that. Dan Needle and Richard
Moorhead. Back now to Ukraine. We heard earlier that, like many public-spirited
people in Britain, Victoria Prentiss has welcomed a Ukrainian refugee into her
home. But most refugees don't want charity. They want to contribute to the host
society and, if possible, pay their own way. That certainly applies to Ukrainian
lawyers. There are said to be some 300 of them in the UK at the moment. And I've
been speaking to two of them. My name is Evgenia Filippova, I'm a Ukrainian
qualified lawyer. Now I'm working as a legal caseworker. I joined Just Write
Scotland last November for the Ukraine Advice Project. My name is Zhanna
Zaitsev, I'm a Ukrainian qualified attorney at law, which is similar to a
solicitor here in the UK. And I work with Virgie Selman in Bristol as a legal
advisor. Toby Cullen, a former lawyer and legal adviser. Tell me a little bit
about how it was when you were working in Ukraine, Yev. I lived in Odessa since
childhood. I've established my own firm with three partners. We specialised in
litigation. I'm also a graduate of the National School of Judges of Ukraine. So
I had bigger plans to become a judge. And it was very difficult to me to leave
it all behind. But the most important thing for me was to bring my children to a
safe place. Your children are still quite young. Yeah. Ten and three years old.
And how are they adapting to life in Scotland? They're doing great. They do
speak English already fluently. They have friends, they have schools. They have
normal childhood. That's very important for me. But the ten-year-old remembers
what happened last year very clearly, I'm sure. Yeah. That's not an experience a
child should have. And what about you, Zhanna? Tell me a little bit about the
work you did. Commercial, corporate, employment-related disputes are
representing clients' interest in the courts. So, yeah, it was really hard to
leave it all behind. You're giving legal advice to people in the United Kingdom.
Tell me about the sort of work that you're both doing. Yev? I provide legal
advice under supervision. I'm doing the helpline. I assist solicitors in their
work. So I can do many things. But are you qualified as an advocate in Scotland
or as a solicitor in Scotland? Not yet, but I have it in my plans. I have a very
supportive team and resources to do that. And the Legal Society of Scotland is
very supportive as well. We have to sit 11 exams. Really fascinating. And we can
become Scottish solicitors. I would like to re-qualify into Scotland. What about
you, Zhanna? Yeah, so I'm also exploring this re-qualification path for myself.
Very important decision to make. But I don't want to look too far ahead at the
moment, but I realise it would be a great opportunity for me. But Zhanna, you
were working at a very high level in Ukraine. The sort of work you're doing in
the UK, in Bristol, is obviously not at that level because it's not work that's
reserved for qualified lawyers. It's pretty basic. Is that right? I can say that
I'm doing a lot of work under supervision of senior members of the team. And I
cannot instruct barristers, for example. I cannot advise clients on English law
directly. But I do assist solicitors drafting documents, helping with witness
statements, expert reports. So, yeah, it's a very, very good experience for me.
And Yevhenia, you have an advantage working from Scotland, don't you? Yes, I do,
because the Roman law is a common ground between Scottish and Ukrainian legal
system. So we have a lot in common. Scottish legal system is hybrid between
continental legal system and common law legal system. And it sounds to me like
both of you think that this is all going to take a long time. When do you think
you might return, Zhanna? As for me, I've decided that I will come back to
Ukraine after the war ends, when we know that it is victory and no missile
strikes. I just want to feel myself in safety. And also this gives me a
possibility to help my family in Ukraine, to help my colleagues who are on the
battlefield at the moment. And Yev? I'm trying not to think of distant things
and concentrate on everyday life and just to focus on what I can do in the
moment. I'm really grateful for this opportunity and for all the support British
people provide us with, and especially law firm I'm staying here in the UK.
Zhanna Zayets in Bristol and Yevhenia Filippova speaking from Edinburgh. That's
all we have for you this week, but we'll certainly be exploring the legal
challenges facing Ukraine and its people in future editions of Law in Action.
But before that, we'll have some reading recommendations next, after a look
ahead to our musical love story on Saturday afternoon. Now on Radio 4 here's
Harriet Gilbert with a Good Read. Janet, would you start us off? What's your
choice of a Good Read? Well, I've chosen a book called The Bloater. Bloater is
such a fabulous word, isn't it? It's like a bloater is a kind of fish, but it's
also a fat person, if you're allowed to say that word on Radio 4 without getting
cancelled immediately. And I read about this book, I think I was kind of
cruising through books online, and I read that it had been republished. It was
originally written in 1968, and the comedian Stuart Lee had written a new
introduction to it. So I bought it because I'm fascinated by books about that
period. I grew up in London in the 1960s, and this is set in Hampstead in, well,
she wrote it in 1968. And it's a, I think it's very much of its time. It's a
novel about a woman called Min, who works in the sound workshop at the BBC. And
she's got this kind of colourful imagination. She's obviously got a really quite
boring job. And she lives in a house with her husband George, who's barely
mentioned. He's just like, also on board, you know, he's just a footnote. And
it's the story of Min's attempts to not be seduced by this man who comes to stay
in her house. He's an opera singer, who she just refers to as the bloater. And
without giving the plot away, the bloater's obsessed with her. And to be honest,
she's obsessed with him too, but she finds him repulsive in every single way.
But she agrees to go to the opera with him. And when I read it, it's so like I
was at that time. I was such a witch when I was like 18 and 19. I was a complete
sex bomb. And I would go for drinks with blokes and agree to go out with them,
but didn't really want to put out. And then I just completely related to how Min
looks at men and how she weighs up all her possibilities all the time. Well,
Felicity Ward, what did you make of it? The Bloater by Rosemary Tonks. I
absolutely loved it. I thought it was fascinating. And I think it's again, so
it's 1968, is it? It was written. It's really interesting when you think of
women in the context of the time and how sort of sexually neurotic she is as a
character. And I also really related to that. Every single line has a footnote.
Every time she speaks, she undermines herself or is like histrionically affected
and has these big by ironic reactions to everything that happens. And I think
that that is pretty like revolutionary for the time, pretty sort of
transgressive, I suppose. But I, again, like you, Janet, I understood that
wanting to experiment my feelings on someone and there were people that I were
repulsed by. I mean, I'm sure they were by me too. I was a weedy little rat
child, but I really understand those complicated feelings. And I don't think
I've ever seen them written down on a page. And also every single page is packed
with a thousand incidences. Every word so carefully selected, so explosive, so
dynamic. Every sentence magnetized me back to the page. I think it's written,
sorry, Harriet, it's written like a diary, really. Yeah. And I went back and
read some of my teenage diaries after I'd read the book and they're just so like
that. And I've got all this subtext of these boys that I've seen and they're all
in initials and I say, saw Graham, but what, what happened? But it's obviously
made a big impact on me. Or saw Terry and you've got all this cast list of
characters and in your head, you're starring in some gorgeous, you know, movie.
But actually you're just going to work. I agree with both of you that it's just
brilliantly written. I wasn't at all surprised to hear that she was a poet.
Yeah. However, having said that, and I do think she's a brilliant writer, I do
have one concern about it and that is her age. This is supposed to be, Min is
supposed to be a woman in her thirties. She's married and she comes across to me
like a teenager, a very verbally precocious, but quite naive in many ways,
teenager and very self-absorbed. I would completely agree with you. I didn't
think she came across as a 30-something at all. She just sounds like me aged
about 18 to 21, where everything's all confusing. And also because it's written
in 1968, the pill wasn't readily available. And I remember everything about sex
then was had to be weighed up in terms of risk management. So you weren't just
going to have a simple relationship with someone. It was kind of fraught with
all sorts of possibilities and dangers. And I think her relationship with the
bloater, the opera singer, is just brilliant because she can't stop looking at
him. She can't stop itemising everything about his big white body. And then
without spoiling the plot at the end of the opera, she has to really decide, you
know, when they go back to the house, what to do. And it builds up to this
crescendo. Now, having read the book, I knew nothing about Rosemary Tonks at
all. So I read some pieces about her and I read her obituary and I discovered
that she was an acclaimed poet and wrote, you know, literary criticism. But
after writing, I think, six novels, she had this kind of catharsis where her
marriage came to an end. I think she was ill as well. But then she discovered
evangelical Christianity, went to live in Bournemouth and spent the last part of
her life going around public libraries and taking out her books and trying to
destroy her own work. And so she disowned all her work and she became a recluse.
So it just seems like this book and the poetry and the other novels all happened
at one stage in her life. And then the shutters came down and nobody knew where
she was. Nobody had any contact with her. And yet if a sequel was written to
this book and that was the story, I would 100% believe that that was the same
person as well. Why? I suppose because of the enormity of the act of becoming a
born-again Christian is so dramatic as well. That seems really in character with
the style of writing. It's funny because there's a, I like another set of books
about London written about this time by a writer called Colin McInnes. He wrote
about exactly this time in London, but it's like a different London because
that's West London and that's all about Notting Hill, Hillgate and Soho and the
Caribbean community establishing itself in London. And it's a completely
different perspective because I grew up in Fulham in West London and went to
school there and spent from the age of 14 in clubs in Soho and so on. And, you
know, going to rhythm and blues and jazz clubs. So I'm completely fascinated by
that milieu, if you like, because that is my life. But this is very much middle
or indeed upper class Hampstead, isn't it? Yes, it's posh. And I only ever went
to Hampstead to the jazz club at Cluck's Clique. And reading this, I thought,
well, she's not going to go there because she went to the opera. And funnily
enough, I did go to the opera when I was, you know, 15, 16, 17 because my
godmother would take me. And so I was lucky enough to go to get cheap tickets
and go to the matinees and stuff like that. But the way that she describes the
opera is a very middle class way. Yeah. Well, we've been talking about The
Bloater by Rosemary Tonks. I'm Harriet Gilbert. You're listening to A Good Read,
where my guests today are Janet Street Porter and Felicity Ward. Felicity, over
to you. Well, I have a non-linear book. I have a book called Seven Brief Lessons
on Physics by Carlo Rovelli. And I think that I first got this book out just
because I was really smart in high school. And then I got really dumb. And I
don't know how. Like, I've gone back and read essays from my last two years and
gone, I don't know what most of those words mean. And I think when I'm studying
and when I was in practice, that my brain is, you know, generating ideas that it
can accept new ideas. And so it was sort of an attempt, I suppose, I was about,
it was about 10 years ago, I think I got this book. And I can't even remember
where I heard about it. But I thought that looks approachable. And then when I
read it, it had the effect that great books have on you, where you can't believe
everyone isn't reading this. And you want to tell everyone about it, even though
it's nonfiction, like all great art, explains something and speaks to you in a
way that you feel compelled to want to share it with other people. And it is
exactly what it says on the cover. It is seven brief lessons on physics. Yeah,
the end. And to have such complicated ideas explained in such a simple way, that
someone like me who feels intimidated even by the word physics and reading, to
be able to have access to those ideas in a way that inspires me, I just thought
was thrilling. I remember I was maybe only on the first or second chapter. And
it's, you know, it's only seven chapters and it's only 77 pages long or
something like that. It's a flit of a book. I remember being in Perth in
Australia, and I've lived here for 10 years. And I remember messaging my
boyfriend at the time, who is now my husband, who was back in London, saying,
I've read this book, and I can, light comes in packets and time curves. And if
twins grew on the top of a hill and at the bottom of the hill, they'd be
different ages at the same time. Like I was really overwhelmed by the ideas and
that I could tell someone else about them too. Janet Street Porter, overwhelmed
by the ideas? I thought she chose the book because she hated me. Because I hate
this book. I can't bear it. I mean, at school, I mean, I did the arts at school.
The only science I did was biology to get an O level. Me too. And physics is
just, I have no idea about physics. I don't want to know about it particularly,
but I gave it a go. My father was an engineer, but I'm afraid it was completely
lost on me. And I mean, until the age of 21, I honestly thought that electricity
came out of plugs and that you had to keep socket things in them all the time.
Anyway, I struggle with the book and I can tell you exact point that I got to,
which was page 28 with the black blobs. The universe began as a small ball and
then exploded to its present cosmic dimensions. And I like the black blobs
because they remind me of an artwork I've got by Gavin Turk. Yes. But I've got a
black bin bag print by Gavin Turk. That's absolutely fantastic. The chapter with
the diagrams I adored. Right, third lesson. It's really helpful, isn't it? The
diagrams are really helpful. But after that, I'm afraid you lost me. And I just
can't deal with it. My brain, particles. Well, you could be talking in Urdu.
It's just not going in. Because I think at school, I just so loved the visual
arts. I mean, I studied architecture at university and I've built two houses.
And I'm very, you know, obviously I've written about architecture and design a
lot. And that is completely fundamental to who I am. And I remember at college
having lessons in physics and applied mechanics and all of that. And I was just,
it just... Just doesn't go in. Just does not go in. And I want the world to be a
romantic, fluid kind of place. And I don't want it over explained. Does that
sound too negative? Janet, I think what I think you should do is return to the
book if you can pluck up the courage and read the final chapter. Because I love
this book. And I only did biology to O level. That was my extent of my science
education. But I just think even though I don't understand, oh, at least half of
it, I should say, including sentences like, you know, or phrases like the
quantum fluctuations of space time, I think. Yeah, OK. But actually, I've read
it twice now because I chose it for a good read a few years ago. And I finally
think I've understood what Einstein meant when he was describing space, not as
nothingness, but as this kind of undulating, curving, sagging stuff. Through
which the planets are rolling and dropping. I may have got that wrong, but at
least because Ravelli uses such great imagery, I thought I've got that and I
shall keep on rereading this book at intervals. Because actually, the thing I
love most about it, and this is why I say read the final chapter, is that it is
filled with and conveys to me absolutely breathless amazement at how wonderful
the universe is, how wonderful the things scientists have discovered already.
And as he admits, the trillions of things they haven't discovered and probably
never will. I mean, it is full of a sort of humble awe, isn't it? Yeah, agree.
And actually, when you when you were talking about it, Janet, this sounds so
nerdy. And I promise you, I'm not like a maths or a science person at all. But I
think there is something quite romantic in the way that Carlo Ravelli describes
these ideas. I think he writes about it. It's like a love letter to physics when
he talks about curving space. I don't understand it. But when I saw the picture
of like the black dots, then the same picture appearing on waves, I was like,
oh, it's waves like there was something romantic about it. But for me, it's like
it's like having a very simple, small textbook that if I because I won't
remember any of these after I've read it again, I will have to go back again and
again and again. But they're helpful to me. I think he would agree with you,
Carlo Ravelli. But doesn't it come down to why you read books in the first
place, though? Because I spend a lot of time reading every day for work. So I'm
reading newspapers. I'm reading factual stuff. I read a huge amount of it. So if
I want to relax, I'm reading novels. So what I don't want is more lessons. I
want the act of reading to be absolutely like drug taking or drinking to be
seductive and gorgeous. So if it starts to be too challenging, I have a choice.
And I think, well, I've only got so many hours in the day for reading my special
reading, my lovely reading. This didn't feel that. You talk about drugs. I find
this book quite trippy. The underlying message of it, which is in that chapter
you were referring to with the pictures, is that what we see is not what is
going on. I mean, it's a brilliant history, really, of how we've understood the
position of the world. So first of all, you get a picture of Earth, and then
there's a sky above it, and there's a little person standing there. Then people
realize that actually things had to go around the Earth. And then in order for
things to go around, it had to be globe shaped and so on and so forth. And then
you move into areas about space time, which I don't understand what they're
talking about. The message really, or one of the messages, I suppose, is we all
know that the world isn't really just how we see it. There's a whole lot else
going on. And I find that just a brilliant idea. We know it because we know
that, for instance, cats and beetles and falcons don't see the same as we see.
So how limited we are and how vast the world is, isn't that quite trippy? Yeah,
but I want to read it through a writer's imagination. Well, we've been talking
about Seven Brief Lessons on Physics by Carlo Rovelli. And to my choice of a
good read now, which is a novel called A Meal in Winter by the French writer
Hubert Mangarelli, who died in 2020 and of whom I hadn't heard until literally a
few weeks ago. Anyway, this novel takes place in Poland. It's a winter's day, a
bitter winter's day during World War II. And it's narrated by a German soldier
who's been posted to Poland. And he's part of a Nazi death squad. And one day he
and two colleagues managed to get sent out into the countryside to hunt for
fugitive Jewish people. The reason they want to do that is because they don't
want to be back at home, back in the barracks, shooting the prisoners, which is
what they would have to do otherwise. They find it less upsetting to go hunting
for a Jewish prisoner, possibly hoping they won't actually find one, but not
necessarily. And that's really all that happens. They go out into the
countryside. It's very cold. They do find a young man, I mean, possibly a
teenage boy. It's not quite clear. In hiding, they're taking prisoner. On the
way back to the barracks, they stop off in this abandoned cottage in order to
get warm. They try to light a fire, try to cook some food. And a Polish guy
wanders in. That is the whole of the plot, really. But although it's a very
spare novel, for me, it just reverberates with a whole lot of ideas about good
and evil, about guilt, about cowardice, about male comradeship. I just feel it
feels like a really big book and it haunts me. Janet Street Porter. Well, it's
interesting you chose it because during lockdown, I'd read another of his books
called The Invisible Land. And the similarities are, now I'm thinking, is this
his formula? I mean, he has a very definite style, very spare style, very
elegiac, very cinematic. I mean, you can imagine it as a movie really easily.
It's a very, I don't think you can say it's a book you enjoy. You read it and
it's just so shocking from start to finish. And he manages to convey the inner
turmoil of relatively inarticulate, uneducated, people really well. The other
book, The Invisible Land, is also set at the end of the war in 1945. And it's
the story of a photographer who is crossing back across Europe with a driver who
decides to take photographs of ordinary German people. And you kind of question
his motives. This book, as you say, very little happens. And as you're reading
it, you feel a bit suspended. I mean, if I'm really honest with you, I thought
it was a bit thin, a bit overruled. I thought that the cooking of the meal was
so drawn out. It was so like, you know, I kind of knew what was going to happen.
But having said that, it's beautifully crafted. Whether I would read any more
books by him, having read two now, I don't know. Okay, well, Felicity Ward. I
found that this book was almost the exact opposite of The Bloater. Yeah, it is.
Absolutely. You're so right. It's the complete opposite. And yet they both feel
like you start in the middle of the story and you end in the middle of the
story. It feels like there is a beginning and an end to both of these books that
are not included in the book. You interrupt the conversation and you're off. And
where The Bloater is, every sentence is packed full of ideas and twisting and
turning and characters, a meal in winter breathes very slowly. The language
breathes slowly. The ideas sort of infuse in your mind as you're reading it.
Something I really struggled with, and it's still plaguing me since I read it,
is I don't know, up until the first time, and I'm quoting here, so I mean, I
don't know if this will be bleeped where it says, the Jew. And when those words
first appear, that's when I realized I'm listening to the perspective of a Nazi.
And I question the writer saying, what is the intent on humanizing Nazis? I
think that's what I struggled with as a reader going, so the Jewish person is
silent in the corner in the storeroom while we reminisce about Nazis life
outside of their job as a soldier or the turmoil of being a soldier. I really
struggled with that. Oh, did you? You see, I think for me that it's an entirely
relevant novel for now because I think it is asking, these aren't leading Nazis,
they're people who are in the army. They're just going along with it. They're
certainly going along with it. But I think it's a question we all have to ask
ourselves about how far do you go along with things because they're clearly
troubled by what they have to do. They're having nightmares. One of them, the
more sensitive of the three guys, is sort of so distressed, he keeps going on
worrying about his son. Well, I read that as he's worried about, is his son
somehow going to suffer because of what he has been doing indirectly in the sort
of cosmic way of things. So I didn't feel, oh, we're being asked to understand
and sympathise with Nazis. I felt we were being asked to look at ourselves,
actually, was my feeling about it. I would agree with you there completely
because I thought, especially now in the light of the war in Ukraine, this book
is more relevant because on both sides we're asking young men to take up weapons
and kill people on the other side in the name of their country or their
nationalism. So I felt that I didn't feel bothered by the fact they talked about
the Jew because they have been programmed to do a job and they are clearly, from
the outset of the book, greatly distressed. They've been placed in a situation
where they can stay in the camp and shoot people or go out, find people and
bring them back and then try to avoid actually shooting them in the camp. And
that is just one of the, it just sums up war. Yeah. In a nutshell. It's
impossible. It's absolutely a series of impossible decisions. None of their
decisions are justifiable. None of them are right. They're in a terrible
situation. And as Harriet said, one of them is clearly having a breakdown and
can't cope with it at all. And they're totally traumatised. And then into that
comes the Polish farmer who is openly anti-Semitic. Yeah. And they're just a bit
taken aback by that because for them getting through every day is taking the
least worse option. Yes. And then this guy kind of, oh, it's a bit too
aggressively anti-Semitic. Can I just pick up on something you said about
finding it a bit thin, Janet? Because for me, it's slim, but it just echoes,
echoes, echoes. There's a passage just here. The soldier who's narrating this is
talking about, you know, what he can't bear about this young Jewish man that
they've captured is that his mother has sewn or somebody has sewn a little
snowflake onto his cap. And he says, if you want to know, it's that that
tormented me. And it torments me to this day, seeing that kind of thing on the
clothes of a Jew we were going to kill. A piece of embroidery, coloured buttons,
a ribbon in the hair. And just a ribbon in the hair, you suddenly you're brought
slam up with the fact they're killing children, which until that point, because
it's a male that they've captured, you're sort of thinking in terms of men. And
I just think children are never mentioned before. They're never mentioned after
that. But suddenly those five words, those five words just, I don't know. I
didn't find it thin. I found it slim, but powerful. Yeah. OK. Yeah. I can see I
can see what you're getting at. And also I found the line about the snowflake
unbearably moving because I'd read The Invisible Land and I'd read it at a time
of COVID when everybody's emotions were heightened anyway. I was probably more
receptive to it. Reading this now, I'm thinking, well, maybe I'll have to read
another one of his books to see if they all follow the same kind of format. I
really loved the exploration of male friendship in such bleak circumstances in
that none of it was, even though one of the characters was slightly more macho,
they were all just holding their breath all of the time and trying to figure out
how to get their friend through the next day or the next hour or the next half
hour. Like they were in each other's thoughts the whole time. And it's not that
I didn't like the book. That's where the conflict came. It's like, is this, I
don't know, I found it really challenging. Well, we've been talking about A Meal
in Winter by Hubert Mangarelli, translated by Sam Taylor and published by
Granter. And before that, we were talking about Seven Brief Lessons on Physics
by Carlo Rovelli, that one translated by Simon Carnel and Erika Segrè and
published by Penguin. And we began by talking about The Bloater by Rosemary
Tonks, published by Vintage. And if you'd like hundreds more book suggestions
from guests as various as Muriel Gray, Elaine C. Smith, Peter Bazalgette, even
Carlo Rovelli, just search for A Good Read online or via the BBC Sounds app. And
if you've read a book we talk about here, join the chat about it via our book
club on Instagram. You can follow us at, all one word, agoodreadbc. For now
though, a big thank you to my guests, Janet Street-Porter and Felicity Ward. And
to you till the same time next week. Thanks for listening. Transcribed by
https://otter.ai