TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 tomatoes. And Michelle Hussain shares her family turnip recipe. Join us in an
hour. BBC News at 8 o'clock on Sunday 26th February. Good morning, this is Lisa
Costello. Rishi Sunak says he's giving it everything this weekend to secure a
new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Social housing managers in England will
have to study for qualifications as part of an overhaul in response to the death
of a two-year-old boy in a mouldy flat. US newspapers have dropped the long-
running Dilbert cartoon strip after its creator described black Americans as a
hate group. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it everything to reach a deal with
the EU on trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. A speculation mounts that an
agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow. The Prime Minister has told
the Sunday Times his goal is to get the job done on Brexit. Under the current
arrangements, known as the Protocol, Northern Ireland follows some EU laws and
goods arriving from Great Britain are subject to checks. Securing the support of
the Democratic Unionist Party for any changes will be crucial for the Prime
Minister, as our political correspondent Ian Watson reports. A deal is
tantalisingly close, but it's not there yet. The Prime Minister has said that
work is still to be done and is taken to the pages of usually conservative
supporting newspapers to reassure critics in his own ranks that any deal
wouldn't be a sell-out and to emphasise his credentials as a Brexiteer and a
Unionist. In what might be seen as a swipe at Boris Johnson, who is Prime
Minister, signed up to the Northern Ireland Protocol, Mr Sunak has described it
as the unfinished business of Brexit and has pledged that he will get the job
done. Much of the heavy lifting with the EU appears to have been concluded, but
the bigger prize is to convince the largest Unionist party, the DUP, to return
to a power-sharing government at Stormont. Its leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson,
has warned that the wrong deal would deepen divisions, and a former Conservative
cabinet minister told me that if the DUP were to give the thumbs down, then all
the political capital that Rishi Sunak had invested in reaching an agreement
with Brussels would have been futile. Police investigating the attempted murder
of a senior officer in County Tyrone have arrested a 71-year-old man under the
Terrorism Act. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains critically ill
after he was shot in Omer on Wednesday. Five other men remain in custody.
Workers at social housing organisations in England will be required to have
professional qualifications under government plans to improve standards in the
sector. The new rules are the latest response to the Grenfell Tower disaster and
the death of two-year-old Awab Ishak after exposure to mould at his family's
home in Rochdale in 2020. S. Hiltkar reports. Social housing managers who
inspect properties and oversee repair and maintenance programmes will have to
gain certain minimum qualifications under new legislation. It's part of efforts
to address the significant concerns raised by the Grenfell Tower fire and the
death of Awab Ishak. Officials say these requirements will bring professional
standards in the sector more in line with other front-line jobs, such as social
work, health care and teaching. Under the plans, around 25,000 people working in
social housing will need to gain certification equivalent to a foundation
degree. Any landlords that don't comply could face being fined by the regulator.
These changes are in addition to plans already announced for Awab's law, which
will mean social landlords have to address mould and damp problems within strict
time limits. The former Labour MP Luciana Berger is rejoining the party four
years after she left because of concerns about anti-Semitism. Ms Berger said
Labour had turned a significant corner under secure starma. Votes are being
counted in what's being seen as Nigeria's most competitive presidential race in
decades. Polling was largely peaceful, but there have been reports of violence
in places. Our West Africa correspondent, Mayoni Jones, reports from Lagos.
Nigerian voters are waiting anxiously to find out the results of these general
elections. Some chose to stay at their polling stations overnight to oversee the
vote counting. There were reports of voter intimidation, including in parts of
the southern states of Lagos, Edo and Rivers. The election was postponed until
today in parts of Bialsa State where polling stations were attacked. Many other
stations across the country opened late and some not at all. Despite the
violence and disorganisation, there are early indications that turnout was high.
Millions of Nigerians are keen to choose a president who will help tackle an
ailing economy and rising insecurity. Many young people are hoping a challenge
from the former state governor, Peter Obie, can help break the two-party system
which has dominated Nigeria since its transition to democracy 24 years ago. A
number of newspapers across the United States have dropped the long-running
comic strip Dilbert after its creator, Scott Adams, called Black Americans a
hate group in a video posted on YouTube. The Washington Post, the USA Today
newspapers and the Los Angeles Times announced they would stop publishing
Dilbert because of the comments. Greg McKenzie reports. The Dilbert, featuring a
put-upon office worker and a talking dog, has been a mainstay of the funny pages
of America's newspapers for decades, satirising the fads of corporate culture.
But the racist comments by its creator, Scott Adams, last week have led to
publishers dropping the comic strip. Mr Adams had been responding to a poll
which purported to show that many Black Americans do not think it's OK to be
white. He told his followers that white people should, as he put it, get the
hell away from Black people. The comments have sparked outrage. The artists said
they had been taken out of context but acknowledged that his reputation had been
destroyed. Cricket and England have been made to work hard on the third day of
the second test against New Zealand in Wellington. The black caps were made to
follow on for the first time at home since 2010 but reached 202 for three, 24
runs behind the tourists' first innings total. Our sports reporter, Stefan
Schamilt, is in Wellington. England might have hoped for victory inside three
days and it was still a possibility on Sunday morning despite Tim Saudi blasting
73 in New Zealand's first innings, 209 all out. The black caps were 226 behind
and made to follow on. They dug in on a pitch with a reputation for getting
better to bat on. Tom Latham made 83, Devon Conway 61 and though the home side
lost three wickets for 18 runs, Kane Williamson and Henry Nichols dropped
anchor. England will return on Monday with a second new ball that is only three
overs old. They are still favourites but it's not out of the question they
become the first England team to lose a test after enforcing the follow on. Time
now for a look at the papers. And I'm the PM who will get Brexit done is the
Sunday Times headline. It reports that Mr Sunak's prepared to take on
Eurosceptics in his party and unveil a new deal with the EU on post-Brexit
trading rules for Northern Ireland with or without the explicit endorsement of
the Democratic Unionist Party. In what it describes as a snub the Sunday
Telegraph says Mr Sunak is poised to scrap Boris Johnson's Northern Ireland
Protocol Bill, which was designed to give the government power to rip up parts
of the protocol. Writing for the paper, Mr Sunak says the bill was always a last
resort. The Telegraph says he believes the legislation is no longer necessary as
a bargaining chip. The paper adds that he's facing a revolt and the Northern
Ireland minister and prominent Brexiteer Steve Baker is on resignation watch
after being frozen out of negotiations. Mr Baker has declined to comment. Mr
Sunak has also written an article for The Sun where he argues that the protocol
doesn't work, needs fixing and he is determined to deliver. The online-only
Independent says senior Brexiteers are split over whether to oppose any deal. It
says members of the European research group of Eurosceptic Tories have said
they're prepared to force a showdown vote in Parliament. The Mail on Sundays
says Rishi Sunak has been accused by some senior conservatives of entangling the
king in what it calls toxic Brexit politics by sending him on a tour to, as the
paper puts it, schmooze EU nations. It says the king's forthcoming visit to
Berlin and Paris is being seen as a charm offensive. The Observer leads on a
report that one in 100 police officers in England and Wales faced criminal
charges last year. An investigation by the paper found the police federation
received more than 1,300 claims for legal support from members facing criminal
charges in 2022. It says the federation refused comment. The Sunday Express
reports on a government crackdown on lawyers representing asylum seekers. Using
the phrase activist lawyers, it says several firms are being monitored for
creating work for themselves. The president of the Law Society is quoted
responding that law firms are rigorously regulated and held to high standards.
The Sunday Telegraph reports that Ian Fleming's James Bond novels have been
rewritten to remove a number of references to race. It says the books, which are
being reissued this spring, have been subjected to a review by sensitivity
readers. For instance, in the reworked version of Live and Let Die, Bond's
assessment that would be African criminals in the Golden Diamond trades are
pretty law-abiding chaps, I should have thought, except when they've drunk too
much, the reference to alcohol is dropped. And in a scene where Bond finds
himself watching a striptease at a Harlem nightclub, the audience panting and
grunting like pigs at the trough is watered down to Bond could sense the
electric tension in the room. And that's the news and papers this morning. And
thanks, Lisa Costello. This is BBC Radio 4 now, an international service for St
David's Day. Good morning and welcome to Sunday Worship. I'm Sarah Roland Jones,
the Dean of St David's. I'm in Jerusalem, that city of honey-coloured stone, a
busy, bustling place of many peoples, languages and cultures. If you had come
here in about the year 550 AD, you might have seen a strange figure, a pale-
skinned kelt from Europe's far north-western shores, a monk simply dressed,
drinking only water, austere and yet with a kind eye. And it would have been
Dewey Sant, St David, now patron saint of Wales, who, it is said, came here with
companions, St Talor and St Paddan. And while he was here, the patriarch made
him Archbishop of the Britons. Though some people did travel so widely in those
times, we have no way of knowing for sure. But we do know that 900 years ago
this year in Rome, Pope Callixtus II publicly acknowledged David's importance,
declaring that two pilgrimages to St David's were of equal value to one to Rome.
This cemented his position at the centre of western identity and character and
reinforced Wales' place on the global stage. Here is love that stares the ocean,
loving kindness as the flood, when the breathes of life are ransom, shed for us
his precious blood, who his love will not remember, who his grace he can never
be forgotten, throughout hell's eternal days. David's identity is international.
David's status reflected the relationship with Rome. His spiritual significance
is reinforced through his relationship with Jerusalem. His birth and upbringing
involved a relationship with Brittany, while his Christian leadership with the
whole island of Britain. In this service, we'll explore locations connected with
David's life and story, and hear not only from me in Jerusalem, but also from
other contemporary pilgrims following in his footsteps, and we'll worship as
David did. We will hold in our hearts and minds his final words to his
followers. Be joyful, keep the faith, and do the little things that you have
seen and heard from me. I'm standing in an old garden on the slopes of the Mount
of Olives, overlooking the old city of Jerusalem. This garden is full of ancient
olive trees, they're gnarled and bending over, clearly hundreds and hundreds of
years old, some beyond a thousand, some might even have been here, tiny shoots
at the time of Jesus. In David's time, pilgrimage to the Holy Land was already
well established, and when they came to Jerusalem, those pilgrims would have
begun their reflections on Jesus' walk through Holy Week and Easter, here in the
Garden of Gethsemane, where Jesus prayed on the night before he was crucified.
We'll pray using the Collech the special prayer for St. David's Day. God our
Father, you gave St. David to the people of Wales to uphold the faith.
Encouraged by his example, may we all joyfully hold fast to the things which
lead to eternal life. This we ask through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. One
contemporary Welsh pilgrim, following in the footsteps of St. David, is the
writer and broadcaster, Hridian Brook. He's a resident here at St. George's
College in Jerusalem, where, after many months, he is still trying to make sense
of this complex and confounding city. He spoke to us from the library at St.
George's. From where I stand, there is a God's eye view of the city, and today
Jerusalem is living up to its name. The city of peace is calm, its hum is dialed
down, the air seems saturated with prayer, the sun is doing that trick with the
light on the ramparts, and Jerusalem is golden for now. Splendid and terrible
things have happened here, and still do. If the walls could speak, they'd have
plenty to say. We've seen everything you can imagine. Innocence massacred,
empires overthrown, prophets prophesying, pilgrims from every land, including
Wales. There's nothing new under our sun. Six months here, and I'm still
scratching the surface of this honeyed limestone. Arriving with a bag full of
opinions and preconceptions, turns out this place can't be reduced to a two-
sided argument, three faiths, or a quartered city. It is an infinite polygon. A
reading from the book of Jeremiah. Now the word of the Lord came to me, saying,
Before I formed you in the womb, I knew you. And before you were born, I
consecrated you. I appointed you a prophet to the nations. Then I said, Our Lord
God, truly I do not know how to speak, for I am only a boy. But the Lord said to
me, Do not say I am only a boy, for you shall go to all to whom I send you, and
you shall speak whatever I command you. Do not be afraid of them, for I am with
you. To deliver you says the Lord. Then the Lord put out his hand and touched my
mouth. And the Lord said to me, Now I have put my words to your mouth. I have
heard so many songs, listened to a thousand tongues, but there is one that
sounds above them all. The Father's song, the Father's love, you sung it over
me, and for eternity it's written on my heart. Today in Rome, Father Matthew
Roach Saunders is a Catholic priest from Aberystwyth. Starting on the cobbled
streets of St Peter's Square in Rome, I'm conscious of the millions of people
who've smoothed underfoot these stones of the eternal city before me, many of
them pilgrims seeking God here, many others tourists, observers perhaps, looking
in from the outside at this curious city, so steeped in Catholic past and
present. But every one of them has returned home with some interior sense of
this place. Father Inevant, as we follow in the filgrinful step of St David and
a counter so many others who have journeyed before us this road of trust in you,
we pray for a sure in his simplicity. May we sense you near us and for a sure in
his joy may your light shine throughout us each day. Saint David himself
probably wasn't one of those who walked the streets of Rome, though one of his
successors did. Bernard, first Norman Bishop of St David's, journeyed here in
the 11th century to petition the Pope to recognise David as a saint and to
appeal that St David's be recognised as an archbishopric. This latter request,
which ultimately fell on deaf ears, would certainly have swollen Bernard's
influence in the medieval Welsh Church. Perhaps it also drew to wider attention
the manuscript of the life of David, the account by the monk Rigevar, which
probably helped to persuade the Pope, and is still our main source for David's
life. We can't assume to know why Bernard did this, especially so many centuries
later. It's possible to imagine Bernard being just as interested in worldly
acclaim for himself as in saintly recognition for his national patron and
returning home disappointed. But it's equally true that had Bernard not been so
forthright, we may never have had 900 years of papal recognition of David's
sanctity. The choir of the English Seminary in Rome. Canon Edwin Council is the
rector of Plantwick Major. My pilgrimage in search of David has brought me from
my home town on the south Wales coast, where the church I care for has roots
that trace back to a Celtic monastic college, where tradition tells that David
was a student, learning at the feet of Italy to his teacher. And here in Saint-
Dévie, a few miles from Brest in north-western France, the ancient parish church
tells the story of David through a timeline of murals, stained glass and
carvings. And artists from successive eras have used their most vibrant colours
to tell of David, Saint-Dévie's dynamic preaching and resolute defence of his
faith. Yet the artwork and tradition tells a story that's familiar to my Welsh
ears and eyes. There are even male voice choirs that turn out to be just as
strong in Brest-run culture. And the regional anthem here is sung with as much
pride and passion as here in La Dvan had I, the Welsh national anthem, yet
bewilderingly to the very same tune. Now it might be lent, but rugby is one
thing that neither Wales nor France will be giving up in the next few weeks.
They say brains and brawn, mind and muscle coexist in the boiler room of a rugby
international. But perhaps those same attributes, along with a common life and
purpose, marked out the pilgrims of Celtic times, who face storms of weather and
theology as they traverse the seaways between Wales, Cornwall and Brittany 15
centuries ago. And in our reading from chapter 16 of Matthew's Gospel, Jesus
speaks to his disciples in no uncertain terms about what it takes to be a
disciple. Then Jesus told his disciples, If any want to become my followers, let
them deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me. For those who want
to save their life will lose it, and those who lose their life, for my sake,
will find it. For what will it profit them if they gain the whole world, but
forfeit their life? For what will they give in return for their life? For the
Son of Man is to come with his angels in the glory of his Father. And then he
will repay everyone for what has been done. There is no sound of love in every
The father's song, heaven's perfect mystery The king of love has said for me Now
you're singing over me the father's song Heaven's perfect melody, the creator's
symphony You are singing over me the father's song Heaven's perfect mystery, the
king of love has said for me Now you're singing over me the father's song The
father's perfect mystery, the creator's song Heaven's perfect mystery, the
creator's symphony The father's perfect mystery, the creator's symphony The
father's perfect mystery, the creator's symphony The This is the place where
eternity touches materiality. God is given a geography, a house, a postcode.
It's just that people can't agree on who has the title deeds or in which house
he lives. And on such things the fragile peace turns. We've moved from
Gethsemane in Jesus' anguished prayer the night before his crucifixion to the
garden tomb where pilgrims from over a century have come to ponder the rock hewn
tomb and meditate on how Jesus' body was laid in such a place and how early on
Easter Sunday morning the women came and found the tomb empty. It's an inviting
place to sit and pause and reflect. Birds sing in palms and terribint trees.
Shrubs, flowers and herbs cluster in gravelly beds beneath the honey-coloured
walls. Pilgrims have long walked in the footsteps of the saints, holy men and
women through the ages. As we've heard from our contemporary Welsh visitors to
Rome and Brittany, the faith of the saints and the witness of their lives can
still encourage us today to follow the one they also worship. Pilgrims' outer
journeying can shape our inner journeying and we can find our identity being
moulded by where we go and the people we meet and the practices we choose to
follow along the way. Jerusalem takes all this to another level. Here pilgrims
are directly confronted by the reality of God incarnate in Jesus Christ, the
divine Almighty sharing in human flesh and blood in our mortality, the historic
facts of his life, death and resurrection are powerfully rooted in the spiritual
geography of this land. I find it blows my mind. It can sometimes feel as though
two thousand years are telescoped into a single eternal present moment. Heaven
has come to earth and stretches out the hand of welcome for us to take. Are we
ready to surrender ourselves once again ever more deeply or perhaps for the
first time into the hand of the living God? It was said that when Dewey came
here he met the patriarch of Jerusalem who made him archbishop of the Britons
and sent him home with gifts of an altar, a bell and a staff to help him
continue on the path God set before him. Well, following the story of David I
met the current patriarch of Jerusalem, his beatitude Theophilus III. The
patriarchate is the embodiment of the sacred history. That is to say the
patriarch of Jerusalem is the successor of the first bishop not only of
Jerusalem but of the whole church of St James, the brother of our Lord. This
succession has been without any break throughout the ages. Iobe attitude, we
can't be sure but do you think that there's a possibility that St David might
have travelled from Wales in the sixth century and met your predecessor of the
time? Of course, I mean there is no doubt about it because we have a lot of
information that they used to come here from Spain, from Italy, from Great
Britain. It is well known and there are many martyrs and many saints that they
became martyrs in Great Britain especially and there is no doubt that I mean
pilgrims who are coming here. I have great experience, I've been here living for
more of my life. I hear from pilgrims that when first come here they want to
come back again, right? So what is that makes them to be so much attracted? It's
not the little streets, let's say the march of the old city or the buildings,
etc. But what remember and what remains indelible in their hearts is what they
have seen, what they have touched. Christ the true light who does enlighten and
sanctify every man that comes into the world, let the light of your countenance
be signed upon us, that in it we may behold the unapproachable light and guide
our steps in the performance of your commandments by the intercession of your
all immaculate mother and of all your saints. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen.
Amen. We began our service by reflecting on Dewey's identity with its many often
international facets. We all understand ourselves better through our
relationships with others and with God. All these help us find our place within
the world today. While Wales might be a tiny nation, David still gives us a
place on the international stage. The very first pilgrims I met on arriving in
Jerusalem told me how much they love St. David's Cathedral. And whether or not
Dewey came here, his compatriots did. St. Jerome in the fourth century
complained at the number of pilgrims coming to Jerusalem, including from the
British Isles. Pilgrim, it wasn't necessary, he said, writing, access to the
courts of heaven is as easy from Britain as it is from Jerusalem, for the
kingdom of God is within you. Let's hear more from Fridion. Stopping at the
Mount of Olives before entering Jerusalem and meeting his death, Jesus gazed
upon the city and wept. If only you knew the things that made for peace. Peace
is something the vast majority of people here want. But as the golden wars of
Jerusalem will tell you and 2000 years of pilgrims have discovered, its peace is
not built on a foundation of rock but on a foundation of sacrifice. Meanwhile,
the people get on with living. The women at the Damascus Gate lay out their
wares. The shawarma man fires up his grill. The Israeli boy soldiers eat ice
cream, guns dangling from hips. Rents get paid, love gets made. Every day the
extra mile is walked. Cheeks are turned, shekels given. Grievens is flair but
most are diffused as they must be when your enemy is also your neighbour. Here's
Edwin again. It seems to me that the whole Celtic Christian community, be it in
Wales, Cornwall or here in Brittany, simply took up its cross and carried it
with courage and determination, be it in the face of heresy or Atlantic storms.
And as we take up the cross on the journey of our lives, just like the saints of
old, we walk in the footsteps of Jesus Christ himself. Father Matthew. I
experience Rome as a place where God and mankind meet. I've not long left the
Sistine Chapel and noticed that Michelangelo picked up this point in his famous
fresco The Creation of Adam, painted on the chapel's ceiling. We see the finger
of God stretched out towards Adam's, who symbolises each one of us. Adam's
finger is not stretched but relaxed, as if he's still deciding whether or not to
connect and to receive the divine life God is wanting to pour into him. I come
back from my own pilgrimage and so perhaps did Bernard, with a deeper desire to
receive God's life in me. This is perhaps the ultimate lesson from all we've
considered. Wherever we go, wherever we find ourselves, God will be with us.
Whoever we are, God will help us as God helped Dewey to be joyful, to keep the
faith and to do the little things he sets before us. Dewey's teaching can be our
moral compass at home and in the world and be a light to guide our path, whether
we travel far and wide or whether we rest at home. The choir of St David's
Cathedral now sing a responsory for St David. This is an arrangement by our
former music director and organist Timothy Noon of a Latin medieval hymn of
praise about St David. This only came to light in the 1960s, a reminder of the
long standing influence of David's words. A little bread, a drop of water was
David's refreshment. The choir of St David's Cathedral now sing a responsory for
St David's Cathedral. This is an arrangement by St David's Cathedral now sing a
responsory for St David's Cathedral now sing a responsory for St David's
Cathedral now sing a responsory for St David's Cathedral now sing a responsory
for St David's Cathedral now sing a responsory for St David's Cathedral You are
the source of justice and of peace. The holy city of Jerusalem is the city of
peace, which has so rarely known the benefits of peace. Yet the peoples of this
city yearn for peace. All the world yearns for peace, and yet, Lord, in our
strength and efforts, this eludes us. In places of division and warfare, stay
the hands of those who cause conflict and comfort the victims of violence. Give
to each one of us, O God, that deep peace in our hearts, which is ours in
Christ, that our words and ways will be for peace. This we ask in the name of
Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace. Amen. And as our Savior Christ has taught us,
we now pray. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom
come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against
us. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. God, awaken in us the
zeal of your servant David, that in singleness of heart we may follow you in
joy, in faithfulness, and in doing the little things you set before us. Amen.
And the blessing of God Almighty, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, be among you and
remain with you always. Amen. And let us kiss our guilty world in love. Sound of
Wales bringing to a close this week's Sunday worship, a service for St. David's
Day led by the very Reverend Sarah Roland Jones, Dean of St. David's and
produced by Dominic Jewell. And you can find out more about St. David's
anniversary and his international links via our website. Sunday worships during
Lent are following the words of the Lord's Prayer, and next week the service
comes from the Catholic Church of the Sacred Heart in Edinburgh. Broadcasting
House is coming up in ten minutes, and Brian gets a wake-up call in the archers
at ten o'clock. Now, though on Radio 4, time for a point of view, a personal
essay from a leading writer. Here's Trevor Phillips. Rain. Somebody's usually on
strike, and if they aren't, it's hard to tell the difference, because the
transport system is so useless they can't get to their desks. And of course,
we're racist and colonialists, constantly wallowing in Imperial nostalgia and
snobbery. And then there's Brexit. But the thing is, still the people come, in
spite of the weather, the class system, and the bonkers politics. Strangely,
even many Scots no longer seem to want to get away from us. Actually, it may be
that the only people who really believe all this about Britain are the British.
The best test of what people think of a nation is what they say when you ask
them, would you like to live there? In 2017, the data analytics firm Gallup
surveyed nearly 600,000 people in 156 nations who wanted to move to a new
country. Britain ranked the fourth most popular destination behind the United
States, Germany, and Canada. Of course, these are all rich countries who
wouldn't want their standard of living. But comparable nations like Spain and
Italy weren't nearly as popular as the UK. Ireland, Norway, Holland, Denmark,
and Sweden, all richer per head than us, didn't even make the top ten. People
like us. They like the way we live, even if right now we suffer from a bout of
crushingly low self-esteem. So, what's so special about Britain? Our
desirability isn't just about money, or about democracy, or the rule of law.
Other nations have those things too. There has to be some other explanation for
the extraordinary number of people from Albania, Syria, and elsewhere who risk
crossing the busiest shipping lanes in the world in a dinghy rather than settle
in France, the Netherlands, or Germany, even if they have relatives there. One
obvious reason is that the foreigner arriving in any major British city may
technically be an alien, but she won't necessarily feel like a stranger. On
average, every sixth person you meet in the UK was born somewhere else. And
these days, when we speak of the world's lingua franca, we don't mean the
trading language of the medieval Mediterranean, we mean English. But much of
that's also true of New York, Toronto, and Amsterdam. I think we differ from
those other countries in another way. They accept difference, but they don't
much like it. We do. In France, women wearing the burka can be forced to remove
it by police. Americans don't mind difference as long as you keep it in your own
backyard. Allergic to paying tax? Well, Alaska welcomes you. Mormons, Salt Lake
City, that way please. My own theory about the USA is that if you live in a
country the size of a continent, you can always find a plot of land remote
enough to avoid getting on the neighbours nerves, where you and the people who
think like you can get on with whatever you want to. Unfortunately, if you live
on an island, you do have to find a way of getting along with people who drive
you mad. I grew up in the Caribbean, where for the past four centuries, people
from all over the world have had to rub shoulders without killing each other.
There, they favour the philosophy summarised in an almost untranslatable dialect
phrase, Soon come. It means that most conflicts will sort themselves out if you
just leave them alone. Have another rum punch while you're waiting. For
industrious, impatient Brits, that's never going to work. So we recognise our
differences, but try to minimise them by turning them into jokes. Think Basil
Faulty, who probably wouldn't have lasted ten minutes in a small American town
before being tarred and feathered. It's not surprising that John Cleese wants to
relocate him to an island in the Caribbean, where my cousins will shrug their
shoulders at his antics, kiss their teeth, and light up another spliff. Here we
call Basil's irritating behaviours eccentricity, smile indulgently and pretend
it's a virtue, a sort of warped cousin to accept. And quite frequently, we find
ways of absorbing other people's peculiar beliefs into the mainstream. It's part
of the British success story, starting with the first Queen Elizabeth's doctrine
of religious toleration. I'm not naive about this. Her spymaster, Walsingham, in
effect ran a police state. She persecuted Catholics. But she also defanged the
zealots on both sides of the religious rift and made tolerance of difference a
British virtue. When a hundred years later, Charles II tried to impose a single
set of rituals and practices on Britain under the 1662 Act of Uniformity, the
cats refused to be herded. The Church of England expelled 2,000 priests, nearly
one in five, in what became known as the Great Ejection, because they wouldn't
sign up to orthodoxy and thus invented non-conformism. By the end of the 19th
century, worshippers could choose from dozens of groups whose main role was to
stick two fingers up to the official state church. Methodists, Presbyterians,
Congregationalists, Baptists, Quakers, Diggers, Levellers. Some were very
strange indeed. I think I would have been a decent ranta. And if I could work
out what they believed, I'd have loved to call myself a Muggletonian. Our
tradition of tolerance of other people's oddness has made us better than almost
any other country at welcoming and absorbing the new, right up to the Windrush
Voyagers whose 75th anniversary we celebrate later this year. Unfortunately, a
new brand of conformism now threatens this inheritance of easy-going tolerance,
and it arises from the best of intentions. In a diverse society, most of us are
more than just a few people. In a diverse society, most of us want inequalities
to be as small as possible, and to rest less on who your parents were or what
they did for a living than on your intrinsic ability and desire to succeed. The
problem today is that some people think that the way to eliminate inequality is
to pretend that human differences don't exist. For example, it's now fashionable
to say that race is a social construct and that we're all the same under the
skin. Families like mine that carry the sickle cell gene, a serious blood
condition that afflicts people of West African descent almost exclusively, and
which in some cases, like that of my own father, is lethal, the notion that
difference is all in our minds is just plain offensive. Some people even imagine
that if you remove words that describe, say, sex or disability, then the
discrimination based on such characteristics will eventually disappear. Nice
idea, but if you stop calling umpa-lumpas, umpa-lumpas, it doesn't make them any
more or less real. Trying to tackle the downside of diversity by pretending that
our differences don't exist is turning into a baleful new version of the act of
uniformity, demanding groupthink, enforced by the modern version of the Great
Ejection. We now call it cancellation. The person thought to be the leading
candidate to replace Nicola Sturgeon as Scotland's first minister, Kate Forbes,
is a member of the Free Church of Scotland, a socially conservative
congregation, sometimes derided as the We Freeze. In the past, they were taunted
for having so few grand churches. Rivals would sing, The Free Kirk, The We Kirk,
The Kirk without the steeple. They would chant back, The Old Kirk, The Cold
Kirk, The Kirk without the people. In the old days, religious and political
differences could be the object of rough humor. We stopped making unorthodox
belief an obstacle to public office in the 19th century. Yet today, zealots are
slowly and not all that subtly imposing new tests of uniformity. This new
movement bears, as the Columbia University Professor John McWhirter points out,
all the features of a religion, and a particularly repressive sect at that. What
its disciples really want to know is whether you are ready to bow to every
article of faith, large or small. It's possible to avoid the fate of the
heretic, but you have to sign up to the whole kit and kaboodle and share their
ideas about racial equality, think what they think about climate change, or
identity, or the right home for the Elgin marbles. Woe be tide you if you fail
to recite any part of the catechism in the prescribed manner. I fear that the
United States, founded for people who refuse to compromise on their faith, will
struggle not to fall to the new religion. It's their way. In Britain, the flame
of non-conformism still flickers, and even here, it is slowly being extinguished
in politics, media, universities, schools, and literature, even sport. I for one
hope that the rough spirit of British eccentricity, the awkward squad, of
putting two fingers up to the establishment endures. Stay weird, Britain. In
Shetland, the red-throated diver is called the rain goose, but if you've been to
Shetland, you'll know that rain is never far away. Like all divers, red throats
are handsome birds, with sharp bills, perfect for catching fish. In summer, they
have a rusty throat patch and zebra stripes on the back of their neck, and in
winter, they're mainly pearly grey and white. Red-throated divers have their
feet set so far back on their bodies that they can't travel far on land, so they
usually choose to nest on the small pools scattered throughout their moorland
homes in Scotland. The parents regularly travel several kilometres to larger
lochs, or even the open sea to catch food for their chicks. Most divers need a
long stretch of water to get airborne, but the red-throated diver is the only
species able to take off directly from land. In summer, the best places to see
and hear red-throated divers are in north and west Scotland, especially on the
Outer Hebrides, Orkney and Shetland.