TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Sounds. On Saturday night at 8. The dissident Republican group, the new
IRA, is the primary focus of their investigation. The PSNI chief constable,
Simon Byrne, has condemned the shooting. Clearly, as an organisation, we are
utterly shocked and angered by last night's brazen and calculated attack. John's
colleagues are understandably extremely distressed by last night's shooting.
However, they remain resolute and committed to bringing those responsible for
this heinous crime to justice. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, has set out
five missions, which he says will give Britain its future back if the party wins
the next general election. Among them are pledges to fix problems in the NHS,
raise education standards and achieve the highest sustained growth in the G7
group of developed economies. Official figures show that a record number of
asylum seekers are waiting for a decision on their case, with 166,000 currently
in the backlog. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting for more than six months.
The government is planning to scrap interviews for some applicants and instead
ask them to fill in a questionnaire as part of efforts to reduce the delays.
Ministers say a shortage of some fruit and vegetables is expected to last for
another two to four weeks. Tesco, Morrison's, Aldi and Asda have introduced
limits on how much customers can buy. The shortages have been triggered by
extreme weather in parts of Europe and North Africa. The former BBC football
commentator, John Motson, has died at the age of 77. During his 50-year career,
he covered 10 World Cups and 29 FA Cup finals. The former England striker and
match of the day presenter Gary Lineker described Motson as the voice of
football for generations. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4, our drama series
charting the rise of the Nazis continues in 15 minutes. But first, will things
ever be normal again between Tony and Lillian? It's the archers. Lillian!
Lillian! I've got to get back. Lillian, wait a minute. There's something I
wanted to show you. Sorry, but I don't have time right now. So when will you?
Did you have your chat with Mum? Yes. What was it about? Well, if you must know,
I was here on behalf of Alice and Kate who are making the funeral arrangements
and need to know how we're all planning to get there. Well, that's all sorted.
Mum, you and me and Pat can all travel together. Actually, Tony, the way things
are at the moment, I'd rather travel in a separate car. What? I've explained to
Mum and she's in agreement that I'll go with Lillian James and she will go with
you and Pat in another car. Is this really necessary? Yes, I feel it is. Can't
we show a united front for one day? For Jennifer's sake, she would have wanted
us to. Please don't tell me what Jenny would have wanted. Lillian! I know full
well the last thing she would have wanted was for any of us to be upset or to
upset Mum on the way to her funeral. Now, if you'll excuse me. It doesn't have
to be like this, Lillian. I'm truly grateful to you for making the time. Of
course, David. Although you're about to start carving soon, aren't you? Any
minute, yeah. Linda! Oh, Ardell, good morning. Morning. Just a quick reminder.
Sorry, I'm running late. I have a parcel arriving today between 1 and 3pm. Not
to worry, one of us will be here. Great, thanks. Better dash? Ardell? Yes? Don't
forget the packed lunch you requested. It's on the hall table, fully labelled.
Of course, will do. Thanks. Wow. You make your guests a packed lunch. Is that a
thing? Certainly not something we've factored in. Well, if you mean, is it a
regular service? Then no. But given enough notice, I don't mind. Ardell is an
exception, of course. He's been here so long. It's less of a B&B and more of a
home to him now. Wow. It really is the full experience here. Don't be
disheartened, David. Ambrich Hall is a high-end, long-established outfit. You
really can't compare yourselves to us. No. I see that. Anyway, as we were
saying, you seem to have all the right fire and safety measures in place. Tea-
making facilities in the room itself, which is vital. Now, I see that your room
doesn't have an en suite. Yes. We have the shared bathroom, which has been given
a freshen up. Mum has the en suite, so that's one less person using the
bathroom. And Ben Ruth and I have decided that we'll try and use the downstairs
lid as much as possible. Hmm. Not ideal, but needs must. It's imperative you
make it clear to anyone interested in booking that the bathroom is shared. Oh,
of course, yes. No, it's more any last-minute snags or issues we may not
initially have thought of that I was hoping to get some ideas about. David, I
can't know what would be required or best suited to Brookfield, even with my
extensive experience and success rate, unless I see it for myself. You mean
visit? Yes. I could squeeze you in at some point this afternoon. But the main
reason I'm asking is to help Ben. Remember, it's his venture now. In which case
I will definitely find some time to visit today and cast a final eye over
everything. We'll most likely be with the cows, Linda, and I wanted to save you
any trouble by coming here. David, do you want Ben to make a success of this or
not? Yes. Good. I'll see you later. These adjustments to the architect's
drawings are very good, Roy. She's managed to get the square footage we were
losing into the suites on the perimeter. Yeah. Is she out on site? Yes. She's
gone walkabout with Peter. They'll discuss materials and costing, which I don't
need to be involved in. I'm sorry I've got my timings muddled up, Ardiall. I
should have been here when she arrived. Don't worry. Peter was on site, and
Andrea's no shrinking violet. If we're not about, she gets stuck in and makes
use of the time. If one of us can be here in future, though... I'll make sure
I'm here next time. I would have been here myself, only I was waylaid on calls
this morning. Everything okay? Yes, fine. Just my sister and her kids doing my
head in. Oh, right, you two. Why? Who's been bugging you? Oh, don't get me
started. Not your neighbour again. Yep. This is the man who lost his wife
recently. I mean, I feel for him, honestly. Once upon a time, he was family. But
he's taken me and Kirsty at our word, and now he's popping around all the time.
He was over last night for dinner, brought a shepherd's pie and some posh wine.
That's nice. Only Kirsty's right. He does love the sound of his own voice, and
once he's got some wine in him, it's like he picks a topic from the news and
just rants about it, like he knows all there is to know. Oh. And when he finally
stops, Kirsty and me self have to think of something to say that doesn't
unintentionally come out as being insensitive. Oh, it's a minefield, Ardill.
Now, I do understand the most innocent common can seem offensive or hurtful to
someone who's suffered a tragic loss. And, well, I'm known for putting me foot
in it, so the whole thing just makes me nervous. So stop inviting him over.
Simple. We can't, because it's the right thing to do, isn't it? Not if you don't
mean it. We do, sort of. Just, I mean, his family's always calling round to
check in on him, and he says he hates it. Makes him feel like he's being
babysat. I reckon he keeps coming over to ours to avoid the family checking in.
Well, that doesn't sound too bad. As soon as things settle, he'll get back to
his new norm. And now he's invited me and Kirsty round to dinner tomorrow night
to thank us for the dinner he brought us last night. So decline. So another
awkward night on the couch for me and Kirsty. Roy, you've just spent ages
moaning about the guy. Why on earth would you accept a dinner invitation?
Because? The right thing to do has to come with the right intention. Otherwise,
it's hypocrisy. Hello. We'll be right out. We need it outside. Can I give you a
hand with that? Oh, you're all right, Lee. I should look where I put things.
Here, let me sweep up the soil. You put the trays back. Everything okay? No. A
case of more hay's less speed. Planted the broad beads and then I go and knock
the trays over. Did your accidents happen? This was avoidable. Have you spoken
to Helen today? Oh, as a matter of fact, I have and she seemed very happy. Did
she? Well, I'll tell you, Tony, since I switched my perspective on the whole
situation with the girls, it's like this massive weight's been lifted. Okay,
California's a long way away, but we can all still talk as often as we can
online and they can come here and maybe Helen and I can take the boys over
there. Oh, that's great news, Lee. Yeah. And I wanted to say thanks, Tony. For
what? If it hadn't been for your sound reasoning, I'd still be moping about
thinking Helen wanted to get rid of me. You are very welcome. If only everyone
was open to a little sound reasoning. Is this about Lillian? Afraid so. She'll
come round, surely. Oh, you don't know my sister. She's as stubborn as a mule.
Linda! No, there's no need to be alarmed. Hope you don't mind. I'll let myself
in. Now, there are many things here that need addressing. You're not going to
step into this kitchen in those boots, are you? Yeah, of course I'm going to
remove my boots, but, you know, this is a working farm. And our guests will know
that comes with all the reality of a working farm. Oh, no, no, no, David. That's
a rookie mistake. Your guests want to experience their idea of farming, not the
stark, smelly, muddy reality. Smelly? Yes, there is a distinct odour life in
here that's a little too close to reality for my liking. Well, with all due
respect, you're not our guest, so your liking doesn't really... I have come to
help, remember. Now, I don't see a space for the guests when they're not in
their room. Please tell me they're not expected to be in here. No, we cleared
the dining room for them. Well, yes, you may think you have, but you'll need a
television in there. They can have breakfast without watching telly, surely. Or
you could install a television in the room. And you may wish to consider a
cleaner. Linda, we want to make money from this venture, not fritter it away.
Right. That's it. What? Clearly, you have no idea what it's like to have a real
live guest staying at your B&B. And I cannot, in all good conscience, let you
loose on the world of bed and breakfasting without a trial run of this place. I
will be making a booking and staying here in row as a guest tomorrow night. Oh,
no, no, no, no. I'm sure that's not necessary. We've got your notes. David,
learn not to look a gift horse in the mouth. And please address these matters
before I arrive. You sure you don't want to share this? No, thanks. I've got my
packed lunch. We'll take a quick half hour and then get back out there with
Andrea before she heads back to London. Sure. OK. Ardile? Yeah? I'm sorry if my
going on about Brian upset you. It's just... I'm sorry. Don't worry about it.
Right. Good. Only I didn't mean to. Look, if you want to feel sorry for him,
then feel sorry for him. If you want to moan about him, then moan. But doing
both is crazy. You're complaining about him for taking you and Kirsty at your
word. Yeah, you're right. I bet he sleeps in your armchair with the television
on because it makes him feel normal. How do you think he'd feel if he could hear
you now? Yeah, I'm an awful person. It's probably the only real sleep he has
right now. Yeah, of course. And I'm sorry again if I've spoken out of tone. Roy,
stop apologizing. Sorry. I lost someone. Close. A few years ago. It's bad enough
you're going through hell. The last thing you need is people being insincere and
offering fake support. So that's two taster sessions and anything for the boys.
Oh, they'll be with Helen. I'm getting some quality time in with my girls before
they leave. Well, they'll have a wonderful time with the horses. I can see that
Evie's already taken to one of the ponies. She's not stopped stroking them since
we arrived. Looks like she's a natural. Is she the youngest? Evie, yeah. Or will
Alice be taking the lesson? Well, it'll depend on the rotor, but we have a
lovely team here, animals and stuff. Honestly, they'll be fine. I'm sure. I just
wondered. Perhaps if they come back for longer visit, you could book some
lessons for them. We'll see. Oh, you don't sound too sure. Actually, they're
about to move abroad with their mum. Move? You mean permanently? Yes. So, I
don't quite know how it's going to work once they're settled. I want to make the
most of the time I've got with them while they're here. Good plan. It's going to
be such a wrench when they leave. I can imagine. We never know what tomorrow
brings, so we may as well make the most of today. I'm sorry, Lillian, if I'm
speaking out of turn. I was so sad to hear about your sister. But for the life
of me, I can't think why you'd want to make more distance between you and your
brother at a time like this. Lee, I know you mean well, but... He's hurting,
Lillian, because of Jennifer's death and because of the distance between you
two, when you could be closer than ever. It's not always that easy. It is if you
let it be. I'm sorry, I know it's not my place. But we should make the most of
the present while we still can. If a sudden loss doesn't teach us that, then
what does it teach us? And there's a real character coming to stay at Brookfield
in this evening's archers at 7. And before that, in our 6.30 comedy, we'll be
observing everyday life through the lens of another character who's rather well
known to us here at Radio 4. The master of satire David Sederis is back with his
unique blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of
themselves at funerals, because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the
third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been studying
Japanese. And I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you know that this
is how you say? And he says, we're only going for four days. A new series of
Meet David Sederis starts this evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And if
you missed David's recent appearance on Desert Island Discs, you can find that
on BBC Sounds. Well worth a listen. Now on Radio 4 we continue with our drama
series, Nazis, the Road to Power. Based on extensive research from documents and
diaries of key witnesses, this is the story of the rise of the Nazis under Adolf
Hitler, an unknown army corporal at the end of the First World War, who within
13 years would become Chancellor of all Germany. Father! Father! Quick, quick!
Come on! Bruno! Go! Go! Go get them! We really do need... The fact is,
Schleicher, I'm getting the blame for all this and I don't like it. This? This
so called... What do you call it? Deflation, Father. Yes, there's no money.
Everyone's getting poorer. I mean, only governors, long as my father, signs
decrees each time. Yeah, they're jumping all over me. It's not your fault.
President, the new Chancellor has no support in Parliament. If it's not to be
your decrees, we must enable him to form a coalition. A bit of national unity,
General Gammy. That's what the country needs. And the Nazis are now the largest
party in Parliament. Yeah, Hitler's lot. They all bang on to any speeches.
Frankly, best job for him is postmaster. Sir... So he can lift me from behind on
my stamps. Father, may I approach her Hitler then? She's like a good god. We
simply cannot allow that man anywhere near government. He's nothing more than a
carnival barter. Sir, to be blunt, either he takes the blame or you do. If you
spoke to him, you might convince him to join the government. Charming idea, but
how do you shut the man up? How has he went on last time? You think he manned
the entire Western Front? You ask him to come with someone like Strasser. He
talks sense. And maybe with some words from you, soldier to soldier, he would
join the government as vice chancellor. Germany, the shame of it. Nazis, the
road to power. Part seven. Hitler, whatever happened to him? The elections in
July 1932 made the Nazi party the largest in Parliament. 230 out of 600 seats.
But still short of a governing majority, and with no other party willing to join
them in coalition. The new chancellor, Franz von Pappen, a one-time diplomat,
has been installed as chancellor by General Schleicher, the army minister. Look
at them out there. They've come to see history. Hope to God they will, Herr
Donner. Tom, please. Since 28, I've been Bieferbroek's man in Berlin. Hitler's
going to walk out in an hour or so, our new vice chancellor. Fact is, with
perfect German, but no family connections, no private income, and a second-class
degree, I knew I had a much better chance as a newspaperman than a diplomat.
He's turned you down before. But look what's happened since. All the state
elections, the Nazi vote is going south. They've peaked, and he knows it, and he
knows we know it. This is his last bloody chance. And I've put in the hard
yards, greasing up to Ernst Röhm, boss of Hitler's storm detachment. And it's
Röhm who gets me in with his old muckerschleicher, which is how I come to be in
Schleicher's office, watching Adolf Hitler arrive to meet the president.
Shouldn't you be in there, General, steering negotiations? Pappen will keep an
eye on the president for me. And Meissner, can you trust him? The president's
chief of staff is a civil servant. Duty before opinion. And the son? Is he in
there too? Young Oscar? As if this country doesn't have enough problems. That's
not for quotation. Sorry, Tom. Please, sit down, sit down. Let's talk, you and
me, shall we? Like old comrades. Otto, will you take notes? Sir. You know the
chancellor here, von Pappen, and this is...? My party manager, Herr Strasser.
Your Excellency, if I may, our expectations are modest. Chancellorship for Herr
Hitler, interior ministry for Frick, air ministry for Göring, labour ministry
for... well, me. And a new ministry for the people's education for Dr Goebbels.
Herr Hitler, we really must all pass on the clock. I also require the post of
the Minister for Prussia. Non-negotiable. Might I suggest instead, Herr Hitler,
I'm only empowered. We would be honoured if you joined my government as a vice-
chancellor. Again, why should the leader of the strongest party in parliament
subordinate himself to you as chancellor? Because you are unable to form a
parliamentary coalition. Surely, sir, you don't intend to remain permanently in
opposition. Given the status of the National Socialist Movement, gaining 37% of
the vote... Almost twice as many as any other party. I have no option but to
demand full leadership of the government. I must be chancellor. Forgive me,
but... in front of God, my conscience and my country. I cannot justify giving
the part of government to a party that is openly inimical towards those who are
different. He's been listening to the Jews again, Gregor. His excellency has
wide responsibilities. Yes, Hitler, if I may. You and I were old battle comrades
and I wishes to remain so. For the moment, may I simply request that your
opposition is conducted with courtesy, with chivalry. Here he comes. Oh, my God,
it's not even been half an hour. It doesn't look too chipper. He certainly
doesn't look like a vice-chancellor. Excuse me, General. I have been lured into
a trap. They... they... they... Drag me in here, in front of everyone, and we're
never gonna walk on me more than this. It's grotesque! Grotesque! It's over for
the president. Over. We'll bring him down. Stupid old man. Chief, come on, let's
get to our... Never sell my birthright for a mess of potage. Never, never. Our
opposition will be implacable, look ruthless, resolute. And the outcome, the
blame, will not be ours, adults. No, they have brought this on themselves. Sir,
sir, sir, any comment for the British press? No, Delma, how did you... No,
Delma, how did you... For the Daily Express? Hey, Hitler, you don't have to...
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes, write this down, Delma. The question is not
whether we shall march on Berlin, but rather who has to march out of Berlin. Why
should I march on Berlin when I'm already here? I only need two years.
Quotation? Do you have a background again? Sorry. People only vote for the
National Socialists out of despair. That's a lot of despair. You've seen it. On
the streets, beggars everywhere, professors begging. But it's getting better. In
two years with a strong economy, the Nazis will be unthinkable. And until
then... The president must suspend the Constitution. We have to talk him round
this time. We must end party rule once and for all, Your Excellency. At the
election, sir, more than half the electorate voted for parties who stand to
dismantle the Weimar Republic. Bruno! I can guarantee the army will see off any
trouble from the left. Bruno, heel! Oh, good boy. We require your decree
dissolving the parliament. Already signed. Use it when you want. But we must
also postpone the elections beyond the 60-day limit. We have council's opinion,
sir. Article 42 of the Constitution clearly states the president's duty to
preserve the German people from half. Which, in these circumstances, overrides
the mandated 60 days. If you decreed, sir. Do I have a choice? Come on, Bruno.
Inside. Work to do. So Pappen and Schleicher are ready when the next session of
parliament opens. But... Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, I insist. Mr Speaker, a point
of order. The member for the Communist Party has the floor. With Goering now
elected Speaker, Herman Goering. We move an immediate vote of no confidence in
the government. Any objections? If there are no objections, I shall proceed with
the votes on the motion from the KPD. I have here a motion of no confidence.
Does any member have a point of order? No? We go to the votes. Sir, the
Chancellor of Germany demands to exercise his right to support the country. The
vote is underway, I'm afraid. No, Mr Speaker. I have here a decree signed by the
President. We are currency- We are currency- Yes, and now! With the vote of no
confidence. Sir! Sir! Sir! Stress is organising the Nazis to vote with the
Communists. Christ! Happens got to get a vote on the dissolution decree first.
The government! The government is defeated by 522 votes to 42. With five
abstentions and one spoiled balance. Also, I have just received this dissolution
order from the Chancellor. Unfortunately, the government has already fallen, so
the order is definitionally invalid. Look at them. That smirk on God was his
food. We can hardly declare a national emergency now. Looks like one to me.
What's 60 days? 6th November. Elections on the 6th November, then, gentlemen.
Hitler will get a majority this time. Let's see. I have a sense that our
National Socialist friends have lost their mystic aura. They're short of money,
the start of the war, and the end of the war. They're short of money, the storm
crew is a hacked off, they're losing party members. No, no, no! I have no desire
to become a minister by grace of some aristocrat. Would you care to join my
cabinet of barons? No! If God wanted things to be like that, we'd have all have
been born with monocles. See this? Told you. Nuremberg, the festival hall, look,
half full. No, half empty. The only political outcome I seek is leadership
itself. True power. And we National Socialists have a holy right to it. We now
realise that Hitler is simply another misguided fanatic, the kind to overreach
and achieve nothing, a falling star in the November fog. See, Tom, he's
downfall. I have chosen this path and will follow it to the very end. A man like
me may die. A man like me can be beaten to death. But a man like me cannot heal.
And look, he's back on the Jews. And who wrote their pattern's economic
manifesto? Jakob Goldschmidt, yes, either the German people will escape from the
clutches of the Jews or we will degenerate into nothing. Show this is desperate.
They can't muster those huge crowds anymore. Capitulation? I do not know the
meaning of the word. The 6th of November and the votes are counted. Two million
less than last time for the National Socialists. The Nazi vote is down and
they've lost 34 seats in Parliament. But Schleicher, for God's sake, the seats
have gone to the Communists. The point is, he's lost them. The bourgeoisie,
they've seen through him and then, unlike all the stormtrooper violence, the
lefties, they've seen through him. The magic is gone, Franz. Everything now
seems to hang on luck and the good or bad mood of four individuals, five
including Franz Schleicher. My aim, Herr Hitler, is to form a government of
national concentration. I'm speaking to every party leader, but I do very much
want to see your movement brought into government. Surely, Herr Hitler, you
agree that times are too serious for everyone to merely seek his own personal
interests, go his own way. Quite, Otto. Well put. I am willing to form a
coalition... That's marvellous...as long as the President first calls on me, as
Chancellor, to form a government. Your Excellency, knowing how much you hate
getting the blame for these decrees, I have a suggestion. My government would
aim to receive an enabling law from the Parliament. That would require a ruling
of national crisis. Remind me, Otto, this enabling... Herr President, an
enabling law allows the government to act without a parliamentary majority and
without you constantly having to sign Article 48 decrees. So, there would be no
oversight? No, no. I'm sorry, Herr Hitler, you must form a coalition, presumably
with the German National People's Party. Work with Hugenburg, unthinkable, no.
An enabling act would lead too easily to a single-party dictator. I see, I see.
You want to make me Chancellor of a government which will unquestionably fail.
It's another trap to destroy me. Don't think I can't see that. Our door is
always open, Herr Hitler. General, how can you ever move forward without the
Nazi votes in Parliament? I'm hearing things, Tom. Not everyone agrees with the
Fuhrer. The Nazi Party is splitting. But who else can form a government? Become
Chancellor. Sir, I must request that you do not charge me with the task of
forming a government. Franz, you are abandoning me. It is beyond me, sir. Not
unless we suspend elections indefinitely. Your Excellency, I regret. Hitler
won't negotiate, won't even come to Berlin. Then we must revert to... I shall
postpone elections. We believe that might provoke a communist uprising. Followed
by a Nazi counter-revolution, it'll be civil war, Father. Your Excellency, we
have submitted a written report. The National Defence Force has been running a
war game and does not believe it could quell internal unrest without leaving our
borders dangerously vulnerable. As you see, sir, the case is somewhat altered.
With God's grace, we shall have to let you try your luck as Chancellor-General.
Your Excellency, I would be honoured. No-one in Berlin expects Kurt von
Schleicher to assume the top job. And now he must go tell Mel to form a majority
coalition. Everyone has an Achilles heel, Tom. And Hitler's goes by the name of
Gregor Strasser. I agree with you, General. This all-or-nothing strategy of
adults, it will never bear fruit. The public don't like it. The party doesn't
like it much either. Your stormtroopers really don't like it, yes? We lost 40%
of our vote in those state elections. And a party based on a psychotic belief in
victory cannot be seen to lose. As you know, the President has charged me with
forming a cabinet. Mm. And I need to appoint a vice-chancellor. How many
National Socialist members do you think he could bring with you? At least 60,
maybe 70. More, once the first step is taken. Well, that could give us a
majority in Parliament. Of course, Schleicher doesn't tell me about this tete-
tete-tete. It's Ren Pappen who smells these particular beans. Dalmer, express.
Good evening, Herr Dalmer. This is? Franz von Pappen, soon to be Chancellor of
Germany. Again? Sir? Restored, one might say, after a needless hiatus. Is this
an exclusive, sir? What I am about to tell you is definitely exclusive. Mm. I
presume your charm general Schleicher didn't tell you who's sipping tea in his
apartment in Alsondstrasse at this very moment? The Herbert Hoover, Joseph
Stalin, and Satan himself. Now you're getting close. Gregor Strasse. Strasse?
Then? Yes, Herr Dalmer. Strasse is being lured into friend Schleicher's new
cabinet, almost certainly as Vice-Chancellor. And the smart money says Adolf
doesn't know a thing about it. Then the money is very smart. Toodle-oo. Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus, Jesus! Hemsstalk, listen. We're doing that silly thing of
translating names again, are we? Listen! Your friend and mine, Gregory Streeter,
yes? Strasse, yes. Is right now having a little one-to-one with General Todie in
private at his flat? He's with Schleicher. Just wondering if your Mr. Hutman
knows about this. Is Streeter there to patch things up, or is our Gregory flying
solo? Do you happen to know? I'll get back to you. Yes! Sally, quick, in here!
Dictation! Coming! Coming! Faster! Faster! Heels off, young lady! And when he
arrives back at the Kaiserhof, poor old Gregor doesn't know that they know. This
is sabotage. Sabotage. You have not followed any single programme since the
summer, except to become Chancellor at any price. Nothing else befits me, befits
this party. There is no realistic chance of this happening. You're a madman,
Adolf! They will call on him. No one will ever enter a coalition with us, and
the price we pay will be the disintegration of the movement. They will appoint
me. It is the path to power. Right, right. I would happily take the illegal
route now. We have the storm detachment, and I will happily follow them into the
storm. I have no intention of wasting the blood of my troopers on something so
fatuous. Germany's youth will not march into Schleicher's machine gun. Then
accept the Vice-Chancellorship. Come on. Once we're in the cabinet, we can lever
it any way we want. You'll do anything just to become a minister. This chaos you
are creating, Adolf. It's not in the interests of this country. The interests of
the Nazi Party are the interests of Germany. Then I shall resign. I'm going.
Where? Holiday. Italy, I fancy. Italy. I am done. You can't just... Is this a
conspiracy? When I return, I shall take my place in the rank and file. No hard
feelings. Gregor, stop! Somebody stop him! Let him go. Does he mean it? We'll
find out. Chief, tomorrow's paper. Sorry. Here. Hitler is to be pushed aside at
last. The Nazi Party is finally seeing sense, and that sense comes in the form
of Gregor. If this party falls apart, I'll put an end to it in three minutes. I
will. No, no! Chief! Handle this, Chief. We can. We shall dismantle Strasser's
entire organisation or structure. The SS will happily step into the periphery.
If this is a rebellion, we must flatten it. Flatten it tonight! My God! 1932 has
been one endless run of bad luck. Let's just smash it to bloody pieces. But for
Chancellor Schleicher, it turns out to be the best possible outcome. The Nazi
Party is a laughing stock, Tom. Look! Look, the Frankfurt time. The massive Nazi
attack on the democratic state has been repulsed. Look, the Berlin Times, there.
Second paragraph, look. Hitler is to be pushed aside at last. Berlin Daily News.
Historians will later write, all over the world, people were talking about...
What was his name again? Adelbert Alphonse. Adolf Hitler. Whatever happened to
him? He just disappeared, didn't he? Hitlerism has perished according to the
very laws by which it lived, Tom. Germany is safe. It's the 3rd of January, and
the two excluded men of German politics are brought together for a secret
meeting. Adolf Hitler commands the largest group in parliament. Franz von Pappen
has the ear of the president. Each needs the other to complete a path to power.
But someone else knows what they're up to, and Pappen is photographed on his way
in. You and I, Hitler, I believe we could find a way. I surely do. I have been
picturing a due unweret, which would mean... A sharing of power between us. It's
the cabinet which... Your people could hold defence and interior, which I
know... No, you... Due unweret, call it anything you wish. However, I must be
chancellor. My party expects it. Do you wish to see the end of Schleicher? More
than you can possibly imagine. Then... Do you wish someone to speak on your
behalf with President Hindenburg? If Schleicher dissolves parliament, he can
still govern. The president has refused him a dissolution decree. Refused? A
vote of no confidence is therefore inevitable. The moment parliament sits, he's
up the swiney. You have this from the president himself. The president trusts
me. The president insisted I keep my apartment in the chancery. You know that. I
pop in through the garden, under the lintant trees, give him my advice. Not a
civil servant in sight. How would you like me to advise him? Was it you,
General? Did you tap his phone, send the photographer? Actually, it was my
dentist. He does strasser as well. Tip me the wink. Where is this dentist? I
think I might have a sudden cavity. Anyway, turns out Papen was only trying to
help things along. He explained it. Makes perfect sense. The general is
convinced that Papen was just trying to find out what did it take to inveigle
Hitler into his cabinet. But what Schleicher needs even more than that is a
dissolution decree from the president. He needs to govern without parliament. If
Schleicher goes into parliament without one, they will call a confidence vote.
He will lose. And then there must be an election. If they vote no confidence,
parliament will be dissolved. But I am also asking for you to decree a state of
emergency and thus postpone elections longer than the mandatory 60 days. The
precise manoeuvre you refused to support when Herr von Papen was chancellor. The
circumstances have changed. Which you said would bring on a civil war. Something
beyond the army's power... The defence forces are now much better. No, General
von Schleicher. If it was extra-constitutional then, it's extra-constitutional
now. Then if the constitution is so sacred, may I ask you not to hold any
meetings with former Chancellor Papen without me being present. Was there
anything else, General? And in this looking-glass world, those photographs
haven't done Herr Hitler any harm at all. All the papers are talking about it,
Chief. I have seen. We thought that photograph was a disaster. It's the complete
opposite. They're all talking about you again. Some of us predicted this, Pussy.
We're inside the president's circle and they know it. You trust Papen? He needs
me. I'm his route to undermine Schleicher. He's my route to Hindenburg. I still
wouldn't trust him. Pussy. You're absolutely sure you want to go ahead with this
election? All this effort for such a... It's perfect. A state election in a tiny
state. Lippertetmolt has barely more than 100,000 voters. It's all small
businesses, no factories. No-one votes communist. We can flood it. Posters,
speeches, all Joseph's tricks. Just the thing to lift morale. It really couldn't
come at a better time. Or worse, if we do badly... We currently have one member
in the state assembly. We'll win half the seats this time. But if we don't... If
we end up looking like losers... We have no choice. Joseph? I'm going to hire
giant tents. They just aren't the venues anywhere in the state. I found a tent
that takes 4,000. And trains. Every speech, every event, we bring people in.
From all the surrounding states. Six trains for your opening night. Huge
audiences guaranteed. The stormtroopers, where will they sleep? We'll find barns
and things, you know. In January? Baron von Einhausen has offered us his estate.
You'll be staying there, Chief. No-one will know. Tom, get this into your paper,
I beg you. Half the people at the rallies are just Nazi members busting from
other states. Three quarters. I don't get it. Isn't he just showing how weak he
is, having to drive out to tiny villages? Thought he was the fuhrer. And every
speech is about the system. The system is the people's enemy. What blessed
system? It's anything you want it to be. The Marxists, the Jews, von Papen. You,
me, the military. Anything you want to blame. The man hasn't got a single
policy. It's all anti this, anti that. What does he stand for? He'll win,
though, won't he? If he does, it'll be like a fly impaled on the tip of a
broadsword. Yes. Yes. 39.5% of the vote. Nine out of 21 seats. See, put see, I
told you. That's a 70% increase on last time. 70% more voters want the Nazi
party. Except, and math was never my favorite. We've done worse than July last
year. We got almost 4,000 more votes then. Didn't we? Six months ago, I mean.
The parliamentary elections. For parliament. You're right, put see. Arithmetic
is not something you should double in. I've started my editorial. From this
small sector of the trenches, the offensive has been resumed. This is no time
for lily livid compromise. Poor old Gregor. He really did miss his moment. No
one will go near him now. Strasser is over. Meanwhile, Herr Hitler has a new
acolyte. Joachim von Ribbentrop, a one-time wine salesman who bought his von off
his aunt and married the boss's daughter. He oils the wave for a Papen Hitler
rapprochement. Oil is rather his strong suit. Please, please, I'll send for
another bottle. I hear you met with Huygenberg. Yes, a man with a political
vocabulary of 80 sentences. He does have a constituency. His party controls the
centre right. And 51 seats. You two would make a formidable combination. I must
be chancellor first. The president has declined that possibility twice. Look
what happened in Lipdertwald. Yes, now, Liverpool approved... We took 40% of the
vote. If that isn't a clear instruction to former governments... Lipder is not
Germany. Its population is less than one-half of one percent of Germany. They're
bellwether. Utterly bellwether. You couldn't afford to repeat it nationally.
I've heard about your unpaid bills, your personal loans to the party, another
national election, and you'll all be in debt as prison. I do not require another
election to demonstrate my right to be chancellor. Maybe I was thinking I could
introduce the Fuhrer to the other Hündenburg, my friend Oscar. The son
unforeseen by the Constitution. Or... If you don't think you can talk the
president round, maybe his son can. The man can barely form a coherent sentence.
His entire life in the army, his father's the boss, and he's still only a
lieutenant colonel. Best of luck with that. And what does Adolf Hitler do? He
goes to the movies. This is marvelous, this bit. You've seen it before?
Yesterday. Oh, couldn't wait to see it again. Look, look, look what he does now.
Magnificent. The whole of the terror is rising up and following him. I see. One
man, one man changed it all. But he dies. In the end, doesn't he? That's the
best bit. He gives himself as the last, the supreme act. We do need to get back,
Chief Fuhrer. The chancellor's... Shh, shh, shh, shh. It's the big fight scene.
The ambush can't miss that. I plan that Germany can be reduced to two words.
Create work. For himself. Few on the right of German politics like what they
hear from Chancellor Schleicher. My predecessor favoured means testing, wage
cuts, and increased funding for industries, for businesses. He told us that
would generate employment. For his friends. We've all seen how that has failed.
Utterly. No. The Scheicher government will directly create work. Financing
projects throughout the country which will generate thousands of jobs.
Ridiculous. How will that restore Germany's growth? I have also heeded the well-
made arguments about our rural lands going uncultivated. Too many bountiful
fields in the north-east go unused while people starve in the cities. We will
accelerate the seizure of these bankrupt farms and make them available to a new
homestead......and that will make him plenty of enemies....as we planned,
Herman. It's no accident. Not as a socialist, but as a problem-solver. Some call
me the Social General, and yes, I wear that badge with pride. Officers of all
German armies have always, first and foremost, sought the well-being of... The
man's a socialist, a cryptomarcissist. That land resettlement plan. He's doomed.
He must surely know these estates belong to Hindenburg's friends. The Barons.
The Junkers. This is Bolshevism, Scheicher. That's a tab. How is this different
from Lenin? Divide everything into the smallest portions and dole them out? As
you're taking land from the people who know how to manage it and chomping it up
into ridiculous parcels. Small holdings. We call them. And then you plonk a
welder or a machinist or a... I don't know what on it and expect him to grow
things. A man who's never left his grimy city ghetto. We've been subsidising
estates in Prussia for years, sir. Millions of marks. And now we're hearing the
big landholders spent it all on motor yachts, racehorses, holidays on the
Riviera. Are you making an accusation, sir? The newspapers. Your Excellency.
They're the ones reporting it. They are... It isn't easy for the government to
ignore some of the more egregious accusations. And all this blizzard about my
own estate. It was a gift on my 80th birthday. My father's ancestral estate. A
token of appreciation from the nation. I can hardly sense that, though. Is this
some sort of threat? I'm sorry? Are you telling my father to kowtow to your
policies or there will be more of this muck raking? Is that what this is about?
Is that what it was about? Not in the least. I don't like seeing my father
blackmail like this. Do we understand each other? Hair, social, general? Thank
you, sir. And Parliament must sit by the end of the month. I am aware. And you
must find a majority of members to support you. I have reopened negotiations
with Herr Strasse. Even if the man has the guts to abandon him... A chemist!
Even if he came over to you with 16, 80 members, you still won't come on. I
don't wish him to come over. He is more valuable to me outside the Cabinet than
in. Then how do you...? The possibility. The mere talk of it will bring Herr
Hitler down from his mountaintop. Force him to join me as Vice-Chancellor. But
he's their messiah. At the bottom of his heart, you know, I don't think he wants
the chancellorship truly. There's a pattern. Every time he comes to the table,
he demands something that cannot possibly be granted. Defence and interior for
himself, that's what he demanded when he met Pappan and Cologne. How could you
ever grant him that? Quite... He's a little man, and he's scared of power. Thank
you, Chancellor. That will be all. Thank you, Your Excellency. Which only makes
it easier for Herr von Ribbentrop. Must be absolute secrecy. And yet every
single time it leaks. He's the servant. Pappan says Schleicher's got army
intelligence tapping people's firms. If they are, he would get a lot more right
than he does. Sunday then. Sunday evening. Your chap, can he really be trusted
to keep any agreement he makes? As Chancellor Herr Hitler would take the oath of
office. But he's always talking about the need for dictatorship, an end to the
Republic. Talk to him. You'll see that's just... You need to meet. It's
essential, even if news of it gets out, that we can plausibly deny that we met.
We need one of those... What's the... An alibi. Yes, that's the fellow, that's
the chap. I have it right here. Four tickets for the Ban on Love, Berlin State
Opera House, Sunday night. Wagner? No, don't worry. It's a comedy. Didn't know
he ever... Really? Comedy? You arrive on Sunday. It's a seven o'clock start.
Settle into your box. Private door. Laugh loudly. LAUGHTER Applaud loudly.
APPLAUSE Right, Oscar. Circulate frantically during the interval. That soprano,
she is truly magnificent. We take your seats for the second half. Enjoying it,
darling? Let the darkness settle. I think it opens in a prison. Oh, yes, that's
frightfully comedy. And slip out of your seats and down to the street. Snow will
help. Collar up. Taxi! Taxi! Check you're not being followed. Actors in films
don't even do this. And get him to drop you at least three streets away. It's...
It's this one here. I'm sore. It's the next left, Oscar. Trust me. And before
you know it, we'll all be sipping sect in front of the fire. Bro! Mm. Mm. That
hits the spot. From the family's reserve cellar. You married well, you're
kidding me. Suts, Suts. The man's in love. Ah, here he is. Let me get you a
glass. Here, here, here. No, I have... Mineral water. Thank you. It's
frightfully good. Yes, terribly. I prefer... Thank you. So, did you chaps see
the march today? I was... 35,000 stormtroopers marching right in front of
Communist Party headquarters. In Bulo, perhaps. Did you hear them? Perfect
unison. We shit on freedom. We shit on the Jew Republic. With full police
permission. A slap in the face for the KPD. A fine victory. They sent 14,000
coppers to protect us. I was told General Schleicher turned down the request for
a Communist counter-demonstration. Is that right? He was there, watching. I
heard him. He said... He saw our chaps marching past perfect formation. He said
these chaps would make first-rate fighting men. Now, besides better than his
defence force layabouts. And now he has French permission to begin rearmament.
Shall you and I have a word, Colonel? Of course. Maybe in the library. To the
library! What do you think they're going to talk about? Maybe some tax thing for
his father's estate. That would ease the path, certainly. And we have plans to
restore the monarchy. That would also help. Thing is, France, if you can't swing
it, we need someone else to whisper in the presidency. Who better than his first
born? I can swing it. Well, then, why haven't you? He wants me for Chancellor,
but I have nevertheless reached a decision. Oh. Yes? This Gordian knot must be
cut. I will support... Hare... Hitler... A teetotaler. To become Chancellor. And
I shall take the role of Vice-Chancellor. Will that make a difference? With
Oscar's help, I believe it marks the end of Chancellor Schleicher. Does Oscar
know there used to be such good friends? Not any more. Not remotely. Naturally,
Oscar was informed in readiness for... He's in that room with the next
Chancellor of Germany. As long as Schleicher doesn't find out first, he mustn't
know a thing. We're all in great danger of overestimating. Schleicher is a very
poor man's Machiavelli. Or shall we eat while they talk? My chef has left us a
venison casserole. It's one of his true masterpieces, I destroy you. Newly
refreshed, Otto Meissner arrives for work at the President's office the next
morning. Meissner? Good morning, Otto. Good morning, General Schleicher. How is
the venison? He does claim it's the best in Berlin. Is it? Here, Meissner. That
was part seven of Nazis, The Road to Power. Written and directed by Jonathan
Meissner. With Derek Jacoby as Hindenburg. Aditomiwa Edun as Sefton Delmer. And
Tom Mothersdale as Adolf Hitler. All other roles were played by Joseph Alessi,
Oscar Batteram, Edward Bennett, William Chubb, Melody Grove, Corey Johnson,
Scott Kareem, George Kemp, Sorsha Kennedy, Jack Lasky, Michael Maloney, Forbes
Massen, Lyn Miller, Alexander Vlahos and Andrew Woodall. Sound designed by Adam
Woodhams and Mark Smith. Original score by Metaphor Music. The producer was
Nicholas Newton. It was a promenade production for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
And you can hear the final part of Nazis, The Road to Power next Thursday
afternoon here on Radio 4. Or you can hear the whole...