TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 available, and what kind of future might they bring? This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. It's five o'clock in London. Hello and
welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service, the Catherine Bia Ruhanga and Bola
Mosur. It's exactly a year since Russia invaded Ukraine. This morning we'll be
hearing about different aspects of the conflict which has had an impact on most
parts of the world. Tens of thousands of lives have been lost and millions of
lives forever transformed. We hear from a teacher on the lives she leads now and
from a group of other women on how their role in society has changed. During
this last year we changed. Now we know for certain who our enemies are, who our
friends and brothers are. We separated the light from the dark. And we hear the
recollections of a Ukrainian MP who returned to the day war broke out. Elsewhere
our business correspondent, Katie Silver, has mourned the scandal engulfing
South Africa's energy company, Eskom. And that's after the latest world news.
Hello I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. Samanis are due to take place across
Ukraine to mark exactly one year since Russia began its full-scale invasion.
Prayers will be read in cities and towns including Bucher where Moscow's forces
were accused of committing crimes against humanity. Over the past 12 months the
conflicts become the worst in Europe since the Second World War. Our
correspondent in Kiev, James Walterhaus, says Russia has repeatedly
underestimated its neighbour. I think you had the resilience of the general
population who have had to learn to live with this. You've had the volunteers
who signed up in their millions. And then you've had the transformation of
Ukraine's military weaponry. And I think Vladimir Putin miscalculated. Russia
was the far superior bigger force. It still has huge mass over the Ukrainians
and yet the Ukrainians still managed to stay to the defence they are. The UN
General Assembly passed a resolution late and Thursday condemning Russia. It
called for an end to the fighting and the withdrawal of Moscow's troops. An
overwhelming majority of countries voted in favour. Speaking at UN headquarters
in New York, Ukraine's Foreign Minister Dimitro Kuleba urged those who
abstained, including India, to change course. It's in the hands of India
essentially how to handle this. But it's obvious that the way of neutrality and
balancing between Ukraine and Russia is not a road to peace. The road to peace
is to support what member states voted in favour today and to support the peace
plan, the peace formula proposed by President Zelensky. China has called in
Russia and Ukraine to hold peace talks as soon as possible. North Korea has test
fired four strategic cruise missiles into the sea. The state news agency said
the drill demonstrated the readiness of what it called Pyongyang's nuclear
combat force. It's the latest in a series of weapons tests that have increased
tensions on the Korean Peninsula. A rare blizzard warning has been issued for
parts of southern California. Millions of residents have been told to prepare
for unusually cold weather and snow. Peter Bowes is in Los Angeles. The National
Weather Service has warned of extremely dangerous mountain conditions to the
east of Los Angeles with blizzards over the next few days. Snow is already
falling across much of California. The emergency services around San Francisco
have been inundated with calls regarding fallen trees and downed power lines.
The extreme cold snap is affecting much of the American Midwest, northern and
western states, while some eastern regions such as Florida are experiencing
temperatures much higher than normal. Peter Bowes with Atraport. This is the
latest world news from the BBC. The government of Madagascar says a storm that
hit the east coast of the island is now known to have killed at least seven
people. Cyclone Freddie brought torrential rain and strong winds tearing roofs
off houses. It's now heading towards Mozambique, where it's expected to make
landfall within hours. Burkina Faso's military government has announced a drive
to recruit another 5,000 soldiers to help in the fight against jihadists. The
defence minister said the recruits must be prepared to serve in the army for at
least five years. A week ago, more than 50 soldiers were killed in the north of
the country. Since an Islamist insurgency began in 2015, nearly 2 million people
have been displaced. An American billionaire financier who was considered a
pioneer of private equity investment has died at the age of 78. Media reports in
New York say Thomas H. Lee shot himself in the Manhattan headquarters of his
investment firm. A successful businessman, Mr. Lee, bought the beverage firm
Snapple in 1994, then sold it two years later for more than 30 times what he
paid for it. A Russian Soyuz capsule has taken off from Kazakhstan to bring back
three crew members who are stuck in the International Space Station. An ignition
confirmed. The engines throttling up. Now at full throttle. Turbo pumps at
flight speed and lift off. A new ride back to Earth for Rubio, Prokopiev and
Patellin takes aim on the International Space Station. The two Russian
cosmonauts and an American astronaut won't return to Earth until September. They
had been due to come back six months earlier, but their own capsules sprang a
leak, causing them to double the length of their mission. The damage is thought
to have been caused by a tiny space rock. BBC World News. Thanks very much for
that news. Hello and welcome to Newsday. Today we mark 365 days since the war in
Ukraine started. We'll be hearing from people from different aspects of life on
what this year has done to their lives. Many have experienced unimaginable
losses. Do they still have hopes and dreams for peace and dreams of reuniting
with their families? We'll also be hearing about the scandal locking South
Africa's energy company Eskom. And we have Europa League action in sport. That's
all here on Newsday. We start with Ukraine this morning on what is the one year
anniversary of Russia's invasion of the country. This war has had a huge impact
on the people of Ukraine and as many as 8 million Ukrainian refugees have been
recorded across Europe. In terms of numbers killed, it's massively disputed.
Estimates from the UK Ministry of Defence of the number of Russians killed range
from 40,000 to 60,000. But Russia denies that. More than 20,000 Ukrainians are
known to have died according to the UK government and the UN. But the real
figure is believed to be much higher. Russia's attacks surprised almost everyone
as their troops headed straight towards the capital Kiev in an effort to
decapitate the government there. Newsday was on air when the news of the
invasion began to filter through. And this is how we reported those first few
hours and days. After months of waiting and predictions Russia has launched a
major military operation in Ukraine. At this point in time we do not have exact
information as the attacks happened in the dark. But what we do know is that war
has started in Ukraine. We're in the heart of the capital city Kiev and like
many people we were woken up by the sound of explosions. The thing which would
have really struck people here is the siren that has been wailing in the past 10
minutes or so. Look, there's one way for this war to end. The rational way.
Putin to pull out of Ukraine. He's paying a very heavy price for failing to do
it but he's inflicting incredible, incredible carnage on the civilian population
of Ukraine. Bombing nurseries, hospitals, children's homes. It's sick what he's
doing. I thank everyone who acts in support of Ukraine, in support of freedom,
but the war continues. Joining us on the voice of President Zelensky of Ukraine.
This morning we're devoting special coverage to Ukraine and revisiting some of
those people who joined us in those terrifying first few hours of the Russian
invasion as ordered by Russia's President Vladimir Putin. One of those heard in
that montage there was Ukrainian member of parliament, Lessiya Vasilenko. She
joined us on the day the war started and we go back to her again. Good morning
to you and thank you very much for joining us. I just wonder when you spoke to
us that day last year, did you ever imagine that one, it would happen, but two,
that we would still be talking about that Russian invasion a year later? I was
hoping that, and quite naively for the matter, that it would be over much sooner
than in a year. And I think the same goes for many, many Ukrainians. This
wishful thinking didn't abandon us until about summertime, come September,
especially when the attacks of the Russian aviation renewed and doubled in force
across all of Ukraine and especially on Kiev and on the energy infrastructure.
But here we are a year in and quite honestly, there's no clear understanding
when this new wave of Russian escalation will end. And if I may ask you, could
you tell us a little bit about what this year has looked like for you because
we've seen many of your fellow parliamentarians and you donning military
fatigues picking up arms at the time. It was something so incredible to think
of, but yet a year later, many of you are still donning those fatigues. Could
you describe what you've had to do and also what you've experienced? Oh my, so
this year has definitely been a very deep and interesting experience and not one
that I'd like to repeat and not one that I'd like to wish upon anyone. It was a
roller coaster of pain, tears, fear at some points, anxieties, hope, smiles,
unity, new friendship, all friendships coming together stronger and all of these
emotions constantly being on repeat. And I think we learned a lot about
ourselves, about each other. War has this way of uncovering all the different
layers and getting down to the nitty gritty of it, to the black and white and
shows people for who they really are, who has values and who has none. And war
has this way of turning your life around into black and white without any real
gray zone. So you're either fighting for the good of it or you're not, you're on
the other side. And there have been terrible losses for so many people, tragic
loss of life and innumerable lives that have been lost in Ukraine. This
happening as your country prepares for what you fear is another spring offensive
by Russia, but at the same token as the UN has issued this resolution calling
for peace. What are your thoughts on that and what are your thoughts for the
future as you look back at what's happened this past year? Well, peace is
something that Ukraine wants, it's something that the world needs, but we can't
afford another half-asired short-term peace in place. We want it in the long
term, we want guarantees of non-repetition of aggression, we want the Russian
military out for good from all of Ukrainian territory. Our lands deoccupied, our
people brought under the safety of the Ukrainian authorities and not their lives
and homes being further destroyed in the occupied cities like it is happening in
Mariupol, like it is happening in Melitopol, like it is happening in so many
places where the Russian military stands and holds control. I mean, look at
Crimea for nine years now it's been used as a Russian military base. The lives
of the people there have not improved one little bit despite the many
propagandistic promises from the Kremlin, but in order to have that long-term
peace we need to get the Russian military out and having declarations in the UN
it's great of course, but we need the action, we need a mobilized military
effort on behalf of Ukraine. Lézio Rasulenko, thank you very much for joining us
this morning and she's a Ukrainian member of Parliament. Well, from MPs to
farmers to doctors to scientists in labs, many have swapped their tools of trade
for guns as they've taken up arms to defend their nation in Ukraine. Others have
had to flee. So what does this anniversary mean for people who've seen their
country invaded? We're now joined on the line from Odessa in the south of
Ukraine by Margarita Boiko, she's a school teacher and Margarita, you used to
live in Mykolaev close to Odessa. What ultimately made you make the decision to
leave Mykolaev? So thank you for the question. One of my friends called me, so I
stayed the first months in Mykolaev but when the war started and the inventors
were close to Mykolaev, they were fighting in both sides and we heard bombing
all the time during the day and during the night but I was staying with my
family, with my husband and his mother but in a month my friend called me and
told that her husband was on the front line and the soldiers were waiting if
they would go towards her son to free her son, they could start bombing harder
and harder and by the way it happened and it made my decision to live, to save
the life of my son. I had to choose between my husband and my son, I have to
save my son. I had no other variants, no choice. Exactly and I was in Mykolaev
just in April and then again I know what you mean, there's constant shelling,
there are water shortages, it's really difficult to live there, some people
stayed but it's really difficult. Tell me about your life since you left your
home, what has that meant for you, what has it meant for your son? So we left
Mykolaev and we went to Romania, we stayed there half a year and as my husband
lost his job because he was working in a seaport, the seaport ports were closed,
I had no money to leave, that's why we found two part-time jobs and I continued
schooling. I had three jobs there and my son helped me all the time, I worked, I
made cleaning and we worked in second hand and also I continued schooling. Yes,
you're still teaching, I understand Ukrainian children via Zoom, what does that
mean that children still can have an education even when they're in a war zone?
Yes, we stopped schooling only for a month when the invaders were closed, when
they were fighting close to Mykolaev and we didn't know the result but after
that in a month we decided to start schooling and we work in Zoom, in classroom,
we used all the platforms to teach our students, by the way most of the students
also left the country. Yes, thank you very much, that's Margarita Bojko, she's a
secondary school teacher from Mykolaev in Ukraine and as you hear there Bojlaev,
just there's so many people that you meet in the country who are still trying to
keep continuing doing their regular jobs. Some semblance of stability for the
children as well but teaching via Zoom and even that must be so hard for the
children if as you say they're in the midst of lack of water shortages and so
many other things that their lives have been deprived. And one of the really
shocking aspects of the conflict has been that schools themselves have been
targeted so you will go to an area and you'll find schools that have had
missiles, that have been struck by missiles, continuous shelling, so those are
difficult things really for people living there. We're continuing our coverage
this morning of a year after the invasion of Ukraine, do text us your thoughts
plus 4 4 7 7 8 6 20 50 85, we'd love to hear from you. You're listening to
Newsday on the BBC World Service. And in fact that's where we're leaving the
World Service and opening up Radio 4 for another day. Hello from me, Alan Smith
and our studio manager, Stephen Bailey. Sarah Keith-Lucas will be here with the
early morning shipping bulletin in a minute, then I'll be back with the news,
leave through the papers, the business and the sport in news briefing, that's at
half past five. But after farming today, John Acheson will be putting the Wren
centre stage for Tweet of the Day, that's just before six. But first, a year on
from the invasion of Ukraine, James Nokti considers what the future might hold.
The world looks to the battlefields of Ukraine and asks how and when will it
end? Both sides speak of all-out victory, but could there be a settlement
between the enemies? This is James Nokti and I've been exploring with diplomats
and peacemakers the lessons of other conflicts to see how they might help in
finding a pathway through the smoke of battle. After nearly a year of war, when
might the talking start to matter more? How Wars End on BBC Radio 4, available
now on BBC Science. And so we go to the weather centre and Sarah. Thanks Alan,
good morning. And now the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf
of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 05.05 on Friday 24th February 2023.
There are warnings of gales in Viking, North Otsura, South Otsura, Forties,
Dogger, Fisher, German Beit and Biscay. The general synopsis at midnight. Low,
southern France 1007, expected Biscay 1004 by midnight night. And the area
forecast for the next 24 hours. Striking North Otsura, South Otsura, Forties.
Northerly or Northwesterly 6 to gale 8, occasionally severe gale 9 in the
Otsuras. Showers becoming wintry, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Cromartie
4th, Tyne. Northwesterly veering northerly 5 to 7, occasionally 4 in West
Cromartie and West 4th. Showers, good. Dogger, Fisher, German Beit. Northerly or
Northwesterly 5 to 7, veering northerly or Northwesterly 6 to gale 8,
occasionally severe gale 9 in West Fisher. Rain at first in German Beit,
otherwise showers becoming wintry, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Humber
Thames Dover. West or North West, mainly 4 to 6, but 3 at first in Dover, then
veering North 5 to 7, rain for a time, then showers, moderate or good. White,
Portland. North 3 to 5, veering North East 4 to 6. Fair then showers, good
occasionally moderate. Plymouth, North Biscay. Northeasterly 5 to 7,
occasionally gale 8 in North Biscay and 4 in Plymouth. Showers, good
occasionally moderate. South Biscay, South Fitzroy. Cyclonic 4 to 6,
occasionally 7 later. Rain or thundery showers, good occasionally poor. North
Fitzroy, Sol. Northeasterly 5 or 6, occasionally 7 in East and 4 in West.
Showers, good occasionally moderate. Lundy, Fastnet. North or North West, 3 to
5, veering North East 4 to 6. Showers, good. Irish Sea. North West 4 to 6,
veering North East 4 or 5. Showers, good. Shannon, North veering North East 4 or
5. Showers, good. Rockall Mallon, Hebrides, Bailey. Northwesterly 4 to 6,
veering North East 3 to 5 in South East Rockall and Mallon, but becoming
variable 2 to 4 elsewhere. Showers, moderate or good. Fair Isle. Northly 5 or 6,
occasionally 7 in East and 4 in West. Wintry showers, good occasionally poor.
Fair O's, South East Iceland. Cyclonic 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4,
becoming Southwesterly 5 to 7 later in South East Iceland. Wintry showers, good
occasionally poor. And now the weather reports from Coastal stations for 0400.
Tyree Automatic. North West 4. Recent drizzle, 6 miles. 1018 now rising.
Stornoway, North West 3, 6 miles. 1015, rising slowly. Lowick, North by West 5,
19 miles. 1009, rising. Lucas, North West 2, slight rain more than 38 miles.
1012, now rising. Bridlington, West by North 3, 1011, falling. Sandetti Light
Vessel Automatic, North West 3, 11 miles, 1014. Jersey, North East 4, 13 miles,
1015, falling. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, North East 4, 1017. Silly
Automatic, North North East 4, 22 miles, 1018, falling. Valencia, North North
East 2, 14 miles, 1022, falling slowly. Monalsway, North West by West 4, 1016,
falling. Malinhead, North West 5, recent rain 3 miles, 1019, falling slowly. And
here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at
0500 on Friday 24 February 2023. General Situation. The Northwesterly airflow
currently affecting the United Kingdom will gradually veer northerly or north-
easterly during the next day or two as high pressure to the west of Ireland
moves north-eastwards towards north-western Scotland. Most areas will have
showers, especially the north and east. Cabrath to Ratray Head, including
Orkney. Northwesterly at first in Murray Firth, otherwise northerly four or
five, occasionally six in east and three later in west. Showers, but becoming
fair except in Far East. Good. Ratray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North-west
veering north 4 to 6, occasionally three in Firth of Forth. Showers, good
occasionally moderate. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North-west 4 or 5 veering
north 5 or 6. Showers, good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North-west 4 or 5
veering north 5 or 6. Rain then showers, good occasionally moderate. Gibraltar
Point to Northfallen. Westerly 3 to 5 veering north 4 to 6. Rain for a time at
first, then showers, good occasionally moderate at first. Northfallen to Salsy
Bill. Westerly or north-westerly 2 to 4 veering north or north-easterly 3 to 5
occasionally 6 later in east. Fair then rain, then showers in east, good
occasionally moderate at first. Salsy Bill to Lime reaches. North or north-west
2 or 3 veering north-east 3 to 5. Showers for a time, good. Lime reaches to
Lands End, including the Isles of Scilly. North or north-east 4 or 5
occasionally 6 at first then increasing 6 at times. Fair then showers, good.
Lands End to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. North or north-
westerly veering north-easterly later 4 or 5 occasionally 6 in west decreasing 3
at times in east. Showers becoming fair later, good. St David's Head to Great
Ormhead, including St George's Channel. North-west veering north 4 or 5
occasionally 6 at first then veering north-east later. Showers becoming fair
later, good occasionally moderate at first. Great Ormhead to the Mull of
Galloway. North-west 4 to 6 veering north-east 3 to 5. Showers then fair, good
occasionally moderate at first. Isle of Man, north-west 4 to 6 veering north-
east 3 to 5. Mainly fair, good. Lockfoil to Carlingford Lock. North-west 4 to 6
veering north 3 to 5 then north-east 3 or 4 later. Showers then fair, good. Mull
of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel.
North-westerly 4 to 6 veering northerly 3 or 4 then north-easterly 2 to 4 later.
Showers then fair, good. Mull of Kintyre to Udnamurkham Point. North-west 4 to 6
veering north 3 to 5 then veering north-east later. Rain or showers then fair,
good occasionally moderate at first. Udnamurkham Point to Cape Rath. North-west
4 to 6 veering north-east 3 to 5 occasionally variable 2 later. Rain or showers
then fair, good occasionally moderate at first. Shetland Arles. Shetland Arles 5
or 6 occasionally 7 at first in east. Showers becoming wintry, good occasionally
poor. That completes the shipping bulletin. I'll be back with a general weather
forecast in a few minutes. Thank you, Sarah. This is BBC Radio 4, it's hop us
five on Friday the 24th of February. Good morning. This is News Briefing with
Alan Smith. A year after Russia's invasion of Ukraine, President Zelensky
insists his country will prevail. Ruchisunak will lead a minute's silence in the
UK to mark the anniversary. In business, food price inflation has seen the cost
of pasta double in two years. And in sport, Harry Brooke and Joe Root hit
centuries for England in the second test in New Zealand. As Ukraine prepares to
mark the first anniversary of the Russian invasion, President Vladimir Zelensky
said he remains confident victory. He said a vote at the United Nations last
night, which overwhelmingly backed a call for Moscow's forces to pull out, was a
powerful sign of global support. More than 140 countries voted in favour of a
non-binding resolution condemning the war. 32 others abstained, including China
and India. Speaking after the vote, the US Ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-
Greenfield, said Russia had been sent a clear message. You saw one year after
Russia's illegal, unprovoked, full-scale invasion into Ukraine, where the
countries of the world stand. We stand with Ukraine. The vote was clear. A
hundred forty-one countries voted for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
Ukraine. In the UK, Ruchisunak will lead a national minute's silence to mark the
anniversary and is expected to urge leaders from the G7 group of nations to move
faster in providing weapons to Ukraine. Last night, crowds gathered for a vigil
in Trafalgar Square in London. These Ukrainian women were there. My dad is
actually a commander of a battalion in Ukraine and for me it's very important to
support him and to show him that we care and we're very grateful that he's
there. My parents are still in Kharkiv and they were there all the time, so I
came just to support my whole country and my parents as well because they are
saying that they are not going to leave their home country because it's their
home and it's so encouraging to see so many people here. A fourth man has been
arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Olmec
in County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was attacked after
coaching children's football on Wednesday. The 48-year-old has suffered life-
changing injuries and remains in a critical but stable condition. A court in Los
Angeles has sentenced the former Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein to 16 more
years in prison for rape and sexual assault charges dating back 10 years. He's
already serving a 23-year sentence after a separate conviction in New York. The
government is considering giving longer jail terms to criminals convicted of
serious crimes if they refuse to appear in court for sentencing. Dominic Raab
made the suggestion during a meeting with the family of Zara Alina whose killer
remained in his cell when the sentence was handed down. Mr Raab said offenders
could be forced into the dock. I wouldn't rule that out but fundamentally if a
perpetrator is not willing to come and face the judge and hear the sentence
handed down by the court then I think we should be looking at increasing the
sentence as an aggravating factor. Nominations for candidates hoping to replace
Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP and Scotland's first minister will close at
noon. Three politicians have entered the race so far. The Scottish Health
Secretary Humza Youssef, the Scottish Finance Secretary Kate Forbes and the
former minister Ash Regan. That's the news. We'll take a look at the papers in a
couple of minutes but first Sarah's back with a look at today's general weather
forecast. Thanks, Alan. Well, we've got a lot of dry, settled weather on the
cards as we see out the last few days of February and there's a colder feel to
the weather with a northerly breeze developing too. Now, today cloud and patchy
rain is moving south right across the UK and that'll be replaced by more
sunshine but a cold wind developing from the north. So, let's look at the detail
across all of southern England, Wales, the Midlands, eastern England and
Northern Ireland too. Well, we start the day under quite a lot of cloud. We've
just got clearer skies in the far south of England and that's where the
temperatures are down below freezing for a few of us first things. So, a little
bit of frost in the far south but elsewhere generally frost free, cloudy, odd
spot of light rain or drizzle around particularly through the morning. Now,
gradually into the afternoon that cloud will start to break up a little bit so
some sunny spells developing later on in the day but far south of England could
remain quite cloudy all day. 8 to 11 degrees the top temperatures today. Now,
through northern England and southwest Scotland we start with a front bringing
some cloud and outbreaks of patchy rain but that should clear over the next few
hours. So, brighter skies developing but a cold northerly breeze and it will
feel particularly chilly around the coast of northeast England. One or two
isolated showers, they just could be a little bit wintry over the Pennines,
North York Moors for instance but most places will be staying dry and highs
around 8 to 11 but feeling cooler in the breeze. Lastly, eastern Scotland and
northern Scotland today. It's going to be quite a cold day ahead with some
wintry showers particularly towards the east where it's going to be quite breezy
and top temperatures here just 6 or 7 degrees. Thank you Sarah. We'll take a
look at the overnight business and sport news in a couple of minutes but first
the papers and many of which are marking the first anniversary of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine or as the Times puts it, Ukraine's year of blood. It reports
that Rishi Sunak will renew Britain's offer to send typhoon jets to Poland or
any other eastern European country that will hand over their MiG-29 combat
aircraft to Kiev. The paper says the Prime Minister is expected to urge NATO to
give Ukraine a decisive advantage over Russia on the battlefield to shift the
mindset of President Putin. The Guardian focuses on the devastation in the city
of Mariupo which it calls perhaps the bloodiest and most shocking chapter of
Russia's brutal war. It tells how after crushing resistance last May, Russian
forces have been erasing evidence of recent atrocities and destroying the
Ukrainian history in the city. The continued defiance of Ukraine is highlighted
in the Metro which has the headline, Heroes never give in. The war has led to
100,000 civilian deaths according to the Independent. It attributes the figure,
which is ten times the official total, to Ukraine's top war crimes prosecutor.
He tells the website the bodies will have to be found and identified after the
country is liberated. The Daily Telegraph's main news is an article by the
Archbishop of Canterbury in which he argues that Russia must not be crushed in
any future peace deal. Justin Welby writes that Russia cannot be allowed to
repeat its aggression but must not be humiliated in the way that Germany was
after the First World War. He says Ukraine must not be pressured into an unjust
peace either. The Telegraph also publishes a poll which suggests 65% of people
in the UK believe Britain should maintain or increase its support for Ukraine.
Both the Daily Mail and the Daily Express lead with comments by the Queen
Consort urging authors to resist curbs on their freedom of expression and
imagination. The Mail describes Camilla as wading into the row about the woke
rewriting of Roald Dahl's classics. The Express quotes a source close to Camilla
saying she was dismayed that the publisher's puffin had made hundreds of changes
to the original text of the much-loved children's books. A claim that Rishi
Sunak is softening his position towards striking NHS workers makes the eyes
front page. It reports that ministers plan to invite in three other unions,
Unite, GMB and Unison, for pay talks after making an offer to the Royal College
of Nursing. The paper suggests the government mood music on ambulance workers
and health staff is now changing with an olive branch set to be offered next
week. The Sun, under an exclusive banner, claims that Vernon Kay will replace
Ken Bruce in the mid-morning slot on Radio 2. Ken Bruce revealed last month that
he would be leaving the BBC. The corporation is yet to confirm who will replace
him. The Daily Mirror and The Daily Star mock yesterday's advice from the
government minister to raise coffee on how to get around fruit and veg
shortages. Let the meat turnips is the headline in both papers. The Mirror calls
her advice bizarre. The Star describes the vegetable as a government-approved
tasty treat and its front page offers a cut-out and keep turnip for every
peasant. Let's now look at the papers. Now business and with an update, here's
Katie Silver. Research carried out for BBC News suggests the price of pasta has
nearly doubled in two years. The average cost of a 500-gram bag from the
standard range at four supermarkets is now 95 pence, compared with 50 pence in
2021. A basket of 15 popular food items from the same supermarkets has risen in
price by more than a third over the same period. Overall inflation last month
stood at 10.1%, but the prices of many food items have risen more sharply and
are still rising. The search is on for the new head of the World Bank, and the
United States has nominated Indian-American businessman A.J. Banger. Mr. Banger
led credit card giant MasterCard for more than a decade and now works in private
equity. The U.S. has been pressuring the World Bank to put more emphasis on
tackling climate change. It comes after David Malpass, who was nominated by
former U.S. President Donald Trump, announced he would step down from the role a
year early. The FTX founder, Sam Bankman-Fried, is facing four new criminal
charges in the U.S. Prosecutors accuse him of using millions of dollars from
customers of his bankrupt cryptocurrency exchange to influence politicians. Mr.
Bankman-Fried now faces a total of 12 criminal charges. FTX filed for bankruptcy
last year, leaving many users unable to withdraw their funds. On the markets
last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones finished up a third of a percent at
33,153. And the FTSE 100 lost 23 points, finishing at 7,908. In Japan a short
time ago, the Nikkei 225 was up more than one percent at 27,398. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20. Against the euro, sterling is at 1 euro
13. That makes a euro 88 pence. Sport now and with the latest from the second
test in New Zealand and the rest of the headlines, here's Richard Newman. Harry
Brooke and Joe Root both scored centuries to lead a brilliant recovery for
England's cricketers on day one of the second test with New Zealand, putting
them in a dominant position in Wellington. Rain brought an early end to play,
with England's 315 for three, having been 21 for three at one point. Brooke's
not out on 184, while Root's unbeaten on 101, his first test century since June.
The England batter Danny Wyatt says the pressure's all on South Africa when they
take on the women's T20 World Cup hosts in today's semifinal. Raining champions
Australia are into Sunday's decider already, following a tense five run win over
India in Cape Town. The Majesty United manager Eric Tanhag says his side are
beginning to feel like they can beat anyone after overcoming Barcelona in their
Europa League playoff. They came from behind to win the second leg 2-1 at Old
Trafford, which secured a 3-2 aggregate victory. The last 16 draw takes place
later. Danny Murray is into his first ATP tour semifinal since June last year,
after coming from a set down to beat the French qualifier Alexandre Muller at
the Qatar Open. He'll face the Czech Yirrida Hechka in the last four this
afternoon. And finally, a glance back at some of the events that were making the
news on this state in earlier years. A year ago, as he sent his troops into
Ukraine, President Putin said he was determined to end eight years of conflict
involving pro-Russian separatists in the east of the country. Myanmar Russia
editor Steve Rosenberg listened to what Mr Putin had to say. Announcing what he
called a special military operation, President Putin said its aim was the
demilitarisation and denazification of Ukraine. Dismissing the West as an evil
empire and complaining at NATO enlargement eastwards, he referred to Ukraine as
a hostile anti-Russia that was being pumped with modern weapons. Three years
ago, one of the most powerful men in Hollywood, the film producer Harvey
Weinstein, was convicted of rape and sexual assault. In 1999, the official
report on the murder of the black teenager Stephen Lawrence described the
Metropolitan Police as institutionally racist. It said there had been
fundamental errors during the police investigation. The Prince of Wales and Lady
Diana Spencer announced their engagement in 1981. Prince Charles had proposed
three weeks earlier at a private dinner at Buckingham Palace. And exactly a
century ago, the world-famous locomotive The Flying Scotsman left the works in
Doncaster, where it was built. And that brings to a close today's edition of
News Briefing. Now I'm ready for it's time for prayer for the day, with Hope
Lonergan. Good morning. John Dewey proposed that the self has no meaning, except
as contrasted with other personas. And as a consequence, the self and the world
are correlative and have the same content. This relational interactivity, the
idea that the origins and foundations of the self emerge in reference to others,
is a key part of social approaches to care work. I cared for the elderly for a
decade before going into comedy. With any relationship, there's a fluidity to
interaction, both to the other entities and the world at large. So carers have
to be socially agile and adaptable, rather than forcing a resident into certain
modes of communication. I found it to be highly effective to open up space for
people with dementia to participate in self-directed action, including the
direction of travel for conversation. For instance, a resident out of nowhere
initiated a discussion about getting an acorn trapped in his belly button. So I
decided to share a story about the time I got a popcorn kernel stuck in my ear
hole. I don't subscribe to the one size fits all essentialist for your dementia,
even if some people wrote this. Either way, when I'm off stage, I now lead a
very hermetic, almost monastic existence. I used to love banging on, you could
never get me to shut up. I was an enthusiastic conversation list. I wanted to
find out everything about a person. Now I'm part of a religion, Quakerism, where
I'm forced to shut up, which suits a 31 year old recluse like me. We've
disinlined God. Thank you for the care workers who devote their time to the
vulnerable. Thank you for the moments of quiet and contemplation. These are the
only moments when I'm truly free of anxiety. Go lightly. Amen. That was Prayer
For The Day with Hope Lonergan. Now on Radio 4 it's time for farming today with
Casgraim. Good morning. Today it's not just salad that's in scant supply. An
acute shortage of butchers, again, means British meat is being shipped abroad
for processing. It's UK PLC that loses out here. If you're exporting something
that's cheaper and then adding the value abroad, you're lowering the
productivity. First of all though, wild cats are the UK's only native cat
species. Only small numbers remain in the Scottish Highlands and even there
they're close to extinction. We're talking about reintroducing species to areas
they once lived in all this week, and wild cats could be reintroduced to Devon
if conditions are right and local communities support the idea. Devon Wildlife
Trust is investigating the feasibility of bringing back wild cats after an
absence of more than 100 years. Sarah Swodling has been finding out more from
the Trust's Director of Nature Recovery, Peter Burgess. In front of us is a bank
of gorse, blackthorn scrub next to the edge of an old farm quarry, and that's
just perfect for wild cats. They want cover but they want to be able to move out
and find their prey, so rabbits, small mammals, and that's what we've got rough
tussocky grassland next door which is just perfect for them. The other element
is it's quite a well connected woodland landscape. If you've got a fragmented
countryside then it is a risk that they won't be able to find other locations or
be quite restricted. Could there be risks in reintroducing a predator back to
ecosystems that are already quite vulnerable? If you're adding another predator
in to a, I don't know, vaults or songbirds that other species rely on and other
species that are in themselves on the edge. Predator-prey relationships are
really complicated and actually bringing back a sort of middle-ranking predator
like wild cats could benefit a whole host of other species. They may be
predating on species which themselves could be having a large impact. Grey
squirrels are just one example which have really significant impacts on breeding
birds for example. So perhaps wild cats might have an impact there but these are
things we really do need to explore thoroughly during the 18 month phase and
find out can our ecosystem support these animals again? If a community is
overwhelmingly majority dead set against it, will that mean that wild cat
introduction doesn't happen there? We can only reintroduce a species where we
have community support. This is going to be a partnership endeavour. We need the
support from those communities. If we don't have that then we really wouldn't be
able to pass to the next stage. One of the factors in the decline in wild cats
in Scotland I understand is them breeding with domestic cats. And that's in
Scotland which you might think was a more sparsely populated landscape than say
Devon. That is a serious risk, potential breeding with feral cats will have an
impact on the species in the future unless there are ways that we can help
mitigate that. So finding landscapes in areas where feral cat populations are
very low. What's really important in studies which have been shown in Europe is
where wild cat populations are strong, the risk of them into breeding with feral
cats is much reduced. So if you can imagine you're a wild cat and you're
struggling to find a mate. You'll settle for anything. So your neighbour, their
tabby down the road might be something that you would mate with but if your
population's strong they will be breeding within their, clearly within their own
species. You'll settle for anything. Peter Burgess from Devon Wildlife Trust
talking to Sarah Swaddling. If you were listening yesterday you'll remember I
visited a Lancashire tomato farm where they grow their tomatoes all year round
under LED growth lights which prompted Joe Ellis from Edinburgh to email us
saying, This is February, for goodness sake we should not expect to have soft
salad and tomatoes in February. This is winter. Well take a deep breath Joe
because for our sister programme On Your Farm Anna Hill has been to visit the
UK's first all year round strawberry growers. A warehouse in Essex has been
converted into a vertical farm. Well the project's the idea of Dr David Mazeros
and we'll hear from him shortly. But first Anna is here travelling on what is
called a scissor lift up to the top shelves to meet Angus Thompson, the grower.
Up and up and up. I can see as I'm coming up each layer of strawberries looks
like I'm in the middle of a field but I'm actually about 10 metres up. It's very
different from what we're used to. We don't have welly boots, we're not in mud,
we're very clean, we're very pristine, there's a lot of white. And I know the
whole system here is powered by solar. Yeah we've chosen all of our inputs very
carefully such as our LED lights to make sure they're the most efficient as
possible. Here's Lee also picking. Hello, hello up there. He's poking his head
through the strawberries. So I'm going to taste this LED groan. I cannot believe
that I've suddenly found myself in February in a box with LED lights. I've just
eaten a strawberry and it tastes like July. That is sweet and juicy. It's
summertime. We're now trundling back. So we're back on the ground now. It is
really weird to think that I'm standing here in February with fresh strawberries
grown in the UK. It sort of goes against the grain somehow in my head because
I'm the sort of person who walks past the strawberry shells in the supermarket
because I say I'm not buying that, it's out of season. Brits love strawberries.
What we're trying to do here and as you can see the quality of the fruit that we
can produce all year round matches and even goes higher than what we're normally
used to. It might do but you've had to invest a huge amount of money to do that
and have this artificial operating system to grow them. David, what's wrong with
only eating food in season? Do we really need a luxury good out of season? Well,
first of all, I don't think that it has to be an out of season luxury good
anymore. The second thing, we have to think about the social and job market
impact of this all. The entire UK market drops all of its volume in the summer
months and once those fruits have been dropped, essentially those people have to
look for other kinds of jobs. What we've created here in SmartGus is not only a
sustainable 365 days operation but also 365 days employment opportunity. It's a
career opportunity. So we've essentially created a plant factory. It's a fruit
factory where we're not having to rely on imports. We don't have those carbon
footprint that the traditional farms have, you know, heating with diesel. And I
believe that strawberry is really just a start. We can literally replace
everything within the realm of fresh fruit and vegetables. Dr. David Miseros and
plenty of food for thought. If you would like to share your thoughts with us,
you can email farming.today at bbc.co.uk and on Twitter, we're at
bbcfarmingtoday. And you can hear much more about that vertical strawberry farm
with Anna at 6.30 on Sunday morning here on BBC Radio 4. It's the last episode
in the current series. Acute labour shortages have led to some UK meat
processors moving their work abroad according to the British Meat Processors
Association. Whole carcasses are being exported overseas to be butchered and
distributed because they say they just can't get the staff to do it here. And if
that rings bells, well, it's hardly surprising because a lack of skilled
butchers was a major factor in the pig crisis in 2021, which led to perfectly
healthy animals being culled because there was no capacity in abattoirs and
farmers couldn't afford to keep feeding them. So what progress has there been in
recruiting and holding on to abattoir staff? I've been speaking to Nick Allen
from the British Meat Processors Association and I asked him first how common it
is now for UK meat to be butchered abroad. If you look at the export figures,
more and more is going as carcasses rather than the value being added here. So
yeah, we're seeing more and more of it. And it started with the exports or
controls really because the export health certificates were really difficult to
get and complicated to get. So it made it easier to do it with carcasses rather
than cutting up anyway. And now we've got the labor shortages on top of that. So
there's even more encouragement to do it. In the longer term, if more meat
processors do send carcasses abroad for processing, what do you think the longer
term problems for the UK processing industry will be? Well, it's UK PLC that
loses out here. If you're exporting something that's potentially adding value
here. I mean, the government keep talking about growth. Well, this is growth
that's not happening in this country. They keep talking about improving
productivity. Well, if you're exporting something that's cheaper and then adding
the value abroad, you're lowering the productivity. What happens to the value of
a carcass for the farmer if it is exported to be processed? The farmer probably
gets the same but my concern here is it's the infrastructure that's being
undermined here really. The more you can add value at home here, the more your
processors are in a position to be able to sort of pay the farmer more at home.
But what we're seeing is gradually an undermining and the discouragement of
investment in the UK industry because they're thinking, well, we put the
investment into plants abroad because it's a better bet. We can get the labor
there and we haven't got the export controls to worry about. Why is staffing
still a problem? I mean, I ask because back in 2021, the pig industry was
severely affected, as we all remember, by a lack of workers in slaughterhouses.
So, staffing problems are really nothing new. What has the industry actually
done since the pig crisis to try and resolve the situation? Quite a bit really.
A lot of them have introduced training programs and are trying to encourage
people to come and work in the plants at home. And also, we have found getting
to grips with the migration licenses. So we are managing to get some butchers in
from abroad as well, which is probably a short-term fix, but a much-needed
short-term fix while you train the people at home. But you can't get away from
the fact that we're short of people in this country to do jobs. Most of our
plants are still running at about 10% to 15% short on staff. In response to the
pig crisis, the government allowed for 800 temporary visas for foreign pork
butchers to come into the country for six months. But there wasn't a huge amount
of interest, was there? Well, the way the system was introduced, it was a mess
from start to finish, really. And they didn't really enable the right people to
go and source the staff. And to be honest, we want people to come and work in
our plants for three or four years at a time. That way, you can train them up.
The government's Migration Advisory Committee is reviewing the shortage
occupation list at the moment. Butchers are not currently on that list. Will you
be arguing that they should be added to it? I mean, interestingly, the last time
that my co-great advisory committee looked at this, they did recommend to
government that butchers should go on the shortage occupation list. It was the
home office that rejected most of their findings and put those on hold. So we
feel we've already won that battle with the Migration Advisory Committee. But
yes, we've already submitted information to them. And therefore, have had
another report looking at labour in industry. And we've been submitting
information towards that. So what should government do then? We're hoping that
they'll implement the Migration Advisory Committee report, make it easier for to
get butchers here in the short-term fix. We still need more help with training
and better schemes to actually help us recruit people and train people over
here. Nick Allen from the British Meat Processes Association. We asked for a
response from the home office and they told us, We work closely with the
Migration Advisory Committee to ensure our points-based system delivers for the
UK. This includes reviewing the shortage occupation list to ensure that it
reflects the current labour market. And that's all from us for today. But do
join Charlotte Smith for farming today this week, tomorrow morning at 6.30, when
she'll be joined by a panel of guests to discuss all aspects of the current
salad shortage. I'm Kaz Graham. Our studio manager is Ilse Lademan and the
programme is produced in Bristol by Rebecca Rooney. Now, just before we join the
today programme, it's Tweet of the Day and the wildlife cameraman John Acheson
presents the diminutive Wren. A tiny wren has a very loud song indeed. You'll
often see the singer, with its tail cocked jauntily, singing from a fence post
or shrub, bill-wide, trembling with the effort of producing that ear-splitting
territorial advertisement. It's the extrovert side of a normally introvert bird,
which creeps, like a mouse, among banks of foliage or in crevices between rocks.
This ability to find food and to shelter in even the most secluded spots means
that despite being small and vulnerable to heat loss, they can live almost
anywhere, from mountain crags and remote islands to gardens and city parks. Male
wrens are well-known not only for their lusty singing, but for their
architectural skills too. In spring they build around half a dozen nests out of
moss, grass and feathers, each one woven into a loose ball. The female selects
her favourite nest, in which she'll raise her brood of youngsters on a diet of
insects and spiders, until they fledge in late spring. The male wren continues
to sing throughout all this time, and as barely a month goes by when you won't
hear this explosive song. Our next tweet is on Sunday morning just before 9
o'clock when you can hear the red-throated diver.