TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Sounds. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. Beep. BBC News at ten o'clock.
This is John Hammond. Good evening. The UN has reached a deal with Iran to carry
out more inspections of its nuclear programme after the discovery of uranium
enriched to near weapons grade. Russian forces are advancing into the outskirts
of the besieged Ukrainian city of Bahmut after six months of bloody fighting,
but Ukraine insists it is still in control. The Home Secretary says she and the
Prime Minister have been drawing up new laws to tackle migrant boat crossings
once and for all. And in sports, a 97th minute goal seals a remarkable comeback
by the Premier League leaders' Arsenal. Iran has agreed to allow UN officials to
carry out further inspections of its nuclear programme. The announcement was
made at the end of a two-day visit to the capital by the head of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi. From Vienna, where the
organisation is based, here's our correspondent, Bethany Bell. In a joint
statement with the IAEA, Iran said it was prepared to provide more information
and access to UN inspectors. Speaking on his return to Vienna, Mr Grossi said
that included reinstalling monitoring equipment and his cameras. He said he
hoped his visit would bring about progress. My recent statements and my reports
have been saying the fact that I believe that it's high time we come to some
concrete results. So this was the spirit of the meetings we had. And I believe
we have a clear understanding in that regard so that we can start implementing a
number of very concrete measures very soon. Mr Grossi's trip followed the recent
discovery of traces of uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at the
Fordow underground nuclear site. Tehran, which says its nuclear work is
peaceful, says it restricts uranium enrichment, but acknowledged there may have
been what it called unintended fluctuations. Mr Grossi said Iran had agreed to
more inspections at the Fordow plant. The agreement is likely to head off a move
to censure Iran at the IAEA's Board of Governors next week. But Western
diplomats say Iran has made similar promises in the past that have yielded
little or nothing. Russian forces are putting strong pressure on Ukraine's
troops to withdraw from the shattered eastern city of Bakhmut following months
of intense fighting. The latest analysis by British military intelligence says
the city's defenders are fortifying their positions and bringing in elite units.
Serhii Cherkhy-Vartiy from Ukraine's Eastern Military Command said victory was
still a possibility. Every day Russian Wagner's group attacks our position.
Every day maybe it's 30, 50 times. But every day our troops defend our position
and every day we kill a lot Russian soldiers. We absolutely believe in our
victory. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale is following developments
from Kiev. For six months Russian forces have struggled to seize Bakhmut.
Thousands of their soldiers have died in the process. But now their commanders
seem growing in confidence. British military officials said Ukrainian defenders
were under increasingly severe pressure. They said Russian soldiers and Wagner
group mercenaries were making advances in the northern suburbs. There were
reports of Ukrainian troops destroying bridges and digging trenches in western
Bakhmut. The US-based think tank, the Institute for the Study of War, said
conditions were seemingly being set for what it called a controlled fighting
withdrawal from parts of the city. Alexander Marchenko, the deputy mayor, told
the BBC that Ukrainian forces still had control of Bakhmut but said it was cut
off with no communication and there was fighting in the streets. It is very
unsafe in the city and the entire population that is staying there right now is
living in the shelters. There is no water or gas or electricity and we have
given heaters to everybody who stays in the city so that we can support the
local population. Russia said its defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, made a flying
visit to eastern Ukraine to inspect troops at what it called a forward command
post. Seizing Bakhmut would be a rare victory for him and the Kremlin. Western
analysts, such as Dr Patrick Berry, senior lecturer in security at Bath
University, suggested the city had little strategic value. It doesn't really
matter in the grand scheme of things. Even in the battle in the east, it's
really been about sucking in resources on the Russian side and giving the
Ukrainians the best chance of destroying those resources in a set-piece battle.
The risk for Ukrainian forces is that in the process they become encircled and
suffer even more losses. But for now it seems that is a risk they are prepared
to take for the greater prize of killing as many Russian soldiers as they can.
The Home Secretary, Soheila Braverman, has said that she and the Prime Minister
will do whatever it takes to stop migrant boat crossings in the Channel and
people should judge them by their actions. She has been speaking to The Sun on
Sunday ahead of the expected announcement of new legislation to tackle the issue
next week. Our political correspondent, Helen Catt, reports. Ms Braverman has
told the paper that she and the Prime Minister have been working flat out to
bring forward what she describes as necessary and effective laws to tackle small
boat crossings once and for all. She says that it has to be that if you come
here illegally, you will be detained and swiftly removed. It's expected the
legislation will place a duty on her to remove anyone who arrives on a small
boat to Rwanda or a safe third country as soon as reasonably practicable. It's
also expected to render the asylum claims of anyone who comes to the UK via
small boat inadmissible and to ban people from returning once they've been
removed. Some organisations have raised concerns about whether this would be
compatible with human rights laws. Others have pointed to practical
difficulties. Downing Street has said that the legislation will come in due
course. The latest round of talks towards an historic agreement to protect the
world's oceans has overrun its two-week deadline. Members of the United Nations
are still trying to nail down a deal to cap more than ten years of negotiations.
The treaty aims to safeguard marine life in 30% of areas that don't belong to
any country by 2030. But there have been several delays because of disagreements
on funding and fishing rights. The actress Jane Fonda has been at the talks in
New York. She gave the UN a petition signed by more than five million people
pleading with delegates to come to an agreement. I think that this treaty is so
important. We have to save these creatures who basically are fighting to save
us. They are our strongest allies in the fight against the climate crisis. The
ocean is one of our strongest allies. Ocean provides us with 50% of the oxygen
that we breathe. We cannot live without a healthy ocean. A loud boom which shook
houses in parts of the East Midlands has been traced to supersonic RAF Typhoon
Jets which were scrambled to intercept a civilian plane after contact was lost
with the pilot. The plane, which was flying from Iceland to Kenya via Southend,
was escorted to Stansted Airport. Essex Police said there had been an equipment
malfunction and the two people on board had later been released to continue
their journey. As Sean Dilley reports, the sonic boom from the RAF jets was
detected in three counties. It was heard across Leicestershire, Northamptonshire
and in parts of Oxfordshire at around midday. This woman from Daventry was
calling her dogs to come back inside the house when she heard the loud bang.
Ivy, Tilly, come on! Oh! Tilly, Ivy, quick! What the hell was that? Nothing to
worry about, said Leicestershire Police. The force posted on its Twitter account
to say it had received numerous calls in relation to the loud explosive sound.
The Ministry of Defence said it scrambled Typhoon aircraft from RAF Conningsby
to escort a civilian plane heading towards London after communications with the
pilot were lost. Essex Police said the aircraft landed safely at Stansted
Airport just before 1pm. They said officers were talking to the pilot and
enquiries were continuing. Prince Harry has compared being a member of the Royal
Family to living in a container. He was speaking to the author Dr Gabor Mate at
a virtual event in California organised by the publishers of his memoir, Spare.
He said the more he was criticised for talking about trauma, the more he felt
the need to share. Our Royal Correspondent, Daniela Ralph, was listening. In
California, in front of a roaring fire, sitting opposite each other on sofas,
Prince Harry spoke to the author Dr Gabor Mate, whose books cover areas
including grief and trauma. The online conversation lasted almost 90 minutes and
had the feel of a therapy session. Prince Harry told Dr Mate that he didn't see
himself as a victim and had never looked for sympathy. They discussed Harry's
childhood, the lack of touching and cuddling within the Royal Family, feeling
trapped within the institution and how he wanted something different now. It
leaves me in the position now as a father, I have two kids of my own, making
sure that I smother them with love. I feel a huge responsibility to ensure that
I don't pass on any traumas or any negative experiences that I've had as a kid
or as a man growing up. You needed to buy a ticket to watch the online
conversation. Each one came with a copy of Harry's book, Spare. He said writing
it had been an act of service. Harry said taking psychedelic medication had
given him clarity and comfort. Dr Mate also diagnosed him as having attention
deficit disorder. But there was much that wasn't discussed. He didn't touch on
the state of his relationship with his father, stepmother or brother. And there
was no talk of whether he'd be at his father's coronation in May. The Glasgow-
based bakery Morton's Rolls is understood to have ceased trading after missing a
deadline to file accounts. Famed for its well-fired baps, Morton's employs about
250 people. They were told in a letter yesterday they were being laid off with
immediate effect. The directors said they were looking to carry on the business
in some form with a reduced workforce. Bill Kidd, the local SNP MSP, said he was
working on a rescue. I'm going to be speaking to Scottish Enterprise and the
PACE team from the Scottish Government in order to ensure that everything that
can be done to save this business and support the jobs will be done. The main
issue that I have been hearing about is purely to do with the fact the economy
has tightened. It's been difficult for people. Sports and the Premier League
leaders' Arsenal left it late to complete a remarkable comeback. While in
athletics, Britain's Laura Muir had a record-breaking day at the European Indoor
Championships. With all that and the rest of the action, here's Shabnam Yunus-
Juul. Well, it couldn't have been a more dramatic day in the race for the
Premier League title. Leaders' Arsenal conceded within nine seconds at home to
relegation threat and Bournemouth. They fell further behind in the second half
before a stirring fightback saw Reese Nelson win it for Arsenal in the 97th
minute. Mikel Arteta's side remained five points clear. Overall, I don't know, a
lot of emotion. It was incredible to experience that with our crowd and for sure
it's a day in the journey that is going to stick to us. Earlier, Arsenal's
closest competitors, Manchester City, beat Newcastle United 2-0. Elsewhere in
the Premier League, every home side won. That meant an easing of the pressure on
under-fired Chelsea boss Graham Potter as they beat Leeds 1-0. Southampton are
off the bottom, having beaten Leicester by the same score. There were also wins
for Aston Villa, Brighton and Wolves. In Scotland, Rangers recorded a seventh
straight Premiership win, beating Kilmarnock 3-1 to close the gap to Celtic to
six points. Dundee United remain bottom after Jim Goodwin's first game in charge
ended in a 3-1 defeat to his former club, Aberdeen. Hart, Tibernian and
Motherwell also won. Britain's Laura Muir has won a record fifth European Indoor
Championship title as she claimed victory in the women's 1500m final in
Istanbul. No British athlete has more wins at the event. Muir says she went into
the championships not fully fit, but didn't want to miss out. I think as you get
older you start to appreciate these opportunities. Would I rather be here not
100% fit or would I rather be at home and watching? I'd rather be here and get
my go. I'm just so chuffed with that. I'm in a really good spot. I'm not in a
bad place, but I've definitely been fitter at this time of year. I'm in a good
place to build on this for the summer. To come away with a win here today, I'm
so happy with that. Formula One World Champion Max Verstappen will start the
season opening Bahrain Grand Prix on pole, ahead of Red Bull teammate Sergio
Perez. The Mercedes of Britain's George Russell and Lewis Hamilton qualified
sixth and seventh respectively. And Tom Pidcock has become the first Briton to
win cycling's one-day Strad Bianco race in Italy. The architect behind the
walkie-talkie skyscraper in London, which is broader at the top than the bottom,
has died. Rafael Vignoli, who was 78, designed landmark buildings around the
world. Adam Porter looks back at his life. Rafael Vignoli was born in Uruguay
and his practice was based in New York. He was responsible for more than 600
buildings around the world, including office and residential blocks, concert
halls, stadiums and airports. His son called him a visionary who left a legacy
of distinctive and iconic structures, while Manchester City, for whom he
designed the City Football Academy, called him a cherished friend. But not all
of Vignoli's projects escaped criticism. Some of the multi-millionaire residents
of an 85-storey block in Manhattan sued over vibrations and creaks from the
building. And in 2013 it was found that sunlight reflecting off the walkie-
talkie building's curved side had melted parts of a car parked nearby. The
headlines again. The UN has reached a deal with Iran to carry out more
inspections of its nuclear programme, after the discovery of uranium enriched to
near weapons grade. Russian forces are advancing into the outskirts of the
besieged Ukrainian city of Bakhmut, after six months of bloody fighting. But
Ukraine insists it's still in control. And the Home Secretary says she and the
Prime Minister have been drawing up new laws to tackle migrant boat crossings
once and for all. BBC News. Which was read by John Hammond. In a moment, Michael
Burke considers whether changing attitudes towards religion should affect how we
choose our leaders in the moral maze. Whatever you're looking for, we've got
sounds for that. Join us for topical conversation that informs, challenges,
inspires and really gets you thinking on Woman's Hour. Or relax and unwind with
the rich musical textures of the Mindful Mix. Or throw caution to the wind and
enjoy Friday night comedy whenever you darn well please. Like on a Tuesday or
even not at night with the sensationally time flexible Friday night comedy
podcast. Music Radio Podcasts. Listen on BBC Sounds. In just over three quarters
of an hour here on Radio 4, Paul Gambacchini welcomes three more music lovers to
the quiz that covers music of all eras and genres. There's extracts from Nina
Simone, John Legend, Laurie Anderson, Placido Domingo, Billy Joel and questions
on everything from Renaissance choral works to contemporary movie themes.
Fingers on buzzers for Counterpoint at 11. Then the Poet Laureate Simon Armitage
opens the doors of his writing shed in the Pennine Hills to a poet, comedian and
songwriter who made her first TV appearance on Opportunity Knocks in the 70s to
talk about performing and her love of nature. That's all to look forward to in
the Poet Laureate has gone to his shed at half past 11. But now on Radio 4, time
for the Moral Maze, first broadcast early in the week. Here's Michael Bourke.
Good evening. The Free Church of Scotland takes religion seriously. The idea
that hymns could be sung at its services was so controversial an entire
congregation and several of its ministers resigned when this frivolity as they
saw it was narrowly approved. The church's views on gay marriage and sex, let
alone having children out of wedlock, are traditional. They disapprove. Tonight,
the We Free's most famous daughter, Kate Forbes, is fighting for her political
life. She's taking part in the first hustings in the race to be the SNP's leader
and thus first minister of Scotland. She was, many thought, a frontrunner until
she was asked about her religion. She didn't duck the questions. She thought
such things as same-sex marriage were wrong, but she backed the law as it stood
and upheld people's right to do things she didn't personally approve of. No
matter, the internet was inflamed. Key supporters deserted her. Many thought
she'd have no option but to withdraw from the contest, if not from politics
altogether. Is this simply a case of the old religion colliding with what some
see as the new religion of human rights? A professed faith used to be seen as an
advantage for a politician, a sign of their moral compass. Now it looks to be a
potential barrier to office. What's changed, and is it for the better? That's
our moral maze tonight. The panel are Mackelvoy, columnist and editor with the
Politico news and commentary group, the historian Tim Stanley, Ash Sarkar from
Navarra Media, and the nation's second favourite vicar, Giles Fraser. Who's the
first? John Fisher? No, no, no. Giles, does your dog collar make you sympathetic
towards Kate Forbes? I suppose it does. I remember that Kennedy speech about the
finger of suspicion being pointed at him because of his Catholicism. And I
don't, I don't, I feel there's something of that that's being pointed at her
because of her faith. But nonetheless, what I really don't like is politicians
who retreat behind this idea that you can have a sort of private religious faith
and it doesn't issue in any sort of political action. And I think that's
nonsense. Anne, Anne Mackelvoy? I think tonight we're going to come across the
line attributed to Queen Elizabeth I when she said she didn't intend to make
windows into men's souls, i.e. she was prepared to put up with quite a lot of
fudging where religion and beliefs about the state or politics coincided, to
which I think Winston Churchill then reposted, no, but he intended to make doors
into the same souls. And I think there is something difficult about saying your
religion overrides any other test that might ordinarily be put to you in the
political realm. Ash, Ash Sarkar? I actually wish that the political furore
swirling around Kate Forbes was about the role of religion in politics, because
I don't think it's actually that at all. I think the reason why it's become such
a hot button issue is because a load of right wing papers thought that she would
just be their woman when it came to trans rights and the Gender Recognition Act.
But it turns out she's got a whole load of other views about sexuality and gay
marriage and unwed mothers, which then makes them feel that she's political
kryptonite and that's why it's a big deal. Tim, Tim Stanley? I'm very
sympathetic to Kate Forbes because I see this race as a test of whether or not a
traditional Christian can still win an election. And the wider debate is not
just the balance between church and state, it's a power struggle between those
whose politics is shaped by religion and those who want a Britain that is
aggressively secular, even atheist. Panel, thanks very much indeed. Our first
witness is Ellie Gomersall, who's president of the National Union of Students in
Scotland, a pro-independence activist and a trans woman. And she's on the line
from Glasgow now. Ellie Gomersall, what in your view would be the consequences
if Kate Forbes wins and becomes first minister and how would you feel about it?
Well, I'd be incredibly worried if Kate Forbes did become first minister because
although she has, she said that she would respect the law as it currently
stands, in the same week she also said that if there were to be a vote on gay
marriage, for instance, tomorrow, that she would vote against it. That to me
says that she doesn't respect me as an LGBT plus member of the community in
Scotland. That says to me that my rights are potentially under threat with her
leading our government. I think that's an incredibly worrying situation for me
and many other people in Scotland, whether they're LGBT, whether they're people
who need access to abortions, for instance. Understood. Tim Stanley? Ellie, but
crucially there isn't going to be a vote on whether or not same-sex marriage
should be legal. So if there isn't going to be a vote and if she said she's not
going to change any laws, then why are you worried about her? Well, I think
first of all that actually we don't know that there definitely won't be a vote
on same-sex marriage, for instance, in this term of parliament. In the way the
Scottish parliament works, any member could propose that as an amnesty. Right,
which should be one vote among many. It's not going to pass. It's not an issue.
Well, let's take a look at other issues that are coming up in the Scottish
parliament over the next few months. Let's take a look at the Buffer Zones Bill,
for instance, which is being proposed by Gillian Mackay MSP around access to
abortion. That is a very hot topic in Scotland at the moment. It's something
that the Scottish government is committed to. Yes, and Kate Forbes has said that
she believes women should be able to access abortion services without facing
harassment. She has, but I think that there's lots of other issues that could
come up over the term of parliament. But we're onto hypotheticals here. I'm
sorry, but can you understand why as a religious person this sounds suspiciously
to me like a test act? Like this is you saying that these things could come up
and because they could come up and we all know what she privately thinks, I
can't trust her. Well, yes. I mean, ultimately, that is the case. Can you
understand how for me as an LGBT plus person, how hearing that the potential
leader of our country doesn't respect my right to get married, my right to live
as the gender that I am? Do you understand how that makes me feel? But in a
democracy, we have to accept that we might not agree with each other or even
like each other, but we have to put up with each other, don't we? Well, that's
that's very true. I think we and I think that point around the fact that we live
in a democracy is a very important one because Kate Forbes was elected on a
manifesto around, for instance, promoting inclusive education, LGBT plus
inclusive education and school. She was elected on a number of very socially
progressive manifesto commitments. And I think that it's important that if she
becomes the next first minister, she stands by those commitments. One thing I
really dislike about whenever we discuss trans or gay issues is that there's
always this sense of an interrogation of gay or trans people in their private
life. Can you see how from a religious point of view, it feels like that's being
done to her, that every aspect of her belief in her private life and her family
is being interrogated in this really unpleasant inquisitorial way? Well, I
actually don't I don't think that this is about her religious belief or her
religious faith. I think this is about her political opinions, which I'm sure
you'd agree are incredibly important when we're talking about the potential next
first minister of Scotland. It might well be that those political opinions have
been formed as a result of her faith, but it's the political opinions that
matter. And regardless of where those come from, I think it's incredibly
important that we're able to scrutinize those and hold our politicians to
account. And Michelle? If I were a person of faith getting involved with
politics and particularly looking at what we've learned from the Kate Forbes
affair, I think the best thing is just not to be very honest at all, to fudge,
to kind of weasel, to equivocate. Isn't that the danger of when we ask people to
declare everything in very stark colours that we don't allow for the fact that
some people will simply have paradoxical views and still be very, very good and
useful politicians? I think it is very important that politicians are able to be
honest. I was grateful to Kate Forbes for being open and upfront about her
views, although of course, in the past couple of weeks, she said multiple things
which are contradictory to each other, which gives me much less faith there. But
I think that you can look at a vast number of politicians for whom their faith,
their religion is deeply important to them. I think that this isn't about Kate
Forbes' faith or her religion, it's about her political opinions. And I think
that it's absolutely right that we're able to scrutinize those. Well, I mean, it
says you. If you're Kate Forbes, you don't think that, do you? You think that
there is a continuity between religious views and political opinions and it
suits those who are coming from a position that wants to be critical of the way
that she sees certain things. You said yourself you felt under threat. Other
people will simply say, maybe I'm uncomfortable. People have different degrees
of what they object to. But you see these things as very connected. What if I
were to say to you, actually, that might not be so for everyone. Some people
might really want to respect that there is a difference between religious views
and politics. Well, I think that, again, it comes down to this point of us being
able to scrutinize those views, no matter where they come from. If someone has a
view or an opinion and is asking to be the next first minister of the country, I
should have that right to be able to be critical of those views, especially when
their views that impact me directly and impact my life as an LGBT plus person,
for instance, in Scotland. I mean, even when we look beyond, for instance, the
legislation, I think it's important to look at the cultural significance that
the first minister has and that influence there that they have. I think that
especially when you look at the rate of hate crimes, as an example, towards LGBT
plus people at the moment, it's incredibly important we have those role models.
I must break in. Does the phrase matters of conscience or anything that comes
outside a particular tick box exercise, and I mean, we all do it about
politicians, but is there anything that is just like the box that says, well,
I'm leaving this one, not applicable or I'm not going to go there because I
accept that there's private space? Maybe the answer for you is no. I wonder why
it is that when we talk about matters of conscience, it's always around issues
that affect minority groups or equalities issues. I think that's interesting,
isn't it? There always seems to be an opt out when we're talking about the lives
of minority groups such as LGBT plus people. But when it comes to other issues
which have vast moral and ethical implications, we don't seem to have those same
conversations. Our next witness is Isabel Hardman, Assistant Editor of The
Spectator, of course, author of Why We Get the Wrong Politicians. Does Kate
Forbes' particular faith make her the wrong kind of politician or at least make
you want to ask questions about how far she might want her beliefs to apply to
other people? I think as a political journalist, I'm naturally suspicious of
everyone. And I think that that's probably the right attitude to have because
Kate Forbes is worthy of suspicion because she wants to lead a political party
and she has a worldview. But then so do all the other candidates. So did Nicola
Sturgeon. And I think when we assume that non-religious worldviews are somehow
the default way of thinking, perhaps unquestionable ways of thinking, and we
don't direct the same interrogations at non-religious politicians, then I think
we fall into a dangerous trap that can actually really harm policymaking because
we start to think that people's assumptions are always correct. So we've been
throwing around this phrase a lot so far called matter of conscience. What for
you defines a matter of conscience? It's a really interesting question because
as your previous speaker was alluding to, it tends to be moral issues around
abortion, around gay rights, around things that are really deeply affected by
people's religious beliefs. And it doesn't apply to matters of war, for
instance, which you could argue and lots of people in politics do argue should
be a conscience vote because that would involve killing people. And do you take
the view that it's important for politicians to be able to act on matters of
conscience? I think if we had party whips on moral issues, we would end up
having very religiously delineated parties, which you do in other countries. But
we don't in this country. And I think it is a good thing that the Labour Party,
for instance, has Catholic MPs in it, has Muslim MPs in it. I think if you were
to have a party whip on matters such as abortion, you would then get that sort
of segregation. Let's take that up for a second because one of the reasons why I
generally vote for left wing parties is that I think that abortion rights are
safe with them. Right. So let's say I vote for the Labour Party, but my local
MP, who's Labour, ends up, because it's a matter of conscience voting against
abortion rights or abstains in it. Don't I have the right as a voter who's given
my vote to that party, allowed them to form a government even, to feel deeply
and profoundly politically betrayed? I can understand why you would feel deeply
politically disappointed, but you might do on lots of other issues as well.
Ultimately, we elect our politicians to take decisions on our behalf, often to
be better informed on things we can't be bothered to get to know, such as
fractional reserve banking, for instance. Yeah, but we're talking about
abortion. Yes. Right. I know about abortion, you know about abortion. And if
someone votes against my right to have one, that's different from fractional
reserve banking. Of course it's different. And of course, it's, you know,
that's, I think, one of the reasons why it's often been backbench legislation,
because governments haven't wanted to get so involved in these big issues. If
you look at the big social changes of the 60s, they were all through backbench
legislation because political parties didn't want to involve themselves and to
get that reaction that you talk about. But to talk about another moral issue,
the death penalty is often something that polls suggest a large number, possibly
even a majority of the public would like to bring back. I think there's a lot of
people who take comfort in the fact that their politicians don't want to enact
that. Giles Fraser. I'm slightly bothered by this line that you get with
politicians all the time of faith, that it's a private matter. And I can see why
they say that. And people advising Kate Forbes might well have been, you know,
should have said that to her, say something like that. But from a theological
point of view, it's nonsense. I mean, the idea that something like that can be a
private matter. So how do the politicians square those two things up? I think in
a way, politicians with a recognised faith have thought about this much more
than those who don't. And I think that it would be better if we acknowledge that
all of us have influences on our world views. I used to be a committed
conservative evangelical Christian. I am not anymore. Some of my views remain
quite stupid, even though they're diametrically opposed to what I subscribe to
when I was a Christian. Some of them are actually largely because of the social
group I'm in. And if I interrogated them, it would be because I want to fit in
with my friends. I don't want to upset people. Now, is that really any better
than because my church told me that that was the right view to have? So I think
a suspicion of all politicians, if you look at Nicola Sturgeon, when she was
being asked about gender self ID, she actually looked as though she hadn't been
asked about the basis for thinking about these things before. And she looked
quite exasperated because normally those questions are labelled at the religious
people, the sort of, you know, the slightly stupid people. I get all that. I'm
just trying to sort of plumb out why it is that religion, where we're allowed to
see it as a sort of private matter. You know, it's particularly in this country.
I mean, it's something that you sort of do in the privacy of your own home or
it's a bit like how you used to think about sex or having to do it in the
privacy of your own bedroom. What was it supposed to be in public? Well, I mean,
as opposed to talking about it. The queue's a very lively place. I mean, I
suppose the other question would be, do we want to end up in a political culture
where flaunting your religious beliefs is something that's desirable and will
help you get elected? Not just in the US, but in Italy and other countries. I'm
not sure that that would be very palatable to the British. It wouldn't work
here, would it? It's not an electoral asset. No, no. And to a certain extent, I
quite like the British spirit of mockery about these things. I just think it
should be applied across the board because all of us have daft beliefs. I agree
with that. Do you think there's something about the way we think about Kate
Forbes and our suspicion of religious people that's slightly imported from
America? Is that sort of we think about American evangelicals and we have this
very English dislike of particularly evangelicals. You know, we don't
interrogate Rishi Sunak about his Hindu beliefs, but we've gone for Kate Forbes.
We don't. And I don't think it's just exported, actually, from the US. I think
it is also a historic thing. If you talk to members of generations above mine,
they will remember greater restrictions being placed on their lives by religious
groups who they didn't necessarily agree with. And I think that's particularly
the case, actually, in some Scottish communities. Isabel Hardman, thanks very
much indeed. Our next witness is Andrew Copson, who is chief executive of
Humanists UK and author of Secularism, a Short Introduction. So there you are.
You've written a Bible, so to speak, for the non-religious. But does it make you
feel uncomfortable to think that Kate Forbes might be denied office, some say
even pushed out of politics, because of her beliefs? If that were to happen, I
would be very uncomfortable, because I think that the public square and
political life should be a place that's open to people of all religious and non-
religious worldviews. But the corollary of that is that we're all judged on our
values and opinions, including our most deeply held ones. And that, I think, is
what's happening to her quite rightly. Anne McInerney? It does rather depend,
doesn't it, what the penalties are for being judged or where we give people a
free pass. So if we take something like gay marriage, which is foundational to
this case, if a majority of voters in a particular territory, in this case
Scotland, were opposed to it, would you then concede that even if your own
belief was strongly in favour, that that was the democratic will? No, because
I'm not a radical democrat who thinks that everyone's lives and rights should be
subject to the whim of a majority. I think that there are some rights, the very
intimate ones, like the right to life, the right to marriage, basic fundamental
civil rights, which should be protected regardless of the democratic feeling
about it. That's why we have things like the Human Rights Act, why other
countries have constitutions. Well, indeed, but they are kind of secular
religions, aren't they? I mean, the idea that gay marriage is a fundamental
right is a very recent extension of the idea of rights. Now, it may be very
beneficial. Some people will disagree with it, but you do have a spread of
things which are taking on a kind of almost religious sort of conviction, which
are secular. The idea that marriage is a fundamental right and there's a
fundamental right to private life isn't new. The bringing into the concept of
human rights of people who previous generations thought were somehow not fully
human, like gay people or women or disabled people or people of different races,
is new. That's true, but I think it's a very good thing and it's part of a
growing recognition that we're all human beings. And I think that, I mean,
you're right that these things are contingent. We might change them tomorrow and
that would be unfortunate, but it might happen. But I think they're beneficial.
So that's why I personally support them. Yeah, no, I understand why you
personally support them. I just don't see quite why you think that they should
be so foundational to why everyone would sort of say you should or should vote
or vote this way or vote another. You, of course, are very free to vote as you
wish and to recommend doing so. But I wondered whether you felt it was a kind of
mission creep here that by the time we've had views on abortion, views on gay
marriage, views on, we haven't touched on euthanasia, but I think it often comes
into this kind of mix, that we end up with lots of things now being seen as core
to a decision to vote for or support a candidate, which would once have been
perhaps more rightly put into a different category. Maybe. I mean, I don't think
you can do much about that because you can't control people's minds. I mean, the
individual citizen is going to vote on their preferences, whatever they might
be. Well, first of all, a candidate has to be allowed through the process for
that to happen. I mean, she was leading until very, very recently. I don't know
how she's doing now, but I don't think there's much evidence that candidates
can't get through that process. I mean, Parliament is full of conservative
Christians. They're overrepresented as compared to the population as a whole. So
I think that the idea that people with those beliefs are being kept out of
politics probably isn't sustainable. They are getting through, they're getting
into politics. That's not a problem. But the arguments, I mean, what your
question boils down to is, you know, why should we respect fundamental human and
civil rights? And I think the answer to that in the end is pragmatic because we
all benefit from that mutual respect. Tim Sirni? If I was to encounter a
candidate who wanted to restrict abortion, I would vote for them. I presume if
you encountered a candidate who didn't want to do that, to keep the current
situation, you'd vote for them. So all we're really talking about here is a
contest between values in the public sphere. Yes. That's such a bad thing. No, I
think it's a very good thing. That's the nature of our democracy. So we can
agree. So really the Kate Forbes thing, actually, this is politics as it should
be. What is meant to happen is happening. She has expressed her strongly held
values, beliefs and opinions. Good. And people will now judge her for it. It
looks to me like you as a humanist, your side is winning. Well, I wouldn't put
it like that. I don't think that this is a war. But doesn't Kate Forbes prove
it? Because the very… Well, she's doing quite well, isn't she? Well, for a
start, she's being challenged not on things that she could possibly do, but on
things which are now settled law. So you've got the gay marriage, you've got the
abortion rights, gender self-ID is probably going to go through. So in other
words, legislatively she's won, but also the fact that she couldn't even voice a
private opinion on it without being shouted down implies that not only is the
legal battle won, but culturally you've won as well. Well, she did voice it and
she wasn't shouted down. In fact, her view was very widely covered in all sorts
of media as it should be. In a mix of outrage and amusement. Well, you seem to
have approved of it, so I mean other people approved of it. I'm sure there are
plenty of people who agree with you. And like you say, that's the contest in
politics. But one can accept, therefore, that really she's lost the big battle,
but is she allowed to have that private opinion? I see. I mean, I don't know
about you, but when I am making my own decisions about who to vote for, I don't
look so much at party, although I look at party of course. I do look at the
individual person. I question their judgment and part of that is their values
and opinions. And I think that if you express your fundamental beliefs and your
worldview, then you will be judged by it on a politician because you can't ever
know a politician's 101 policy positions. You've got to sort of make a judgment
about their instincts and their worldview. But is it our matters, doesn't it?
But we've moved from a position where 40 years ago, unfortunately, there was
prejudice against certain minorities and they were culturally not represented
and they were looked down upon and sneered at. It now just feels like that's,
it's switched. That this is really a power struggle and the old conservative
side have lost and they're now the ones being laughed at and marginalized. I
suppose you might feel like that if you're on what you perceive as the losing
side. That's not how I feel. I don't think I sneer at people like that. And in
most of the people I encounter who have the same mind of me, I don't feel
they're a sneery bunch. But I can understand how a side that feels it's losing
as you express it might feel that way. But a lot of us feel that way about all
sorts of issues. It's not just about what they might wish to do if they were
elected. It's also this perception that if you hold certain views, you're an
idiot and you just shouldn't be allowed into the public sphere. Well, I don't
agree with that. So I'm not the right person to ask about that because I think
this mix of views is what we get in a plural society. Andrew Cobson, thank you.
Note of agreement. Thank you very much indeed. Our last witness is James
Eglinton, who's senior lecturer in reformed theology at the University of
Edinburgh. And he's on the line from there now. We're really on to the wider
questions of religion and politics now. But reverting for a moment to Kate
Forbes, would it be good for Scotland to have her or someone like her as leader,
do you think? I think so. I've argued this publicly recently that the kind of
culture that we've had in Scotland under Sturgeon has been what sociologists
would call a bureaucratic culture. It's all about uniformity. It's quite a low
trust culture. A lot of Scots find it difficult to trust people who are
different to them, but who say they will represent them nonetheless. I think
having a leader with some minority opinions, even some quite unpopular opinions
like Kate Forbes, but who is committed to democracy, to representing those who
don't think like her, would actually shift us into quite a different kind of
culture. And I would see that as a properly political culture that's about unity
over uniformity. OK, Charles Fraser. How can you trust someone who says they're
against gay marriage, but they wouldn't do anything against it? They wouldn't
move against it. There seems inconsistency. Isn't that what creates the
distrust? That's a very good question, Giles. I think that the exercise of trust
is one of the big and difficult things about living in a liberal democracy. A
few of the previous witnesses have touched on that issue of trust, and I think
that's one of the key issues in Scottish culture at the moment in terms of
politics. Exercising trust is really difficult. You make yourself vulnerable,
but because it's a democracy, if someone breaks that trust, you vote them out
the next time you vote for someone else. But we trust people because there is
some sort of consistency between what they believe and how they act. And there
seems to be some break in that in the Kate Ford situation, which is how we feel
trust is actually problematic here. OK, well, that's again a good question. So I
think the way that I approach this, when I think about liberal democracy, who to
trust and how to exercise trust, a lot of the previous witnesses have spoken
about worldview. And I think that's great to hear that that's a big part of the
conversation, the idea that everyone believes something, that there's no such
thing as a neutral politician who's just some kind of robot. And even robots are
pre-programmed by something else. I think it's really important that we can ask
people questions about how their values and beliefs have been formed. And
because liberal democracy needs politicians who are people of distinctive,
identifiable, you know, they have a fire in their belly over particular issues.
But we don't want to just bland politicians. I think you have no convictions. I
think it's really good that we have politicians who do believe things, even if
we disagree with them. I'm with you on that. Does that mean that you think that
this would be sort of conscience votes, which feel a bit to me like sort of
religious get out of jail free cards? You can just you put it down and no one's
allowed to ask you. I mean, it's just the way of bypassing. Not at all. So I
actually favor a more rigorous level of interrogation. So I think that every
politician, as I said, has a worldview. I want the freedom and a liberal
democracy to ask them, tell me where your beliefs come from. They come from
somewhere. One of the previous witnesses mentioned that that was quite painful
to watch with Sturgeon on gender self-ID, that it was as though she hadn't been
asked that before. And she was shocked at trying to the difficulty of trying to
articulate where this is from. So I want to ask politicians two questions. One
is where your beliefs are from. And then that gets you the distinctive things.
We're doing this with Kate Forbes at the moment. But then the second question I
want to ask is how those beliefs, how that worldview enables you to live well
alongside people who don't share it. I think that's really key for liberal
democracy. I think that we're not quite at that level in terms of a very healthy
public conversation about this. But we need to get there. And then I think you
let the worldview explain how it makes the politician distinctive, but also able
to represent people who don't agree with them. Do you want Kate Forbes because
she actually does broadly agree with you? Oh, I'm not here to endorse any
particular candidate. I think that there's a really good case that can be. You
said that would be a better place for her leadership. I think that the example
of minority, minority opinion leader who's committed to democracy would be a
really good thing for Scotland because of the break from that kind of
bureaucratic culture where, again, it's just I think it's a really big problem
that for a lot of us, we find it difficult to trust people who are other, but
who say that they will look after our best interests. That's not healthy for
liberal democracy. I think that's really troubling. The kind of direction that
it pushes us in towards being a low trust culture. Do you think that leaders of
governments like a first minister, for instance, have different moral
obligations than your average citizen or a local councillor or indeed an MP or
MSP? Oh, yeah, I think the bar for being able to practice the key beliefs of
liberalism, that's much higher for a leader. And I think that that so far in
Scotland that actually all three of the candidates have demonstrated or they've
put forward their case that they're not autocrats, that they're all Democrats.
And I think for me, that's an absolute bar. And I think that has to be a really
high bar. So you can tolerate maybe lowering levels of skill and being able to
work out how to live well alongside people, to represent people who aren't like
you at a very fundamental level. At lower levels in society, that's I think it's
really important still, but less important than in the first minister. And
that's why I think being able to ask these kinds of questions of candidates is
so important. So if we both agree then that prime ministers, first ministers,
they're not just another flower in the garden of diverse opinion. It's really
essential that the electorate can expect and be confident that a prime minister
won't ride roughshod over those who didn't vote for them or who aren't like
them, that they'll in short protect minority rights. And we've heard from a
witness earlier who said, I cannot trust Kate Forbes with my rights as a
minority. Isn't that Kate Forbes' failing rather than Ellie Gommersall's? I
think I would find it difficult to lay the blame at the foot of any one person
in society because I see this as a collective failing over a number of years in
Scotland in general, that we have shifted towards being more of a low trust
culture. And that's just not a good thing. I think people are diverse. People
are different. But you're saying that someone like Kate Forbes would mean that
we all have to become more trusting, more able to live with people of different
opinions. So that ultimately means that it's us as voters or minority voters who
have to kind of get on and lump it rather than Kate Forbes being sensitive to
the needs of those voters. Oh, I think that it probably takes two to tango
between the voting public and whoever they vote for as the leader. The leader
really does have to be sensitive. The leader does have to be a prime minister's
a lot bigger feat than your average voter. Right. They can do a lot more damage
if they step on you. Indeed. But there are a lot of us with a lot of feet. So we
want to add it all up. Then maybe the metaphor kind of runs out of steam. But I
think in this case, the exercise of trust is, I think, one of the most beautiful
things, but also one of the most difficult things and the most necessary thing
in a liberal democracy. And I think we want to lean into that more than ever,
actually, in Scotland. And I think that it's uncomfortable. It's uncomfortable
for everyone in a democracy. Nobody gets everything that they want, or at least
not in a liberal democracy, maybe in a one party democracy or so on in a much
weaker form. There is someone who gets whatever they want. But in our kind of
diverse society, nobody will get everything that they want. And that just takes
trust. James Eglinton, thank you very much indeed for joining us this evening.
Interesting how the arguments develop, Panel. How did you feel, Tim, about our
first witness, the trans woman Ellie Gomesall saying, well, actually, she almost
said she wouldn't feel safe living in a Scotland led by somebody like Kate? I'd
say that I understand and I'm sympathetic. And I think as a Christian, Kate
Forbes would want to provide an answer to that, which was compassionate, because
that's typically what Christians want to do, regardless of their religious
beliefs. One thing I want to add is that Kate Forbes hasn't lost yet. And my
suspicion is that a lot of the negative reaction, in fact, was a London media
reaction to her and not necessarily reflective of Scottish opinion. Scotland,
don't forget, in many ways, is a very socially conservative society. It was sort
of it was created by the Enlightenment and the Reformation. It's the land of
John Knox. The idea that this is this is some secular paradise and she is
ruining it. No, she speaks from a tradition which is very strongly represented.
And the other thing I'd like to say as a political journalist is I follow
Parliament. I sit on debates. Christianity is mentioned a lot. A lot of MPs are
Christian. I would say that proportionally Westminster is far more Christian
than the rest of the country. What isn't popular within politics is a certain
brand of Christianity, which Kate Forbes represents, which is a traditional or
religiously conservative form of Christianity. But actually, there are plenty of
politicians who talk about Jesus Christ, and he is often invoked to justify left
wing positions like welfare spending. And I'm all for that. But when witnesses
like on this program and elsewhere say that because of her beliefs, she is
disrespecting, delegitimizing gay people who've had gay marriages and so on. Do
you think they're overreacting? Yes, I do. I mean, I disagree with her
profoundly. I believe in gay marriage. I think gay marriage would be a very good
thing. And I believe it for religious reasons as well as would vote for it. But
I actually think the idea that someone disagrees with me on that, I don't think
that is, especially in the 21st century, is any sort of threat to the rights and
privileges that have been built up, hard fought for, of course, but actually are
well secured in our society. But there was a point though, wasn't it, when one
of the witnesses said that Kate Forbes saying that she'd fight for gay right to
get married because it was the law, but she'd vote against it if it came up
again. Is something of a contradiction? Well, this is the point that I was
trying to make, which is that opinions and votes aren't the same thing. So I
don't mind what Kate Forbes or anybody else thinks. What my concern would be is
how's it going to come down when it comes to your vote? Because that's really
the only thing we've got to hold politicians to account. And I think that's
where Ellie Gommersall was coming from. And I know that you were saying it's
highly unlikely that a crunch vote on gay marriage would come down to the vote
of Kate Forbes. But Ellie Gommersall was essentially going, can I trust you with
my rights? Can I trust you to vote in a way that would protect my rights? The
answer is no. Therefore, I don't want you to be first minister. And that's
called democratic discernment. But can you see how this might get crossed with a
sort of broader suspicion of the religious people? That you get a sort of, that
there is somehow, there's something working underneath here, which is, you know,
we think this is crazy. We think this is mad. I don't believe people who say
they don't care what you think privately. I don't believe them. So Ash, if you
had the perfect socialist candidate, but you knew they were a creationist, would
you still vote for them? I've actually got a real life example for you. Rebecca
Long Bailey, a socialist on the left wing of the Labour Party and a Catholic.
And one of the things that she said is that my Catholic beliefs will not impact
how I vote on abortion. These things are totally separate. And I believed her.
And I suppose the central, it's not a very, it's not a very Catholic line. I can
tell you that. And the central question, really, I suppose, in what way are
religious beliefs different from political beliefs? I think that's what we were,
is this a value difference or, you know, is that coming from such a different
place? Well, if we don't accept that there is some difference, I think we do get
into a bit of a dangerous territory, because it's not to say that every
religious belief that affects politics is legitimate. Some of them are wise,
some of them are unwise, and some of them, you know, you and I and everyone
around the table and listening would have a different view of. But I don't think
we have given enough weight in these arguments tonight to what happens when you
don't allow religion its space in society. And we become a little bit lazy about
it. And we think that when someone pops up and they are inconvenient, as in the
Forbes case, to a very smooth view of what a progressive politician should
believe in or should not believe in, we go after them. But actually, I think the
more interesting thing for me is, have you looked at what is happening in
societies where religion is not allowed to coexist in all its paradoxes close to
politics? That's the danger zone. I mean, the really interesting thing about
this is saying, you know, are we excluding religion from the public sphere? When
you look at what's going on with demographics and birth rates, there's a book
called The Religious Shall Inherit the Earth. Religious people are having more
babies. They will make up the bulk of the American electorate within 25 to 50
years. And we'll probably be having a really different kind of conversation
about the protection of minority opinions in that context. And I think it's
really bad to treat either a secular worldview or a religious worldview as one
which is natural and right. It's one that you constantly have to advocate for.
Getting down to specifics again for just for a minute. The argument was that it
was not really a full and satisfactory answer to say my religious beliefs apply
to how I live my life. I don't impose them on others. Isn't that the question?
How far do you think your beliefs should apply to others, Giles? Yeah, I mean, I
think there is some sort of distinction here. I mean, you know, not everything I
think is right or wrong needs to issue in legislation. I mean, it's perfectly
consistent to say that you think adultery is wrong and to think you don't think
adultery should be illegal. I mean, that's a perfectly fine position. I imagine
quite a few people think it. So you don't think everything that you believe
morally, even quite strongly morally, has to end up in law. So I think there is
something to that. But it's when people start, you know, it's when beliefs, as
it were, private beliefs, whatever that really means, sort of are very, very
proximate to what is a live issue, political, then that's a different matter. I
was going to say to sort of take the other side of that, Giles. I did think it
was a very interesting case when Ruth Kelly, a very traditional Catholic who was
not opposing gay adoption as such, but she didn't think that in this case that
Catholic, to give the example of a Catholic adoption agency, should be mandated,
which was the way that the policy was going to go under Labour. And I think
that's a very good example. As we say, well, it might be nice if you could
separate these things off. But what will happen is there will be something that
will arise, practically speaking, which will turn the screw. And what then does
the politician have to answer to? Do they simply say, and I think she did try to
say, this is simply my belief, that wasn't good enough for a lot of her
colleagues. But I do rather understand where they were coming from as well,
because there was, well, if you believe this, then something follows from it.
That's where this becomes more than a maze. You really have a hard choice then
as a religious person. What do you think is basically happening here? Do you
think there's some sort of new orthodoxy that's antipathetic to religion or at
least to conservative Christianity and that the matters of moral conscience are
actually mainstream politics now? That's what political argument is increasingly
about. Giles, you're nodding, but that's not so interesting. I think it's partly
that. I think also the culture is obsessed with sex. And one thing that really
irritates me as a Christian is that whenever a politician is exposed, they come
out of the closet as a Christian. The first Christian they're asked is, what do
you think about sex? It's really prurient. And it's really offensive because, of
course, Christianity is not primarily about sex. And Christians have many views,
which might be quite outrageous and controversial. I'd love to know what Kate
Forbes thinks about various Calvinistic doctrines. Does she believe in the total
depravity of man? That's really interesting. Plus, there are many Christians.
But there are also many Christians, like the former Archbishop of Canterbury,
who's very pro-trans rights for a Christian reason. And finally, I think,
Michael, it was you who raised the question about issues of conscience. Someone
who mentioned war. Now, about 50 or 60 years ago, probably actually 100 years
ago, Second World War, First World War, the primary issue of moral conscience in
this country was pacifism. Now it's not anymore. But actually, that's an
entirely legitimate Christian perspective. And I think it's so interesting how
it's never mentioned anymore. We just go straight to the sex stuff. I thought
the other interesting point was that nobody asks Rishi Sunak about being a
Hindu. And in fact, there is a Muslim candidate for this. And it's so silly
because it's a fascinating subject and I'd like to know his answer. Well,
actually, the Muslim candidate in this instance has been asked repeatedly about
gay marriage. He was asked just this Sunday on Sophie Ridge, do you consider gay
sex a sin? And he said no. So he was comfortable in his answers. And I think
that that does kind of explain a lot of the… He's not getting an easier ride
because he's a Muslim. But that raises questions itself. What kind of… about his
Islamic faith. But the thing that I'm saying is that I think that this is part
of what's driving the story is that it's very counterintuitive for lots of
people in Westminster to see an argument about gay marriage play out, whereas
the Pakistani Muslim saying I'm fine with it. And because they can't handle the
fact that their person who aligned with them on things like gender recognition
actually has a whole host of other opinions, too. That's at the heart of this
story. Well, we could go on with this for at least another quarter of an hour.
But I'm afraid our time's up. That's it for this week from our panel, Giles
Fraser, Ash Sarkar, Anne McElvoy and Tim Stanley. Until the same time next week,
Godspeed, goodbye. The Moral Maze was chaired by Michael Burke and produced by
Jonathan Halliwell, with many more mazes to be enjoyed at your leisure on BBC
Sounds. After the news, Paul Gambaccini poses the music questions to three more
competitors in Counterpoint. That's looking forward a couple of minutes. But
first, here's Andrea Cathward, whose job is to look back. Radio 4's feedback
airs your thoughts and questions on BBC Radio programme. We are making changes
to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and
platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working
by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing
this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or
mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Please contact Andrea
Cathward for a new series of feedback, starting next Friday afternoon at 4.30 on
Radio 4 and BBC Radio.