TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This Friday morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at eight
o'clock. Rishi Sunak has announced that a new deal between the UK and the EU on
post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern Ireland has been agreed. The text,
finalised today in Windsor, will alter the Northern Ireland protocol by
scrapping some of the paperwork currently required for goods arriving in Belfast
from the rest of the UK. The Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, has told the Commons
that his party would support the deal. The Prime Minister said the text took a
long time to agree. After weeks of negotiations today, we have made a decisive
breakthrough. The Windsor framework delivers free-flowing trade within the whole
United Kingdom. It protects Northern Ireland's place in our union and it
safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland. By achieving all
this, it preserves the delicate balance inherent in the Belfast Good Friday
Agreement. The Democratic Unionists, who have been blocking the formation of a
new government in Northern Ireland until issues with trade have been resolved,
say they are yet to decide whether the new agreement is acceptable for them. The
new IRA has said it carried out the shooting of a senior police officer in
County Tyrone. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was attacked in front of
his young son at a sports centre in Oma last week. Six people are still in
custody for questioning. Lidl has become the latest supermarket chain to limit
the sales of some fruit and vegetables, blaming adverse weather conditions in
Spain and Morocco for shortages. Tesco, Aldi, Asda and Morrisons have already
capped the number of salad items that customers can buy. The World Bank
estimates this month's earthquakes in Turkey have cost at least $34 billion in
physical damage. It's warned, though, that the final bill for reconstruction
could be double that. Police in Ecuador have seized almost nine tonnes of
cocaine from a shipment of bananas bound for Belgium. Officers say it had a
street value of more than £250 million. BBC News. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I
was filming East London Mosque when the story broke the three schoolgirls from
the area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State
Group. Breaking news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly
missing. Shamina Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of
the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and
into Syria to find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her
story. What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a
potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamina Begum story, series two of I'm Not
a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. Here on Radio 4, we'll be putting globalisation
in the spotlight in half an hour. Professor Ian Golden will be asking how far
the world is fragmenting both politically and economically and what the
consequences of that could be. That's tonight's analysis in half an hour. But
first, the Shetland Islands are 100 miles from mainland Britain and have a
population of just over 20,000 people. And yet they find themselves at the heart
of the UK's debate over oil and gas. Jen Stout reports on a complex energy
transition and the people stuck in the middle. Cambo, 75 miles west of Shetland,
is a prospective oil field. It's actually one of several, but Cambo is
particularly distinctive due to the political back and forth over whether it
should get the go ahead. In 2021, the project seemed to be shelved for good. Two
years on, the war in Ukraine, Putin's weaponisation of gas and the resultant
energy crisis apparently mean that things have changed. So where does that leave
North Sea oil and gas? And more importantly, if you're standing where I'm
standing, where does this leave Shetland? Shetland is almost an exception in the
way that we can critically think about North Sea oil and gas. I'm 20 miles north
of Shetland's capital, Larwick. I'm up in the North Mainland near Vaux. It's a
windy day, so I'm indoors looking out of the big picture windows of my rented
house. And the view from here on the slopes of a steep river valley looking out
over the sea is every cliche you've heard about Shetland. A vast, dramatic
landscape dotted with little houses, that big, wide sky and the sparkling sea
never far away. But it's night time now. Darkness comes early at 60 degrees
north. And yes, the stars shine bright, but so does something which perhaps
doesn't fit the romantic stereotype of Shetland, the unspoilt wilderness. Behind
those big hills to the north, there's a large orange glow lighting up the sky.
And it's been there a long time. It comes from the huge Sulum Vaux oil terminal
and its tall flare stack. This big industrial site, decades old now, might be
hidden away on a remote peninsula, but the light it emits is seen far and wide.
And the impact on life here is visible everywhere. The good roads, the fine
schools, the general sense of prosperity, of cash. An oil fund, a bit like
Norway's, gathered the benefits of oil and gas for Shetland's 20,000 odd
residents since the early 1980s. Good times were had. I think that we really
shouldn't understate the cultural, economic and societal significance of the
transformations that the oil brought to northern Scotland and Shetland in
particular. Historian Ewan Gibbs. And it led to a fundamental reorientation in
economic activity, a whole new set of powerful economic actors in the form of
multinational oil companies who had an interest in political affairs on the
island. And it obviously led to important new revenue streams, which have had a
huge impact on the infrastructure and built environment of Shetland as well. And
of course, a lot of what you're describing there, Shetland's story is different
to elsewhere in the UK, because it was possible for the council back in the 70s
to secure something akin to a softened wealth fund. I think that that was the
product in many ways of Shetland already having a very distinctive cultural
identity and distinctive political institutions, and it's simply physical
geographical distance. Oil wasn't necessary for Shetland to continue as it was,
and it didn't desperately need in many senses the benefits of oil. So it was
able to drive a relatively hard bargain with oil companies. Shetland back in the
1970s fought its corner hard. What could have been a wild west, a black gold
rush, was kept largely under local authority oversight, with the council owning
the port and harbour and negotiating a disturbance payment for each barrel of
oil going through the terminal. This went into what's now called the Shetland
Charitable Trust, which began in 1976. Over the past four decades, that trust
has distributed more than £300 million throughout Shetland society. Arts,
charities, crafts, local businesses, social services all benefited. Shetland
flourished. Ian Clarke was the man behind this deal. He was at that stage the
chief executive of the Shetland Islands Council. This week, Ian Clarke, the man
described as Shetland's answer to Colonel Gaddafi, left the islands to join the
board of the British National Oil Corporation. Thanks largely to Ian Clarke, the
19,000 Shetlanders are set to become the richest community in Britain. Shortly
before he left the islands, he gave a farewell sermon in the tiny church at
Vaux, just a few miles from the site of the multi-million pounds oil terminal
from which Shetland's wealth will flow. The love of money, says Paul, is the
root of all evil. Surely this verse is a very pertinent verse for those of us in
Shetland today. I don't think we should exaggerate the extent of that in some
ways, because I think that ultimately it's been the oil companies that have
derived the huge benefits from the North Sea industry and Shetland has derived
some benefits at a local level from being able to impose conditions effectively
on the use of its territory. But that could all be coming to an end. Oil
production is declining and many want to stop it altogether. Climate targets
must be met. So what replaces it? Well, if I turn to the south and I look out
along the long Kergard Valley, I can see another glow in the sky, a brighter,
more electric light. That's the new converter station for one of the country's
biggest wind farms under construction. 103 turbines strung out along the high
hills all across central Shetland, each one taller than the London Eye. Turbines
that they're speaking about are just vast. The blades on those are fully as long
as the ferry that connects Shetland to Aberdeen. Daniel Geer is a Shetlander who
works in the oil industry. This is the hub components. They look like something
out of Star Wars, I think. Yeah, there's a sci-fi to this all, the scale of it
and these big sort of strange shiny objects landing on the pier here. Yeah, I
think it's 100% science fiction. I grew up in one of Shetland's smallest
islands, Fair Isle. Oil shaped the lives of the people of Shetland's smallest
islands, Fair Isle. Oil shaped the lives of my generation. And now that story is
set to change again. One of the biggest burning questions at the moment is the
question of Cambo and Rosebank and the other, many other, proposed new oil
fields. The debate's obviously very heated on this. There's a lot of people that
feel relatively conservative with the small sea think tanks saying this is
absolutely incompatible with climate change targets. There's a lot of people as
well in places where oil is a significant employer saying, well, we can't just
stop this overnight. How do you see this debate unfolding in the next couple of
years? Yeah, I mean, I think firstly, this was never expected in the 1970s. I've
been reading a lot of archival records recently from government, from industry,
from trade unions that really view the North Sea oil boom as a very temporary
phenomenon. And the expectation when the Sillon Bow terminal was built on
Shetland in the mid 1970s, when construction began, was that this would be done
by the start of the 21st century. So why oil and why now, when even the
International Energy Agency said in 2021 that there must be no more new oil and
gas exploration if we're to meet our climate goals? Energy security fears
prompted by the war in Ukraine have changed the economic landscape. I'm James
Price, and I'm a senior research fellow at the UCL Energy Institute. And my role
is essentially looking at modelling the energy system from how we transition
from where we are today, which is using a lot of fossil fuels, to a low carbon
future that meets our energy needs and also limits climate change. In terms of
how the war in Ukraine has impacted North America, North Sea oil and gas
decision making, well, we've seen that the war has disrupted European oil and
gas supplies, and that's led to prices rising, particularly for natural gas, as
we've seen in just the last year. At the same time, the UK is still heavily
dependent on fossil fuels. It relies on oil and gas for around 70% of its energy
needs. And I emphasize energy, not just electricity. So that's the oil that goes
into our cars, and the gas that goes into our boilers to heat our homes. So
energy security has become a hot political topic. And in response to that, it
appears to make sense to extract more oil and gas from the North Sea to shore up
the supplies that we depend on so much. But the key issue with this is that the
oil and gas dug up in the UK is owned by the fossil fuel companies that extract
it, not by the UK itself. And it will be sold by those companies on the global
market at a global price, not at a discounted rate to UK customers. Roughly 80%
of that oil is exported because it's of a different type of crude oil than the
refineries in the UK want at the moment. So it's exported, and then it is
processed abroad along with other types of oil that's being traded all over the
world. And then we reimport roughly the same amount from other countries, like
Norway, like the USA, and indeed prior to the conflict, like Russia as well. So
more North Sea oil and gas doesn't actually improve our energy security, but
rather it benefits the fossil fuel companies that extract and sell it on a
global market. You see quite short term really fluctuations and changes in the
political context being used to justify what are very, very long term decisions
that are going to impact all of us in the long run. The development of the
Campbell oil field, for instance, is not going to provide oil and gas in the
immediate future. It's been very noticeable that even just in the last few
months, as oil majors have recorded record profits, they've also revised their
previously stronger commitments to decarbonisation. The Campbell oil field was
discovered in 2002, and it's expected to yield over 170 million barrels of oil
equivalent over 25 years and 53.5 billion cubic feet of gas. The field is
primarily owned by Ithaca Energy, which is in turn owned by Israel's Delek
Group. 19 miles from Campbell is the Rosebank oil field. It's attracted a lot
less attention, but Rosebank is huge. It's the largest undeveloped oil and gas
field in the North Sea. Campbell has become symbolic of the debate over fossil
fuels, and it also underscores the tensions between the UK and Scottish
governments. In 2021, Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon argued that it
shouldn't get the green light. Westminster prevaricated. This political impasse
was framed by the backdrop of COP26, the UN Climate Change Summit held in
Glasgow that year. Campbell became a political hot potato that no one wanted to
touch. Even energy giant Shell, which at that point had a 30% stake in the
project. Today, the UK government is pressing ahead with plans to issue more oil
and gas licences. The Scottish government, which now includes ministers from the
Green Party, is pushing for a low carbon, low emissions economy with much more
emphasis on renewables. And in Shetland, we're used to being stuck in the
middle. The question that I've asked myself there and others have asked has
been, if the oil from Campbell and Rosebank is produced, will that result in
more oil being burned in the world? Energy logistics expert Daniel Geer. What
would be the emissions if there was an alternative? If there is no more oil
burned and you're bringing that oil in from somewhere else, does that have a
positive or a negative effect? Will the act of producing oil west of Shetland
result in more demand in the world for oil? Will the transition be supply led or
demand led? And that is a big question. I don't know the answer to that. My gut
feeling is that the transition from oil is going to have to be driven by
government introducing policy that curbs demand. But what's the right way of
this? How are we going to solve this? How are we going to solve it? With the
least pain possible, because one solution would be to basically shut off the
taps tomorrow. But actually that could drive the same outcome that we're trying
to avoid for different reasons. OK, we're rolling. Do you want to introduce
yourself first, Billy? I'm Billy Fox. I'm born and bred Shetlander and lived
here all my life. I spent 22 years in the oil industry working for BP at the
Sombor terminal and I'm now retired. When oil was first spoken about here in the
early 70s, I was one of the ones that wasn't particularly happy about it. I
never actually campaigned against it, but I thought, ah, this is going to be a
big change for Shetland. I'm not sure I like this. But it was going to happen,
so we lived with it. I remember being asked by a friend of mine, how can you
actually work in the oil industry? You know, it's a bad industry and all the
rest of it. And I said, well, to be honest, if you're going to have the oil
industry here, you've got to have people who are environmentally minded working
in it. You never really knew what was going on offshore, but we could control it
around our doors pretty good. But then, of course, there was the Braer oil
spill. In 1993, the worst fears of conservationists and of all islanders came
true when a tanker ran into rocks just off the southern tip of Shetland in
hurricane force winds, spilling nearly 80 litres of oil into the ocean. Spilling
nearly 85,000 tonnes of crude oil. Thousands of animals were killed in the
slick, despite the best efforts of local people to save them. You speak to folk,
like, they're still traumatised by that. It was extremely shocking to see just
what can actually happen fairly easily when oil goes wrong in a place like this.
Absolutely. I was traumatised by it as well, because I was on shift at Solon
Bow. I was in control of Solon Bow when it was all happening in the early hours
of the morning, I think around about six o'clock. We were just coming off shift
at eight o'clock. So we were listening to the radio and hearing everything that
was going on. And it was scary. It was really scary. But it was human decisions,
decisions made by human beings that actually caused it to happen. And that could
happen with absolutely anything. As I see it just now, we sit at a crossroads.
Shetlander Miriam Brett is an economic researcher. She's now based in Glasgow.
It's important here that we're not just talking about one or two projects in the
grand scheme of things. The UK government is currently exploring plans to award
around 130 new licences for oil and gas exploration. But really importantly
here, the industry forecasts for job numbers in oil and gas, they show a
decline. So it's incumbent on governments to plan for the next phase. And
Scotland has a huge role to play because of our green energy potential in a
green industrial transformation. There's a climate change debate happening in
Larwick tonight. I'd hoped to be there. But proximity is a bit of an issue as
I'm visiting Fair Isle and the weather is against us. Hi, Tessa, how you doing?
Hi, Jen. Well, thanks. Are you in Shetland now? I am. Yes. Super. OK, you're
doing better than me because I'm in Fair Isle and I'm not sure the plane's going
today. So I'd hoped to be there tonight at your panel, but not sure that I will
be. But at least... Tessa Kahn is an environmental lawyer. She founded and
directs climate campaign group Uplift. How did you how did you get involved in
this? We've been in touch for some time with some of the activists in Shetland
who spoke out against the Canberra oil fields. They invited us to come over to
Shetland and as a result of that Shetland News has organised this panel. If
you're still around on Thursday when I will hopefully be on the Shetland
mainland, then we could catch up then. Yeah, I'd love that. Hello, everybody.
Welcome to what is the first ever public debate hosted by Shetland News. That's
Hans Marter, editor of Shetland News. Climate change is a huge and complex
topic. It's going to affect us all. And in fact, it is already affecting us. Yet
Shetland has grown very wealthy over the last 50 years. Alongside Tessa and
Daniel, who we heard from earlier, there's also Claire Ferguson, who leads the
climate change strategy at the council and former oil man Gunther Newcomb, who
heads up the Orion Renewables Project. Orion is a massively ambitious project to
turn Shetland into a renewable energy hub, including hydrogen, offshore and
onshore wind and marine energy. Partners include Shetland Islands Council and
Strathclyde University. Some robust dance routines for Up Helly Aa squads,
that's the annual Viking Fire Festival, were taking place next door in this
community centre, hence the music and occasional thumps. In my view, in many
ways, Rosebank is a perfect example of how little public benefit a new oil and
gas field will bring. 90% of its reserves are oil, as I said, 80% of which will
be exported. The licence holders, which include the Norwegian state-owned
Equinor, will receive a half billion pound subsidy to develop the field as a
result of a loophole that's been written into the recent energy profits levy.
And that's at a time that I'm sure you'll agree we don't need to transfer wealth
from the UK public to a very wealthy Norwegian state. The environmental
consequences of Rosebank are of course also immense. Burning all 495 million
barrels of oil that are targeted by that project would result in carbon
emissions that are equivalent to the annual emissions of the world's 28 lowest
income countries. Well we finally had a good day of weather, which means I got
from Fair Isle to the Shetland mainland on the small plane and I'm now making my
way down the wee winding lanes of Larwick to go and meet Tessa Kahn, who was
part of the discussion last night about how Shetland reaches net zero. She's
about to get on the boat but we've managed to just grab her for five minutes so
go and find her. Hi Tessa, nice to meet you. Yeah great to meet you. We could
head in the general direction of the ferry terminal. I think that's a good idea.
You do need to get the boat. Yeah indeed and I assume you know which way. I do
know which way. And how was the discussion last night? It was really lively
actually. It was a full house. There were people standing and lots of questions
from the audience. I mean it carried on for a couple of hours in the end. What's
your sense of how people here are feeling about the just transition, the
possible end of oil? There seems to be a kind of broad acceptance that there
does need to be a transition away from oil and gas and that renewable energy
will for the most part take the place of hydrocarbons. You know and this is also
obviously a community that's benefited from the oil and gas industry in so far
as it's received wealth from it. But at the same time Shetland hasn't benefited
from it in so far as there are incredibly high levels of fuel poverty here. A
lot of the oil and gas as one of the panellists put it last night kind of
bounces off the sand and then heads elsewhere. So I think there's a realisation
that in the next kind of phase of the energy system that we're moving into
there's got to be a lot more community benefit. There's been much discussion of
a Shetland TARIF of cheaper energy prices here because we're hosting one of the
biggest industrial scale wind farms in the country. It doesn't seem like it's
coming anywhere with that. There's no realistic legal way to do that. That we've
been told of so far. Do you worry that the just part of the transition is
getting missed out for places like this? Yeah definitely and I think that's a
you know potentially prohibitive obstacle to a transition at all. You know if
there's significant community opposition to these projects then they won't go
ahead and it will I think undermine people's faith in a transition that
ultimately is going to be one of the biggest in human history if we do it at the
scale and pace that's required for us to stay within safe climate limits. But I
think though that there's a process underway here from what I understand to
develop new principles around consultation and community benefit in relation to
energy projects that the council as well as some of the developers are involved
in putting forward and so it is a matter of making sure that the regulators and
industry embraces those and has that consent kind of moving forward. Well thanks
for your time. No it's a pleasure. Good luck on the boat I hope it's a calm
sailing. Thanks so much Jen. Okay take care. Bye. Shetland's benefits from oil
and gas they extend beyond jobs. It's in no small part because of Shetland's oil
fund negotiations which have you know in turn delivered wider benefits to the
community but while that's beneficial if we look to our Nordic neighbours for
example Faroe and Norway and the ownership structure they have over oil and gas
those wider benefits are very clear of a much more kind of democratic model and
overall the fossil fuel era kind of more broadly has been dominated by really
concentrated ownership structures and extraction and so stewarding a
comprehensive managed just transition it creates a chance for us to reimagine
our approach to energy. So Miriam you grew up in Shetland you're familiar with
the particular problems faced here with fuel poverty, the housing stock being
often very drafty, the climate being what it is. You can see why people feel
very uncertain about a move away from oil and gas when you know there's a
relatively few houses that have heat air pumps and also recently we had massive
blackouts lasting up to a week in some places with people left who were reliant
on electricity with no heating at all. Do you think we're ready for this
transition? So really what that highlights is the need to actually fundamentally
rewire every aspect of our economy because Shetland is disproportionately hit by
fuel poverty. The reason Shetland has high rates of fuel poverty relate to the
cold windy climate and the housing stock but especially the lack of mains gas.
People often rely on heating oil which doesn't get capped in price and they have
to buy gas in canisters. And it's also a failure of our current approach to
energy right to know how energy rich Shetland is and how many people are in fuel
poverty and I think that's why it's really important that as we transition we
look into these questions of ownership of what community benefits can and should
bring to the green transition what they should deliver for communities because
our current approach to energy is unsustainable in so many ways. A crisp new
copy of the Shetland Times, our 151 year old newspaper, probably one of the best
local papers left in Scotland. And this week's edition really does sum up the
scale of what's happening here with the green energy boom. The gigantic blades
of the Viking energy turbines stacked on the deck of cargo boats so big they
make the trucks alongside look like Lego toys. If we go to the inside pages
there's more aerial shots of the huge scale of wind farm components at these
industrial bases near Lerwick, more reports about the company's attempts to
blast tens of thousands of tons of rock from the quarries it's creating around
that part of Shetland. It's fierce objection from local communities. But
alongside these are good news stories of the renewables boom. Children at a
school involved in the innovative tidal turbines there. A young man from the
island able to return home with his family to take up a job in green energy
instead of staying south for work. Billy, in recent years you've campaigned a
lot against one particular green energy development which is the Viking wind
farm currently under construction. How do you feel about the situation now? It's
a very very large wind farm. When it was proposed first there was 150 turbines
which at that time would have been the largest wind farm onshore in the whole of
Europe. It's finally been cut back to 103 but it's still very large. Former
councillor Billy Fox. And there was very little cognizance given to the amount
of opposition that was to it when it kicked off. It was seen as a possible
panacea to the loss of the oil industry and that was actually very much the way
that the developers pitched it. That this was going to be a real winner in terms
of Shetland's economy. Back in 2005 the Viking energy wind farm was sold to
islanders as a community owned project with the prospect of huge income down the
line. Something to replace the security the oil had brought. But since 2019 the
project has been wholly owned by SSE Renewables, a subsidiary of Perth-based SSE
PLC. The Shetland Trust which invested will get returns and SSE will pay into a
community benefit fund for local projects worth 2.2 million pounds a year. The
impulse is to say we must do something. But if we do something and it is
actually not the correct thing to do, that's actually worse than taking a step
back and saying hold on a minute this doesn't actually produce the supply of
energy that we actually need. We need to do something else. Green energy does
not come out of thin air. Just like its fossil fuel predecessor it has to
physically be somewhere. And once again Shetland is that somewhere. The
importance of keeping the just in the just transition is arguably one of the
biggest issues facing us as a society as we grapple with inequality and
ecological crisis. To see how it plays out in the coming months and years look
north. The phrase for this in Shetland would be a night of dirt. Yeah it's a
poor night. Daniel Geer. I moved back to Shetland after living in Aberdeen and I
moved back to Shetland because I wanted my bairns to have the same opportunity
as I had grown up and I wanted them to have the same sort of free childhood that
I had. And there is actually an opportunity for Shetland here. We need to work
together to find the best possible compromise. I think it is ultimately going to
be a compromise on all fronts to try and reverse us out of the situation that
we're in which is an unsustainable one. Life on the Edge of Oil was produced by
Victoria MacArthur and presented by Jen Stout. And next Monday night it'll be
the turn of the machines. What would a documentary made by artificial
intelligence sound like? I'm Laura Lewington and I'll be guiding you through
ChatGPT, the AI technology that's popping up all over the place. Can it write my
script? Will it be able to transform jobs? Can it change our lives? I'll be
interviewing experts, some users and ChatGPT itself. We'll explore the
immeasurable possibilities, the problems and the creativity of this new
sophisticated technology in a documentary by ChatGPT on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds
next Monday evening at 8 o'clock. Now on Radio 4 in this week's analysis, the
Professor Ian Golden explores globalisation and asks how far the world is
fragmenting both politically and economically and what the consequences of that
could be. The future does not belong to globalists. The future belongs to
patriots. That is why we are coming out of the EU on October the 31st, come what
may. Let's get Brexit done. Our manufacturing future, our economic future, our
solutions to the climate crisis, they're all going to be made in America. That
was Donald Trump, Boris Johnson and Joe Biden. We may be witnessing the death
knells of globalisation. And over all of this hangs a sword of Damocles, the
danger of a new fragmentation of the world, of de-globalisation and decoupling.
That's Germany's Chancellor, Olive Schultz, voicing his concerns that the world
is breaking up, politically and economically. And all this at a time when we are
struggling to recover from the Covid pandemic, face the consequences of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine and address other urgent challenges. I'm Ian Golden,
Professor of Globalisation and Development at the University of Oxford. And in
this programme, we'll explore whether globalisation is ending, and if so,
whether this should be a cause for concern or celebration. But what do we mean
by globalisation? Globalisation is about the movement of things, finance, ideas,
people and communication across national borders. The more of these flows there
are, the more the world is globalising. The globalisation of the world is a
globalisation of the world. The globalisation tidal wave we have experienced
started around 1990, with the end of the Cold War and opening of China,
integration of Europe, global agreements to reduce trade barriers and the
development of the World Wide Web. Deng Xiaoping transformed China with a simple
idea. Deng opened China's door to foreign investors. They set up factories by
the thousand. It's a new medium. It allows people to exist in an information
space which doesn't know geographical boundaries. So my hope is that it'll be
very positive in bringing people together around the planet. This is the east,
over there is the west. I'm standing, along with several thousand other people
tonight, on the Berlin Wall. My concern is that while globalisation is far from
perfect, it needs to be improved, not destroyed. De-globalisation would increase
political tensions between countries, making it more difficult to slow climate
change and stop the next pandemic. Breaking up the world economy would also slow
growth and increase poverty. My name is Ngozi Okonji-Walla. I'm the Director
General of the World Trade Organisation. I do share concerns about the era we
are entering into. People forget that globalisation lifted more than a billion
people out of poverty, not only in China but other parts of the world. It made
goods cheaper for poor people in rich countries. The point is that global trade
reduces costs, spreads knowledge through economies of scale, through technology
spillovers which benefits emerging markets and developing countries. So when you
fragment the world and you fragment trade, you lose some of these benefits and
that's why it's worrying. Trade doesn't just bring a bigger range of cheaper
goods. It also creates jobs in export industry and in tourism. For example, when
China recently isolated itself to try to stop Covid-19, its economy stalled, as
did businesses internationally that rely on Chinese markets and tourism. The
World Trade Organisation has assessed the impact of what might happen if the
world splits and China's economy is affected. The World Trade Organisation has
assessed the impact of what might happen if the world splits into separate
trading blocks. The consequences are significant. We found that it would cost
the world a 5% loss in global GDP in the long term. That's like saying that we
lose the entire economy of Japan. That's huge. It's much more than the entire
British economy. The costs of deglobalisation are so large because trade is
essential for all economies. No country can produce everything itself, from
vaccines to light bulbs and the wide range of food we eat. There will be no rice
or bananas on our supermarket shelves. Trade is also reciprocal. So if we make
it more difficult to buy products from other countries, we can be sure they'll
find ways to stop buying ours, won't invest, be less likely to be tourists or
come to study. Most worryingly, they will be less willing to work together to
address the failures of globalisation by improving trade rules, reducing tax
evasion and helping solve our shared problems. We'd end up with a more dangerous
world, with job losses and lower incomes. But if trade is so good, why are
countries now putting up barriers against it? Manoush Shafiq is President and
Vice-Chancellor of the London School of Economics. We are seeing national
security concerns affect the trade in certain goods, particularly things like
microchips or batteries, certainly military goods. And so I think what we're
seeing now is a kind of a globalisation that is segmented, where there are some
markets, say the market in silicon chips, which is being governed more by
politics than by economics. Politics is driving countries to blame others for
their problems. While their policy choices to protect their industries may make
sense to them, there's a knock-on effect on other countries and consumers around
the world. Here's Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala again. I am concerned about subsidies. If
you're subsidising particular industries or sectors, and excluding others
outside of your own jurisdiction or country from benefiting, then those types of
subsidies can very quickly lead to a race to the bottom, because other countries
may be incentivised to subsidise their own industries. And where does this lead
us? It becomes a question of the rich have the might and the poor are left
behind. In this race, it's only those with the deepest pockets that will win.
The number of new cars made in the UK has fallen to its lowest level since 1956,
figures for last year were 10%. Recent figures show the UK car industry
struggling to compete against subsidies from the US. UK car manufacturers are
concerned that the UK is falling behind the US and the EU. The United States is
offering billions in subsidies to carmakers who create electric vehicle supply
chains in the US. And an angry EU is considering retaliating by either
explicitly relaxing state aid rules or doing so under the guise of extending
COVID recovery or green technology boosting programmes. So if the richest
countries engage in a spending race, the rest of the world finds that they can
no longer compete. Although the UK is a relatively rich country, there is no way
it can match the US, the European Union or China in subsidising its industries.
The editor of The Economist, Zannie Minton-Beddoes, says this policy of
countries putting themselves first, focusing on what's best for them, I win, you
lose, national gain rather than mutual benefit, involves more than just
subsidies to help domestic industries. It also includes export controls. The US
has slapped on a huge number of export controls on products that can no longer
be exported to China, for example. There's also much more active use of
investment screening. Countries are much more worried about foreign investors,
particularly from China, buying up shares or buying up domestic companies. So
we're seeing what used to be the kind of tools of global integration, if you
will, becoming weaponised and becoming tools of this zero-sum world. The US says
it is doing this because China has embarked on unfair competition. Let's hear
what the head of the World Trade Organisation thinks. At the WTO, we have heard
this complaint that China is unfairly subsidising, there is no level playing
field. We've actually launched a study on subsidies to try and get some facts on
the ground. President Biden's new law, the Inflation Reduction Act, as it's
called, aims to boost green technology. It includes many buy America
restrictions, so firms can only get the subsidies and tax credits if they are
located in the US. And that means now that a whole bunch of European car firms,
for example, are thinking of shifting their production to America to benefit
from these subsidies. So if you're a European policymaker, you think, oh, my
goodness, am I going to have to introduce similar kinds of subsidies with
similar kinds of restrictions to ensure that the production stays in Europe?
Last month, the British firm Arrival, which makes electric delivery vans,
announced plans to move its production from the UK to the US to take advantage
of Biden's green energy subsidies. And BMW is moving production of its electric
minis from Oxford to China, where the government is actively supporting the mass
production of the required batteries. British carmakers historically have
exported over 80% of the cars they make, with over half of these going to
Europe. The ending of seamless access to Europe and race to the bottom in
subsidies now pose an existential risk for this proud British industry. In the
US, there's a rising tide of protectionism, somewhat ironic given that the US
was the driving force for globalization. Here's Ronald Reagan in 1988 and Bill
Clinton in 2000. Here in America, we should take a moment to recognize that one
of the key factors behind our nation's great prosperity is the open trade policy
that allows the American people to freely exchange goods and services with free
people around the world. For me, it means it's very important to get China into
the World Trade Organization, to ensure that China's markets are open to us,
even as we have our markets open to China, and to advance peace and stability in
Asia and increase the possibility of positive change in China. So why has the US
turned its back on globalization? Rana Foroohar is the New York-based Financial
Times commentator and author. This idea that capital goods people could sort of
travel seamlessly across borders and land wherever it was most productive, that
was kind of the assumption up until probably the financial crisis. And then I
think since then, and certainly since COVID and the war in Ukraine, there's been
a shift. Globalization created a tremendous amount of wealth at a global level.
That was great in many ways because it lifted a lot of people out of poverty.
But within almost all OECD countries, you saw dramatically increasing inequality
that was sharpest in the Anglo-American world. So that rising in-country
inequality created the politics of nationalism that I believe was responsible in
large part for the rise of Donald Trump in the US. I think it's at least
partially responsible for Brexit. Some of the nationalism that you see on the
continent, some of the problems that you see in many other countries around the
world, that sense of, wait a minute, we have a global market system that has
become so untethered from the interests of the voting populations in democratic
states that there is now a backlash to that system. Growing inequality, together
with the job losses and economic stagnation, which followed the financial crisis
of 2008 and 2009, led an increasing number of people to feel that the system was
rigged against them and that far from globalization bringing jobs, it benefited
a small elite and brought new risks. This failure to distribute the benefits
more evenly lies behind the rise of nationalism and protectionism. In the US,
politicians of all political persuasions have turned their back on
globalization. But at what cost? The US, UK, and Europe cannot afford to exclude
the Asian market. The 21st century is going to be the Asian century. The center
of gravity of the world's economy is going to be in Asia. The world's largest
middle class populations are going to be in Asia. Kishore Mabobani is based in
Singapore and their former ambassador to the UN. The growth engine of the world
will be the new CIA. And CIA stands for China, India, and ASEAN, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations. Now, their combined population is 3.4 billion
people. What's particularly striking is how quickly the middle class has grown
in that region. In the year 2000, their middle class population was only 150
million. But by 2020, they've grown to 1.5 billion. And by 2030, you'll grow to
as close as 3 billion. Now, this is going to be the world's largest markets. If
you're not going to participate in it, you're shooting yourself in the foot. If
the US and Europe decide to trade less with China, will China and Asia also
start to de-globalize by putting up more trade barriers? This is going to become
the world's largest economic ecosystem because it's the largest free trade area
in the world. But we will also trade with countries far away. Just to give you a
concrete example, Brazil, which is much closer to the United States than it is
to China. 20 years ago, it took Brazil one year to export $1 billion to China.
Now it takes Brazil 72 hours to export $1 billion to China. So it's not just
East Asians trading among themselves. The growth of China on the whole has been
immensely beneficial for US firms and consumers. So why turn its back on such a
lucrative market? Is the aim of the Biden administration to keep China down?
There's absolutely no doubt that the United States has decided to pursue a
policy of stopping China's growth. And frankly, it's in some way, it's perfectly
understandable because no number one power has ever gracefully ceded its number
one position to the rising power. Zaniment and Beddows believes the United
States should focus on keeping ahead. I don't think the logic of keeping China
back for its own sake makes sense. Much more important is to, you know, enable
America to do better. So for example, a much more sensible immigration policy in
America, which would make it much easier to attract the kind of high skilled
people who are needed to keep America at the kind of frontier of technological
innovation. It's an irony that it's harder to go to America if you're a talented
scientist right now than it ever was. Because of visa restrictions? Yeah, the US
immigration system makes it much, much harder to attract foreign talent. And
that's to me a much more dangerous risk for America's position at the very
forefront of technological innovation. There aren't thousands of people
clamoring to move to China. There are a lot of people who would love to move to
America. Globalization has given us cheap goods from every corner of the world.
But there are risks. China's growth is slowing, so countries need other markets.
And given the level of tension between China and Taiwan, for example, it makes
sense to have more than just one supplier and ensure that for national security,
you're not reliant on firms from just one country. Here's Rana Faruha and Ngozi
Okonjo-Iweala. The idea of 92% of all high-end semiconductor chips being in
Taiwan, that was what globalization gave us. I mean, it was cheapest to make
them there. It was very easy as long as everything else was working. But now
suddenly you have 92% of what is essentially the digital oil for the world's
economy made in one very highly contentious island in the South China Seas. And
that's a problem. And the same goes for pharmaceuticals. You have continents
like Africa that import 99% of their vaccines and 90% of other medicines. That
is not right. We need to build resilience. We should look at how to
deconcentrate this manufacturing and try to, you know, spread it to other parts
of the world. Is there a danger, though, that if you start subsidizing some
things, it becomes like mission creep, the thin end of the subsidy wedge? Zannie
Minton-Beddoes. We need to worry about relying on a country like China for
critical inputs, whether those are the rarest that you need in the batteries for
renewable energy or whether it's solar panels. So in both those areas, I think
there is a reason for having broader supply chains, for not relying on one
country. But what I worry about is that once this logic of industrial policy and
the zero sum logic gets ingrained, it goes much, much further. And you feel that
every part of the economy is strategic and every factory and every firm and
every industry has to be supported and that every country has to have every
element of the supply chain. And that's the risk that I think we see now with so
many countries getting enamored of industrial policy and wanting to make
everything at home. It is clear that the current rules governing subsidies need
to be relooked at by the World Trade Organization. How do we reform what there
is? How do we ensure that we have a more level playing field? And maybe those
agreements that were signed at the WTO in the early days in 1995 may not be up
to the job. But to change it, you need some facts. Some of these agreements were
entered into before China became a member of the WTO in 2001. So I think it is
also fit that we say, OK, the world has changed substantially. Can we take a
look at these agreements and make them fit for purpose? Reforms in the
international system are urgently needed. Without them, countries will keep
building higher walls to insulate themselves from outside threats. But no walls
can be high enough to keep out the big challenges facing humanity, including
pandemics, climate change and conflicts. Rather, they increase poverty, slow
growth and reduce the skills and investments we need. Most importantly, they
undermine political cooperation. Our focus should be on ensuring globalization
works for all, starting at home. Manoush Shafiq from the LSE. One of the
problems that is behind the kind of anti-globalization backlash is that while it
is usually true that open trade and globalization has increased total output,
we've done a pretty poor job of compensating those who've lost out. And we've
done a pretty poor job of making sure that we've made the kind of investments in
people's skills and infrastructure that enable everyone to take advantage of the
potential benefits of globalization. Rising inequality and the failure to
address it is at the root of the problem, the source of resentment. But isn't
inequality also the result of globalization? It is, although in fact, what the
rise in inequality can be predominantly traced to isn't the growth in trade, but
really the changes in technology that have made some industries less efficient
and the lack of investment in new technologies that mean that those jobs can be
sustained in those sectors. So globalization takes most of the blame, but
actually most of the reason behind the rise in inequality is that over time, the
kind of jobs that are associated with higher skills are as a result of changes
in technology. For example, many repetitive jobs are being automated both in
manufacturing and in services like call centers and accounting. Another reason
for rising inequality is that governments have less money to spend from taxes.
They've been falling over themselves to attract companies to invest, pushing
down taxes to encourage them. Is this race to the bottom in taxes another
underbelly of globalization? There has definitely been tax competition in the
world and countries feeling pressured that they need to lower particularly
corporate taxes in order to attract investment. It is a pity that there wasn't
an agreement around setting a minimum global corporate tax, which would at least
put a floor on that competition between countries. I think that is a real issue
and of course, most extremely so with global tax havens, which attract a lot of
capital by offering very, very advantageous tax regimes. Do countries in fact
need to cut taxes in order to attract investment? I would argue that that's a
very minor part of decision making for investors looking as to which country to
invest in. They're much more interested in, is this country stable? Is its
macroeconomic policy sound? Does it have good infrastructure? Does it have
skilled people? And I think focusing on those things is a lot more important
than trying to compete with other countries by constantly lowering your taxes.
Governments need tax revenue to modernize their economies and to invest in
education, skills, and infrastructure so they can compete in a globalized world.
Far from globalization leading to a world which is flat or the death of distance
as was claimed, place has become more important. The new firms and opportunities
are not in the same places as before. So ensuring that people can get to where
the jobs are with affordable housing, transport systems, and available school
places is vital to address the inequalities generated by trade and technological
change. Where countries have not done enough to keep pace with change,
globalization is an easy target of blame for a country's ills. Kishore Mabubani
is convinced this is what is driving the politics. Unfortunately, the average
income of the bottom 50 percent in the United States has not gone up for 30
years. So clearly there's a very simple reason why there's massive
disillusionment among American workers about the idea of globalization, because
they haven't seen any of the benefits. But that's not because of globalization.
It's because of the failure of the political class to help the United States
economy adjust and adapt to new competition. Here's the head of the World Trade
Organization. We are at a, yes, a difficult place in the world now with the
vulnerabilities that we've seen in supply chains during the pandemic and this
war in Ukraine. But we could see an opportunity in these vulnerabilities to
build resilience by using diversifying supply chains and deconcentrating
manufacturing to developing countries that have not had a chance to be included
in this global wealth creation and job creation that took place under the first
wave of globalization. Similarly, poor people in rich countries, re-skilling
them so they could also benefit. So that's what we are calling re-globalization
at the WTO, a more inclusive globalization. So globalization with a more human
face. Exactly. Globalization has brought enormous progress, but it also has had
very bad and very ugly consequences. Global connectivity has brought us vaccines
and ideas about gender equality and a growing knowledge of climate impacts. But
it's not just about the pandemic. It's about climate impacts. But it also
brought the financial crisis, the pandemic, and accelerated climate change. To
address these risks, as Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala argues, we must strengthen
cooperation. We must discern when we have strategic competition from when we
need strategic cooperation. We will not be able to solve problems of a global
nature alone. I believe it was the failure to manage global finance and the
crisis of 2008-9 that undermined trust in centrist governments and led to rising
inequality. Paradoxically, we can't fix the problems we face without more
globalization of politics, as we need to coordinate more with others. The
challenge we face now is to manage it more effectively. Our governments have a
vital role in this, not least in addressing inequalities at home and working
more closely with others internationally. But it is not too late to reverse the
tide. Right now, the trade data on merchandise trade do not show this
fragmentation yet. Trade between China and the US, between China and EU, between
EU and US is still quite robust. So that's why we're saying, OK, we are talking
geopolitical tensions. These are obvious. Let's not let them manifest in actual
terms. We need to move beyond the anti-globalization rhetoric to address its
shortcomings, while also accepting the benefits arising from a more integrated
world. Our futures are entangled, and turning our backs on globalization won't
bring jobs or improve our security. Zannie Minton-Bellows. If you're in a world
where the logic is, you know, my country versus the rest, that is not a world
that's very conducive to solving global problems like climate change, which
requires countries to work together. It also makes the risk of the world being
divided into sort of geopolitical blocks much more of a risk. And that in turn,
I think, makes conflict more likely. And so it's a dangerous political, economic
and ultimately potentially, you know, threatens global peace. Analysis was
presented by Professor Ian Golden and produced by Sally Abrahams. On Radio 4.
Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared
by Christians around the world. On earth as it is in heaven, Give us this day
our daily bread. In this year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of
this prayer. As we forgive those who sin against us, Sharing stories of
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom.
Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.