TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at two o'clock.
Ukrainian troops are fighting to maintain control of the eastern city of Bakhmut
in the face of further Russian advances. There have been reports of clashes in
and around the city, which has been holding out for months. Our diplomatic
correspondent James Landale is in Kiev and says it's questionable how
strategically important Bakhmut is. It's not a military hub, it's not a
communications hub or a transport hub. But that said, Russia has had very few
victories for quite a long time in this conflict and so any seizure or capture
of part or most of Bakhmut would be seen as a success, as a victory by the
Kremlin and they would use it as evidence to try and suggest that Russia is
beginning to make advances. It's emerged that the former health secretary Matt
Hancock claimed that the Eat Out to Help Out scheme during the Covid pandemic,
which was promoted by the then-Chancellor Rishi Sunak, was helping to spread the
virus. Mr Hancock has said the messages printed in the Daily Telegraph give a
partial biased account and don't show what happened in official meetings. Unite
has defended not joining other health unions in suspending strike action by
ambulance workers scheduled across England next week, saying that it couldn't
accept the government's preconditions for talks. The health secretary, Steve
Barkley, has urged Unite to join the GMB and Unison at the negotiating table.
Teachers in Scotland are considering a new pay deal after an improved offer was
made by councils yesterday. The biggest teaching union, the EIS, has suspended
strike action and is recommending members accept the deal, which includes a 7%
rise backdated to last April, 5% this April and 2% next January. It's understood
the Morton's Rolls Bakery in Glasgow, which employs around 250 people, has
ceased trading. It's believed it missed a deadline to file accounts. And Irish
Ferries has promised a full investigation into a fire in the engine room of one
of its cross-channel services yesterday evening. 183 passengers and crew had to
spend the night on the ferry, it was towed into Calais this morning. BBC News.
This is BBC Radio 4, where it's time now for Any Answers with Julian Warricker.
VG, thank you. A very good afternoon to you. You've plenty of politics to
consider this week, accompanied by a few WhatsApp messages. The newly agreed
Windsor Framework has very much put Northern Ireland in what the Prime Minister
describes as a unique position, as you'll be aware, there are various political
parties still mulling over that particular agreement, most significantly the
Democratic Unionist Party. But what does it mean for you, especially if you live
in the province, although we're getting some interesting calls from around the
UK on that subject. So by all means, join that conversation on 03700 100 444.
When it comes to Partygate, we've had this initial report by MPs into Boris
Johnson's behaviour during lockdown, which has been critical of him. But then
he's saying that the separate findings of the top civil servant, Sue Gray, are
now questionable because she's had this job offer from the Labour Party. And
there was a question about that in Leeds last night. If you wish to go down any
of the various avenues that are opened up by that, again, by all means do. Post
Covid, what have we learned, whether it's about the lasting impact of the
pandemic or about the decisions being taken at the time? And that's where those
WhatsApp messages may inform your thinking. Plus HS2, Northern Powerhouse Rail.
What are your experiences, your frustrations, your prescriptions maybe for a
better service given the situation that people particularly in the north of
England face on that subject at the moment? And there was a question as well,
should the poor be expected to pay more for their gas in the context of the
current price of energy bills? 3700 100 444, that's the phone number. You can
email any.answers at bbc.co.uk. You can text 84844 or you can tweet using the
hashtag BBCAQ. We're going to kick off in Port Glasgow with Alastair McMillan.
Alastair, good afternoon. Good afternoon. I was very surprised that the panel
yesterday didn't mention that for the benefit of Yorkshire, the Windsor
framework, the Green Lane system will benefit everybody shipping goods like
ourselves to Northern Ireland, who are only shipping to Northern Ireland, that
instead of the potential of everything being inspected, or a large proportion
inspected, it will now go freely into Northern Ireland, as it was prior to
Brexit. And this and other small changes make the trans make transactions or
even movement, say if you want to go for a weekend break to Northern Ireland and
take your dog, you now won't need to fill in mountains of paperwork or you won't
shortly. Just to be clear, just to be clear on the differences, goods moving
from Great Britain to Northern Ireland under this new framework would use, as
you say, a Green Lane involving minimal paperwork and no routine checks. If the
goods are moving through Northern Ireland to the Republic, they would then use a
Red Lane meaning customs processes and other checks. You talked about how the
people of Yorkshire should recognise that. How does that potentially affect you
personally? Well, we ship goods to Northern Ireland virtually every day and have
been for the last 30 years and we haven't actually had any problems at all. A
lot of the problems were sort of warnings that were flagged up by sort of people
for whom it's in whose interest it was to make as much sort of noise about it as
possible, whereas in actual reality, we haven't had any. We haven't had any
issues whatsoever. It's just a matter of following a procedure. So you've not
had to deal with any more paperwork since... We've had to supply an invoice with
every item, every package that is sent, but other than that, we've had to do
absolutely nothing. So it's been a very... There's been no complication
whatsoever. But other than that, which is minor really, we always put in a
delivery note. So it's just a matter of printing one extra bit of paper. But I
know that, for example, if you wanted to take your dog to Northern Ireland, it
was an absolute nightmare with paperwork and that will be done away with. And
for people who are, say, exporting seeds or trees or sausages or whatever, or
not exporting but selling into Northern Ireland, that has been very, very
complicated and that will certainly be simplified. And I just think there are...
Nothing like this is ever going to be perfect for us or for the EU in what they
want. But I think the EU have recognised that there is relatively little trade
actually crossing the Irish border. And there is not even that much that goes
through Northern Ireland and into the Republic. A lot of... Most traffic from UK
to... or GB to the Republic goes from Holyhead and places like that, and a lot
by air, in fact. So it's... I think that is... That is quite small. Can I read
this tweet to you? There's no doubt about it, writes this correspondent. If the
Windsor Framework is so marvellous for Northern Ireland, the rest of the UK,
including the good people of Yorkshire, deserve the same great access to the EU
single market as it was before the 2016 vote. That's not the only message along
those lines that I've got in front of me. What do you say to it? Well, I... We
obviously, as a business, are operating in the single market for quite a long
time. And I have to say that I'm quite pleased we're out of the single market
because the single market is not everything to world trade. As a company, we
sell 70% of our stuff is overseas. And we sell in the EU forms a substantial
chunk of that, but it's probably about half of that. But in fact, our business
into the EU, both and business to the rest of the world, has increased since
Brexit. We do more now into the EU than we did before. Rishi Sunak takes the
view that Northern Ireland now has a unique position in the entire world because
in part, it now has access to the EU single market that other parts of the
United Kingdom don't have. Well, that is partly, that is entirely because of its
unique geography. I mean, none of the rest of the UK has a land border with the
EU. And that makes a big difference. The cost of shipping, sticking something in
a truck and pushing it across the border is minute compared to shipping from the
UK to or GB into Europe. You have to cross sea or you have to go through the
channel tunnel or you have to go by air. And that immediately puts up costs. So
in that respect, Northern Ireland does, because of its particular geography, has
a unique point. And also because it is having to obey single market rules. Well,
I'm very glad we don't have to obey single market rules, especially all the
extra ones that have come into play since we left the EU. I think, you know, I
can understand where Rishi Sunak is coming from. And I think it is a matter of
compensation to Northern Ireland businesses that they have an opening both ways.
Well, if you run a Northern Ireland business and want to drop us a line or
contact, by all means do 03700 100 444. Alistair, thank you very much for
kicking us off. Tweets and texts coming in. Wendy Chamberlain says David Grace,
like other Liberal Democrat MPs, fails to call for the whole of the UK to have a
Windsor deal, in other words, to join the single market and customs union or
rejoin. It's the obvious thing to do, says David. Why are they scared to say so?
Judy Ann says if having access to the EU single market makes Northern Ireland
the most exciting economic zone, why on earth did we ever give up on that
economic excitement, as she phrases it? And Charlie from Belfast emailed. The
agreement means Northern Ireland is still in the EU single market, he says. Will
Rishi Sunak ensure that there is no divergence from EU standards so that the UK
single market is protected? Andrew Kirschman's in Hackney. Andrew, good
afternoon. Hello. Nice to speak to you. And you. I'm more in sort of agreement
with your, the people have sent you texts and less in agreement with your
previous caller, Alex, in terms of I'm yet to define any kind of benefit to be
derived from Brexit. And all I can see is this kind of damage limitation job,
which the Windsor framework seems to be, which is an improvement on the on the
kind of bogus bung it in the oven, get Brexit done deal that Boris Johnson
agreed with. Yes, the oven ready deal. But you heard Alice's arguments. You
know, he does what he does and his business has been relatively unim, unim,
what's the word I'm looking for? Unhindered by the issues so far. Does that not
make you have a rethink? Alex seems to be a little bit confused. I think he said
that 50% of his business was with the EU and he felt he was free from the
regulations of the EU having having agreed and gone along with Brexit and us
having got Brexit. But what he doesn't seem to notice is that if he wants to,
the 50% of his business that he does with with the EU has to conform with the
rules of the single market. He can't he can't diverge from it and let's assume
we I don't know what Alex's business is, but let's assume that a pig farmer and
a Alistair, sorry, and they we relax rules about certain types of breeding of
pigs that will if he if he goes along with that, then he's not going to be able
to sell his product in the single market. So he's it by by the very fact that we
have to trade with these with the single market, we have to conform to its
rules. There's no there's no sort of there's no getting away from it. There's no
there's no way in which we can we can both set our own rules and trade with you
without being obliged to conform to that. You acknowledge to a degree that this
is an improvement. I take your point that from your point of view, it's not much
of an improvement. I think would be roughly where you're coming from. Margot
says this. No, fair enough. Yeah, that was your wording damage limitation.
Margot says, bear in mind that the Windsor framework avoids multiple disasters,
the worst of which would be upsetting the balance of the Good Friday Agreement
and the risk of reigniting old troubles. She has a point, does she not? She
certainly does. Yes, that's exactly it. The problem is we have a very good
arrangement where we were part of the single market and we didn't have Brexit
and we could all trade and that helps bring down borders between and
particularly that were the one between Northern Ireland and Southern Ireland. We
decided that we wanted to take back control and reassume those borders. And
that's caused a problem with that historic border that we don't want to re-
erect. And that's what the whole problem is about. It's not a problem of
Northern Ireland. It's not a problem of the EU. It's a problem with us and our
relationship with the EU and our decision to withdraw from the EU. That's what
the problem is. We've caused the problem. Which was democratically voted for, of
course, it's worth pointing out, Andrew. Yes, it was. But if you look at the
arguments that went along with that, we were told lots of different things. A
lot of the Brexiteers were saying we wouldn't leave the single market at the
time. Many of the key ones said it would be ridiculous that we would do so. And
then once we got Brexit, it became harder and harder and the argument became
less and less we could be part of the single market. And so I would have said
that a 48-52 vote would have meant that we would probably have a kind of very
gentle Brexit to take account of the fact that it was a very marginal victory.
And instead, we got an argument of, well, we won and you lost. And therefore, we
should have the harshest argument. And it's just basically generated from
Theresa May to Boris Johnson and so on. So we've got just a much harder deal
than many Brexiteers were expecting. You'll understand that I didn't really want
to rerun the 2016 referendum on this programme. But I appreciate your call,
Andrew. Thank you very much. Teal Mogridge is in Bristol. Teal, go ahead. Hello.
Thanks for having me. No problem. So I am in manufacturing. I make safer
chemical products. They are made in the UK. They are sold in the UK. So I am in
favour of Brexit because why should manufacturers like me, who only operate in
the UK, be forced to comply with more and more and more and more and more EU
regulations? If I decide that I want to export to an EU country, it is within my
gift to find out what the requirements are and make my export products compliant
with EU regulations. The argument presumably would be that if you did want to go
down that road, in other words, export to the rest of Europe when the UK was in
the EU, it would have been easier to do that then than it is now. Well, yes, but
it would have been made that ease of access that would have been at my cost of
complying with data sheets, labelling, drop tested boxes, on and on. You could
make a Monty Python show. And if you want to do one, give me a call and I'll let
you know. Well, that's not in my gift, Teal. But yeah, OK. So there was a great
deal of bureaucracy and you're saying that because the UK was part of the EU at
that point, you had to comply with that. Exactly. Right. OK, but you're now only
operating within the UK and will carry on doing so? As far as you know. In the
foreseeable future. And are you tempted to explore the European market?
Actually, no. I have more inquiries from American potential customers. So that's
the way that I would look. And when you look at what we're talking about at the
start of the programme, namely this Windsor framework and the politics behind
that and the plans behind that, does that therefore have any impact on you and
your business at all? I'm not quite sure. I don't know the details well enough,
but I have a sneaking feeling that it's going to be bad news, because if we're
going to have all the freedoms that Rishi Sunak thinks we're going to have, I
think we're going to be bound by EU regulations, which I don't want. Well,
you're not, because there's no suggestion under his government that we're
returning to the single market or the customs union. This is a deal that is
unique, he says, to Northern Ireland. Well, in that case, perhaps it'll all be
fine. On that uplifting note, Teal, thank you. Peter Berman's in Watchit in
Somerset. Peter, go ahead. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. Actually, I'm in
Wiverlyske in West Somerset, where you broadcast some last week. I was in the
audience. Goodness me. Well, you're very welcome on the phone, Peter. What do
you want to say about the Windsor framework? Yes. I think I agree with the
person about two of these calls ago. We voted narrowly for Brexit. At no stage
were the British people asked whether you wanted to leave the single market,
customs union, whether you wanted a hard Brexit or a soft Brexit. In fact, as
the previous caller said, many people, many Brexiteers reassured us it would not
be a hard one. But of course, Boris Johnson thought otherwise. His aim was to
rupture relations with Europe completely. So we are so this huge benefit that
Ritchie Sunak tells us that the people of Northern Ireland have got could have
been shared by, and going back to the very first question, the people of
Yorkshire and indeed the rest of the UK. It's an absolute nonsense to say how
lucky the people of Northern Ireland are. The people of Northern Ireland are
lucky that they are getting something that we all could have had. I'm just
wondering about the mechanics of what you said at the start, though, because
there was a referendum about leaving the EU. And as you say, that the vote was
to leave. Are you then saying we should have had successive referendums
thereafter to determine the actual method of leaving? I think or they should
have said, look, if you vote leave, this is what we want. We want you. We're
going to be out of the single market. Any business that wants to export to
France, to the EU, will have to go through all these customs barriers. I mean,
the lady from Bristol talked about how nice it is, easy it is to export just to
trade with the EU. I think there are many, many more businesses who trade with
the EU have mountains of forms to complete. In which case, how long it takes. In
which case we now have this Windsor framework, which is specific to Northern
Ireland. But do you not get the sense that the prime minister is now hoping that
having done this deal, it will improve relations with the EU on a number of
other levels and therefore relations which might include trade relations in the
future will start to benefit as well? I very much hope that this prime minister
or another government will see the sense of much closer relations with the EU.
We have been on a deliberate collision course with both Boris Johnson and his
trusts, who seem to just sort of take it, who just seem to enjoy baiting the EU,
who are our closest neighbours and have been our friends for years and years.
And I think it's about time we had a sensible government and Rishi Sunak just
going gently in that direction that says these people are not our enemies.
They're our friends. They're our neighbours. They're our closest trading
partners. And for heaven's sake, doing a deal with Australia is no recompense
whatsoever for doing a deal with the EU. And indeed, our farmers are up in arms.
You only have to listen to your farming programme in the morning and realise how
up in arms the farmers are about some of the trade deals that Liz Truss and
others were concluding in a great rush and at great cost to British farmers and
indeed the standard of our own food we eat. Peter, thank you for the call.
03700, 100444, some more tweets. Britain will not be a manufacturing powerhouse
and will not benefit from Brexit, writes this correspondent. The government's
own Yellowhammer report sets that out. That manufacturing powerhouse is a
reference to something Lee Powell said on any questions last night. We need to
rejoin the single market, says David. If Northern Ireland benefits from the
deal, why can't we? He says there are no positive benefits of Brexit and he
adds, we see that now. Although, of course, again, referring back to last night,
both Miriam Cates and Lee Powell, who favoured Brexit, said it's too soon to
make that judgment. John Lomas is in Swindon. John, good afternoon. Good
afternoon. Green and red lanes, John. Yeah, I think you're actually, you're
Glasgow, Port Glasgow correspondent made the point as well. What is the point of
having a red lane from the Stranraer, Cairnryan area? Nothing should be entering
the Republic via Northern Ireland from the UK mainland. It should all be going
by the direct ferries, which have got a customs organisation anyway. Right. But,
I mean, presumably it's put there just in case that happens, isn't it? Well,
who's going to travel, you know, all the way up from the East Coast ports to
Stranraer to go across to Ulster in order to then go south? Yes, I do see your
point. I mean, people are hiding things. Right. Yeah, I do see your point. It
does seem quite a long way round. But presumably they must have factored in the
possibility that they need to put this kind of mechanism in place. I just don't
see the point. You know, you have ready-made customs arrangements from all the
other West Coast ports. I believe someone mentioned Holyhead. I believe
Liverpool has a Republic service. East Yard has a Republic service, and if they
really don't want to put stuff through the UK, where incidentally they never
spend anything because they enter the UK with full fuel tanks and they refuel
when they get back to the Republic. OK, John, I'm going to move it on because
there's lots of other people who want to have their say, but thanks for making
that point. Arthur Clarke's in Bridgewater. Arthur, good afternoon. The Windsor
Framework for York specifically, I think you wanted to talk about? Well, yes,
for Yorkshire. I mean, that was the question. It was? I'm glad you've taken this
back to the question. That's always a good thing. That's what I'm going to stick
to. Yeah, what I wanted to say was that it's the Windsor Framework, if it goes
through successfully, will be of benefit to everybody in the country. And I
think there's several callers and people who have texted have already said that.
So it's taken the wind out of themselves, really. But I mean, what I'll deal
with is the alternative. And that is if it doesn't go through, then also, as
other people have said, there's going to be a trade war because it's all very
well for people to say that Britain has sort of given way and given way and
given way. The EU has given way, given way even more, I think. And with this
framework, I think it's probably going to be the last ditch. When you say it
doesn't get through, I mean, all the all the political mathematics here would
suggest that when it comes to a Commons vote, because Labour are likely to vote
for it, it will get through. Well, nobody has yet practically factored in what
your Glasgow caller said about the number of people who had made a lot of noise
and invented a lot of problems which didn't really actually impact that much on
trade. It was all about staying within the union. Yeah. And also, obviously,
there's the Democratic Unionist Party's as yet undeclared position on this,
which is clearly going to be significant. Well, what I would say to the people
of Britain, people of England, GB and Wales and Scotland, is for those who don't
already know, there is the Northern Ireland is probably our last and largest
colony near Great Britain. Well, not everybody there would see it that way, as
you readily would acknowledge. No, I acknowledge that. But it's a fact. It is a
fact. Well, it's a fact for you, but maybe not for others. I'm going to move on
to other matters, Arthur. But thank you very much for the call, because lots of
other issues have arisen, not least Covid. And the question specifically on the
programme last night was about what we had learned from Covid and then
panellists tended to take it in directions that they chose to. Dr Alex Scott-
Samuel is on the line from Liverpool, a public health doctor, I think, Alex.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon, Julian. What specifically are you looking at
here in the context of what we are now learning from Covid? Well, what we've
learned from all the discussion this week about the Matt Hancock WhatsApp is
precisely nothing, because all the discussion has been about a dump of WhatsApp,
which took place in April 2020. And in fact, the door was already open and the
horse had bolted in March 2020, when on the 17th of March, almost a month before
these WhatsApps, Simon Stevens, the chief exec of NHS England, who's famously
independent of government ministers, issued an urgent letter to all hospital
chief executives, instructing them to discharge as many patients as possible
into their homes or into care homes without any mention of prior testing for
Covid. So in fact, it wasn't Hancock's actions which caused the 20,000 care home
deaths in the first wave of Covid in 2020. It was the actions of Simon Stevens.
I'm just reading because I have that selfsame quote in front of me. Trusts were
told to postpone all non-urgent operations and, quote, to urgently discharge all
hospital inpatients who are medically fit to leave. And this included some
inpatients who would then be discharged to a care home. And as you say, that was
on the 17th of March, I have in front of me here. And then you scroll forward,
don't you, to a month later, when the government published its adult social care
action plan, which said that trusts would need to test all patients prior to
being discharged and admitted into a care home. That was when the change
happened. It did that on the 15th of April, which was the period of the WhatsApp
messages. But by then, there were 400 Covid deaths in care homes every day. So
10,000 people had died already of Covid in care homes in the previous four
weeks. And a further 10,000 deaths happened later on in the first wave, most of
which were already becoming infected. I mean, you're pointing the finger at
Simon Stevens in this context, and obviously he's not here to to answer that
specific charge, although the quotes, as you rightly say, are in front of me as
well. Is it not, though, fair to say that as the secretary of state for health
in England at the time, Matt Hancock was in a position to either oversee that
decision or influence it in some way? And of course, he has since said he put
this protective ring around care homes. Well, you're absolutely right in that.
Firstly, he was technically responsible as the secretary of state, although on a
day to day basis, NHS England, since it was set up in 2014, has always acted
fairly independently in terms of operational management of the NHS in England.
But I certainly agree with you that this phrase, protective ring, while no doubt
it scored points for the clever person in marketing in government who dreamt up
that phrase, it was complete nonsense and there was never any ring at all. And
it has to be said that there is clear accountability in NHS England and in the
government for the vast majority of the Covid deaths in this country. I mean, if
you compare us with New Zealand, we've got 10 times the population, but we had
200,000 more deaths from Covid than they have. Government has never taken Covid
seriously. Just on what else emerged in these various WhatsApp messages over the
last few days, which of course were sent to the Daily Telegraph or given to the
Daily Telegraph by Isabel Oakeshott as a result of her dealings with Matt
Hancock over his book. Have we learned anything else that we didn't know before,
do you think? Well, I was listening to the media show and it's very clear if you
talk to media people that we've learned an awful lot about, let's call it the
social relations of political journalists. And clearly Isabel Oakeshott was
already well known as the kind of person who puts personal advancement above
loyalty. And we've learned a lot in terms of morality. She might not see it
quite that way, but I take your point. About the morality of this government,
that none of this comes as any surprise. OK, thank you very much for the call,
Alex. Some Covid texts. I remember the human cost of Covid. It's easy to be a
lockdown sceptic when you didn't have to face this appalling disease when there
were no vaccines, writes one correspondent. The countries that locked down early
and then had a good vaccine programme had fewer deaths. Sadly, we were slow to
lockdown. So despite a good vaccine programme, we had lots of deaths. Mohamed is
in Yorkshire. Mohamed, good afternoon. Good afternoon, sir. Your point here.
Thank you for having me on, first of all. And my point, I've got a few points.
It's about the NHS, about Manhattan, Hancock and about the lady journalist.
Briefly, I will just give a headline. Yes, briefly, if you would. When he went
to the jungle, it's disrespectful to politics in itself. They are politicians.
They are not actors, and really, you should get a grip and have respect for the
nation. If he wants to do that, then maybe he wants to go into TV and film, not
into politics. However, that's one side. The other side is he was caught red-
handed. He's been snapped up kissing the woman he was passionate about. We've
all got passion. We all feel emotional. We all feel loved from time to time. But
there's a time and place. He chose the wrong time and the wrong place. So that's
another flaw he had. What about his handling early on of how he tackled the
start of the pandemic? Well, I've heard many views since, but I believe he
handled it OK. We had our masks in. That's what they could do at the time. The
material thing was a mask. And we drafted in all the masks that we can get hold
of, which is a good thing. Whether we got access to masks or not enough is
another debate. But we got it dealt with with vaccines. We got them all in. We
catered for the public within the territory, which is also another good thing.
But what about this protective ring he said he'd put around care homes? What
about the PPE shortage that surfaced at that point in the proceedings as well?
Do you not hold him, to a degree, accountable for some of that? To be honest
with you, that protective ring, it depends how you basically read into that.
Well, it wasn't there, according to our last caller. I feel the protective ring
was protecting them against their family. Don't let them see their family. That
was the protection. He protected the care home workers rather than the people in
the care home, which is very unfortunate. I've seen TV shots of people with
their loved ones, their parents, grandparents, all sorts. Honestly, it made my
heart cry. That was heart-rending. Absolutely heart-rending, you're right. Use
the wrong word for that issue. It was protective for the staff maybe in the care
home, not the public. OK, Mohammed, thank you so much for the call. The late
introduction of public health measures, writes this Twitter correspondent, and
missed Cobra meetings led to a loss of control of transmission of Covid. Let's
change the subject. Diana Pearson's on the line from Bradford. I think, Diana,
you want to talk about Sue Gray and the fact that Labour would like to give her
a job. Good afternoon. Hello. Yes, my point, having listened to the commentators
yesterday, you know, on the PM programme and various things, one thought I had,
which obviously Sue Gray hasn't given any information, but having done the
report that she did and having looked into the lockdown parties as she did,
makes me wonder whether, you know, that's partly what made her decide to leave
the civil service and go and work for Labour, because of her disgust at the
things that she found out. Nobody has put that as a possible reason. And no
doubt, eventually, in time, when the sort of the committee that looks into
whether civil servants can, you know, what sort of job they're going into, I
know it's record advisory, it's not legal. Yeah, I mean, she's supposed to wait
three months, a minimum of three months before she takes on outside employment,
apparently. Yeah, but I know I'll be very interested to hear what she says
about, you know, why she has made this move out of the civil service. Yes, I
suspect there are quite a few people queuing up to get their first interview
with Sue Gray at the moment. Obviously, she's got 10 minutes to phone this
programme. Does it give you any questions in your mind? Because Boris Johnson's
point is that the conclusion of her inquiry now has questions hanging over it.
He says, he says, and I quote, I think people may look at it in a different
light because of what she is now planning to do. Do you have any sympathy with
that argument at all? I suppose I would have sympathy if if we found out about
the timeline of her discussions with Keir Starmer. And yes, obviously, if that
timeline goes back into the period where she was investigating. Well, yes, I
think he might have a little bit of a point, but I don't really I don't really
take the point. I thought Sue Gray's report, in actual fact, was quite mild. And
certainly the prosecution, the police did were very mild considering what we
found out about what was going on. So, you know, I well, I take everything Boris
Johnson says with a huge pinch of salt. I sense that, Diana, from you. Thank you
for calling. Patricia Wright, Sue Gray's appointment is rotten and it stinks.
Keir Starmer has made a bad mistake if he thinks he will get away with this.
Andrew Walker's in Lincoln. Andrew, go ahead. Are you are you with Sue Gray's
appointment? Are you doubtful about it? What I'm against is the government's
reaction to her leaving. It's it's it's outrageous. And no criticism of Sue Gray
at all. Working civil servant, obviously tries to work with integrity, does the
report, goes to Labour and then gets kicked in the teeth. It's astonishing that
they can behave in such a unprofessional, disrespectful manner of one of their
own civil servants. Well, there are there are various sides to this, aren't
there? I mean, you can see. Well, let me put the conservative side first. The
side that says here she was conducting this report undoubtedly in the way that
you described without fear or favour. She's pretty critical of number 10 Downing
Street's operation and of the prime minister. And then a while later, we
discover that she's been offered a job. What's the connection? Well, I'm not
suggesting there is one. This is I'm putting their argument. Don't don't you
know, don't shoot the messenger here. Sorry, I do apologise. I mean, Sue Gray
was appointed. She's appointed as a senior civil servant trying to do a good
job. Yeah. As we all try to do. We try to do a good job. Yeah. She did her job.
No criticism at all. And then when this happens, it's like it's been thrown into
what it's like. It's like the thick of it, but it isn't funny. I mean, the other
argument you're hearing, of course, is from those who are much more on your side
of the coin who are saying, look at all these people who were previously talking
about Sue Gray's undoubted skill and impartiality. And these were people from
within government as well as from without. Reaffirming everything. Yeah. Saying
that this is this is the ideal person to do this. And now suddenly she's a
different person entirely. Yes. And I'll say it again. It's like the thick of
it, but it's not funny. Yes, it does. It does remind me of how long we were
told, weren't we, over that long period. We're all waiting for Sue Gray. And
eventually Sue Gray's report appeared. Thank you for the call, Andrew. A change
of subject. Dave Holliday's on the line from Glasgow. And I think you wanted to
talk about HS2, Dave, which was a question with particular reference to
Yorkshire in the programme. But clearly you can take it geographically where you
wish. Good afternoon. No, no. Yeah. Well, having lived in Bradford for a while,
I do know a little bit about the area and comparison things. 2014, I was
actually involved in some consultation to do away with 74 level crossings
between Kings Cross and Doncaster, which would allow higher speeds up on that
line. Right. And we proposed HS2 station site, which was an old lead station
just south of the existing station. It's now a supermarket and car park. We
provide a route in coming out via Methley to Doncaster. You probably not 15 to
20 minutes off the Leeds to London journey time. Right. The increased speeds by
not having to have permanent speed restrictions for level crossings. You could
probably cut the Leeds to London time down to one and a half hours using
existing track. So if you if you apply that logic more broadly, are you saying
that actually there are ways within the current rail network to make us move
around it more quickly? Well, I was chatting with Lord Barclay a few years ago
now, and then they put proposals which were dismissed of doing it slowly and
steadily. And by comparison, over the past 12 to 15 years, we've had a project
in Scotland for the 47 miles between Edinburgh and Glasgow compared to the 48
miles between Leeds and Manchester. And in that period, we have electrified five
separate routes across between Edinburgh and Glasgow. They've all got 100 mile
an hour new or refurbished trains. And the journey time has been cut by 20
percent. You'll be glad to know, Dave, you've sparked instant activity on
Twitter. Let me read this to you. HS2 is not about speed. It's about increasing
capacity on our crowded network. Mixing high speed trains with local trains on
the same line is inefficient as they get in each other's way. HS2 gives us a
modern railway that is the norm in Europe. Well, I would pick up on a statement
that was made back in about 2007 that no new main railway had been built in the
UK for 120 years. When we've actually opened mainline railways, sections of
mainline railways since then. But in 1906, two major main lines were built
between London and Birmingham and Sheffield and between Reading and Taunton to
speed up the railway. OK. High speed lines. And perfectly ready to go. Right.
Stay there. Timothy Brown's on the line from Hatfield. Timothy, good afternoon.
Hi. I sense you have a level of expertise similar to Dave. So what do you what
do you make of what he said? Absolutely. I spoke to Tony Barclay while he was
preparing his piece, when he came up with his separate report in 2020. Right.
But it was clear that politically it had been decided HS2 had to go ahead. For a
political grant project reason. And that's what Boris had decided. Well, it
wasn't just Boris, to be fair. But yeah, go ahead. Well, well, successive
governments have backed it and Labour's are still behind it, too. Well, that's
right. But it was dodgy in 2020. And this was prior to the pandemic, of course.
And there has never been a proper technical and financial feasibility of HS2.
They're now quoting they're going to run 18 to 20 trains an hour. Just not just
not possible. And they've been told this by SNCF and by Deutsches Bundesbund.
You can look up in the parliamentary records. SNCF in France. Yeah. Yeah. Yes.
But they were refusing to listen to common sense. Just imagine trains at three
minutes interval, travelling at 250, 300 miles an hour. It's not technically
possible. Dave Holliday, quick reaction to that before I take somebody else's.
Well, certainly with Tony Barclay's stuff, I would pick up also that in terms of
project management, a friend of mine used to work in the oil industry where
their projects cost far more than HS2 did. And they had what they call a stage
gate process. So you had to complete the stage of getting the planning sorted,
the design sorted before you moved on to the next stage through the gate. Right.
And HS2 is blundered through that. Whereas most rail projects have what they
call the grip process, where you can't start cutting soil and building until you
get all the designs right. And HS2 is blundering through this. Gentlemen, I'm
going to say I'm going to say thank you to you both, because it's been
interesting to hear both of your perspectives, because we've got a minute of the
programme left. And I wanted to take one more call on this subject from Robert
Craig, who's in Somerset. Robert, good afternoon. Hello. Yeah. My point is the
gentleman, the businessman who was on the panel, said that HS2 should start from
Leeds. Yeah. I think if the government is serious about levelling up the north,
it should start from Newcastle upon Tyne. And then slowly head south via Leeds.
Head south down to Leeds. That would bring up the north to start with. And that
would send a signal about levelling up that you don't think you're seeing at the
moment. No, I think this HS2 at the moment is to link London with Birmingham and
create a mega city, essentially. In the Midlands? Well, you'd be like a Dumbo.
London at one end and Birmingham the other end. Well, we shall see the outcome
of all of it in the years to come, quite a few years to come by current
timetables. Thank you very much, Robert, for your call. And thank you to
everybody who's got in touch, whether it's on the phones, via Twitter or via
email. It's ended up being quite a busy programme. So thank you for taking part.
Stay tuned, of course, to Radio 4 for the rest of your afternoon and this
programme back at the same time next Saturday. Any Answers was presented by
Julian Warwicker. The producer was Dan Hardoon. And the studio engineers were
Andrew Garrett and Donald MacDonald. The celebrated playwright David Edgar will
be performing his autobiographical solo show next this afternoon on Radio 4
after a word about a new series starting on Tuesday. There's a crisis in UK
music education. In today's climate, there's a lot less funding available to
support many young musicians who would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto
Kinch, a musician myself, and in the new three part series, I'll be finding out
why the future of British music is under threat. If you don't have adequate
provision in our schools, that is going to have an impact on the talent
pipeline. And it is going to have an impact in terms of the diversity of that
talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an elitist occupation? Rethinking
Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts on Tuesday morning at 11.30. At half past
three this afternoon, we'll be hearing from some of the Ukrainians who fled
their homeland and found sanctuary here in the UK. A year on from Russia's
invasion, they're grappling with what the future might hold. Ukrainians in
Britain, where next is in around 45 minutes. First on Radio 4, it's time for our
drama. And the celebrated playwright David Edgar has some tricky questions for
his younger self on his own life's journey. If this was a play, it would be
clearer when it had started. The house lights would go down, latecomers would
only be admitted at a suitable break in the performance. And you might well ask,
what the hell is this guy doing here? And if it was a play by me, there'd
probably be warnings. Which is often an issue between playwrights and
management. And although I've had smoke and flashing lights and nudity in my
plays, involving people of both sexes, you'll be relieved to hear not this one.
My big problem has always been with armaments. So when the Royal Shakespeare
Company did my play Pentecost, which is about a fresco in an East European
church which is taken over by asylum seekers, there was a big debate about
whether we should warn about gunfire. Because if you know there's gunfire coming
in Pentecost, there comes a point when you know how the play is going to end. So
we negotiated. And we thought about kind of obscuring what was going to happen,
either by generalisation, Pentecost includes effects. Equivocation, Pentecost
may contain gunfire. Or camouflage, Pentecost contains some, but not necessarily
all of the following. But then something struck me, maybe we're looking at this
thing the wrong way round. Far from warning too much, might we be warning too
little? Aren't the things that people have a right to know about beyond smoke
and bangs? This production contains at least one catastrophic piece of
miscasting. There is a significant long gurr towards the beginning of Act Two.
The management knows about the lighting. There will be elements of self-
exposure. Things remembered, maybe things imagined. Then and now. An old man
sits in a room at the top of his house. The window looks out over what might
seem a contradiction in terms, a breathtaking view of the Birmingham skyline.
But the most striking thing about the room is that it's full of paper. Mostly
but not all in ring files, box files and cardboard boxes in which a large manila
envelope stuffed with documents and cuttings. The latest of which was originally
marked Euro Pop Right. Then amended to Euro Pop Right Brexit. And now to Euro
Pop Right Brexit Trump. And sometimes during a doomed attempt at serious
decluttering, he thinks there might be a new play in all of this. Far out. Far
out? So it's like what, you on stage? Yes. For the first time since... The early
70s. Too much. What's Brexit? LAUGHTER Can I ask you some questions? How many
people in this room vote the same way as at least one of their parents? Give us
a cheer. Yes! How many people have voted for more than one party? Yes! The
floating voter is found. LAUGHTER How many people have ever voted Conservative?
Yes! And there's no shame in that. LAUGHTER How many people voted Brexit? Yes.
Well, that's it. We are a completely representative sample of the general
population. That's if you're all telling the truth, which of course you are.
Now, here's a list of six characteristics of voters in the 2016 EU referendum.
What I want to know is which of these characteristics would make someone least
likely to vote Brexit and which one most. Having a household income under
£20,000, having voted Labour in 2015, I'm going to ask you this at the end,
being 65 or over, having a degree, being in paid work, thinking that capitalism
is all in all a force for ill. So what was the factor that made people least
likely to vote Leave? Shout them out. Four. Four, which is having a degree. Any
others? Six. Well, you're right. It is actually voting Labour in 2015. Lest we
forget, Labour delivered two-thirds of its 2015 vote to remain. And what did
people think was the most likely factor to make people vote Leave? Three. One.
Three. The threes have it. It was being 65 or over. Archetypal Leavers were not,
by and large, working-class Labour voters from the north of England. What they
were was old. And old people are less likely than young people to have a degree,
they're poorer, and more likely to support bringing back blue passport covers
and the death penalty. LAUGHTER And, of course, to have come of age in the late
1960s. So what happened to the Sgt Pepper generation? And so he set to to
discover. He does what he always does. He reads books, watches documentaries,
goes through tapes and videos and files of newspaper cuttings, and conducts
interviews, largely with people who, like him, came of age between Love Me Do
and Let It Be. People like Martin Jakes, who went on to edit the journal Marxism
Today. Well, both my parents worked during the war at Armstrong Sigley, which
was an aircraft factory in Coventry, and they joined the Communist Party in that
period. David Aronovich of The Times, also from a Communist family. There was
always, really, the Russians. I was on the side of the Russians. I knew every
kind of aeroplane flown by the Russians in the Second World War. 1968
revolutionary leader Tariq Ali, who was brought up in Pakistan in a household
full of... Communist intellectuals, trade unionists, peasant leaders, and
occasionally meeting people from a completely different background who were, in
some shape or form, running the country. And there were many feminists. Anna
Coote, who was a student journalist, and then went on to The Observer. I would
have been about maybe 20, and we had to go and look for things in the library,
which is in another part of the building. And to get there, she had to walk
through the compositor's room, which was full of big burly blokes operating the
machines. And what they did, when I appeared at one end of the room, was to set
up a whistle, and then they would all take it up until, when you got to the
other end of the room, everybody was whistling at me. I found this profoundly
embarrassing. But it strikes him there's one person he hasn't interviewed,
because, in a sense, he can't. Born in 1948, 13, when Kennedy was assassinated.
In 1966, 18? When, much to my father's irritation, I grow my hair and buy a
Victorian frock coat, three wing collars, two cravats and a cravat pin. It is in
this Wildean persona that I intend to take the University of Manchester by
storm. I come to the attention of the student newspaper. I raise eyebrows at my
hall of residence, and I'm asked by a fellow drama student if I'm for real. It's
a good question. What am I trying on? 18 months later, I'm editor of the student
newspaper and campaigning for the reinstatement of two students who have been
expelled for shouting down the Secretary of State for Education. Although the
two students are members of the revolutionary International Socialists, later to
become the Socialist Workers' Party, not to be confused with the International
Marxist Group or the Socialist Labour League or the University Socialist
Society, I don't support them for that reason. I see this as an issue of the
right to protest. And then I hit Damascus. I hit Damascus. It must be very early
in April 1968. I think it's in the Student Union cafeteria. A student I know is
sitting there. The month before he'd been filmed by Granada's World in Action on
his way to the 17th of March anti-Vietnam War demo, the one that ended with
pitch battles between protesters and the police in Grosvenor Square. Dave Clark.
So I think that the time has come for all of us, or at least for many of us who
feel like me, to in fact unite and to try and bring about a radical social
change. And if violence is a part of this, then violence is a part of it. And
Dave calls me over to his table to congratulate me on the speech I made in the
Students' Union in support of the two expelled students. But he has something
else to say. Isn't it time that I got serious and joined the revolution? And I
imagine, but I don't remember, him asking me why on the 31st of March President
Lyndon Johnson had effectively resigned. I shall not seek and I will not accept
the nomination of my party for another term as your president. And he answers
that two months ago a guerrilla peasant army of little yellow people in black
pyjamas managed to invade the headquarters of the most powerful military machine
on earth. And I say, yes. And so what do we do to support these heroic people?
And I say, yes. I'll tell you, uncle, we bring the war on home. He calls me
uncle. And a few days later Martin Luther King is assassinated and cities across
America erupt in flames. In May, the Paris student uprising, which provokes a
general strike. And Dave moves in. And we print the Socialist Society... Or Sock
Sock....magazine Guerrilla on an ancient Romeo duplicator in our bathroom. And
then in February 1969, Sock Sock is mounting a campaign for the reform... Well,
abolition....of the examination system. And there's a ballot for a student
boycott of all classes if our demands aren't met. In the last three days of the
campaign for yes, we produce a daily leaflet. The last one on the actual ballot
day will go to every student in the university... Under doors of rooms in every
hall of residence... Handed out outside every lecture theatre... Or department
building. Or laboratory. There's 10,000 students. And the leaflet's two sides...
With two colours on each side. And now into the duplicating process, the
electrical element in our third hand Romeo gives up. We're faced with nearly
40,000 manual turns of the duplicator's handle. The blokes do it in 20-minute
shifts, while the girls make coffee and pass cooling hands across our brows. At
6am, when the distributors arrive to collect the leaflets, we've finished. It is
among the happiest nights of my life. I've tried it on. I've tried it on. It
fits. We lose the ballot. But that kind of proves the point. Revolutionaries
always lose referenda. LAUGHTER But I have doubts about myself. There's a minor
occupation of the office of the registrar, and someone has to sit down at his
desk and confront him when he comes in and demands that we all leave. And by now
I'm chair of the Socialist Society, but I don't want to do it. Because I'm
fearful that if he told me to get out, I would. And if I can't do that, sit in
someone's chair and not vacate it, what kind of revolutionary am I? Our house
wasn't full of Marxist intellectuals. For me, it was never a place for a
revolutionary. For me, it was never a place for a revolutionary.