TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You know, thrown in time warning. Useful. Thank you so much, Susie Dent. That's
it from us, our editors today, Tom Smith-Arden, Victoria Gardner. I hope we've
given you con-felicity. BBC News at nine o'clock. The BBC understands that a
number of energy companies are preparing for the government to provide further
financial support for households with their gas and electricity bills. The
current assistance is due to finish at the end of this month, but the Treasury
says it's reviewing the situation. A separate £400 winter discount will end as
planned this month. Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, says
charities and energy companies themselves have been asking the government to
ensure average bills don't rise above £2,500. They have not been told that the
rate is staying. They have been told that there is an attempt to keep the rate
at £2,500. So we're not at the smoking gun stage that this is definitely
happening, but I would say we're at an 85% likelihood. Labour have defended the
decision to offer a job to the former civil servant Sue Gray, who oversaw the
investigation into lockdown parties in Downing Street. Some Conservatives say
her appointment as chief of staff would call her impartiality into question.
Labour have said any suggestion of impropriety is ludicrous, but that they will
abide by the decision of the Parliament's Advisory Committee on Business
Appointments, which will decide the suitability of the move. A man and a woman
will appear before magistrates in Crawley this morning, two days after the body
of a baby was found in a wooded area near Brighton. Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon are accused of gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth of a
child and perverting the course of justice. The chief executive of HS2, Mark
Thurston, has told the BBC that various options are being considered to control
the spiralling cost of the project. He said the impact of inflation had been
significant and that he was looking at ways of mitigating this, including
possible delays and supply chain savings. Ken Bruce's final show on Radio 2 is
due to begin in half an hour. Ken has been presenting his mid-morning show for
more than 30 years, bringing in features including the ever-popular quiz,
Popmaster. BBC News. Should Sue Gray stay away from party politics? Is Labour
right to work with the former civil servant given her role in investigating
those lockdown parties? Nikki Campbell is taking your questions and discussing
that topic now over on Five Live. Later this morning here on Radio 4, we're
heading to outer space, only to look straight back at home. The astronaut Tim
Peake found that whenever he had a spare moment aboard the International Space
Station, he spent it staring straight back at Earth with a growing sensation
he'd never felt before, homesickness. He wants to find out what is this powerful
desire? Is it a psychological illness, a cultural phenomenon, or something
altogether more profound? We'll investigate in Homesick Planet at 11 o'clock.
But first, here on Radio 4, it's time for Desert Island Discs with Lauren
Laverne. My cast away this week is the artist Sonia Boyce. She was just 25 when
the Tate made her one of the youngest artists and the first black woman to enter
its permanent collection. Last year, she represented Britain at the world's
oldest international art show, the Venice Biennale. She took home the coveted
Golden Lion Award, the first British artist to win the top prize in 30 years and
the first woman of colour to represent the UK. She was born in London to parents
who arrived as part of the Windrush generation, and as a child, she drew
incessantly. Her art teacher spotted her talent and suggested she give life
drawing a try. She's used performance, film, installations and sound in her
work, but says her true medium is people. She's a collaborator and has taken the
stories of domestic violence survivors to the Serpentine Gallery, the voices of
black female singers to the Venice Biennale, and the memories of a local
community to a mural running for two kilometres alongside the new Elizabeth line
in London. She says, whenever a door is opened, I ask myself, if I am in this
place, what is possible? What will enable something to change so that others can
benefit from me being here too? Sonia Boyce, welcome to Desert Island Discs.
SONIA BOYCE Thank you. JILL So talk to me, Sonia, about the excitement of
collaboration. It's something that's engaged you for many years. What do you
love about it? SONIA You know, there's this idea that as an artist, you work on
your own. But I always get very inspired by how other people take to a
situation, what they do. They always do something really unexpected. And they've
come along on the journey, not knowing necessarily what that journey might be.
I'm thinking, I am so grateful for them, just thinking, yeah, this might be
interesting. JILL That must be quite a wave to ride, though, as an artist,
because you have to be very brave to allow things to unfold in unexpected ways.
SONIA I'm always anxious in projects that I do. And also the people that I work
with, because I don't really, you know, I kind of made a decision not to direct
people. I mean, there have been many times when I've thought, I've brought all
these people together, I'm not sure anything's going to happen. People are going
to just sit here for ages, just looking really worriedly at each other. To not
have a plan, just to know that we're all going to be in a space and something's
going to happen. And then seeing where it goes. And usually it just goes off in
such spectacular ways that I'm kind of now addicted, you could say, to the non-
planned plan. JILL The non-planned plan. I love it. So Sonia, let's get cracking
with your first disc then. What have you got for us? SONIA So I always feel
slightly embarrassed about this. I must have been about six, seven, eight,
possibly even nine. And I saved up my pocket money to buy this record. And I was
so chuffed with myself that this was my record, because of course, we had
records in the house and but they either my brother's, sister's, parents' music,
but I actually had my own record. So this first record is Meet Me on the Corner
by Linda's Fun. And I still love it, even though I sound a bit embarrassed
because it being a folk stroke hippie kind of song, but it does it makes me
happy still. Mind me tugging at your sleeve I'm asking you if I can fix a rotten
roof For your dreams are all I believe Meet me on the corner when the lights are
coming on And I'll be there, I promise I'll be there Down the empty streets
we'll disappear into the dawn If you have dreams enough to share Lay down your
fun news and pranks and reminders And spread your wares on the ground Well I've
got time if you're dealing round I'm just hanging round Linda's Fun and Meet Me
on the Corner. Sonia Boyce, you were born in London. Your father, Donald, came
from British Guyana and your mother, Edna, came from Barbados to study nursing.
So tell me about your dad first. He was one of the Windrush generation. How did
he adjust to life in London? His first job was as a projectionist in cinema in
Camden. He'd actually been a tailor before he arrived in the UK and I think it
was just the first job that he got when he arrived. And after doing the job as a
projectionist, he went back into tailoring. And my mum, before she was a nurse,
she was a dressmaker. And we were all of our family were always making things
because there was loads of bags of cloth in the house. I always think that my
mum, if she'd been born at another time, more my generation, I think she might
have become a fashion designer because she was always making clothes for us. I
often thought that they were very weird in terms of materials that she would...
Why? Because they were kind of off cuts from what she... She would do a lot of
piecework at home. And so there was always these very weird kinds of bits of
fabric that she would say, oh yeah, I think I'll make you a dress out of that.
So it'd be like an off cut or things that she'd put together that sort of
weren't meant to go together, but she'd find a way to make it work. Yeah. And I
remember lots of very scratchy dresses. So your parents separated when you were
very little. What was your relationship with your dad like? I didn't see my dad
again until I was in my teens, about 15, 16. He lived in London, lived in
Highgate, had a very lively life in Highgate. So I used to go and see him with
my sisters. Lively in what way? Well, he would talk about having celebrity
filled parties where the bath would be full of champagne with ice. And were
these tall tales or true stories? No, no, because he was very involved with the
Labour Party. So there'd be MPs and all sorts of celebrities would be at his
bashes, whatever they were. He was quite gregarious as a great charmer. I could
see how he kind of was charming to my mum, but they're very different
personalities in terms of, she's very much about getting things done and doing
things in the right way. I can imagine why it would have been irritating for
your mother to hear about that as well. She was left to look after you guys.
Yeah, she wasn't, she was no longer enamoured with him. And my parents split up
just as my mum got pregnant with the last child. And so there was five of us and
that she was keeping going. But she was very determined to make sure that we got
a good education. She was always convinced that whatever was out there in the
world, we should go and get. Disc number two, what are we going to hear next? So
we're going to hear, there's a track that reminds me very much of my eldest
sister, Marietta, who subsequently died. And we always used to all pile into her
house and she's got five children and there was always music playing. And this
particular track reminds me of the 70s and being in their house and there being
lots of food and lots of noise and lots of people in and out of the house. And
it's a track by John Holt called Help Me Make It Through the Night. All I'm
taking is your time Help me make it through the night I don't care who's right
or wrong I don't try to understand Let the devil take tomorrow Lord, tonight I
need a friend Yesterday's day in gold And tomorrow is out of sight And it's sad
to be alone Help me make it through the night Sonia Boyce, when your parents
separated, your mother moved the family to a tenement block in East London. You
lived very near to the renowned Whitechapel Art Gallery. Did you ever go inside?
Part of me wonders whether I first went to the Whitechapel Art Gallery because
of a school trip, because I don't remember the very first time, but I remember I
would go in there quite often on my own. And just kind of because I'd been there
before, I would just walk in. So, you know, about seven, eight years old, I just
kind of walk into the gallery and I quite liked it. I really liked the scale of
the building. I really liked the light that was in there and there were all
these things that were on the wall. I don't remember any specific paintings or
drawings or images or objects. I just remember like I just like going in there
whenever I was kind of off walking on my own, I would just walk in there. And
what about when you were at home? I know that you love drawing and would use any
available surface. Much to my mum's real kind of frustration. When I was at
school, I was always drawing the margins. When I was at home, any surface, I was
just always drawing. And I wasn't even particularly conscious of the fact that I
was drawing. It's just something that I always did. What were you drawing? I
mean, it's doodling, really. Faces, names, you know, if there were patterns, I
would draw little patterns. This idea of motif and particularly wallpaper has
recurred in your work throughout the decades. That presumably then goes back to
your childhood. Tell me a little bit about the story behind all of these
patterns and papers that you're surrounded by. I had this thing where I
particularly kind of wake up in the middle of night and I was always convinced
that the wallpaper was moving, that I could see things in the wallpaper. And I
do think that wallpaper or repeat pattern has a kind of otherworldly quality
about it now. But as a child, I was just always a bit scared of the wallpaper.
And by the time I was doing my degree and using those images, I started to kind
of get to love more than fear what a repeat pattern can do. Time to go to the
music, Sonia. It's your third choice today. What are we going to hear and why
have you chosen it? This is a particular, I was really into reggae and lovers
rock. And this particular track by Louisa Mark, Caught You In A Lie, for me,
absolutely captures that 70s moment with me and my friends and how we all used
to go to parties or clubs, youth clubs or town hall clubs. And we all sing along
to these songs and dance to these songs. I suppose it's another way in which I'm
thinking about how I've congregated with people around music. But I found out
that she wasn't this young. I caught you in a lie Louisa Mark and Caught You In
A Lie. So Sonia Boyce, when you got a bit older, one of your teachers spotted
your artistic potential. She really took you under her wing. Tell me what
happened. Mrs Franklin, who was my art teacher, wore lots of purple. She was
very much part of that kind of bohemian, what I imagined to be bohemian to be
about. And she saw something in the drawing that I was always doing and said,
OK, you need to go to art school. I'd never heard of art school before. I was 15
at the time. And most, most young people don't go to art school until they're
about 18. And she wrote my mum a letter. What did your mum make of that? I think
she was a little concerned because she didn't really know what it meant. But she
said, OK, if your teacher says that you should do this, you should go. So she
had that kind of sense of respect for a professional opinion. Yeah. Almost the
teacher's voice was the law for her. And it was like this world opened up
because I had no idea about art school before then. What were you expecting? And
what was your first day like? My first day was it was hilarious. So, you know,
coming from school and at school, you knock on the teacher's door and they say,
come in and you can go into the classroom. So I get to East Ham College and I'm
told where the life drawing class is. And I knock on the door and I stand and
I'm waiting for someone to say, you can come in. And people are coming in and
going out of the room. But nobody said you could come in. So I was just standing
there for ages. I stood there, I stood there at least half an hour. And this
person who'd come in and gone out a few times, talked to me and said, you know,
you can just go in. And I kind of walked into this room and then, you know, this
room full of about 20, 30 people seated with these easels. And there's this man
standing there with no clothes on. And I'm like, what is going on? I didn't know
where to look. And then Arthur, who is the life drawing tutor, said, oh, just
set yourself up. And I was like, what is going on? Why is this man got no
clothes on? Because I had no idea what happened in art school. And my mum had no
idea. I mean, that's the reason why I needed to have her to sign permission for
me to go because of life drawing. Letty, you're fourth music choice today. What
have you gone for, Sonia? When I was young, about 10, 11, I was obsessed with
the Old Grey Whistle Test. I was actually I was obsessed with two programs, Old
Grey Whistle Test and the Open University programs. It always happened late at
night, midweek. And I learned a lot about kind of new wave bands that were
emerging and a particular band, Talking Heads. And this track, Psycho Killer, I
first saw on Old Grey Whistle Test. I can't seem to face up to the facts I'm
tense and nervous and I can't relax I can't sleep cause my bed's on fire Don't
touch me, I'm a real live wire Psycho killer, what do you say? Better run, run,
run, run, run, run away You start a conversation, you can't even finish it
You're talking a lot, but you're not saying anything When I have nothing to say,
my lips are sealed Say something once, why say it again? Psycho killer, what do
you say? Far, far, far, far, far, far, far, far, far better run, run, run, run,
run, run, run away Talking Heads and Psycho Killer. So Sonia, in 1980 you
started a degree, Fine Art was your course at Stourbridge College of Art. Did
you find your creative feet there? When I was on Foundation, I was very
interested in feminist art practice. Feminist art practice often spoke very much
about social issues and I was coming in all guns blazing wanting to talk about
the social issues and with other female students we formed a feminist student
group. We were very concerned about the fact that there were no female tutors on
the course but 50% of the student body was female. Particularly those of us that
were part of that group would often, any time we spoke, there'd be the raised
eyebrows and almost the yawn, here they go again kind of. But actually we were
trying to fight for something better. It must have got quite serious because is
it true they wanted to expel you? Yeah, by the end of my first year into my
second year, they wanted to expel me and so basically I was, throughout my
second year, I was on continuous assessment and I was terrified to tell my mum.
So I just didn't tell her. Because she would have told you to do what you were
told? To do what I was told. Did you at any point think, I'm just going to do
what they want me to do? No, I did. I was doing what they wanted me to do. I was
doing these very formal, abstract drawings and learning, in the process,
learning a lot about paper and materials. To a certain extent I had been
browbeaten, you could say, into getting through the course. Everything changed
for you though Sonia, in 1981. So you saw a poster for an exhibition at the
Wolverhampton Art Gallery and it featured work by a group of young black
artists. What impact did the art have on you when you went to see it? It was
very raw, it was very DIY, it was very energised. I could tell that the artists
were young because of the nature of what the subject matter, it was all about
subject matter. And this became the Black Art Group, I think they were all in
their teens, right? They were in their teens. And what was the subject matter?
You mentioned the subject matter. I remember a series of drawings and a series
of collages that were about the Suslaws because young people were really feeling
that experience. There was something to be said and it couldn't be suppressed
anymore. And for me it was like, I literally woke up, the ground shook for me.
That's your thunderbolt. So what did it do for your sense about your own art? I
went back to the art school and I just ripped up so much of the work that I'd
done and thought, right, this is it, I'm going for it. If they fail me, they
fail me, I don't care, I'm just going to do it. Sonia, I think we better hear
your next track before we find out the next chapter in your story, number five.
What is it? This track by Dennis Brown, Wolf and Lippards, is part of that
moment in reggae where there's a sense of consciousness raising about being in
the UK but also being from the Caribbean and that question of a colonial past
that had brought us to the UK. For me it's very much about that social moment,
this track. Come along, yeah, and dig my soul. Too much wagonist, too much
antagonist. Wolves and leopards are trying to kill the sheep and the shepherd,
yes. Wolves and leopards are trying to kill the sheep and the shepherd, yeah.
Too much informers, too much stillbearers. Time to separate the sheep from the
wolves. We're at the crossroads and this is the time of decision. Too much
informers, too much stillbearers. Too much informers, too much stillbearers,
yeah. Dennis Brown, Wolf and Lippards. Sonia Boyce, you graduated in 1983 and
you started making art your own way. Your work took on subjects like
colonialism, feminism and organised religion. What did your mum think of it?
She'd say, oh, couldn't you do something nice? Couldn't you just paint some
flowers or do a portrait? And when I first graduated, I moved back home, moved
back to London and she let me use one of the rooms in our house as a studio. And
one day I came home and she had the neighbours in the studio kind of talking
through it. So it was quite contradictory. I was furious. It's like people are
not allowed to come in the studio. And she's going, well, they just wanted to
know. And people started asking whether I could do their portrait. And I said,
well, actually, I don't, that's not quite what I do. So it was kind of mixed. On
one level, her being very proud, but also her, I think, feeling really scared.
She was worried about me being disruptive. In 1985, one of your drawings
featured in an exhibition called The Thin Black Line. Now, you called the piece
Mr. Close Friend of the Family Pays a Visit Whilst Everyone Else is Out. And it
shows a man reaching out to touch a young girl. We can't see his face, just the
open neck of his shirt and his crucifix peeking through. That young girl is you.
What's the story behind that image? Well, I was remembering this incident that
had happened at home where a man who was a close friend of the family had come
round to the house. Nobody else was in the house. I'd let him in and he tried to
rape me. I would have been 12, 13, something like that. And I never spoke about
it. Had you thought about it a lot since? Or was it something that came back to
you when you started making that work? I think it just came back to me. And I
didn't really talk to anybody about what I was going to make for the show. I
just kind of turned up with this thing rolled up in a tube and put it up and
then ran home because I just kind of felt, I just need to say this at this
moment. Did anybody know in your life what had happened, what you'd been
through? No. And I was very aware when I was constructing the image that the
female figure who's looking out is looking out directly to the audience to
acknowledge her presence. Did it help? Yes, it did. I mean, I think that's part
of the whole thing about making art is that somehow you're able to process
things. And so, yeah, it did. It did help. Let's go to the music, Sonia. It's
your sixth choice. What are we going to hear next? I wanted to choose something
that was about me and my partner, David. This particular track reminds me
particularly of us having a holiday, a break in Amsterdam. And we'd gone to a
record shop and we both went for this record by Gil Scott Heron, a track called
Is That Jazz? David is convinced that he bought the album. I'm convinced that I
bought the album. It's never going to be resolved because we both feel that we
own that album. But really, I bought it. Well, you've got it on your island. So
there you go. Sorry, David. Gil Scott Heron and Is That Jazz. So, Sonia Boyce,
as I said at the beginning of the programme, your career has included many, many
firsts. You were the first black woman to have a piece of work collected by the
Tate in 1987. You were just in your mid-twenties at the time. The first black
woman to represent Britain at the Venice Biennale. How, I wonder, do those
firsts sit with you? I love that people recognise me and recognise the things
that I'm doing. But when I'm told, oh, you're the first, I kind of think, oh,
they weren't expecting me or anybody like me. That's part of my frustration. So
when I was in the run up to doing Venice and the British Pavilion, that's all
that got said, is the first black British female artist to represent Britain.
But nobody knows what I do. If you just say that, it doesn't matter what I do.
Literally, you're just looking at me and not the work that I make. In 2018, you
hit the headlines, Sonia. Some of the staff you were working with on a project
in the Manchester Art Gallery chose to temporarily remove J.W. Waterhouse's
painting, Hylas and the Nymphs, from the wall where it was hanging. Now, the
decision to take it away came out of a wider conversation about who decides what
work will be shown. Why was this painting in particular singled out to come
down? What the staff, public-facing staff, kept saying was, well, actually,
there's a kind of culture that is developing around this painting where young
teenage girls come and take selfies. And then there's a kind of cruising culture
that happens where a lot of middle-aged men gather also around those girls who
are taking photographs of themselves. And as the conversations developed, and
there were members of staff, as we said, they were mainly male members of staff,
who thought, oh, this is not actually that serious. I think maybe you're
exaggerating a little bit. Until the very last session when we were all sat
there, there was about 30 of us by this point, this man came around and he had
an iPhone where he was filming all of the paintings and sculptures where they
were naked or semi-naked women, and making these very guttural sounds of like,
oh, that's really gorgeous. And obviously, he was recording something. And then
he stops at this painting, Hylus and the Nymphs, and he's still making these
guttural sounds. And another member of the general public, another man, comes up
to him and says, you do know that they're meant to be prepubescent girls? And he
goes, oh, that's even better. At which point, everybody who was sat there, we
were all sat there in the same gallery space, said that painting has got to come
down. So that's why that painting came down as part of a performance where there
were lots of other things that happened. Exactly. And then in the performance,
so it comes down for a week, and then it was replaced by post-it notes. Where
people could talk about representation. Where people could kind of have their
say and they could put their voice, as it were, on the gallery wall. So the
removal of the painting caused, you know, a fair amount of outrage, hullabaloo,
on social media, some sections of the press. Were you surprised by the response?
Because it was, it was massive. It was massive. It was global. I was getting
messages from all over the world. There were death threats to the staff. Did you
get death threats? No, but I got a lot of quite horrible emails, getting hounded
by certain people for well over a year. You know, the police got involved at one
point. How did you deal with that? I was really scared by it. For members of
staff to receive death threats because of an action which didn't hurt anybody. A
painting came off of the wall, and then it went back up, and people were asked
to respond. That doesn't, in my books, doesn't warrant a death threat. Let's
have some more music, Sonia. Your seventh choice today, what's it going to be?
It's a song for my girls. I've got two daughters. This is a track by Corinne
Bailey-Ray, Put Your Records On, and I love this track, and the girls love this
track. And what I love about it is the kind of message of just step into your
own beauty that is just joyful. Three little birds sat on my window, and they
told me I don't need to worry. Summer came like cinemage, so sweet. Little girls
double-dutch on the concrete. Maybe sometimes we got it wrong, but it's alright.
Come on, things seem to change. Why they stay the same? Don't you hesitate. Go
put your records on. Tell me your favorite song. You go ahead, let your hair
down. Sapphire in faded jeans. I hope you get your dreams. Just go ahead, let
your hair down. You're gonna find yourself somewhere, somehow. Blue as the sky,
sunburned and lonely. Sipping tea in a bar by the roadside. Just relax, just
relax. Don't you let those other boys fool you. Got a love that I foreheaded.
Maybe sometimes we feel afraid, but it's alright. Come on, you stay the same.
You're in Bailey Ray and Put Your Records On. Sonia Boyce, you've been working
steadily for 40 years, but your success at the Venice Biennale put you in the
international spotlight. Your winning entry was called Feeling Her Way and
features improvised performances by five black female musicians. What did this
recognition mean to you? I was genuinely confused about what emerged in terms of
Venice. Being asked in the first place to do the pavilion and then being awarded
the Golden Lion. And I remember on the stage just thinking, I don't know what's
going on right now. Because I just kind of... You were quite emotional too, I
think. I was very emotional. It goes back to this thing about being the first
whatever on the steps of the British Pavilion and seeing hundreds of people
queuing to come to see the show. It broke me. I just kind of thought, I'm really
feeling the weight of history right now. And really saying, please don't mess
up, Sonia. Please don't mess up. Because I knew that I love what I was doing,
but I had no idea how the work was going to be judged. But just suddenly
thinking, oh, I think this is a big deal. Your mother at the beginning of your
career was anxious about you kind of making trouble, making yourself heard,
maybe causing trouble. Did she keep any of your pieces? So this must have been
in the 80s. She asked me to do a picture for her. And I thought, oh, that's
lovely. And then she handed me a postcard of a poor Gauguin and she wanted me to
do a copy of it, which I did. And so when my mum, she had dementia in later
years and ended up having to go into a nursing home. And the thing that she
wanted to come with her was that picture. It was quite an emotional thing. It's
like, this was her painting. I think hopefully she'd have gone back, poor
Gauguin, by that point. But yeah, it's curious. I think she had come round in
some ways, not just because of that particular work, but because of the fact
that she realised that other people took it seriously, what I was doing. I
really feel that she was quite proud. You're very sociable, Sonia. I mean, a lot
of your work, obviously, as we've discussed, involves collaborating with other
people. But I'm afraid I'm going to send you to the solitude of the Desert
Islands. How do you think you'll be on your own? I'm quite good on my own. I
think it was because there's always a lot of family in the house and lots of
people in the house when I was growing up, that I would go to the quiet room and
lock myself and be reading or playing records, whatever. And I can do long
stretches on my own because I spend a considerable amount of time daydreaming.
Well, we'd love to hear one more track from you before we send you to your
islands, Sonia Boyce. What's your final choice going to be? It's Joan
Armatrading, Love and Affection. I love the opening line to this song. This idea
that you're looking at somebody and they're looking at you and I could be
persuaded. It does actually remind me of the relationship between me and David,
that kind of interplay between will you, won't you, shall we, shan't we, which
we still do. Even 30 years on. Even 30 years on, we're still that kind of little
game. But also when she says, make love with affection, seeing someone that you
want and that you're kind somehow. I love that. I am not in love, but I'm open
to persuasion. East or west, where's the best? For romancing with a friend, I
can smile. But with a lover I could hold my head down and really laugh, really
laugh. Thank you. You took me dancing across the floor, cheek to cheek. But with
a lover I could really move, really move. I could really dance, really dance,
really dance, really dance. I could really move, really move, really move,
really move. Now if I can feel the sun in my eyes and the rain on my face, why
can't I feel love? Joan Alma Trading, Love and Affection. So Sonia Boyce, the
time has come. I'm going to send you away to the island. I'm giving you the
Bible, the complete works of Shakespeare, and you can take one other book. What
are you going to choose? I think it might be Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.
I won it as a prize at junior school. So it was the very first book I owned that
I didn't have to take back to the library. I could read it whenever I wanted to.
And of course, Charlie, being ever hopeful, and the moment when he thought he
was going to give up, he hit gold. It's yours. You can also have a luxury item.
What will that be? I am partial to champagne. So if there could be some
champagne there. Oh, absolutely. I mean, that would ease the fact that there's
nobody else. I mean, it's never the wrong thing to take. I mean, I'd miss
everybody, but... Sure, but we're only up to a point. But, you know, you've got
to do what you've got to do. And finally, which one track of the eight that
you've shared with us today would you save from the waves? Is That Jazz by Gil
Scott-Harron. This history upon which he draws from, his poetry with that
history. But also the connection between me and David. And yes, I do own it,
David. It's mine. But the song itself, it's a love story to all that's gone
past. Sonia, boys, thank you very much for letting us hear your Desert Island
Discs. That was amazing. Desert Island Discs was created by Roy Plumley. The
producer was Paula McGinley. Lauren Laverne's cast away next week is the writer,
actor and comedian Robert Webb. You can listen to many more editions of the
programme on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, we continue our Book of the Week, A
Tomb with a View. As the popularity of burial declines, Peter Ross visits a
cemetery in Bristol, taking an innovative approach. The reader is Andy Clark. It
was Halloween and I was in Arnos Vale for Liz and Sean's wedding. This burial
ground opened in Bristol in 1839 and is perhaps the finest Victorian garden
cemetery outside of London. It's also the best example of a 19th century
graveyard being repurposed for the 21st century, reborn as a place of leisure
and pleasure. At one side of the gates was a billboard advertising a forthcoming
theatre production of Jekyll and Hyde. On the other were hoardings noting the
availability of burial space, coffee and cake. A blackboard outside the
visitor's centre listed that day's wildlife sightings – a cat, two bats, a
peregrine falcon above the tomb of Vraja Ramahan Roy. Is this place the future
of graveyards? The 45-acre site is home to around 290,000 dead and the cemetery
is synonymous in this city with the life beyond life. I'll see thee down Arnos
Vale is a typical line from Bristolians of a certain vintage, said with a smile
but serious too, meaning that the speaker and the friend would end their days in
the same ground. There are worse places. Although it's bigger than Highgate
Cemetery in London, Arnos Vale feels much more compact. On either side of the
entrance on Bath Road are two small neoclassical gatehouses. One is now the
cemetery reception and shop. Wander a little further in and you'll arrive at the
real treasure. Two chapels, one Anglican, the other nonconformist, both grade 2
listed. Sean and Liz had booked a nonconformist chapel for the reception, though
the ceremony itself was to be elsewhere in the grounds. The cemetery has been a
marriage venue since 2014 and it hosts around 40 each year. The coordinator is a
young woman called Buffy. She gets a lot of goths. Wedding photographs taken at
Arnos Vale tend to feature tattoos, black cakes, motorbikes. One couple walked
down the aisle to Iron Maiden. Brides have been known to arrive by hearse. I was
a little early so I visited the chapel. The room where the reception was to be
held looked gorgeous, elegant and full of light, the table dressed with gourds
and ivy. Immediately below, and accessible to the public, was the site of the
former crematorium. Between 1928 and the discontinuation of the service in 1998,
123,000 people were cremated down there. The area is used now to tell the story
of Arnos Vale, but one of the great ovens is still there. It's a rusty brown
colour. Across the way is the atomiser, a glass-fronted machine full of wheels
and belts, which was used to grind the cremated remains into ash. Liz Webb and
Sean McHale live in Bristol. He's 32, she's 29. Liz grew up nearby and she's
known the cemetery since childhood. They're not goths or pagans, although Liz
admits to witchy vibes. They're just regular folks who are into Halloween. The
presence of the dead doesn't bother them. Arnos Vale is owned by Bristol City
Council, managed and leased by the Cemetery Trust. It has annual running costs
of around half a million pounds. To meet these, without local authority funding,
the cemetery is used for a variety of purposes, including, of course, burial.
Some of the activities might have surprised the Victorians. Weddings, for one,
but also film screenings, The Lost Boys, Corpse Bride, etc. They're held in the
Anglican Chapel. There's an annual festival called Life, Death and the Rest,
which is intended to bust taboos around dying. On the day of my visit, the crypt
had been taken over by the city's Mexican community for Dia de los Muertos. It
was turned into an ofrenda, an altar covered in food offerings, bright skull
decorations and photos of the deceased. It's a matter of instinct and debate to
ensure that the integrity and atmosphere of the cemetery isn't compromised.
Perhaps it's easier to sustain an artsy, liberal, hipsterish Bristol than it
would be in some other cities. Janine Marriott is the public engagement manager.
She tells me it's a constant question discussed by the Trust and the staff and
the friends and the public. Is this appropriate? For instance, she said, when
certain films have been proposed, Psycho, we decided, was a step too far.
Someone else wanted to do a talk on necrophilia. We said no to that as well.
Janine sees the cemetery as a sacred space, but also a heritage space, and
insists that the two aren't at odds. She argues that councils haven't got the
funds, so they're never going to care for a historic cemetery over a nursing
home or a museum or a sports centre, so some kind of income-generating activity
is vital. The model at Arnas Vale relies heavily upon volunteers. Among the
regulars is Howard Utting, although he's more like a patron saint. He's the guru
of the graveyard. He's 76, with long grey hair, a long grey beard, and a long
association with Arnas Vale. Howard's grandfather, William Utting, was the
superintendent, responsible for running the cemetery from 1908. His father,
Alfred, born in the cemetery in 1910, eventually took over the superintendent
role. Howard was a true child of the graveyard. He lived here until he married
at 31. Arnas Vale was his playground. He'd ride his bike along the paths, climb
across graves to reach the best conkers, share the sammages of the gravediggers.
As the family grew, the Uttings settled in the East Lodge, to the left of the
main gates as you come in. These days, on Fridays, Howard mans the reception
desk of what used to be his living room. From the window, he can see his
parents' grave. Howard didn't go into the family business. He became a postman.
Still, growing up in a graveyard shaped him in several important ways. It made
him realise that you can't take your money with you, so what's the point of
grasping for it and exploiting others to get it? Even more significantly, he
understood and accepted the inevitability of death at an age when most kids were
having trouble accepting the inevitability of school. He remembers being sent
out to tell his dad it was time to come in for dinner and finding him in one of
the chapels, closing up for the night. We were standing at the altar. My father
said to me, Life's like that candle. If you're lucky, you'll burn all the way
down. He licked his thumb and forefinger and pinched the wick. Life can be
snuffed out, he said, but tomorrow I'll light the flame again. Arnasvale is
alive. The weddings, the funerals, the tours and talks keep its pulse steady.
Things could easily have been very different. If not for the determination of
locals, I might have found the gates padlocked and the graveyard dead. The
cemetery had been in decline since the late 1950s, and in 1987 it came into the
ownership of a businessman who announced that he wanted to build 400 houses on a
seven-acre section of the grounds. Families were asked to consider exhuming and
removing the remains of their relations. This caused widespread outrage and
inspired a long campaign which would, in its quietly determined British way,
revolutionise the way Arnasvale was owned and run. Joyce Smith, together with
her husband Richard, was one of the leaders of that campaign. Now in her mid-
seventies, she explained why she'd first got involved. It was personal. Her
father had died only a couple of years before and been buried at Arnasvale. My
mother rang me up and said, they're going to dig everybody up and clear the
cemetery. What shall we do about Daddy? Joyce replied, well, we're not going to
do anything about him because he's not going to be dug up. A campaigning group
was formed to resist the development plans. Things came to a head in 1998 when
the crematorium failed to meet new environmental guidelines and its licence
expired. The owner announced that he could no longer keep the cemetery open and
attempted to lock the gates. He was prevented from doing so by a crowd of around
200 locals who came to be known as the Arnasvale Army. They established a
caravan just outside the main entrance and for several years made sure the
cemetery was open in the morning for those visiting graves and locked up in the
evening to protect it from intruders. There followed a series of legal battles,
first to establish the right of the Arnasvale Army to be there and then in
defence of Bristol City Council's compulsory purchase order. This went to the
High Court in London and in 2003 the Council, now the owners of Arnasvale,
licensed the new cemetery trust to manage it. Joyce and Richard Smith found
themselves in charge of a graveyard that had one foot in the grave. We were so
close to real disaster, Joyce told me. The West Lodge was the worst. The
staircase was gone, it was damp, rot everywhere and the roof was leaking. It was
only the spiderwebs holding it up. Richard Smith had been running an office out
of the back of his car but eventually they managed to clear out a corner of the
non-conformist chapel and install that invaluable item, a kettle. Tea could be
made and with a little tea, progress could be made. The resurrection of
Arnasvale was steaming ahead. Money helped. The trust was awarded a 4.82 million
Heritage Lottery Fund grant. This was to pay for the restoration of the
buildings but funds were still required for the day-to-day running of the
cemetery. Joyce started giving tours. It was a real wartime effort, she laughed,
but people came. That was the amazing part. People wanted to see the cemetery. I
found it so uplifting. I was inspired by everybody's support. Richard Smith died
in 2009. His ashes are buried in one of the Gardens of Rest. A plaque in the
cemetery pays tribute to his passion, commitment and leadership. The main route
through Arnasvale is known as Richard's Road. Sean and Liz were getting married
in the Underwood Centre, up a steep winding path through the trees. It was in a
part of the cemetery where, during Howard Utting's childhood, the horse and cart
were kept. Now it was an outdoor wedding venue. The ceremony would take place
inside what looked like a deconstructed barn, a steep roof but open on all
sides. This had been decorated with bunting, lights, candles, autumn leaves and
pumpkins. Sean looked sharp in blue tweed. Liz arrived in a burgundy 1934
Cadillac. The actual car from Downton Abbey, Buffy whispered, and stepped out to
the sound of Jimmy Cliff singing many rivers to cross. She wore white and glossy
green wellies. The ceremony was short but lovely. Champagne popped, Sinatra
sang, guests gathered around the fire for speeches and toasted marshmallows. A
glass was raised to Sean's late father Rob. The dead remembered and named
brought a little closer to the warmth. Afterwards we all walked back down the
hill, a line of suits and dresses passing along an avenue of graves, till death
do us part never felt so real. As guests gathered by the steps of the chapel to
smoke and chat and sip beer, Liz and her mother and uncle stopped at the white
archway of the Garden of Rest. Her grandmother had died before Liz was born and
her ashes scattered there. It was a quiet, still moment. A final ritual. Friends
and family formed two lines, an honour guard, and Sean and Liz ran between them
in a shower of rose petals. Confetti in a graveyard. If one were looking for a
symbol to sum up how these great gardens of death can also be places of life,
just follow the drift of those petals. Andy Clarke was reading A Tomb with a
View. The book was abridged by Anna Magnusson and the producer is Ailey
Macready. Since Peter Ross's book was published, the guru of the graveyard,
Howard Utting, has died. His ashes are scattered in Arnos Vale. Now let's look
ahead to later this morning. On BBC Radio 4 We are all a unique accumulation of
our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem Sisset looks at
uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it happens.
Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of graduates, people
without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sisset is the
one and only. He'll like an aw. Starting this morning at 11.30.