TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Mascaturing. The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's
radio station. At four hours GMT on the BBC World Service, nine former Soviet
countries condemn Russia's war in Ukraine. Russia is acting on a pattern of
aggressive conduct, which we have already witnessed in Moldova, in Georgia and
in Ukraine. While Vladimir Putin stirs up support for the invasion at a rally in
Moscow. I'm Peter Goffin, and coming up on the newsroom, we'll look at Elon
Musk's complicated relationship with the state of California, preparations for
Cyclone Freddy to make landfall in Mozambique, and if you know your way around a
bell, Britain needs you to give King Charles a ring. We want to make sure that
there are ringers for every church so that we can all ring out the ring for the
king for the coronation. On the BBC World Service. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth
Barlow. The head of the United Nations has condemned Russia's invasion of
Ukraine as an affront to the world's conscience. Antonio Guterres was speaking
at a special meeting of the UN General Assembly in New York. It's debating a
motion calling for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. The Kremlin's ambassador, Vasilino Bienza, accused the West of
wanting to defeat Russia at any cost. I think that today, one year after the
active stage of the Ukraine crisis began, very few doubt that it's not Ukraine
that's fighting Russia, because Ukraine basically spent all of its military
potential in the first weeks of the special military operation. Rather, it's the
collective West, in the form of the United States, NATO and the European Union.
The Mexican Senate has approved a controversial and wide-ranging reform of the
agency that oversees elections. The changes include removing millions of dollars
of funding and closing many of its local offices. Bill Grant reports. In passing
the measure, 72 votes in favour to 50 against, the Senate has approved a motion
close to President Lopez Obrador's heart. He has long argued that the country's
electoral body is no longer fit for purpose. His complaints date to his
unsuccessful presidential campaign in 2005 and a close-run vote which he largely
blamed on alleged vested interests inside the electoral agency. In essence, the
reform will reduce the budget for the agency, known as the INE, and water down
its responsibilities. Opponents say it's the latest step in an increasingly
autocratic control of Mexico's state institutions by Mr Lopez Obrador and his
party, Morena. A TV news journalist has been shot dead while working at the
scene of a murder in the US state of Florida. A nine-year-old girl was also
killed inside a nearby house. Peter Bowes has more. Police first responded to a
shooting in a community of Pine Hills where a 20-year-old woman was found dead
in a vehicle. Five hours later, two members of a television news crew were
reporting from the scene when they were also shot. One later died in hospital,
the other is in a critical condition. At around the same time, the police say a
woman and her nine-year-old daughter were shot inside their home nearby. The
child has since died. The suspect, 19-year-old Keith Moses, is in custody.
Investigators say they don't immediately have a motive for any of the shootings.
Media reports in the United States say the daughter and son-in-law of Donald
Trump have been summoned to testify before a federal grand jury. They say Ivanka
Trump and Jared Kushner have been called to give evidence on the former
president's role in the storming of the US Congress two years ago. Both served
as White House officials in the Trump administration. World news from the BBC.
Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are attempting to reach more than
50 miners still trapped in an open-cast coal pit that collapsed on Wednesday.
Two people are known to have died. Six others have been rescued so far.
President Xi Jinping has ordered a rapid investigation into the causes of the
accident. The British government has announced plans to make major changes to
the way English football has governed. The proposals include setting up an
independent regulator. Dan Rowett reports. This is a hugely significant moment
for the English game. The independent football regulator is designed to prevent
a repeat of the failings that led to the collapse of Berry FC in 2019, one of a
host of clubs to suffer financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee
a licensing system to ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a
strengthened owners and directors test, give fans a greater say in key decisions
and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like the European
Super League. Ministers say they want to preserve the top flight's global
popularity, but insist a governance overhaul is now needed for the good of the
wider game. Brazil says it will suspend beef exports to its biggest market,
China, from Thursday after fighting a single case of mad cow disease. The
Agriculture Minister said a sample had been sent to the World Organisation for
Animal Health. Brazil is the world's largest exporter of beef. Mad cow disease
can cause brain damage in humans. A new research suggests that people who
regularly use laxatives could be at far higher risk of developing dementia. A
study by Chinese scientists found that people who used over-the-counter
laxatives on a daily basis were over 50 percent more likely to develop dementia
than those who did not. The scientists say it's possible that changes to
microbes in the gut may in turn affect the brain. If the findings are confirmed,
doctors could focus on other treatments such as encouraging patients to drink
more water or eat more fibre. BBC News. Hello, I'm Peter Goffin and you're
listening to the newsroom from the BBC World Service. No one is more alert to
the threat of Russian military aggression than the former Soviet states around
Ukraine, and in Poland, a bloc of these countries within NATO, known as the
Bucharest Nine, signed a declaration condemning Moscow's invasion. They also
urged Joe Biden to step up the American defence presence in the region. The
summit was co-hosted by the Romanian President Klaus Johannes. Almost one year
ago, Russia tried to destroy the European and Euro-Atlantic security and the
rules-based international order. Russia is acting on a pattern of aggressive
conduct, which we have already witnessed in the Republic of Moldova, in Georgia
and in Ukraine itself. Well, Vladimir Putin has been busy this week touting his
war as a fight for Russian freedom against Western aggression. On Wednesday,
tens of thousands of people packed into Moscow's Luzhnykiy Stadium for a
patriotic concert and rally headlined by President Putin. Our Russia editor,
Steve Rosenberg, was there. The Kremlin put on a show to rally Russians around
their president and his war in Ukraine. At the stadium, which hosted the 2018
Football World Cup Final, patriotic pop songs were the warm-up act, plus
speeches reminding Russians that their country had defeated Napoleon and Hitler
and would be victorious in Ukraine. The event was highly staged managed. Tens of
thousands of people had been bussed in from colleges, factories and state
enterprises. Enter Vladimir Putin. Sharing the stage with Russian soldiers back
from the front line, the Kremlin leader declared, right now, there is a battle
on our historical frontiers for our people. They are fighting heroically,
courageously, bravely. Three cheers. Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah! A state
propaganda here tells Russians that it was the West that started the war in
Ukraine. Many in the stadium seem to believe that. We didn't start all this,
Irina tells me. I trust our president. Not everyone here, though, was so
enthusiastic. In temperatures of minus 15, we saw large crowds streaming away
from the stadium, even before Vladimir Putin arrived. Steve Rosenberg in Moscow.
With that one-year mark of the war fast approaching, the United Nations has
called a special meeting of the General Assembly to consider a resolution for
just and lasting peace. If it's adopted, the UN would demand that Russia leave
Ukraine immediately and unconditionally. Vote is not expected to take place
until later on Thursday, but the UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has
already made his position clear. That invasion is an affront to our collective
conscience. It is a violation of United Nations Charter and international law.
The position of United Nations is unequivocal. We are committed to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. Our New York correspondent, Medita Fik, told
Charlotte Gallagher Moore about this proposed resolution. Ukraine and their
supporters, obviously the West, are hoping that they get close to the number of
support that they've gotten with previous General Assembly resolutions. Those
include two from March that denounced the invasion, that called for the
humanitarian situation to improve and criticized Russia for it, and then one
from October that condemned Russia's illegal annexation. In all of those votes,
they got more than 140 members out of the 193 bodies. Really only a handful of
countries voted alongside Russia. Those resolutions, many more, chose rather to
abstain from the vote at all. That is what Western nations are hoping, because
for them, leading into the one-year anniversary, they're really hoping to once
again show just how isolated Russia is all these months on. Obviously it sends a
message, and it's symbolic if this is backed, but is Russia paying any attention
to this really? Yeah, I mean we have to remember, right, that this is a General
Assembly resolution. It's where Russia doesn't have a veto, like the Security
Council, so like you say, it is very much symbolic. I don't think anybody is
under the illusion that this is going to change President Putin's calculus or
change anything on the ground, but rather I think it's very important for the
international community from the West's perspective to be able to say that they
are going to stand up to the principles of the UN Charter. Meda Tophique in New
York. We shift our attention now to a cave in France, where researchers have
found evidence of the first bows and arrows used by modern humans in Europe. The
findings, published in the journal Science Advances, mean European archery is
40,000 years older than we thought. The newsroom's David Lewis told me more
about the discovery. It's really an astonishing find. Up until this new study,
the earliest known use of bows and arrows for hunting in Europe was sometime
between 10,000 to 12,000 years ago. Those tips were discovered in peat bogs
mostly around modern-day northern Germany. This new evidence comes south of them
in Grotman Drin Rock Shelter overlooking the Rhone River. It wasn't the most
straightforward find. The area was first excavated in 1990, and amongst the
horse bones, neanderthal teeth and stone tools discovered, the site contained
multiple layers of archaeological remains stretching back more than 80,000
years. There's evidence neanderthals and their cousins homo sapiens both lived
in the cave complex. The key discovery here was of tiny stone points dating back
some 54,000 years. These hand-cut flints are key because all the other elements
connected to archery such as wood, leather, resins, etc. are perishable and are
rarely preserved in such ancient sites. So how do the experts assess where they
were from and how old they were? The stone pieces found by specialists in this
so-called archaeological layer E, attributed to homo sapiens, stood out as more
finely sculpted than the flints in the layers above and below. All right. Are
ancient ancestors using these tools to hunt for food? How did researchers figure
out that's what they were used for? Well, it's not just the ancient people who
are using them. As proof, researchers took it upon themselves to reproduce the
tiny flint heads. They're smaller than a penny coin, some less than one
centimeter wide, and fired them off as arrowheads with a specially produced
replica bow at dead goats to see if they could pierce animal hide. Law Metz from
Marseille University, a co-author of the study, said, we couldn't throw them at
the animals any other way than with a bow because they were too tiny and too
light to be efficient. In short, the force of a shooting arrow was needed to
bring down prey with such a small flint. And luckily, Metz also said there was
evidence homo sapiens in the anathols met in the cave at some point, though she
doesn't know if that was a friendly encounter or otherwise. David Lewis, a
reporter with many strings to his bow. Now, our top headlines. The UN General
Assembly has been meeting in New York to discuss a demand for Russia to withdraw
immediately and unconditionally from Ukraine, nearly a year after the invasion
began. The Mexican Senate has passed controversial reforms backed by President
López Obrador to the body that supervises elections. And a U.S. television
journalist has been shot dead while covering a murder in Florida. For almost two
decades after its founding, the electric car giant Tesla was based in
California. Then, in 2021, its co-founder Elon Musk had a change of heart and
abruptly moved its headquarters to Austin, Texas. In a parting shot, he called
California the land of taxes, overregulation and litigation. But now, he's back.
We're excited to announce that Tesla's global engineering headquarters will be
right here, the former headquarters of Hewlett-Packard. This is a poetic
transition from the company that founded Silicon Valley to Tesla. And we're very
excited to make this our global engineering headquarters. Mr. Musk made the
announcement alongside the governor of California, Gavin Newsom. I'm
appreciative of you and appreciative of our partnership over the course of the
last 20 years. And let's see this as the beginning of something even more
extraordinary on the journey to dominate in this space and to change the way we
produce and consume energy in this state and this nation and the world we're
trying to build. California Governor Gavin Newsom there. So what's behind this
move by Tesla? Our North America technology reporter James Clayton told me more.
This really marks a vault fast from Elon Musk, another one. And it kind of shows
you how much power California still has in the world of tech because Gavin
Newsom, when you saw that press release, was smiling ear to ear that Elon Musk
had decided to move the engineering HQ of the business back to California. And
it's pretty clear that he thinks this is a bit of a coup for California. And I
think there is also in this a kind of impression that California is losing tech
businesses, particularly the area of Silicon Valley, San Francisco. So this is a
bit of good news for the area. So there's all sorts of things that this
announcement kind of displays. But I think in particular, it shows that
California is a huge market for Tesla and Elon Musk's simply couldn't move
everything out of the state to Texas. So seemingly that relationship between
Tesla and California is improving. But at the same time, the company is still
facing government investigations and regulatory reviews by the state. Exactly.
And if you look at how tech is regulated, California is usually at the forefront
of that. And that is absolutely the case when it comes to driverless cars. And
there's a California rule that has come into place that you can't over
exaggerate or exaggerate, I guess, how effective the driverless part of your car
is. And I think anyone who follows Tesla will tell you that Elon Musk has said
time and time again that by the end of the year, Tesla will reach pretty much
full driverless capacity. So it will essentially be able to drive itself. Year
after year, that does not come to pass. And in fact, is being sued in a class
action lawsuit about those claims. And certainly new California regulation
should mean that Elon Musk should not make these claims again. So you have all
sorts of regulatory pressure kind of almost aimed at people like Elon Musk that
is coming out of California. At the same time, you're getting Elon Musk saying,
oh, I actually am going to move my engineering HQ back to California. Once
again, that shows you the power that California still has in tech. James Clayton
in San Francisco. Tropical cyclone Freddie has battered the east coast of
Madagascar. Heavy rains, thunderstorms and powerful winds tore roofs off houses
and triggered a storm surge. At least four people were killed. And U.N.
officials now say Freddie is forecast to hit the African mainland in Mozambique.
This local resident gave his assessment of the preparations. I think work done
so far is commendable by the government. They have been caught off guard several
times. So I think they've learned some good lessons. One is that they're risky
people themselves. They want to see so that they believe. The second thing is
the government itself. The sooner they get on the ground, the sooner they act,
the better for the population. They can save more lives. Jose Tembe is a
journalist based in Maputo, the capital of Mozambique. In some of the places the
cyclone will pass through, there has been a test of resilience over the last 48
hours, even before cyclone Freddie. We could see cars on television submerged,
ceilings blown up and electricity disrupted. Officials say flooding is worsened
not only by the rain, but also by ditches which are clogged. People are
desperate. Their homes are not resilient. And they have not been able to stock
food and water for the cyclone days because they can't afford it. People are
talking food, are fortifying their houses. Awareness or early warnings are not
enough. Jose Tembe in Maputo. Now Gareth has some other stories from our news
desk. British and Irish political leaders have condemned the shooting of an off-
duty policeman in Northern Ireland. He's in a critical condition in hospital
after being attacked at a sports complex on Wednesday night. The UK's Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak said he was appalled. His Irish counterpart, Liev Radker,
called it a grotesque act of attempted murder. Severe weather warnings have been
issued for parts of New Zealand's North Island, which are still recovering from
a cyclone earlier this month that killed at least 11 people. Heavy rain and
thunderstorms are expected in Hawke's Bay and the Coromanal Peninsula. And
scientists say they are increasingly concerned by the health impact of air
pollution produced by the wear of vehicle tyres. Researchers from Imperial
College London say the particles are especially damaging due to the toxic
chemicals they're made from. The warning follows UK government data that shows
significantly more tiny pollution particles now come from tyre erosion than are
emitted from vehicle exhausts. The European Union is due to regulate tyre
emissions in a world first, with new standards due to being enforced by
mid-2025. Thank you Gareth. The Biden administration says it's extremely
concerned by growing levels of violence in Israel and the Palestinian
territories. On Wednesday, the Israeli army killed 11 Palestinians and wounded
dozens more in the town of Nablus, in the occupied West Bank. Within hours,
funerals were held for some of the raid's civilian victims, including a 72-year-
old man. Our Middle East correspondent, Tom Bateman, sent this report. We are in
one of five hospitals in Nablus now, treating people with bullet wounds. I've
just been up to one of the wards where the doctor described this as one of the
worst events of his kind. He's seen in recent years, he called it a disaster. We
spoke to a 15-year-old boy who has a bullet wound to the leg. He told me that he
was standing near militants and he was hit by Israeli gunfire. What is so
striking about this is the time of day this raid happened. It was the middle of
the morning when the old city of Nablus is packed with families and people
shopping, when the Israelis encircled a building where they said three militants
were holed up, those men were all killed. All senior Palestinian militants and
members of the Lion's Den group, which is a militant group, has been active in
the city over the last year. The other thing that is so striking about what has
happened here is, first of all, the death toll, which matches the most deadly
raid in the occupied West Bank in the last two decades, and it is the number of
wounded. The Palestinian Health Ministry is saying that more than 80 people have
gunshot wounds. On the ward we were just in, they were treating at least eight
people. One of them also, they said, was shot in the bag. The Israeli military
says it operated because the men that it targeted, it was trying to arrest them,
they refused to surrender. It says the Palestinian militants fired on them and
they upgraded their response firing shoulder-launched missiles towards this
building. It says that those men were involved in the killing of an Israeli
soldier last year and also they were planning imminent attacks. The Palestinian
Authority has described this as a massacre and amid reported concerns about
retaliation, Hamas, the militant group, has said that its patience is running
out. All of this, when the United States has been trying to broker a kind of
understanding between the Palestinian leadership and the Israelis to ease what
have been spiralling tensions recently, this shows that those attempts are
failing. Tom Bateman in Nablus. Now over to Richard Newman for the latest sports
news. Thank you. The Manchester City boss Pep Guardiola says he told his players
to keep their heads up after letting a lead slip to draw one-all with RB Leipzig
in the first leg of their Champions League last-16 tie in Germany. Mr Milan beat
Porto 1-0 after Romelu Lukaku scored a late winner. The Italian football
journalist Mina Rizuki says reaching the quarter-finals would represent a
success for Inter. Inter have enough. It's just about whether or not they
believe that they have enough. But Porto has been a side that's knocked out
Juve, Roma, won four points against Milan in the group stages. So knocking them
out will be big for Inter. It will give them a huge boost psychologically to
then go on in the knockouts. Panama have completed the line-up for the Women's
World Cup, reaching the tournament for the first time after beating Paraguay 1-0
in their play-off. The world champions the USA won a fourth straight She
Believes Cup beating Brazil 2-1 while the European title holders England won
their own mini-tournament thrashing Belgium 6-1 to retain the Arnold Clark Cup.
The potential for Premier League clubs to join a reimagined European Super
League has become even slimmer with the UK government confirming plans to create
a regulator for English football. It would have the power to block sides
breaking away for closed competitions. Wales Rugby Union players have stood down
their threat of strike action after reaching compromises on a number of issues
in a contract dispute with the governing body. It means their Six Nations game
with England and Cardiff this Saturday will go ahead. Captain Ken Owens says a
number of high-profile problems has made Wales the laughing stock of world
rugby. This is how the Welsh Rugby Union's interim chief executive Nigel Walker
responded. Ken's used that phrase, laugh in stock. I'll let other people decide
whether we're laughing stock. It's been an edifying period for us. No two ways
about it. But it's my job over the next six months to make sure that we're not
having conversations like this in the future. In cricket, England are sticking
with the same 11 which beat New Zealand in the first test for the second match
in Wellington which starts on Friday. And the world's tennis number one, Igas
Viontek, again looked in unbeatable form in Dubai, dropping just one game in
beating Ludmila Samsonova in the last 16. Andy Murray produced a typically epic
three-hour performance to beat Alexander Zverev at the Qatar Open. Sports
reporter Richard Newman. Now, there are just 10 weeks to go until King Charles'
coronation. But there are concerns that some church towers in the UK will be
silent over the 6th of May weekend due to a shortage of people who know how to
properly ring the bells. Current estimates suggest there are 30,000 to 40,000
bell ringers across the UK, but even more are needed. The BBC's Joe Black has
been to the English town of Ipswich to meet a team of campanologists preparing
to ring for the king. On the waterfront at Ipswich, the bells at the church of
St. Clement ring out. It's a deconsecrated church, and this isn't the weekly
service. It's a training session. Balance to balance, so when we ring rounds in
a minute, you can control, that's it. Now control the backstroke. Most of the
new recruits have answered the call to ring for the king, a recent appeal by the
campanology community to get more people interested in acquiring this skill.
Among them, Freya, a 17-year-old A-level student who has been ringing since
November, and says being involved on Coronation weekend will be something to
remember. It's like being something I've been interested in, but I suppose ring
for the king made me think this is the time to get into it. Amanda Richmond from
the Association of Ringing Teachers is guiding the new members, and is pleased
with their progress. We want to make sure that there are ringers to every church
so that we can all ring out the ring for the king, for the coronation. In some
areas of the country, bell ringing is thriving. Those here at St Paul's in
Birmingham are aged between 11 and 80 years old, and their bell ringing school
is full. But in other places, there can be very few. Simon Linford is from the
Central Council of Church Bell Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of
not really realising that the ringing community was getting older and failing to
replace ourselves, but now we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes
around 10 to 12 hours of one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing.
Still time to learn ahead of May the 6th. Joe Black and a group of bell ringers
preparing for the coronation of King Charles. And that brings us to the end of
this edition of The Newsroom on the BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin.
Before we go, a reminder of our main news. The UN General Assembly has been
meeting in New York to discuss a demand for Russia to withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from Ukraine nearly a year after the invasion began. Thanks for
listening. This is the BBC World Service meeting the Vietnam War veterans who
left America and retired to the country they fought in. 50 years ago, on the
29th of March, all American forces will be withdrawn from South Korea. Today, a
small group of US veterans now in their 70s have returned to live there
permanently. I was expecting people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed
me like I had just left the day before. I am now farmed, and I'll be finding out
why they choose to retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and
what you did. I say this is the only thing that makes sense, me living in
Vietnam. I came back to fight the war. I kind of explained it as when you're a
little kid, you've got a monster under the bed. I had to look under the bed, and
the monster wasn't there. No place like Nam, Saturday at 12 GMT. How do you make
Michelin star level food for 200 people in a kitchen you just built in someone's
garden and with no access to cooking gas? It's just a typical day for chefs in
the world of high-end mass catering. I'm Marie Keyworth and in the food chain we
hear from a catering manager providing for conferences VVIPs and two cooks who
worked at some of the USA's most fancy weddings and garlors. That's after the
latest world news. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The United Nations looked likely
to approve a resolution calling for Russia to pull out immediately from Ukraine.
The vote carries political weight but isn't legally binding. It's due to take
place later on Thursday, the eve of the invasion's first anniversary at the UN
General Assembly in New York. Mexico Senate has approved a controversial and
wide-ranging reform of the agency that oversees elections. President Andres
Manuel Lopez Obrador argues the changes need it to rein in what he views as a
partisan body. Opponents say his party is becoming increasingly autocratic. A TV
news journalist has been shot dead while working at the scene of a murder in the
USA to Florida. A nine-year-old girl was also killed but he say the motive for
the attacks is unclear. The Israeli military says it has intercepted rockets
fired by Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip. The attacks follow a deadly
raid by Israeli troops in the occupied West Bank on Wednesday. Hundreds of
rescue workers in northern China are attempting to reach more than 50 miners
trapped in an open-cast coal pit that collapsed on Wednesday. Two people are
known to have died. Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New
Zealand's North Island. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are forecast to hit areas
still recovering from a cyclone which killed at least 11 people. The British
government has announced plans for major changes to the way English football is
governed. The proposals include setting up an independent regulator which could
block teams from joining breakaway competitions. And researchers say a
54,000-year-old cave in southern France holds evidence that the first modern
humans to reach Europe hunted with bows and arrows. Tiny fragments of flint
arrowheads were discovered during excavations in the Rhone Valley. World news
from the BBC. Welcome to the Food Chain. I'm Marie Keyworth. For most of us, the
world of fine dining exists in restaurants, in the realm of Michelin stars, and
exclusive venues where you have to wait months to book a seat at the table. The
chefs are superstars, they're influenced global, and their food is written
about, reviewed and rewarded in countless places. But it turns out they're only
part of the story. There is a food world out there that is every bit as
ambitious and excellent as the Michelin starred restaurants. But because it
exists in this episodic way for a special night, a one-off, it doesn't get the
kind of attention. It's a world where chefs earn hundreds of thousands of
dollars a year, but the customers have no idea who they are. Where celebrity
clients with budgets of millions will have their dreams made a reality with your
food. Diana Ross' backyard on a day when it was a torrential rain and her son
was getting married. And where food can be a business so serious, it becomes a
matter of life and death. Some of these environments, particularly quite
recently, have become very intense because you walk into a room and there are
guards that have loaded guns. We're lifting the curtain, or the pipe and drape,
as it's known in the business, between the event and the kitchen. We're going
behind the scenes to explore the high pressure theatre that is the world of
high-end catering. Let's start in Lisbon, at the world's biggest technology
conference. It's called Web Summit, and the three-day event sees some of the
biggest players in tech share their wisdom across multiple stages to more than
70,000 attendees. And they all need feeding. This man is enjoying the array of
delights on offer in the forum area of the conference. That's the Web Summit's
VVIP area. It's the speaker's lounge and also where important types gather. But
don't think it's some cozy, intimate nook. It resembles a huge hanger, bustling
with people lounging on sofas and perched on bar stalls. Around the side, there
are a bunch of wine bars and coffee stations. And one end of this space is
dedicated to serving a vast array of food. I'm at a huge glass table, which I
think you could call the salad, snacks and desserts part of the buffet. Large
plates full of chopped fruit, massive platters with hummus, sweet corn, salad.
And what looks really good to me is a really large platter full of tiny little
meringues. And it doesn't stop there. This place has everything. So let's look
at what's on your plate. Little samosas, a taco. Yeah. The Mexican caught my
eye, so I made a taco that's got some chicken, a little bit of Mexican salsa.
And I find it very interesting that they can cater for this amount of people
that still keep the quality quite high. Because I can imagine that's what the
challenge is, right? Like making this much food and making sure that it's good
as well. This VIP area has at least one perceptive guest when it comes to the
challenge of producing high quality food at scale. So what is it like to run a
food operation like this? I spoke to the man in charge to find out. I'm John
Downley, and I am the catering manager for Web Summit. If you have a very quick
look around the room, you can see there are a number of different parts. We've
finished breakfast, which has been going on here since 7 o'clock. There's sort
of station in the corner which has the plants on it. We'll have three Michelin
star chefs cooking there today throughout lunch service. So they're each cooking
about 250 portions of Portuguese dishes. And they're served to our VVIP
attendees here. This space is obviously incredibly restricted to speakers, but
there are also people that pay 25,000 euro to be in this space for the duration
of the event. Beyond the forum area, on the huge conference site, there's
general attendee catering that will feed around 40,000 people through vendors
and food trucks. And there's the three and a half thousand staff and volunteers
that need feeding breakfast, lunch and dinner every day. I guess like any
restaurant or hospitality business, the people that run them are always running
into difficulties in relation to equipment breaking or power going down or water
going down or people not showing up. So it's really about just managing all of
those little issues as they crop up because they always will. Let's head to the
kitchen. Let's head to the kitchen, yeah. So this is one of four primary
kitchens that we have here. We'll pop into this kitchen and see what's going on
there. Hopefully nobody will find it. This kitchen area is a big open tiled
space and across the middle are rows and rows of trestle tables. In front of me
there's women putting basil leaves on a tomato mozzarella salad. There are
people chopping melon and arranging small little bite sized desserts on a
platter. And this place is very busy. It's full of service staff and their
uniforms coming in and out. And a couple of staff who seem to be running the
kitchen, they've got headsets wearing just black and shouting orders to people
to make sure that everything happens smoothly and for time. Joao, the sort of
angry looking guy in the black t-shirt over there, he runs this section. So this
particular space that they're running is extremely busy all day long. Sorry, the
lady shouting at me over there is Patricia. She's the boss of this space.
They've snacks in the middle. They've obviously got a three hour lunch service.
There's food in between then and then from 4.30 to 6.30 there's a cocktail
reception in this space as well. So we feed about 12 to 1500 people per day in
that space. Hi. Patricia runs this wonderful company Food Events Network that
produce all the food. John makes me crazy but I love that event and John of
course. The crazy event of the year. How does this compare to other things that
you work on? Because they are very, very crazy. This is very stressful for us.
That is amazing. Because we have media, staff catering, VIPs. It's a big
challenge. The team at Web Summit cater to a crowd who have high expectations of
the food put in front of them as part of their high ticket price or invite to
speak. But there's a level of high end mass catering that goes beyond the
conference VIP. And the challenges there are even more extreme. I think the
first thing to recognize is that there is a food world out there that is every
bit as ambitious and excellent as the Michelin starred restaurants. But because
it exists in this episodic way for a special night, a party, a gala, a one-off,
you know it's highly bespoke, it's custom, it doesn't get the kind of attention.
Matt Lee is a food writer and cook. He's been writing about and working in the
food industry in partnership with his brother Ted since the early 2000s. As the
Lee brothers, they wrote a column for the New York Times Magazine called The
Industry where they shadowed people with unusual and often unsung roles in the
food industry. Because the methods required to deliver food under those
circumstances are so unusual, it also doesn't get the attention that it
deserves. And for good reason, in some cases, because of the kinds of shortcuts
and methods that you use don't look very good. We couldn't resist exploring that
world because of all those things. They eventually went on to write a book about
the high end catering industry called Hot Box. Here's Ted Lee. Right, I mean,
we're talking about a kind of catering, a boutique caterer that does events like
galas or weddings that are generally very private. You know, in the case of a
wedding or a big anniversary or a charity gala function is usually in the US
starts at $1,000 a ticket and goes up to $3,000. So they're very exclusive and
they tend to be very exclusive because they're very expensive events to pull
off. A lot of caterers are working in a different venue every single night. And
a caterer may actually be doing multiple functions in the same night. So being
flexible, being resourceful, improvising, that's art and that is catering. So
what about some of the stressful moments from the Lee Brothers' time on the
front lines of VVIP catering? Oh gosh. In Diana Ross' backyard in Greenwich,
Connecticut on a day when it was a torrential rain and her son was getting
married. It was a beautiful event and the sun came out ultimately. But when we
were setting up, the ground underfoot was mud. So that's one example. The sod
was sloughing down the hillside. But a lot of these old venues, especially in
New York City, these beautiful glittering venues were never created in the 19th
century to be party venues. So you really are working out of, like Matt said, an
elevator. Like they'll stop an elevator, take it out of service, and you'll put
your equipment, the kitchen will be in the service elevator. I mean, it's a
miracle it all happens. What also interested me and Matt about the character of
the chefs who are drawn to this, there's a sort of class of executive chef who
is drawn to these kinds of challenges that really would crush most people. And
yet there are ones who love going in, discovering the new place and making it
work. We found that a lot of them had a military background, which Matt and I
think was probably not coincidental. Organization is the name of the game. But
that's thrilling to discovering what is the challenge that we weren't prepared
for that we are going to have to solve tonight to get this beautiful food on the
table for all these people. And that's the other thing we haven't really talked
about is the crowd that we were in general cooking for was a crowd that goes to
two or three galas a week. They go to all the Michelin-starred restaurants. The
food simply cannot be pedestrian. It has to look and feel and taste like the
best restaurants in New York. One of the quirks of being this kind of chef in
New York is that propane is banned. So you're literally not cooking on gas. The
best alternative on offer is a sort of jellied fuel that can be spread on trays
and set alight to create a cooking flame. The title of the Lee Brothers book Hot
Box comes from the stainless steel transport cabinet that's made into a
makeshift oven on the event site by filling it with alternate sheet pans of
jellied fuel and food. That truly is the challenge. How do you make the food
resemble five-star food if what you're working with is an aluminum cabinet and
jellied fuel? The answer is you really have to be sort of a technician of
protein in the way you don't when you're doing to order food at a restaurant.
Most of the proteins like for example a filet of beef, that would get par cooked
at the catering commissary kitchen, the home base kitchen, the day before in a
fryer, like a dozen at a time. Those filets would go into a deep fryer to just
get that sear on them and then they'd be transferred into a refrigerator to
chill down and they'd be held until the next day when they get transported to
the venue and finished in that warming cabinet. As a result a lot of the
proteins that happen at off-site gala events are really ones that hold well like
short rib, lamb shank. And usually the real creativity comes in things that can
be served at room temperature, the fish crudo, the raw preparations, things like
that. That really is the fundamental challenge for a catering chef. How do you
replicate Michelin-starred food when the circumstances are so rudimentary? So in
the world of fuel jelly and pop-up kitchens, are there some requests that you
just couldn't fulfill? Oh gosh, yes, that tension between catering to the
clients, whims, the host, their word is golden on the one hand, but on the other
hand not everything's possible and failure is incomprehensible. You just can't
present them with a limp, soggy, cold French fry. So what do you do? Well you
have to have, we found that the military background but also the theatrical
background is common to a lot of these chefs, presenting that confidence and
pushing back against requests that are not feasible. Someone wanted, for an
example, a fry station on the beach out of multi-million dollar media executives
Labor Day celebration. Well okay, so the beach is down below the cliffs and far
from electricity. You wouldn't want to bring in a generator to make all that
noise and smog. So how do you do French fries? Fresh order on a beach and it was
decided to scrap that idea but it got very far down the road before it was
scrapped. But you know, life goes on. That's the other part of catering is
failure is ever present, always hovering, just a hair's breadth beyond and
sometimes it happens and you just kind of have to move on. Which is why a lot of
the chefs in catering do not claim the spotlight and do not beat their chest and
proclaim themselves as the next great thing because they know that to the extent
that their name is on the marquee, they're going to take the hit when the
dessert course goes down because someone rolled that cabinet over on its side
and all of the pre-prepped parfaits got turned into a puddle of sludge. So were
you that person ever who was the one who rolled that cabinet on its side? I
personally pushed that thing over over a snaking electrical cord and fortunately
there was a second cabinet and there were like 10 desserts on offer. So the
sludged parfaits were not put out and the show went on but I can't imagine if it
was the only choice of dessert. Who do you send up to the host to explain that
dessert won't be served at this wedding? Inconceivable. The great thing about
catering chefs is you cannot be demoralized by that. You just have to work
through it and onto the next. You're falling into wherever the work needs to be
done. If that's not your comfort zone, then you don't work in catering and so
there's not this sort of thing that there is in restaurants where well, I've got
my mise en place for my station and this is where I am and I'm here. And so you
have to be more fluid. The other thing about a catering kitchen is usually it's
a big kitchen. A lot of people working in the same place. There's no room for a
screamer. It's all about teamwork and a lot of times like a scream might be
heard on the floor of the event, which would be disaster. Can you imagine if
someone got angry in the tent and the bride and groom heard it? So no screaming
allowed then. You're listening to The Food Chain on the BBC World Service with
me Marie Keyworth. This week I'm talking to some unsung heroes from the world of
mass catering. Restaurant kitchens are notoriously tough when it comes to
workplace culture. So how does this side of the industry compare? Yes, the ways
in which a restaurant is perilous for the employees tends to be in time demands,
length of work and in kind of general collegial harassment issues. What we found
on catering crews is because it's this very fluid, a different team every night
drawn from so many places. I mean, it's very mercenary that you actually didn't
encounter for the most part those kinds of harassment issues that you did in
restaurants. It's not because a catering kitchen is a happier place. In many
ways it's because it's more on the edge. This is a survival mode. Survival isn't
just a concern for the chefs working in these high pressure environments. Often
they're cooking for people who, through their status in society, are at risk of
being targeted through the very food they eat. It's something that John Downey,
the catering manager at Lisbon Web Summit, who we heard from earlier, was
dealing with when we spoke. You're sitting here with your phone in front of you
on the table. You want to keep it on, you need to check messages in case there's
some sort of food emergency. At this point, just before service of lunch, what
constitutes a food emergency? What's the kind of thing that you might have to
deal with or dread having to deal with? I can't really give you too much
information right now, but we have a VVVIP on site that has a lot of security
associated with them. They have a team of six that need to be fed right now. In
reality, our greatest issue is ensuring that we have food that has been sourced,
that we are absolutely certain is secure, has been verified by their side, and
that we can access through the 30 or so security personnel that we need to get
through in order to actually deliver food to that spot. The person he's talking
about at the time is the First Lady of Ukraine, Elena Zelenska. Essentially, we
produce very high-end food in this particular space, for example, and we could
very easily service their needs from that. But we also have 150 temp staff in
the space who we don't have security background information on and can't verify
their identity. In that case, we have one person who's dedicated specifically to
this. They will go to a specific restaurant outside of this venue with a member
of security from the other team, collect food specifically from that spot, and
have that fast tracked through here up to a point. And then at that point, we
sort of try and hand it over and ensure the person working with us is a real
VVIP caterer specifically for this one. She works with Four Seasons. We've
contracted her specifically for this one part of the event. We just need to
ensure that there is absolutely zero risk from our side. It's about life or
death, as you say, so it's just trying to protect that person. This is not a
precooked dish that's being transported from a restaurant, is it? There's
heating issues there, shouldn't there, unless it's a salad. We have a specific
service kitchen set up just for this that has been guarded since Monday.
Admittedly, some of these environments particularly quite recently have become
very intense because you walk into a room and there are guards that have loaded
guns that we're very much not used to seeing. And it's a bit nerve wracking. I
was physically carrying plates and glasses into rooms yesterday with guards
standing there with their fingers on their triggers, ready to shoot. I was
trying not to drop the glasses and also trying not to be shot by not looking
like a threat to them. I think they can see the bags under my eyes after several
days of no sleep and they can verify that I'm definitely part of the crew. The
whole job sounds incredibly tiring, demanding and stressful. So why get into
this world? Let's go back to Matt and Ted. Well, we were inspired by a single
catering chef we met back in, I think, 2011 who kind of opened up this world for
us. And not long after we realized that this really merited a book and for us to
dig in elbows deep and to do it was the only way to do it because there's no
room in that world for a fly on the wall. And so we signed up and we actually
got paid by the hour to do the research for our book. The only parts we didn't
do, although we interviewed plenty of people throughout the industry, was sales
as an interesting cadre of people who have to kind of sell the party and promise
the world and then negotiate with the kitchen and show up at the wedding and
smooth feathers and make sure everything goes sweetly. And then the management
and the ownership. They're interesting folks as well and totally unafraid of
hauling bags of garbage to the street and digging elbows deep when they have to
as well because they've internalized that reality that you just, everyone is on
duty and everyone has to work as a team and get us to the finish line and sweep
it clean. I think it was always a journalistic project. I don't think we were
ever deluded by the fact that we could ever live in this world and succeed in
this world on the level that our friends were succeeding. We started, I would
say around 2011 and I think I worked my last party maybe 2017. So it was kind of
like a six, seven year process. These are valiant people, true artists, some of
the hardest workers in the world and so resourceful. And there's no awards for
them. There are James Beard awards and all kinds of awards, Michelin stars and
stuff for other chefs, but for these chefs, it's only the personal satisfaction
of having avoided failure and maybe a smile from the groom and the bride, but
you might not even get that, you know, because they're behind the pipe and
drape. And so you really have to just be satisfied with your own internal
satisfaction. In the world of private events laid on for the enjoyment of high
net worth individuals, discretion is highly valued. So how did the Lee brothers
square this with the writing of their book, which laid bare the secrets of what
goes on at the gala or wedding? Absolutely. We were nervous before publication.
I think I being the more anxious of the two of us took on most of that, but I
just wanted to do this world justice. Listen, the gossip channels and catering
are legendary and truly epic. I mean, the industry functions on gossip and yet
there are no institutional secrets because remember everyone's a mercenary at
the lower levels. They might be working for your competitors last night and the
night beyond. And so like, you know, you really have to be strong and
comfortable in your skin. And so the part that's interesting is the truly
successful executive chefs and catering are a very hot commodity and they get
paid plenty and they don't have any time to spend that money. They will get paid
more than the typical independent restaurant chef. We're talking back then, you
know, 10 years ago, like $250,000 a year to be the executive chef at a small to
medium size catering firm because everything rides on that person's creativity
organizational skills, forethought leadership qualities and the owner of the
company simply can't do that job on balance, like back of the envelope, what the
cost in terms of the labor and the food and the pipe and drape and the decor and
the rentals and all of that in a New York framework. So a privilege, you know,
expensive urban environment is going to be a thousand dollars per person under
people. It's going to be a hundred thousand dollars. So what keeps people coming
back to work in this world of hazards, hurdles and high end clients and their
demands? And one thing Matt neglected to mention, which I think is a big part of
it is the adrenaline rush. It's just crazy and it's so exciting. And to this
day, I mean, I'll be walking by the New York public library and I'll see the
party rentals trucks backed up into it and I'll get this intense like, oh my
gosh, I wish I wish I had my catering kit and could just step in there because
there is something about that teamwork and the adrenaline that really is
addictive and fun. Despite the stress and the pressure, John Downey and Lisbon
is also remarkably upbeat about his job. But it's great. I definitely have the
most fun job by far in the company. It's a little bit stressful at times, but
it's definitely the most fun part. From my own perspective, you know, I think
the event itself is an incredibly important event. You know, a lot of people
that are here are really have an enormous impact on the rest of the world and
the future of the world from not only from a tech perspective, but from a
sustainability perspective as well. And I'm incredibly proud to be involved in
that. And with that, John hurried back to the task at hand while conference
goers inspected rows of tempting treats and chatted over maybe just one too many
glasses of afternoon wine. We hope you've enjoyed our race through the world of
the high-end caterer and that maybe if you're ever lucky enough to attend a gala
or a black tie big budget event, that you spare a thought for the hive of
activity and precision happening just behind the curtain. You've been listening
to the food chain from the BBC World Service. It was presented by me, Marie
Keyworth, and produced by Sarah Trina. This is the BBC World Service and on this
week's assignment. Why do so many Russians support or at least accept a war
against their closest neighbour, Ukraine? Join me, Tim Hewell, and Nick Sturdie
as we talk to some of those who've persuaded them and helped create Russia's
parallel universe. Assignment today at nine 30 and 20 GMT. What can hip hop do
for the world's biggest democracy? I'm Bobby Friction and I'm about to find out
how rap in India is starting a revolution which will be heard around the world.
News D is next.