TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 And BBC Sounds starts next Wednesday morning at 9. Joe Malinovsky, who founded
the comparison site Energy Scanner, doesn't think a blanket extension is the
right idea. idea. There are people out there who are in absolutely dire
financial straits, they're underwater on their energy bills, they need more
support than households such as myself for example. So what we're saying is that
the extra cost of keeping the energy price guarantee in place for another three
months, about two and a half million pounds, could be far better targeted at
those vulnerable households. The Parliamentary Committee investigating
statements Boris Johnson made to MPs about Partygate has said in an interim
report there's evidence he may have misled the House of Commons. Mr Johnson, who
will appear before the committee later this month, has denied misleading
Parliament. He also raised concerns that evidence would be taken from the report
by the civil servant Sue Gray, who's on the verge of becoming the next Chief of
Staff for the Labour leader, Sikir Starmer. A couple's due to appear at Crawley
Magistrates' Court in West Sussex this afternoon, charged with gross negligence
manslaughter, concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of
justice. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday and charged
following the discovery of the body of a baby in woodland near Brighton. The
former England cricket captain Michael Vaughan has begun giving evidence to the
inquiry into allegations of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket Club. He told the
disciplinary hearing that claims he referred to several team-mates of South
Asian origin in 2009 as Ulot went against his values, morals and personality.
It's been announced that the King and Queen Consort will travel to France and
Germany later this month in their first state visits. During the six-day trip,
the King will become the first British monarch to address politicians at the
German Parliament building, the Bundestag. BBC News. Miles Jupp is the time-
travelling biographer James Boswell, who meets Lord Byron at the beginning of
his career in 15 minutes. But first, back to the present day, and Chelsea is
struggling to prepare for an important interview in the Arches. What's the time?
Er, just time five. It's less than two hours till the interview start and I
still ain't got a subject for my talk! I don't know what your problem is,
Chelsea. There's plenty of outlawer locks in here. Yeah, none of it's
interesting though. Oh, I wouldn't say that. What are you going to talk about
then, Uncle Neil? When Sir Edwin Padgeter raised troops to fight the Cumberland
forces against the Jacobite Rebellion. Yeah, that's what I mean. Boring. Well,
what about the house being used as a hospital for soldiers coming back from the
Somme? War again! The gardens being laid out by Perspicacity Taylor? Well, look,
you need to find something and quick. Yeah, I know. Or you're going to find this
interview a bit of an embarrassment. Look, Uncle Neil, stop. Hm? What? Go back a
bit. Yeah, there. He's a looker, isn't he? Well, I suppose so. Quite dashing,
you might say. And she's gorg. That dress is lush. Though, nah. What? I can't do
a rate my selfie on an oil painting, can I? That's not what Freddy will be
wanting. Come on through, Alice. It's nearly ready. Oh, hello. Hi, Alice. All
right? Oh, sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt you. Alice has come to collect my
offering for the buffet. For the funeral? Yeah, that's right. Oh. Well, it's no
problem. We can carry on in the lounge, can't we? Oh, yeah, totally. I hope it,
you know, goes all right tomorrow, Alice. Oh, thank you. Right. Yeah. I was
quite surprised when I heard the wake was going to be at the ball. I thought
Brian would have wanted something posher, like the golf club or Lower
Locksleigh. Oh, no, no. We all agreed there couldn't be a better place because
Mum grew up there. Oh, of course. That makes sense now I think about it. It's
the ideal venue, isn't it? We thought so. And people can just walk there from
the church. Yeah. And how are you doing yourself after last week? I'm a lot
better, thanks, Susan. Oh, I am pleased. You were such a help. Well. I've been
talking a lot to Lisa, my support buddy. And Chris has been brilliant, too.
That's good to hear. You have to remember a lot of people care about you, Alice.
Yeah, I realise that. Anyway, what have you made for our centrepiece? Yes, well,
I thought I'd do one of your mum's classic recipes, avocado and asparagus
terrine. Oh, Dad loves that. Obviously, it won't compare to the original, but I
thought, well, it'd be a nice tribute to Jennifer. Couldn't be better. The tin's
just been loosening in some hot water. It just needs turning out. Oh, great. So
if I just... Oh, my goodness. Oh, no. Oh, dear. Well, that's not how I remember
it. What have I done? I really don't know. Not enough gelatine? Maybe. Or
perhaps I didn't leave it in the fridge long enough. Well, look, I'm sure it
tastes fine. Could we put it in bowls and call it a dip? Oh, no. It's a
disaster. Oh, I'm so sorry. And the towns and villages of Borsicher still
contain descendants of the men who marched with their Colonel Edwin Pardester in
1745. I have to say, that was very good. Oh, thank you, Freddie. There's just
one thing I wasn't clear about. Yeah? Were they actually involved in any
fighting that year? No, because Charles Edward Stuart's army turned back at
Derby. Perhaps because they believed that strong forces were heading to
intercept them, including Freddie's ancestor. Yeah, sure, that was part of it,
Nolutando. OK, um, Neil, could you give us a few minutes to have a chat? Oh,
yes, of course. Just take a seat outside. Right you are. We'll be with you very
soon. Help yourself to tea or coffee. Oh, I will, thanks. Yes, OK. I won't say
we told you so. You were right. And Lily was. If you hadn't upset her so much,
she might have been helping with this. I probably need to say sorry. Hmm. I know
Neil's not young and funky, but he'd be a very safe pair of hands. Oliver, too.
He was pretty hot on all that military stuff. So much better than poor Fleur.
Not that we expected her to do well at this. We gave her a go, though, anyway.
Important to show you're giving equal treatment to all the possible trainees.
Exactly. Including Chelsea Horribin. I don't know what all the fuss is about.
There's one on the house in our road. You can't hardly see it. No, Chelsea. This
isn't just one charging point. It's a whole charging station. There's going to
be dozens of those things. Oh. And not just that. They're applying for
permission for a shop and a cafe on the site as well. So customers have got
something to do while their car's charging. Sounds to me like it's going to be a
mini motorway services. I didn't realise. So not only is it going to be a blot
on the landscape, it's going to be competition for all the existing businesses
in the area. What, like the village shop, you mean? Yeah, and the one at Bridge
Farm. The tea room. Maybe even the bull. But, does that mean there'll be new
jobs at this, like, station? Well, I suppose so. But local businesses have been
finding things a real struggle this last year. Two more places all chasing the
same customers. It might be the straw that breaks the camel's back. Yeah, no
wonder Susan's been having a mare about it. OK, Chelsea, we're ready for you
now. It's all right, it's all right. Will you come in with me, Neil? Well, would
that be OK, Nolotando? Yeah, I guess, if that's what Chelsea would prefer. Yeah,
please, I would. Then I can't see any problem with it. Come on in. Look, you
really don't need to worry. You've picked a good story. I hope so. And they're
not trying to catch you out. Chelsea wants Neil to sit in. That's all right,
isn't it? Yeah, of course, as long as you're happy with it, Neil. Oh, yes,
that's fine by me. Sit down, both of you. Thanks, Freddie. Make yourself
comfortable. Thank you. So, as Neil has already heard, the purpose of this
initial session is for us to get a feel for your personal style and how you'll
engage with the sort of material that you'll be working with if you eventually
become a Lower Loxley tour guide. Yeah. So, Chelsea, what have you chosen to
talk about today? OK, right. Yes, so what it is, it's not ancient history.
That's fine. It's like, like, 1940s. Go on. And it's dead romantic. Sounds
interesting. Yeah, it is, because it's the story of how young Gerald Parget had
told his family where to get off because he'd fallen in love with, like, a
showgirl, a dancer, and even though they were dead against it, he wasn't having
any, and in the end, he only went and married her. It just came out in a
horrible mess. I really don't know what I did wrong. I did try to tell Susan not
to worry about it, but she insisted on us coming over. I just had to apologise
to you in person, Brian. Yes. And I couldn't leave it till tomorrow. That
wouldn't have been right at all. Well, look, I'm sure Alice is right. It's not
the end of the world. But I feel terrible about it. You were relying on me, and
I've let you down. I won't say that. We've all had our share of kitchen
disasters. It can happen to anyone. But this is so important. So I know it's not
the same, but, well, if you can suggest something you'd like, Brian, I'll go to
the supermarket now and buy it. No, no, you don't have to. I know it's not
really right to get something shop-bought. I mean, Jennifer would be turning...
Well, it's not her sort of thing at all, but I can't see any other option. It's
fine, really. Lots of people are providing food. We won't go short. But this was
going to be the centrepiece. I'm sure we can find something else. Did you say
centrepiece? Yes. Er, well, I'm not sure, but a chair might have a solution. And
against all his family's worries, and all their dire warnings, Gerald and Julia
stayed happily married until he died over 30 years later. So, that's it. Well
done, Chelsea. Ta-da. And thanks for helping me with it. No, no, no, it was your
work. So, what do you think? Er, no, I mean, you're right, Neil. It was very
good, Chelsea. Thanks. Perhaps we might need to talk about the best way to
phrase certain things, choice of words and so on, but it was very engaging. I'll
say. You really made it come alive. There were just a few things I wondered
about. You know this is my grandfather, Gerald. Yeah, I guess. When you said he
climbed over the fence at Bridlington to go and see Julia, my grandmother,
perform, are you sure about that? Well... Well, because he was an officer, so I
think he probably could have just walked out the front gate. Yeah, well, I did
say just imagine him doing that. I see. So that meant it was actually you
imagining it? Well, yeah, kind of. But it's the sort of thing they did in those
days, innit? Erm, Nolotando? Did you imagine the presents he gave her too? Oh,
no, that would deffo right, because I checked with Freddie's mum. And the dress
she wore at the wedding? I saw it in the photograph. Right. Well, do you know, I
think you actually make a really good double act. The two of us, you mean?
You've got really complimentary style. As I say, it will take quite a lot of
work. But with your thoroughness and Chelsea's energy... I certainly think we
could move on to the next stage of the training. Oh, that's awesome. No, not at
all. But no thanks. I'm sorry, what? I don't want the job. But you've just...
It's also boring. No offence, but that story was the one interesting thing I
could find about the whole flipping place. Chelsea! And if you think I'll do all
that work and not get paid for it, you need your head examined. Again, no
offence. None taken. I just wanted to prove I could do it. And now I have. My
work here is done. That's a very well stocked freezer. Ah, here it is. Wow,
that's big. Lamb, leek and prune pie. Eat hot or cold. Obviously it'll have to
be defrosted. Well, I'll do that overnight. No problem. I know it's not the same
thing as you were making, Susan. Oh, no, that's all right. As long as there's a
centrepiece, that's what's important. Who bought you that? Was it one of Linda
Snell's? No, no, your mother made it. Jennifer? Not long before she died. Oh,
Dad. I didn't really think about it until now. But I'd really like it to be part
of the buffet. Oh, yes, absolutely. There couldn't be anything better. Oh, I'm
sorry, Susan, I didn't mean... No, it's perfect. And like you said, I can
probably turn the terrain into a deep. What is it? It's actually quite funny
when you think about it. Who else but Mum could be so organised that she's
contributing to our own funeral tea? MUSIC And Umbridge prepares to say goodbye
to his friends and family pay tribute to Jennifer this evening in the arches at
7 o'clock. And now on Radio 4, another chance to hear Miles Jupp as the
biographer James Boswell attempting to do for other celebrities what he did for
Dr Johnson in Boswell's Lives. MUSIC MUSIC Beauty, madness, genius, fame. I
cannot think of Byron without thinking of Bowie. They had so much in common.
They both knew me. Byron, Bowie, Boswell, we are starling, eternally orbiting
each other. 1807, much praise there was in literary journals for George Gordon
Byron. At 19, he had already published a volume of poetry called Hours of
Idleness. I was much taken by a poem called The Tear. Too oft is a smile, but
the hypocrites while, To mask detestation or fear. Give me the soft sigh, whilst
the soul-telling eye Is dimmed for a time with a tear. Big boys don't cry. Big
boys don't cry. I then discovered he was the sixth Baron Byron, Lord Byron, a
man of high birth as well as great talent. I had just had to meet him. That very
afternoon, I journeyed to Trinity College, Cambridge, where Lord Byron was a
student. From London, it took 20 hours or more, which felt like an eternity. It
was more than 200 years ago, and yet I recall precisely what I was thinking. I
really want to see you, Lord. Really want to see you, Lord. But it takes so
long, my Lord. It was worth it, though. There he was, standing at the open
window of his rooms in Trinity College. Lord Byron, I presume. You presume
correctly, sir. I am James Boswell. You are the celebrated biographer of Dr
Johnson. Celebrate me. Celebrate me. I shall. It's a remarkable book. Your
powers of observation and relish for humanity make you a biographer of genius.
Thank you. Forgive me if I do not smile delighted, as I am. Too oft is a smile
but the hypocrites' wile to mask detestation or fear. You know my work. I do. I
believe you are a poet of genius, and the critics agree. They do, so far. I am
honoured to make your acquaintance. No, sir. It is I who am honoured to make
yours. No, it is I who am more greatly honoured. No, no. There cannot be a
greater honour than to meet James Boswell. No, no, no, there can. No, no, no,
no. The honour I bestow on you by making your acquaintance is as a raindrop to
the ocean of honour you bestow on me by making mine. No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
The ocean of honour I bestow on you is as a mountain range to the mountain range
with more bigger mountains that you bestow on me. Say again? Do you not have a
lecture to attend? I have a lecture to miss. Let us drink together. Go into my
rooms. Welcome, Port, Sherry, Claret. All of them. You did not tell me you had a
bear. You did not ask. Regulations forbid me from keeping a dog but make no
mention of bears. You have nothing to fear. Humour him. Hello, bear. Does he
have a name? He has whatever damn name he pleases. Here, your drink. Thank you.
Your other drink. Thank you. Your third drink. Thank you. Cheers. May I offer
you a mouse? No, thank you. I was talking to the bear. The boy was
irrepressible. Or so I thought, for while I was there, the porter delivered a
copy of the Edinburgh Review. They hate me! I desire him that he do forthwith
abandon poetry now! I shall kill myself! Do not weep. You're wetting the bear's
chest. He comforts me. It is but one critic. All the others praised you. You do
not understand. Oh, but I do. One drop of vitriol outweighs a pint of milk. I'm
in despair. You're in despair now, but in a few seconds you will puff up, you
will swell with bravado. I will cut myself apart through the world or perish in
the attempt. You see? Oh, I'm good. I'm very good. And now you will be filled
with scorn for the man who has censured you. Go! A man must serve his time to
every trade, save censure. Critics all are ready made. Critics all are ready
made. So true. Who said that? Well, it wasn't you. And the bear's nodded off. I
shall write a poem denouncing all critics. It is a splendid idea, my lord. No,
it's not. I cannot denounce all critics. I'm 19. It's outrageous. But you are
outrageous. The bear is proof of that. I, for one, cannot wait to read it. I'm
greatly flattered by your interest in me. No, I am more flattered by your
interest in me. My flattery of you is as a raindrop, etc. Why are you so
interested in me, sir? I am older than you. I am better acquainted with the ways
of the literary world. I can help you. I am the bear to your cub, sir. I feel
most paternal. How sweet. I shall call you Bearswell. Excellent. Oh! It is
awake! Calm yourself! I can't! I was talking to the bear. I stayed the night at
an inn, and then, on the morrow, we strolled to the River Cam. Or, rather, I
strolled and Byron limped. For now I could see that the poor boy's right leg was
shorter than his left. And, worse, his right foot turned inwards. I felt sorry
for him. I wished to say it. But it always seems to me that sorry seems to be
the hardest word. We sat down on the riverbank. He brooded, was lost in his
pain. But then he was suddenly animated. He had, overnight, written two hundred
lines of his poem. Has soon seek roses in December, ice in June. Ho Constancy in
wind, or corn in chaff. Believe a woman or an epitaph. Or any other thing that's
false before you trust in critics, who themselves are sore. Excellent! I am sore
myself! I curse this leg! A heavy iron cramp have I had, and a built-up boot
with a brace, yet nothing works! An astonishingly beautiful girl is approaching
us. I'm in love! Can I speak to you, man to man, or, rather, bear to calf? Her
hair is the colour of spun gold. By the time I was your age, I'd engaged in
concubinage with three married gentlewomen. I am sad this cannot happen to you.
She's beautiful. She's beautiful, it's true. You have curly, auburn hair,
delicate features, fine blue eyes, with a manly expression. Hello! Many are the
ladies who will seek you out as a friend. Why does she not see me? But let me
assure you, you will not die unknown to women. There will be one woman, maybe
two, but more likely one, who will overlook your clubfoot. She may be a
desperate woman. Look at me, you angel! Perhaps on her deathbed, or a
prostitute, a blind prostitute, obviously, but she will make a man of you. Never
fear. She sees me! She faints at the sight of me. You delude yourself, my boy,
as she tripped. She's fallen in the river. Stay there, I will rescue her. No,
no, it is I who cause her to faint. I must rescue her. With that, he leapt to
his foot, hobbled up the towpath, and dived into the river. Thankfully, he had
but a short distance to swim. I did not see him for many minutes, and so, like
any bear, was much concerned for his welfare. I duly searched and found him in
some long grass. Ah, you are drying her. Well done. Go away! A few minutes
later, he rejoined me. Well then, my boy, how was your first time? You mean my
first time today? There's a lady called Jenny in Covent Garden who will do
anything for her boss' wealth. Long grass is just the start of it. Bushes,
trees. Would you like to hear more? No. You say you wish to help me, Bearswell.
How? I shall introduce you to Mr. Cawthorn, the publisher. But take it from a
man of the world, you cannot publish your denunciation of critics under your own
name. Why not? It's too offensive. Fear not, though. I have thought up a name
for you. Mr. Cawthorn, allow me to introduce you to the author of this poem.
Delighted to meet you, sir. I am Anonymous, author of many great poems. This is
one of mine. Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall. Humpty Dumpty had a great fall. All
the king's horses and all the king's men couldn't put Humpty together. Again?
You see? You know it. My boy is a genius, is he not? But my boy would not be
anonymous for long. Soon the word was out. This savage attack on the literary
establishment was the work of young Lord Byron. I met him one evening in the old
Cheshire Cheese in Fleet Street to make plans for his future. It was in this
very tavern that I drank with the great Dr. Johnson. Samuel, Sammy, Dr. J. That
was a long time ago, Besswell. It was, my boy, it was. Steak and ale pie, pint
of porter? No, the pie will make me fat. The ale, mad. You refuse my
hospitality. I forgive you just this once. Thank you for introducing me to
Cawthorn. Oh, I will do much more for you. No fashionable door in London is
closed to me. I shall introduce you to Lord Holland, the Cowpers, the
Abercrombies. But I know the Cowpers and the Abercrombies. Henry, too. Who's
Henry? Lord Holland. I call him Hal. Catherine Gordon, you must meet her. She is
my mother. Then you cannot meet her often enough. Listen, I must travel. I'm
hungry for new experiences. I can't wait to go to Greece. Though I love my
country, I do not love my countrymen. The limits of their morality enrage me.
Their hypocrisy likewise. I understand, my boy. You must travel. You are hungry
for new experiences. Though you love your country, you do not love your
countrymen. The limits of their morality enrage you. Their hypocrisy likewise.
Is that not what I just said? I hope so, for we think and speak alike. There is
a bond between us which none can break, my boy. Stop calling me that! Look at
that girl by the window. I wish I did not fall in love so easily. And yet I am
glad I do. She smiles at me. No, this time you're wrong. It's me she smiles at.
That's Jenny from Covent Garden. Here. What's this? Give it to Jenny and she
will do for you what she does for me. My treat. You give me pocket money to
spend on a woman in the manner of a father and his son? Cub! Take it back, sir!
You've refused my hospitality once. You will not do it again. Wait here. I shall
speak to her myself. Jenny says she'll do it for nothing. Thank you and goodbye,
Bearswell. I do not need you, Daddy. Don't leave. I can't forget that evening.
His face as he was leaving. But I surmise that's just the fashion in which our
story was bound to unfold. He wanted his freedom. Who could keep Byron from
Greece? It was his destiny and he'd pursue it fearlessly. Ever and ever. Forever
and ever. Greece was the one that shone in him like the morning sun. I woke the
next morning and was haunted by Greece. Greece was the word. The time, the
place, the motion. For Byron, everything led to Greece. Greece was the way he
was feeling. But did he think I would abandon him? No. I'd make him understand
how much he needed me. His fearlessness alarmed me. Here was a boy who lived
with bears, fell in love instantly, everywhere, with everyone, dived into rivers
with no thought for his lameness. What might befall him in Greece? Briggans?
Disease? Drowning? In July 1810, I sailed stormy waters to be near him and to be
free. Free from the worries that beset me. He was living in a Capuchin monastery
at the base of the Acropolis by the Temple of Jove. In the monastery lived a
friar, his six boy pupils, and Byron and his retinue. I arrived at night. Byron
was burning the midnight oil, his quill in furious motion. Oh, no. Good evening.
Beerswell! You've tracked me down. I'd thought myself free from you. No, my
lord, you need me. I do not. You do. I shall prove it to you. How will you do
that? I've travelled thousands of miles. At least do me the honour of reading
your latest work. Grant me that, for you are the greatest poet of the age. You
think your flattery will persuade me? Yes, you're vain. I'm vain too, so I know.
Well, in this case, you're right. Take a seat. I'm writing Childe Harold. It's
the story of a young man's travels and his passionate amorous encounters. Ahem.
Adieu, adieu. My native shore fades o'er the waters blue. The night winds sigh,
the breakers roar, and shrieks the wild sea mule. Shrieks the wild sea mule. Yon
sun that sets upon the sea, we follow in his flight. Farewell, awhile, to him
and thee, my native land. Good night. My native land, good night. You are
arrogant, sir, but you're gifted, all right. All will assume Childe Harold is
you. I will deny it, of course. You will deny it, of course. Everyone will
marvel that such a young man can have experience so much and know so much about
the ways of women. Everyone will marvel that such a young man can have
experience so much and know so much about the ways of women. Dammit, sir, have
you travelled all this way to repeat what I say in the manner of a parrot? No,
my lord. You know I have travelled all this way. I do not. You need my
protection. The Greeks eat octopus, drink wine that smells like bleach, and you,
as you know, are prone to melancholy and fat and falling in love too easily and
madness. You were here to protect me from octopus. No, they're a squid too, and
the winter nights in Athens can be mightily cold. I thought your concern was
paternal. It is. No, you're more like a mother. I will help you with your
writing. I'm a genius too. What can I do? Well, if you sincerely wish to help me
with my writing, there is one thing you can do. Tell me. I will do it. Leave. I
bid you good night. I bid you good night. Ha! You repeated what I said. I win.
But my night was not good. Not good at all. I was haunted by the look of him,
pale, sickly, wild-eyed. I feared he had indeed gone mad. And yet, next morning,
there he was, in the monastery garden, looking vastly happy as he scampered
about and pelted the friar's young pupils with grapes. Oh, fares well. I wrote
through the night and slept not at all, and yet I feel vigorous. I'm glad. Have
some grapes. And wine. The one begetting the other. No, thank you. It is the
wine that has furnished you with your vigor? No, it is love. Might I be
permitted to know the object of your affection? You might. There. Where? There.
There? There, by the swimming hole. By the swimming hole? There, by the swimming
hole, with the silky black hair. There, by the swimming hole, with the hair?
Yes. Have you ever seen such a beautiful creature? That's a boy. Yes? It must be
the octopus. It's taken hold of your senses with its eight tentacles. That means
it has eight testicles. It's filled you with sexual madness and turned you into
a... hyacinth. His name is Nikos. He's beautiful. Do you not agree? Of course I
do not agree. In England, you'd be hanged for saying such a thing. Why do you
think I came here? Come on, we're far from home. Tell me the truth. Would you
like an introduction? Nikos! No, keep him away from me. I am not a pervert. I'm
simply a man who wants to be your mother. I am no pervert either. The great
object of life is sensation, and I am fearless enough to pursue sensation
wherever it is to be found. Who would not want to ruffle his hair? I would not.
He's taken off his clothes. I'm reluctantly prepared to ruffle his hair, but
only the hair on his head. Ha! I knew it! You're a hyacinth like me, but you
choose to deny it in the hypocritical manner of our country folk. I do not deny
it. Ah, so you admit it. No, I mean it's not there to be denied. Nikos beckons
he and I shall swim together naked as God intended. God intends no such thing,
and nor do I. I do not intend to watch this. Then imagine it. That's often
sweeter. I see I cannot save you from yourself, Lord Byron. My journey has been
wasted. I shall leave. Release the hyacinth within, Bareswell. I am keeping my
hyacinth firmly inside me. Good day, sir. Ha, ha, ha! Nikos! I shut my eyes. I
could not bear to see. But then I opened them, for is it not a great
biographer's duty to observe and report? There was no hyacinth inside me. I am a
thistle, a Presbyterian thistle. Inside me was a small, God-fearing voice
choking on the word sin. It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a sin! I was gone
within the hour, but I did not go far. I paid Byron's valet to inform me of his
master's movements, for, despite what I told him, I was still determined to save
him from himself. Even more so, now I knew he'd gone mad. May the 3rd, 1810. The
valet informed me that Byron would today attempt to swim the Hellespont from
Cestos on the European shore to Abydos on the Asiatic. It was a hobbage to
Leander who nightly made that expedition to visit his lover Hero. Hero, despite
his name, was a woman. Had Byron, in his hyacinth madness, forgotten that? I
chartered a boat and followed his course from a distance. After an hour and ten
minutes, I could sense that fatigue was about to overwhelm him, and so I jumped
in to save his life. Don't move. Daddy's here and Mummy too. Byron! Gadso! Is
there nowhere on land or sea I am free from you? Don't speak. Save your breath.
I have come to save you! Don't put your hand on me! If I do not, you'll fright
me. I am stopping you from drowning! You are stopping me from swimming! You're
brave as a club-footed lion, my lord, but you're mad! Ephemerate men can't swim.
Everybody knows that. Then what have I been doing for the last hour? You've
been... nothing. Now, be quiet. Just let me save your life. For God's sake! You
do not save a man's life by lying on top of him! You'd know all about that. A
minute later, we lay on the shore. His teeth were chattering, so I held him to
me for warmth. You tried to kill me! On the contrary, I tried to keep you alive
and succeeded. You're not my bear, you're not my mummy, you're... Oh, Daddy,
you're my rival! You've competed with me since we first met. You do not know
what you're talking about. You do not know what you're talking about! I know
more about what I'm talking about than you know what I'm talking about. You envy
my youth, you envy my genius, you envy my endless love. Nonsense! I don't want
your lovers. Apart from, well, the female ones. You're just a... jealous... He
could not speak, so violently were his teeth chattering. And then I too started
to shiver. I began to lose control. I began to lose control. I was shivering
inside, swallowing my pain. I'm just a jealous... Was that true? I'm just a
jealous guy... Gentle listeners, it was. I did not wish to bear hug Byron, nor
father him, nor mother him. I wished to keep him down, literally down
underwater, so I could remain always above him. Why could I not be as good as
him? Had he not called me a genius when we first met? Was I not desirable to
hordes of women, some of them unpaid? And then there was the melancholy. Byron
brooded on riverbanks. I too am inclined to be gloomy. Like Byron, I'm a child
of sunshine and cloud. Oh, I am so poetic. I sailed back to England, resumed my
London lodgings, ate to excess, drank to excess, fell in love every time I
walked down the street. One night, after falling out of the old Cheshire cheese,
I made love in the street with a tall, thin woman who turned out to be a lamp
post. Oh, yes, if Byron was mad, bad and dangerous to know, I was madder,
badder, dangerous. I wrote through the night, as poets will, as poets must. I
write my poems in the dark and stop not till I hear the lark. I found it hard.
Like all artists, I was seeking truth, and truth is elusive. Why do I find it
hard to write the next line? I want the truth to be said. And then I lay down my
quill, for I'd found the truth. I had truly written those lines through the
night and not stopped till dawn. I folded the poem in two and kept it with me
always. I knew its time would come. 9th of May, 1812. As I walked through Covent
Garden, I saw him, heard him before I saw him, the heavy new boot on his right
foot announced his presence to all. Byron! Bareswell! Have you come to kill me?
Just at that moment, a chamber pot fell out of a second-floor window, missing my
head by a whisker. Damn you, madame! It seems you are the one in danger of
death. Stay there. I will join you. Why are you limping? The pot grazed my ear.
Your ear isn't limping. Do you mock me, sir? I'm entitled to limp. It's a free
country. Have you made yourself like me? Ha! Is that it? Don't tell me you've
taken up poetry. Do you recall when we first met, you called me a genius? Read
this. What is it? My first poem. It's two lines long. I don't have time to read
this. Read it, damn you. You owe me that much. I introduce you to your
publisher. I write my poems in the dark and stop not till I hear the lark. With
feeling. I write my poems in the dark and stop not till I hear the lark. No,
it's no better with feeling. It's inspired by your genius and my own. We are
connected, both made from sunshine and cloud, darkness and light. No, nothing
connects us. I called you a biographer of genius. Your genius is for repeating
what other people say. My genius is for repeating what other people say. You're
not a poet. You're incapable of original thought. You're a sponge, sir. You
absorb. Then you squeeze yourself. Am I a sponge, gentle listeners? Do I absorb
and repeat the words of others? Are my thoughts unoriginal? If so, I apologise.
I'm only human. I'm only human. Of flesh and blood I'm made. Or has that been
said before? I think not. In 1813, Byron wrote his most famous poem. She walks
in beauty like the night Of cloudless climes and starry skies And all that's
best of dark and bright Meet in her aspect and her eyes Thus mellowed to that
tender light Which heaven to gaudy day denies She walks in beauty like the night
Where have you heard that before? She walks in beauty like the night I write my
poems in the dark Do you see? This happened much later with Bowie. It was I who
suggested Sammy's sunshine And the insects from far Ziggy's stardust and the
spiders from Mars The rhythm was mine, the mood was mine Everything was mine,
except the words I wrote Byron a letter Demanding he acknowledge my poetic
contribution I received this by return I write my poems in the dark Cannot be
called poetic Banal? Prosaic? Certainly To which I'd add emetic To words a poet
gives new life He fashions their existence But Bos repeats what others say Sees
genius from a distance Poor Boswell, he's a parasite Who makes true poets sick
If genius is an elephant Boswell is a tick Yes, Byron wrote a poem about me
About moi, about I That very day I took it to the publisher, Mr. Cawthorn A
thousand copies were sold in a week And I only bought five hundred A thousand,
that's a million in today's numbers It was Boswell mania I win, I'm eternally
connected to Byron We're together, we're immortal To coin a phrase, Byron and I
are gonna live forever Gonna live forever Hallelujah In Boswell's Life of Byron,
Freddie Fox portrayed my lord His acting was spectacular, the script was what
was flawed Miles Jupp was Boswell, or a parody thereof John Cantor was the
writer, done for money, not for love And who produced this chamber pot, who
dropped it on your street? Her name is Sally Evans Enjoy the repeat Welcome to
The Spock I feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws They're juggling
flaming torches, but they could just as well be juggling chainsaws The monkeys
might be hypothetical, but the issues are real Part of what we need to be well
is a world that we can feel that we belong to I'm Helen Lewis, back with a new
series of Big Conversations Talking to people who bring radical new thinking to
vital questions Like when to quit, social prescribing, scientific fraud and
preventing suicide Small acts of reaching out, small acts of interrupting those
thoughts could be life-saving The Spock starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds Now on Radio 4, what impact is an ageing population
having on the state pension system? And why has the state pension age for women
gone up so much? Tim Harford has the answers in Understand the Economy Welcome
to Understand the Economy The podcast that takes you back to basics to explain
how economics affects our everyday lives In this episode, pensions! Don't switch
me off, I promise, they're important, very important But we really don't think
about them enough, often until it's too late And maybe you think you've got your
pension sorted Even if you have, though, you may end up paying more tax to pay
for someone else's pension So this is really everyone's problem A pension is
money you receive when you've retired We've made the decision in the UK that the
state will give everyone some money once they get to a certain age But as we'll
hear, that decision was made a long time ago, when people didn't live as long as
they do today I'm joined in the studio by Rajiv Prabhakar He's a senior lecturer
in personal finance at the Open University And the author of Financial
Inclusion, Critique and Alternatives Welcome Rajiv Thank you Tim So we should
start at the beginning, state pensions At the moment, how do they work? So you
build up a national insurance record, which could be either in work or if you're
caring And once you reach retirement age, you get something called a new state
pension Where everyone gets a flat rate They're an example of what is called an
unfunded system So in effect, the taxes of the current generation of people of
working age pay the guaranteed pension of the retired And so when people who are
pensioners, when they say, I've paid in all my life That's sort of true, they've
paid national insurance contributions, they've paid taxes, they have paid in all
their life But in another way, it's not true Because that money that they've
paid in, that was paying for something else back in the day Their current
pensions are being paid for by the current taxes and national insurance
contributions of the working population Exactly I was always told, you get your
pension when you're 65, that's your retirement age As a man, 60 if you're a
woman, that's not true anymore is it? No, so the state pension age is the same
for men and women So currently, in 2022, the state pension age is age 66 and
it's due to rise to 67 And then by the mid, I think in my 2040s, it's going to
rise to 68 years old So the pension age has been going up, so why is that? The
key thing is we're talking about demography, people are living longer, which is
a great thing But this then raises a challenge for state pension systems Because
people could be living 20, on average 20 years after retirement How are you
going to pay for this via taxes? As it happens, women tend to live longer than
men And so there's a rationale, first for equalisation, but secondly for raising
the state pension age And as I understand it, there's two different things going
on and they're both causing a problem The first is that people are living longer
And the second thing is, well the baby boomers are retiring So that's a very big
generation, born in the 20 years after the war And they're entering retirement
and the generation following them, poor hard-working Gen Xers like me, we're
smaller So you've got a smaller working age population working away to fund the
retirement of these baby boomers There's loads of them and they live forever
This seems like it potentially is a big problem, I mean is the whole system
unsustainable? We could also, our government could also, encourage the
population to save more into personal or private pensions So we've seen
initiatives, for example, in the UK, as things such as the automatic enrolment
into a workplace pension Which is now 10 years old Yeah, now I want to come back
and talk about these various initiatives to get people to save for their own
retirement Rather than relying on the state But before we do, I wanted to bring
in our resident historian, Victoria Bateman, from the University of Cambridge
And as she usually does, Dr Bateman brings us more war stories By the 17th
century, Britain had been building its military and fighting ever more wars And
with it came a growing number of injured servicemen, many of whom fell into
poverty after their injuries, unable to fight anymore And so in 1681, King
Charles II decided to do something about this problem What he did was to grant a
royal warrant for the building of the Royal Hospital in Chelsea To care for
those who were, to quote, broken by age or war But there were many more injured
and elderly servicemen than could fit in these two hospitals And so the military
started rolling out a pension scheme that would be to some degree recognisable
to us today That came in the form of a weekly payment in financial terms Rather
than having to live in, in a hospital or an institution In 1859, it was rolled
out to everyone in the military And it became the precursor to the 1908 old age
pension that was introduced for pensioners right across the UK For anyone who
was aged 70 or above who was in financial need And that pension gave the
equivalent of in today's money, £27 and was collected from the local post office
Dr Victoria Bateman, and just to put that retirement age of 70 in context Not
many people lived to the age of 70 at that time It was 1908 and for that
generation of pensioners, they would have entered adulthood around 1860 And life
expectancy was 58 for men and slightly more for women So if anybody made it to
70 to claim this pension, it was already quite an achievement Today, the
generation who are currently getting their pension aged 66 On average, they're
going to live until they're 85 or 87 So many, many more years in retirement
Rajiv Prabhakar, we've talked about dealing with this ageing population by
getting people to save more for themselves So are we any good at saving for our
own retirements? Actually, it can be really complicated to design a savings plan
over your own lifetime Because there's lots of unexpected things, there's lots
of other factors you don't know about The pension system is really complex,
that's one thing But even if you manage to design a savings plan that can kind
of look into the future and give you enough income Can you stick to it? There
are times in which there's simply going to be cost of living pressures So for
example, you may need to pay off a student debt You may need to get a mortgage
if you've got children You may need to pay that So actually, people are going to
be buffeted through their whole life By these kind of things which will put
pressure on a pension Which is in effect, it's a long term saving To turn it
down a bit, I'm looking over at my producer She's crying quietly in the corner
of the studio, she's a bit younger than we are It's a hard life you're
describing here, being buffeted Right, second thing, there's been a school of
thought called behavioural economics Which fuses together psychology and
economics And what some economists have said, another problem is actually They
tend to prioritise today over tomorrow This is sometimes called present bias I'm
trying to save up for my pension But then an old friend says, oh do you want to
go out to a restaurant? And I'm thinking, well I don't really have the money to
do that this week Because I need that money to save towards my pension, I made
that plan But your friend's asking if you'll go out, you can't say no to your
friend And so you say yes, and you spend that money And just once it doesn't
matter But the trouble is, that's going to happen all the time Your entire life
you're going to be presented with these temptations That it's going to be hard
to say no to Correct, and then the main policy example of which Is this
automatic enrolment into a workplace pension What the insight of economists here
is saying Okay, all of us have these kind of biases, we're humans, we're not
robots Can we design a personal pension system in a way That harnesses the kind
of biases that we all exhibit To encourage us to save more So the idea here is
when you join a company And you're asked if you want to sign up for that
company's pension And the idea would have been, well the company's going to
contribute The government's going to contribute, of course you want to do that
But very often people actually don't Because of these biases you described,
because they're focused on their problems right now They don't want to think
about their pension So the automatic enrolment says, actually we're not going to
ask you We're just going to tell you it's happening, you can opt out But
otherwise it's just going to happen automatically Exactly, and actually if you
look at what's happened With the automatic enrolment into a workplace pension
Which was introduced from 2012, so it's 10 years since What's happened is that
the membership of pension schemes has increased by about tenfold Yeah, I mean
that's amazing, it's worth holding on that Ten times as many people enrolled now
because of automatic enrolment Correct And that sounds like the problem's been
solved then Has the problem been solved? No No! Because for automatic enrolment
people typically contribute 8% However, for an average earner, 12% would be
needed to provide enough money in retirement So, and that maybe doesn't sound
like a big gap But they've only got two thirds as much money as they need And so
in retirement, if that continues, they're only going to have two thirds the
pension income that they need I wanted to ask about pensions for men versus
pensions for women We all know there's a gender pay gap Women on average earn
less than men for a whole bunch of different reasons Should we presume that
there's a pensions gap? Do we even know if there's a pensions gap? Actually,
this is one of the key challenges facing public pensions Because there is
increasing focus on what is called a gender pensions gap There's a growing
awareness actually, retirement outcomes for women are systematically worse than
for men So for example, if we look at something like income, there's a 40%
shortfall for women compared to men Also, the gender pension gap, if we look at
say income, is about double the gender pay gap So the pension gap is twice as
bad as the pay gap? Yes, roughly, yeah Wow So what's driving the gender pension
gap is really to do with private pension provision And put very bluntly, women
do a lot more unpaid caring than men How does that affect it? Well, it affects
in a couple of ways Number one, they're out of the workforce, the paid
workforce, and they're doing unpaid caring So they don't have the opportunity to
build their private pensions But the second strand is that when they do come
back into the workforce, predominantly they take part-time work Which then feeds
into their pension contribution And why is that important? Women live longer
than men And so they will live a longer life, but they're going to have less
money coming in Rajiv, I was wondering, my niece has just had twins Oh,
congratulations Oh, they're so cute, they're so cute They are going to turn 78
in the year 2100 And I was curious, do you think in the year 2100, those
78-year-olds will get a state pension? And if not, how are they going to be
providing for their own retirement? Wow, that's a hostage to fortune No, wait,
no one is going to hold you hostage to this We'll all be dead by then, hopefully
they won't My instinct is that actually, there will still be some form of public
state pension Because one of the things that the state pension does is to stop
poverty and retirement And actually, sometimes people can't work, sometimes
can't be in paid employment How are they cared for? So I think that some form of
state assistance will still be there But there will also be a growing emphasis
on saving for retirement And I suspect there will be changes to the state
pension age Rajiv Prabhakar of The Open University, thank you so much Thank you,
Tim So, the good news is, Rajiv says, that even if you live to 2100, there will
be a state pension The bad news is, it may not be as generous as you're hoping
for So get saving, babies What would a documentary made by artificial
intelligence sound like? I'm Laura Lewington and I'll be guiding you through
ChatGPT The AI technology that's popping up all over the place Can it write my
script? Will it be able to transform jobs? Can it change our lives? I'll be
interviewing experts, some users and ChatGPT itself We'll explore the
immeasurable possibilities, the problems And the creativity of this new
sophisticated technology In a documentary by ChatGPT on Radio 4 and BBC Sound