TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Radio 4 at 7.15pm and you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. BBC
News at two o'clock. The government appears to be on the brink of agreeing new
terms with the EU on post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland. The
DUP have refused to form a power-sharing executive in Stormont because of
objections to the current deal, which created a trade border in the Irish Sea.
Our Northern Ireland political editor, Ender MacClafferty reports. The moment of
truth for the DUP could be fast approaching. The final pieces of a deal between
the UK and the EU over the protocol are falling into place. Even down to the
title, with the Windsor Agreement being floated as a possible option. Once
published, most likely on Monday, the spotlight will fall on Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson and his party. But don't expect a quick response. That is not the DUP
way. The party will reserve judgement on any deal. They will want to look beyond
the headlines and study the legal text, which will accompany the agreement. That
will be the acid test. Does it meet the party's seven demands? Crowds have
gathered in County Tyrone in Northern Ireland to show their support for an off-
duty police officer who was shot in Omer on Wednesday. Detective Chief Inspector
John Caldwell is critically ill in hospital. Five people have been arrested in
connection with the attack, which police are treating as a terrorist incident.
The Deputy Chair of the Environment Agency Judith Batchelor has called for food
production and distribution in the UK to be made more resilient. Supermarkets
are limiting the sale of some produce because of bad weather in growing regions
abroad, as well as high energy costs for farmers in the UK. A search operation
has resumed for two people missing in the Firth of Clyde. They were on board a
tug which overturned close to the town of Greenock in Inverclyde yesterday
afternoon. Millions of Nigerians are voting in the country's most competitive
election since military rule ended there more than two decades ago. The race is
between two major established parties and a third candidate, Peter Obie, who's
galvanised the support of young people. BBC News We have a drama documentary in
an hour here on Radio 4. The writer tells the story of her personal voyage on a
sailing ship with other artists, combining it with a drama about two people
travelling to the end of the world in search of a new beginning. Voices from the
end of the world is at three o'clock. But first, it's time for Any Answers with
Anita Rannant. Thank you very much indeed, Tom. Good afternoon. Welcome to Any
Answers. So, yesterday marked the year since Russia invaded Ukraine. And I don't
know whether you were listening to any questions. I hope you were, because you
would have heard some really powerful testimony coming from a Ukrainian young
woman who described how fear was a fact of life for those people still in her
country. And she wanted to know how long can and should Britain back President
Zelensky. I'm paraphrasing, but that is in essence what we're discussing today.
How long should we back President Zelensky? Or maybe you think we shouldn't at
all. 03700 100 444 is the number. We have the Homes for Ukraine scheme here. I
wonder if you took part. If you did, just how did it go? What was the experience
like? And the question that was put to the Any Questions panel was, what about
refugees from other places? Don't they deserve similar consideration? 03700 100
444. Lots to get your teeth into. Maybe not turnips. Turns out, according to
some of the newspapers, after advice from Therese Coffey, there are no turnips
to be had. OK, so look, is it all right for politicians to recommend that you
eat seasonal? Is there something important in this message? Or maybe you were
just straightforward worried about the lack of lettuces, tomatoes and cucumbers
on the shelves. And what do you blame for that? Is it bad weather? Is it Brexit?
03700 100 444. I'd love to know what you made of the Ferrari around Roald Dahl
books and sensitivity reading this week. So if you have any thoughts on that,
and I bet you do, 03700 100 444 is the number to call. You can email any.answers
at bbc.co.uk. You can text 84844. Text will be charged at your standard message
rate. So do check with your network provider for exact costs. Or you can tweet
us for absolutely nothing. Hashtag BBCAQ is where we're at. So far, the great
majority of you want to talk about the war raging in Europe. So let's start with
that. James Bruce from Berwick-upon-Tweed. First of all, I mean, gosh, can you
believe it's a year? It's been an entire year since this has started. James,
what are your thoughts? OK, not quite since it started, Anita. Good afternoon.
It started eight years before that. But that's not the main thing I just want to
start with. No, no, no, no, no. That's a fair point. So you're talking, you want
to take us all the way back to Crimea. That's absolutely fine. We can. We can
definitely talk about that. I definitely wanted to just make the point, though.
I think it's really encouraging that there was strong audience support for the
measured and enlightened contributions of Mary Dijewski in that debate. I think
the rest of the panel was intoxicated by the usual bull in a China shop
jingoism. And I think what's needed and what's responsible leaders and statesmen
and women should be calling for is diplomacy. This is what we actually need. We
don't need more weapons. We don't need more killing. We don't need more
violence. We need diplomacy. We need to be well past the time for a ceasefire
and forcing both sides to sit around a negotiating table. Because as Churchill
said and as everybody knows, jaw-jaw is better than war-war. That is simply the
message that I think we need to get across. And I'm very grateful for the
message. May I? Yeah. I mean, if you're sitting at a negotiating table, you have
to have things that either side are willing to give up. What do you think the
Ukrainians ought to be willing to give up? Well, this is where it's not really
for us to say. And I know that's what the panel said as well. But the thing is,
it's not for us to say any more than somebody from Moscow is going to have an
opinion that is valuable about how the Irish and the British should negotiate
about Ulster. There's no valuable contribution that someone from Moscow is going
to make about that. And so for me, speaking from Beric Bonjour, where I am, why
should I make any valuable contribution? This is for them to thrash it out. OK.
All right. OK. So let me put it another way then. OK. And this is your solution
to the problem or your advice to solve this problem. How do you force somebody
like Vladimir Putin to sit down at a negotiating table? He's had sanctions
against him. He's had assets frozen. He has the world at the moment turning its
back on him. How do you force him? What more do you do to force him around a
negotiating table? The truth of the matter, as far as I'm concerned, and I do
know both these countries quite well, by the way, I've spent quite a lot of time
in both Ukraine and Russia. As far as I can see, it's not the Russians who have
to be persuaded. It's the Ukrainians and the people who are blocking that are
NATO countries. And above all, the people driving the train who are the
Americans. They are the ones who are blocking Ukraine from doing the
negotiations. And there were negotiations. We know that there were negotiations
still going on until April last year. And then Boris Johnson flew out to Kiev
and basically told Zelensky, no, your bosses won't allow you to continue with
these negotiations. The trouble with all of this is that there's a Hollywood
conception of international affairs. And I think we all know this is true, in
which every situation is reduced to the idea of goodies and baddies.
Unfortunately, that is not the reality. OK. OK, so stay with us. Don't go
anywhere. Don't go anywhere. Stuart Macfarlane is calling from Oxford. Stuart,
meet James. James, meet Stuart. So, look, James, very passionately arguing for a
negotiated settlement and don't characterize this as goodies and baddies. It's
not easy. It's not as easy as that. And if you do treat it as binary, is that
we're never going to get anywhere? Stuart, what would you say to James? He's
there listening. Well, I respect what James says. For many years, I was a CND
supporter and therefore I'm all in favor of parleying rather than bombarding
people. But I'm afraid I have to disagree with James in this particular
situation. I don't think Putin is to be trusted. And he's got some very dodgy
allies as well in North Korea and Syria and elsewhere. And I'm sorry to say,
although in a way it's naive to talk in terms of goodies and baddies, I'm afraid
in this case it is rather an obvious case of people who will not be persuaded.
And what is striking to me, there have been some wonderful programs on the
television, some of them BBCs, about the war in Ukraine. The astonishing thing
is that the people who are suffering don't want to give up. As far as we know, I
mean, we don't know how impartial the broadcasting is. But as far as we can
tell, the voice of the Ukrainian people is entirely in favor of resisting almost
to the last man and woman. I mean, that's a dreadful thought. And the
destruction of the territory there in Ukraine is just heartbreaking. We've seen
it over and over again. OK. So let's throw that back to James. And then I know
there are lots more calls on this. So we'll move on. James, what do you say to
what Stuart says? Well, one of the things you've reminded me of is that... Just
talk to Stuart. He's there, right there. You've reminded me of Stuart, is that
it's actually Jeremy Bowen, among other people who have said that there is a
valid criticism which is made of the US and British in this, that they are
willing to fight Russia to the last Ukrainian. I mean, this is what is
actually... This is a perfectly legitimate claim. They simply are using Ukraine
to damage Russia. This is how they can do it. And I do believe there are two
important myths that need to be busted. The first is that it started in February
2023, 2022. It didn't. It started eight years previously with the overthrow of
an elected government. OK, that's how this started. It was the 22nd of February
2014 is when this started with the overthrow of an elected, democratically
elected government. It wasn't a perfect government by any means. It was probably
a very corrupt and a lot of problems with that government. But it was a violent
overthrow that was financed and orchestrated by Western powers. And there are
very few people who are naive enough to not accept that. And the other thing is
that in the eight years before that, 14,000 people have been killed in the
fighting in the Donbass. So that's the equivalent for comparison. The troubles
in Northern Ireland over 30 years, there were three and a half thousand. So this
is a very, very major conflict that was going on for eight years. Can I put this
to you then? I mean, if it is as straightforward as you say, Poland, which has
some experience, by the way, of boundaries being crossed, has said, look, Poland
and Europe stand by your side to Ukraine. We will definitely not leave you. We
will support Ukraine. We had the Estonian prime minister again sort of in the
region, a separate sovereign country saying if aggression pays off, aggressors
will take note. Yeah, OK, that's important. And their voices are important. But
so is the Hungarian voice. And in fact, the Hungarians have a direct experience
of their people, their Hungarian, ethnic Hungarians and Hungarians because being
discriminated against in Ukraine. And that is why you will find a very different
picture in Hungary. If you if you go to the opinion polls in Hungary, they will
tell you very clearly that they are much more inclined to blame the Americans
and NATO for this situation. Let's do it. Come back, James, let's come back. And
then I know John's waiting. Mary Louise is waiting. Others are waiting. Stuart,
very briefly. I mean, the very cogent argument from a very cogent argument. I
don't think that if we look at the parallel with the rise of the Nazis under
Hitler, we can be at all assured that the Americans and ourselves are not
fighting a just and necessary war on behalf of the world, as Zelensky would say.
OK, thank you very much indeed. Some of your thoughts, lots of your thoughts
coming through on Twitter and on email. Badtemperedbarger says, what should the
Ukrainians give up? Nothing. Not so long as there are Russian aggressors in the
country once they have withdrawn and made reparations for all damages and maybe
negotiations can be heard about territories. This one here, Putin must not see
the rest of the world even blink at maintaining support for Ukraine. This is a
long term strategy, writes this correspondent, Rosie. Similarly, the media must
not print a word of doubt about his this commitment. That's how Russia plays war
games, says Rosie. Another one here. I think we shouldn't, says Adam Clare,
provide jets to Ukraine, as this, in my view, is escalating a war. It isn't a
British war. Britain has a poor record throughout history in interfering in
other people's problems. Let's take another call on this. Mary Louise Morley
calling from near Princess Risborough. Now, you're talking about Ukrainian
refugees and you have some experience of, is it hosting or placing refugees?
Placing, hello. So, I am a trustee of the Ukraine to Chilton's charity based in
Princess Risborough, Buckinghamshire. We were set up last year to help support
the government's home for Ukraine scheme. We set up originally as a small group
of people that just wanted to do something to help. But within a period of just
a few months, we managed to find homes for nearly 200 Ukrainians in the
Chilton's area of Buckinghamshire, thanks to over 70 local families and
individuals stepping forward to host. And that's just in our small area. I
believe there's about over 1,000 Ukrainians now being hosted in Buckinghamshire.
So, the generosity of the British people is absolutely heartwarming. And in our
experience, the homes for Ukraine scheme has really brought the community
together with so many people volunteering their time, their energy, their ideas
to ensure that the Ukrainian guests don't just have a home, they're really made
to feed at home. And when you speak to the people that you've settled, I mean, I
know this is not an opinion poll, but what do they think about what should
happen next to their country? Are they saying, you know what, I'd like both
sides to negotiate a settlement. I would, you know, if it means giving up
territory, that's fine. Or are they telling you, actually, no, we've just got to
carry on fighting? They most definitely want their country back. In our
experience, you know, are Ukrainian guests resourceful? They've shown themselves
to be incredibly resilient and courageous. And their goal is simply to get back
on their feet as quickly as possible. So, whether they can forge independent
lives in Buckinghamshire or go back to their own country. Okay. Okay. Mary
Louise, thank you very much for calling us. We've got Tony waiting, John
waiting, Francis waiting. Let's go to Tony Banks from Northumberland. Hi, Tony.
Hi there. Yeah. Hi. Hi. I would say a couple of things. Let's not forget that
years ago, okay, Ukraine and the most nuclear weapons in any Soviet country and
they were persuaded and asked to give them up when the Cold War finished, which
they did on the understanding the West would guarantee their geographical
integrity and which is clear what we didn't do. Because when the when the party
went into into Crimea, we literally just looked and it was on news at 10 for a
couple of days. And that's it. It didn't it didn't have any coverage and it was
forgotten. An entire an entire portion of one of the biggest countries in Europe
was taken by force. People killed and we didn't do a thing. I think to come back
to the question that we need to be supporting Ukraine until the last bullet and
when you get people like Musk that starts withdrawing this is a satellite Skynet
system for financial reasons, for business reasons. They will hurt his business.
The Ukrainians need the Skynet system to run their drones to try and fight back
when you've got when you've got weaponry like that been been been stopped from
being been used. We we in in England and I'm speaking I've been to I think the
Bosnia. If anybody wants to see what it's like in Europe to go to war within
modern times, go to Bosnia. Look at what happened in Kosovo in Bosnia. Yeah. So
what Mary Dejewski and others, Tony, have been arguing on the program, one of
our previous callers as well, just saying, look, you know what, that's what we
don't want to see. We don't want to see other young men like you were sent
during that conflict, during the Balkan conflict to be fighting any kind of war.
And the only way to do that is to have some kind of negotiated settlement. And
for some people, it is going to be an acceptable compromise to say, OK, you
know, those areas in the Donbass, let them keep it, let them have let the
Russians have their buffer zone, at least then the rest of the world has peace.
And so, really, do people really, really think if we let them have the Donbass,
which is a total no go, it shouldn't happen. If but if we let Putin, Putin's not
in right. Clearly they managed to range. But is that is that protected? I mean,
it's beginning to fall away now, but it is so protected and shielded that nobody
can get to him. But Putin like it, like many of the leaders all over, you know,
years gone by, you've only got to get one or two men that are protected to turn
the course and to cause mass carnage. I think we ought to we ought to remember
that if Putin gets away with the Donbass or they get away with keeping Crimea,
he will he will want more and more. And that will be what about what about those
people who say that, you know, the West, Britain and America in particular have
no position on any kind of moral high ground because their interventions in the
Middle East in particular have been ultimately self-serving and nothing to do
with the freedoms of the people who lived there. What would you say? Yeah, yeah.
I'm I'm I'm a little bit too pleased that you brought the Middle East up. Let's
talk about Syria. I would say that I mean, I went to war in like Gulf War one
and very nearly died. But we went to war to kick out a dictator, yet again, a
dictator that had the power of over an entire country went into a different
country because there was oil involved and because it was politics with friendly
government. Everybody went in. The United Nations went in. Everybody went in
NATO. Everybody kicked him out. I mean, but with Iraq, it was it was a leader of
a sovereign state and it was regime change that took place there in the Bosnian
conflict. You have a you had a United Nations peacekeeping force involved. We
don't I mean, yeah, you did. But you see you see the difference. You see the
difference. No, no, not at all. No, I don't see the difference because you've
got countries, you've got dictators in these countries, OK, Carradich and
various others. Again, one man and it tends to be men, one man going into
different countries. Can I just say one thing? OK, look, very briefly, Tony.
Yeah, yeah, very briefly. OK, thank you for your time. You give me very briefly.
Take a look what happens when when when the US say this is a red line when I'm
talking about Syria, red line, no, no gas warfare, absolute red line. If you if
you use gas, we'll go in. And we didn't go in. And look what look what Putin
did. And it is Putin's hopes that when I look what a total mass city it is now.
OK, OK, so that's so the red lines have to be red lines. I hear you, Tony. I
hear you. Thank you very much. I think Putin's been in touch. The relationship
between Ukraine and Russia is long and complex. But Mary Dijewski's simplistic
claim that Russians can be trusted to keep their word and treat the Ukrainians
humanely fills me with skepticism. In other words, if she said it was raining,
I'd have to go out and check. Steve Hill says it's utterly maddening that people
are making the argument Mary Dijewski made on your program, just flat out not
acknowledging that if the escalation she complains about didn't happen, the
result would be more death, more suffering for the Ukrainians. We already know
what Russian forces do in the areas that they have overrun, of which there would
be many more if the Ukrainians lacked the escalatory material in line with her
wishes. They have raped, murdered, tortured, pillaged, enslaved and so much
more. Frances Watkins is calling us from High Wycombe in Buckinghamshire. Hi,
Frances. Hello. Hi. Hi. I just wanted to make a short point about how refreshing
it was to hear Mary Dijewski's point and to hear a voice that is slightly
dissenting from mainstream media. I thought it was extremely enlightening and I
think there should be much more of that kind of discussion because what's
happening is we're being fed a line or however you'd like to perceive it. We are
being presented with a very one-sided argument and I myself agree largely with
that argument. I think we need to think about how to stop the escalation and we
need to discuss which is what civilized countries do and civilized leaders do.
Otherwise, where will this go? And I myself have an emotional relationship to
this. I teach Ukrainians. I also teach one or two Russian emigres who are now
ruthless and they're wandering other countries that they're allowed into, living
out of suitcases, very, very desperate people as well. And I think we have to
just stop the escalation and behave in a commonsensical way. Is Vladimir Putin
an honest broker? I mean, somebody said on the program, any questions, look at
what happened in Bucher, look what happened in Irpin, look at what Russian
troops have been doing on the ground. A similar point was made just now in one
of the emails that we received. You're talking about civilized discussion. I
know. Don't all parties need to be civilized in that case to have that
discussion? At least we have to try. We have to try and bring down the rhetoric.
We know that Putin is going to react to our bombastic rhetoric. We can all see
the kind of person that he is. I don't think that's just the man that we've been
presented with that. I think he is a man who doesn't want to lose faith, et
cetera. So we have to handle this very carefully and very different. So I'm
genuinely trying to understand what the diplomacy or the diplomatic solution
would look like. Would it mean, do you think, that the territory that has been
gained by Russia in the last 12 months should be kept by Russia forever? I am
not a politician, but I do think that there would have to be some compromise.
And of course, and I know from my wonderful Ukrainian students that I teach
that, of course, they don't want to. Their knee-jerk reaction is, of course, we
can't give one centimeter of our land. But if this long term is going to mean
saving millions of lives on all sides and possibly preempting a third world war,
God help us, then these are the steps that we have to take. And if somebody said
that sounds like appeasement, then? Well, I'd say then we have to appease. Okay.
Okay. Okay. Okay. Francis, very grateful for your call. This one here is from,
I'm not sure, someone in Glasgow, MGT. The West and the people should have a say
in this war, particularly if there is a risk of escalation. Millions of lives
could be lost in this. This is not right. The war should be ended by
negotiation. George Bernard Shaw, regular. What should the Ukrainians give up?
Whatever Ukraine is or isn't prepared to do, it is not for us to dictate. This
one here is Stephen Manchester. We shouldn't even yet talk of negotiations with
Putin. He's not to be trusted and would soon cheat on any deal. We appeased him
with Crimea. Look what happened. Sean Francis says, my guess as to why there are
no ongoing peace talks is because savages like Adolf Hitler and Vladimir Putin
would only be interested in such talks if it would further their savagery. Putin
should be arrested by the United Nations. Yes, they're not mild feelings in this
debate, are they? And with good reason. Let's speak to Hussein Vefey about this,
calling us from Fife. Hello, Hussein. Hello. Good afternoon. Hi. Good afternoon.
Thank you. And the fact that a lot of the points which was I was going to bring
out, they already have been brought out, but I'm going to repeat a lot of them,
which is what's happening in Ukraine. There could only be one solution, which is
talk. Recently I was in Palestine. In fact, they said the last few weeks of
January. And I met a few activists from this country who are going there to
actually to stop or to demonstrate against settlement buildings or land
grabbing. When you compare the two situations, Palestine and Ukraine, and both
victims of similar aggression in Palestine by the creation of Israel, like
similar to what's happening in Ukraine now, hundreds of Palestinian villages
wiped out of the universe. They don't even exist. Until today, they are
Palestinian. Listen, did you call, was saying, can I honestly ask you, did you
ring up to talk about Ukraine? Or did you ring up to talk about Palestine? No,
the two together. The two are. There's one parallel to the other one. The
similarity is like Afghanistan. So since the subject that we're talking about
today is what happens, and what would you say then? I would say this. With the
Palestine hinterland that you have, what is the settlement or what is the way
out of what is going on in Ukraine? With all of the knowledge that you have and
with your trip, your recent trip in mind, what would you do? People like Turkey,
who are speaking to both sides and bring both sides to talk. If they don't talk,
then they will eventually be a complete destruction of Ukraine and either a
third world war like somebody suggested or an extreme disaster will be so much
bigger. Because to say that there is nothing Ukraine will accept less than every
Russian soldier coming out. That's not going to happen just now. And you cannot
compare Putin with Hitler because Putin has nuclear weapon. Hitler did not. If
Hitler had it. OK, OK. Yeah, I know. Listen, thank you very much for your call.
And that, yeah, a very serious point there. And lots of people getting in touch
today about the fear of nuclear escalation. I mean, who thought that we would
have this conversation in 2023 about nuclear Armageddon? But that is where we
are. James Marlow, there is a way to resolve the horrible conflict in Ukraine.
You know, that is to have a genuine United Nations sponsored referendum in
eastern Ukraine and Crimea. Ask the citizens there what they want their future
allegiances to be. Unfortunately, that's a resolution that will probably be
unacceptable, both to Putin and Zelensky, in case either of them lost the vote.
John Ferrago says Russia's invasion of Ukraine is wrong and unforgivable. The
idea that problems between peoples and nations can be solved in the 21st century
by killing and destruction is wrong. In the end, Putin or no Putin, all the
people in Ukraine and Russia will find a way to live in peace. But unless the
aim is to destroy the Putin regime in Russia is the best way to get there for
NATO to increase the capacity and efficiency of the Ukrainians to kill and
destroy without any prospect of a peaceful resolution. Let's take one more on
this and then one generally on refugees. We had a very lovely woman who rang up
and said, look, you know, we've been resettling Ukrainians in Princess
Risborough. The question that was raised on the program was that should we do
that for other people around the world? You know, why are the Ukrainians a
special case in point and why not for others? And I'll take a call on that. Andy
Townsend is calling us on from Worcester, first of all. What should happen to
resolve the crisis in Ukraine, Andy? Good afternoon, everybody. Well,
personally, I think a lot of people asked me the same question, actually, which
I'm going to tell you now. If Ukraine would have attacked, sorry, if Russia
would have attacked the UK, land or sea, would Ukraine have helped us? OK.
Right. And what do you, it sounds as if you've got the answer to the question up
your sleeve. What do you think? Many people I've asked this question and said
no. Right. And the other thing is, I feel very sorry for all the people that are
suffering over there. I really do. My heart goes out to them. But at the end of
the day, we are sleepwalking into World War Three. I think most people
listening, I mean, I've never had said if they send their F-16 claims and God
knows what else, it's going to be a disaster because something will happen at
the risk. Yeah. I mean, Andy, I mean, just when World War Two, let's talk about
two prime ministers of this country. You brought up what would happen if this
country was invaded. Two different prime ministers in the run up to World War
Two. One was Chamberlain, who said, you know what, this is not our conflict
going on when Hitler's troops started crossing borders. It's not our border. And
so there is peace with honor, peace in our time. He waved the bit of paper. Did
it stop the Germans from crossing over other boundaries? And then you had
another prime minister who said, actually, it doesn't matter. They're not
crossing our border, but it will be a matter of time if they're allowed. If
you're allowed to cross any borders, you can cross all borders. And therefore we
draw the line here. And that was Churchill. Now, who do you think was right?
Well, I'm a big fan of Churchill. I've got statues in the house of him,
actually. So why is this different? So why is this different? The difference is
now is the fact that, first of all, the armory is totally different. I mean,
they could destroy us within a blink of an eye. We could all be very... I don't
think really people, maybe most people do realize this, but there was the worst
thing that ever happened in nuclear attack. There wouldn't be a few potholes in
a few fields. We'd be very prized. So it's not... It's a different thing
altogether. So it's the jeopardy, not the morality of it that's... Yeah. Yeah. I
mean, the thing is, the thing is, the Ukrainian president would be quite happy
for us to send for the jet service, because he knows it'll escalate, and that's
what he wants. Okay. Okay. Okay, Andy. Okay, Andy, thank you very much for your
call. This one here regarding Ukraine, have we learned nothing? It says Ian
Whitman from Reading. Have we learned nothing from the lead up to World War II?
Appeasement will only... Sorry, this keeps jumping around. Will only encourage
an aggressor. Putin needs to be resisted and repelled until, and only until, he
seeks negotiation. Another one here, Maggie. Yes, upon a time, wars were clearly
won and lost, and that was an end to it. Now rich countries drip feed arms to
one another, thus prolonging the war. Another, Steve in North Allerton. So if
the French nipped across the channel and took the Isle of Wight, we'd just say,
okay, you keep it, because we don't want any more deaths. Let's go to Hugh
Deller, who's calling us from North London. Hi, Hugh. Yeah, hello. Thank you
very much for letting me on. Yeah, I'm calling basically because I've traveled
and worked for the last 20 years all across Ukraine, Russia and Belarus, and I
know a lot of people on all sides of the current conflict. And I think what's
often missing from the debates that we're having here is actually the voices of
Ukrainians and the opinions of Ukrainians. And I work regularly with Ukrainians.
I've hosted Ukrainians here in London. And I also know a lot of people on the
kind of anti-Putin side in Russia. And I think we run the risk in the West of
basically asking other people to give up parts of their land. And I always think
when I hear callers like the last caller, which part of England would you be
willing to give up to appease Putin for the next sort of six months or year? I
mean, isn't the fact he's trying to protect every inch of England because he's
saying, you know what, the difference is they have nuclear weapons and the
losses, he said we could all be vaporized were his words. We obviously... Our
last caller. Hello, Russia. You'll note that Russia threatens nuclear war any
time it doesn't get what it wants. And if we want to de-escalate the risk of
nuclear war, we have to see the defeat and overthrow of the Russian military and
the Russian regime. For 20 years now, Russia has been threatening the West with
nuclear weapons. I mean, you go back and look at the Chechen War, you go back,
you go back before Putin, you look at the annexation of parts of Georgia in
2008, they were threatening nuclear war. You look at 2014, the Russians were
threatening nuclear war. They threatened nuclear war if any of the so-called
annexed territories were retaken by Ukraine. And places like Herr Sonne have
already been retaken de-occupated. I mean, it's a hell of a risk, isn't it? The
hell of a risk. What's the alternative? The alternative is that we allow Putin
to annex parts of Ukraine, which allows him to regroup, come back, take more of
Ukraine next, because he's made it very clear he doesn't stop at any point. And
in the end, what we run the risk of is basically descending into a world where
people who have nuclear weapons use them to blackmail other countries. We also
have nuclear weapons. I mean, you know, this is what people forget. We have
nuclear weapons, the Americans have nuclear weapons. Yes, I know. I mean, it's
all part of something that was called M.A.D. Mad, quite correctly, mutually
assured destruction. It is, but I think we should recognize that, you know, we
think Putin's playing some kind of 3D chess. He's playing poker and it's a
bluff. OK. And there is no way the Russians are going to resort to nuclear war
about this. All right, Hugh. Thank you very much. Let's say, you know, there was
one of the subjects brought up saying so many success stories of people hosting
Ukrainians in this country. But what about other refugees? Sandy's been in
touch. Why aren't we inviting British homeless people into our homes and hotels?
There are literally thousands of British homeless who need this help. What about
other refugees as well? I mean, that was the question asked on the program.
Stephen Marriot has called us from Wells. It says, Wells next to sea in Norfolk.
I don't know Wells next to sea, but welcome to you, Stephen. Hi. Hi. What do you
want to tell us? I want to tell you about two brothers whom I know. Their father
was doctor to the British Embassy in Kabul. He was refused an exit visa. The two
boys saw people starving, daughters being sold by their parents to save their
lives. The youngest one, who was 15, had 30 of his classmates in his year group
die of starvation. His father told the boys to go. They walked to Cali. They
could not get across legally. They are highly educated, trilingual, and very,
very respectable. Now, that's one point. That rather puts the kibosh on the idea
that we welcome refugees. Secondly, there's a great deal of nonsense talked
about economic migrants. Economic migrants need work. They've obviously got
skills, otherwise they wouldn't try to go somewhere where those skills could be
used. We have a labor shortage. If you allowed people who were economic migrants
to come to this country, be registered, pay tax, pay national insurance, and
therefore be obliged to be paid a fair wage, it would not undercut the British
workforce. Stephen, yeah. Sorry. No, no, no. You've been talking and
compellingly for a while. Let me just draw you back to Sandy's tweet, which I
just read, saying, look, what about British homeless people? What about putting
them in homes and hotels as well? And others saying, look, it's good to help,
but charity begins at home. It's an interesting point, but you have to remember
one that we are one world. We are all brothers. We are all responsible, one for
another. The government does not care a thing about the homeless, otherwise they
would do something. The problem is basically that we have a very callous
government. We have two home secretaries and we've had two prime ministers. So
would you let all refugees in? So Stephen, what would be the criteria? Just very
briefly, in one sentence, I really do mean one sentence because you've been on
for a decent amount of time and I'm glad to have you. In one sentence, who would
you say no to or would you say no to nobody? I would say no to anybody who could
be proven to be a probable security risk. But everybody else could. OK, listen,
I asked you a very clear question and you gave me a very clear answer. Stephen,
thank you. Tony says, no, most Brits really don't care that much about the
integrity of our borders, whatever that means. They care about being fair, as we
have always done. Eddie says, the Ukrainian support screen payments have
increased to £500 per month per family. Why doesn't the government support a
scheme to provide accommodation to all who need shelter? And Damsel says, I
think we have enough problems to sort out a home, we should be aware. Housing is
in short supply, we cannot feed and keep the world who wants to come here. OK,
food, food security, turnips, she shouts. Turnips, anyone seen a turnip lately?
Not to be heard for love nor money after the introduction of to raise coffee
saying we should eat turnips because there aren't that many lettuce, tomatoes
and cucumbers on the shelves at the moment. What is going on and how do we fix
this? Liz Webster calling from South Cotswolds. Hello. Hello, how are you doing?
I'm good, thank you, Liz. What did you want to tell us about this? Well, you
know, there's a lot of things going around wanting to protect certain people or
certain arguments. But the truth is this, you know, we've just been talking a
lot about Ukraine. The world is in a crisis and that is having a massive impact
on food globally. And the reason that we have more food shortages here than
anywhere else in European nations is because we're the only country that have
Brexit. And what we did was we snapped our food system with Brexit. And then
this government, instead of shoring up our domestic supply, it has actually
destroyed it or is working to destroy it. Food contraction here is food
production here is contracting. Well, is that to do? Well, hang on a minute.
Hang on a minute. Hang on a minute. What about to raise coffee saying this is
about, you know, this is about cold snaps in Europe. This is about a dry summer
in or a wet summer. I can't remember which one it is in Morocco. But you know,
this is what her phrase was. We can't control the weather. We can't control the
weather. Every year we have problems with the weather and we've never had
shortages like this in modern times. And the reason is, as I've said, is because
A, the world food system is under a lot of stress. But more than anything, it's
because producers over in Europe and processors don't want to send stuff to
Britain because of the red tape. It's a lot more expensive. Well, I mean, in a
lot of respects, the red tape hasn't yet kicked in. I'll just read you a bit
from the Guardian, OK? This is from the Guardian newspaper. Certain fresh
vegetables and fruits are hard to come by in the UK as a result of an
unfortunate combination of poor weather, reducing the harvest in Europe and
North Africa, as well as lower power supplies from the UK and Dutch producers,
which have been hit by a jump in energy bills used to heat glass houses. I mean,
the fact is, over a number of years, we've sort of developed this kind of
monoculture of doing one crop and relying on greenhouses. And now it's very
expensive to power those greenhouses, so we're not. Well, I mean, that's a bit
of a higgle-y-biddle-y mess you just said. Look, we have got a government that's
withdrawn food subsidies from farmers. So we were paid and incentivised to
produce food. This government don't want us to produce food any longer, and they
are paying farmers to plant flowers and go into rewilding schemes. And then
other things like the labour shortage, and yes, the extreme energy price rises,
have forced more contraction much, much quicker than we ever thought. So when
you look at food security, it's the same as, you know, you're talking about
nuclear war and nuclear weapons. You know, Brad the Meditator doesn't need to
nuke or bomb us if he can starve us. That was a major offensive in World War II.
Food security is mash-off security. OK, listen, it's a point well made, and
we've got three minutes left, and we've got at least triple that number of
callers just waiting to talk to us. Some importers have indeed been saying
actually the additional costs and bureaucracy created by Brexit have put the UK
at the back of the queue. As Liz has said, what do you think? 03700, 100, 444.
Why is this happening? David Hill, why are the shelves empty, David Hill,
according from Norfolk? I think it's pretty simple. At the moment, we're short
of tomatoes and things from the hot areas of Spain and Morocco because they had
very bad weather before Christmas and another dose of it after Christmas. They
don't have glass houses, they grow all theirs under poly houses, and so there's
no insulation. So when you lose an entire crop, it has a catastrophic effect.
We've also had difficulty in loading ferries because there's been very high
winds and actually getting ships in and out has been very difficult. So that's a
short-term problem. OK. But long term, longer term, the supermarkets are not
paying enough money to British farmers to produce a lot of the crops. We used to
produce vegetables for supermarkets and we got fed up with it. We didn't make
enough money out of it, so we've given it up. But a lot of people are now doing
the same thing. So it's no surprise to us at all that we're actually short of
green veg as well. OK. But nothing to do with Brexit, nothing to do with being
tangled in lots and lots of red tape or not being in the club and therefore not
being considered when the handouts are happening of... No. No, nothing to do.
OK. All right, listen, look, we've got one minute left. Let's go to... Oh, I see
what you're doing. OK. Killing us. Because there was only one panel member who
got this right and that was Darren and he raised the serious, terrifying issue
of food shortages that are not going to get any better because of the climate
crisis. And I think that's a very important question. And I think that's a very
important question. And I think that's a very important question. And I think
that's a very important question. And I think that's a very important question.
But I think that's a very important question because it's a very important
question because basically it's a very important question because it's a very
important question because we have to look at a number of different issues that
are not going to get any better because of the climate crisis. And nobody
mentioned the root cause of all this extreme weather, which is our continued
commitment to burning fossil fuels. So, it's climate change at the bottom of
this, which is an enormous topic that we will discuss. eating seasonal food like
turnips is 2023 with climate change. We're mad to keep contributing to the
problem. So agreeing with Fiona. And that's all from us. See you next week. Any
answers was presented by Anita Arndt. The producer was Dan Hardoon and the
studio engineers were Emma Hart and Duncan Hannant. Now on Radio 4, do you have
a habit of putting things off? If so, James Marriott has a seat saved for you at
his support group. It's time for one-to-one. Hello, I'm James Marriott, a
columnist at The Times. Every weekend I sit down to write a book. It's all I've
ever wanted to do. So naturally I start off bubbling over with enthusiasm. Oh
boy, I think. I'm going to write so many damn words this weekend. Then I open my
laptop and notice the first nauseous waves of fear, laziness, self-doubt, and
shame rippling across my soul. I get up and start faffing. Nothing exotic,
collecting all the stray bits of change that are lying around my room,
rearranging my bookshelves. Why am I procrastinating so much? Not just when it
comes to the book, but every week with the column two, faffing about making
pointless elaborate lunches when the deadline is flying towards me. When I'm
doing this, I always find myself thinking of the author Jeff Dyer. He wrote the
classic book about procrastination out of sheer rage. So when I wanted to speak
to a fellow sufferer, it had to be him. Hi, Jeff. Hello, James. Yeah, let's hope
we can use this as a therapy session. Are you really a procrastinator because
you have written a lot of books? Yes, but not pathologically so. I mean, I think
it's a basic condition of existence, really. But I think also it's worth
mentioning that there's procrastination and then there's rightily
procrastination. I think writing imposes particular demands on someone. And I
think one way we can think of it is contrast the writer with the musician. You
know, what does a musician want to do when he or she wakes up in the morning?
What's the first thing they want to do after they've brushed their teeth? They
want to play music. They can't wait to pick up the guitar or whatever it is and
play music. They love doing it. The thought of it doesn't fill them with dread
or horror, especially if they've got friends coming round to jam with, this kind
of stuff. The situation with a writer couldn't be more different, except for a
few very weird examples like Joyce Carol Oates or John Updike. Most writers wake
up in the morning intending to write and then will go to any lengths to put off
this thing, which as you rightly said, they were under the impression they were
looking forward to doing. And it's only when they've kind of exhausted all the
possibilities of further delay that they finally get around to it. And then
maybe after an hour of plodding and it's just dreadful, then maybe they ease
into that state of sort of cruise altitude, as it were, where they're quite
enjoying it. But the thing to emphasize is that that's the state that the
musician woke up in. I find that procrastination infects my entire life. So I'm
not just not writing a book. I sort of live in the ruins of this procrastinated
life overflowing wash baskets full of clothes. I've never got around to washing.
There's a really hideous situation with the bins at home at the moment, which
are just surrounded by fruit flies and overflowing rubbish bags. And everything
logical says that I should take the bins out, but I'm not doing it. And it all
seems to sort of be this enveloping problem that maybe is most acute in my
writing, but it's part of everything else as well. Do you find that your
procrastination is solely a writing thing or does it infect the rest of your
life? Well, it's funny that situation you've described because I'd have thought
that as a writing procrastinator, you would have like me a scrupulously clean
kitchen because putting out the garbage, doing the laundry, doing any kind of
cleaning is exactly the kind of thing that I do as a way of putting off writing.
So, funny enough, those kinds of things which you're saying are part of this
existential procrastination don't afflict me. I mean, the more horrific the
task, the more eager I am to get it over with. And actually, because I'm a
chronically lazy person, that's actually always served as an incentive for me
getting things done. So, for example, I can remember that in geography A level
or something, the teacher would, on the last day of class before the Christmas
holidays, he'd assign us homework, an essay, to do over the Christmas holidays.
And I would always do that on the Saturday immediately after term ended on the
Friday, not because I was diligent or a swat or anything like that, but because
I couldn't bear the horror of that hanging over me. But I think you are a swat.
I think there's a real sort of people who think they're lazy but then actually
display behaviours that are the opposite of lazy, like writing essays
immediately and producing many books. The one thing that I can't ever face doing
is my tax return, which is just so boring and quite complicated, because I don't
keep receipts in order, all this kind of stuff. So that's just too dreadful to
contemplate. But it's not that when I'm not doing that, I'm having a nice time.
At some level, all that procrastination is often very fretful. Do you think the
problem of procrastination is solely laziness? Because for me, I always think
it's kind of bound up with fear a lot. I sit on my bed with my laptop every
Saturday and I kind of look at it and I literally feel scared of it. I can feel
slightly sick. I can feel my heart rate going up. Then I open it and opening the
Google Doc is the next stage of fear. And then actually looking at the stuff
that I've written last time also fills me with fear. I think it's perhaps the
potential discovery that what I've written is a load of nonsense. Is
procrastination for you fear as well? Oh, yes. I mean, I think it's more than
fear. It's dread, actually. But I think also there's a problem contained in that
phrase when you say you opened your laptop and you're so young, you'll probably
never experience this. But there was a time when opening my laptop meant just
one thing, writing. So in a weird way, by opening the laptop, I was kind of
ready to go. Whereas now, as we know, opening the laptop is a portal to, well, I
mean, just a thousand million years of potential distraction as you can watch
every film ever made, all sorts of crazy stuff on YouTube. So I think that thing
of being able to compartmentalise your life is increasingly difficult when we've
got this kind of huge reservoir of serial distraction built into what used to be
the prelude to a working day. Yeah. And I've ended up in this absurd situation
where I feel like I've owed a certain amount of distraction. So I'll open my
laptop and think, well, of course you have to spend 15 minutes, becomes half an
hour on Twitter because you've got to get it out of your system, you sort of
deserve it. And when you've done all that, then you can start writing. But then,
of course, I never start writing. I wonder if the solution is just to disconnect
from the internet. Is that what you do? Well, one thing I do have in my favour
is I'm not on any social media at all. So that area of temptation is removed.
But I've heard from people who've used that app or whatever it's called, called
Freedom, whereby you can't get on the internet. A lot of people then spend half
the day trying to find the code to crack that thing as they're desperate to get
back on it. But there's so many things. There's kind of laziness, distraction,
all this kind of thing. But a more serious level when you're writing a book,
you're always trying to work out, is this the moment? Is this the right moment
for me to write this book? So say for someone like Clint Eastwood, when he
optioned that film, the script, Unforgiven, he knew he was going to have to wait
till he physically aged another 10 years before it was right for him. But with a
book, you're not sure. And then quite often, you can think, OK, I need to wait
until this has happened or until I've done this and that aspect of the research.
So you wait. And then you can find in that awful way that, oh, actually, I
shouldn't have waited because the bus that I thought was going to come by
actually went by without my realising it several years previously. So in fact, I
think the life of the procrastinator is actually anything but relaxing. It's to
exist in a state of constant decision making and recalibration, a form of
actually highly inefficient torment. I think the moment of exquisite discomfort
comes at the end of the day when you've done nothing. And you can remember what
it felt like at 9am in the morning when you woke up and you were going to do
everything. And all that hope has just vanished. And you're sitting at the edge
of your bed thinking, well, maybe I'll just go and have a drink now, but I
didn't really feel like I've earned it. And everything just sort of feels
disconstant and wasted. Do you feel like self-hatred is a big part of it for
you? Oh, yes. I'm very familiar with that feeling of having accomplished nothing
in a day, so around about 5 o'clock. It's terrible on a Monday, worse on a
Tuesday. If you get to day three, Wednesday, that's really bad. But the very
worst feeling is when you get to 5 o'clock on a Friday and you've accomplished
nothing in the whole week. On the other hand, it can happen that having
squandered most of the day by 5 o'clock, if you know you've got to go out at
about 6.30, so 15 minutes to have a shower or whatever, that last hour can
become quite extraordinarily productive. So as Nietzsche says somewhere, you
know, if you've got a lot to put in it, the day has many pockets. When you have
had a productive week, however we define it, on a Friday evening when you've
managed to produce something, and ideally you've earned some money as well,
well, that's a great feeling, and you feel that you can then join the rest of
the hordes of the city as they make their way to the numerous sort of boozers
across town. So sometimes I think that thing of having an endless expanse of
time is not a good thing, even though, of course, everyone thinks time is
exactly what you need to be a writer. Sometimes having some pressure on your
time is a very good thing, which is why actually a lot of writers appreciate a
deadline. I mean, my thing with that is the opposite. I have such a horror of
deadlines that I never want to know what they are. And I remember one time with
a book which I was contracted to write, I was so frightened of the deadline.
Anyway, I didn't want to know when it was, and I dutifully handed in the book,
and my agent said, oh, wow, this is the first time anyone's ever handed in a
book six months early. You're proving yourself the absolute opposite of a lazy
procrastinator. We're going to have to fire you from the programme because
you're doing everything early. Well, laziness and procrastination are really not
the same. I mean, procrastination is really, it's a kind of, not a full-time
job, but it's a very full-time existence, I think, especially if, and this is
certainly in my case, if I was asked instinctively what, I know what
procrastination is, but my instinctive response would be, oh, it's indecision.
And for me, procrastination is so closely bound up with chronic indecision. So
it's not just putting things off, it's thinking, oh, should I be doing this
rather than that? I completely agree. And that really puts a finger on something
that I always feel, which is, I think, perhaps the dominant note of my awful
periods of procrastination is, oh, God, you should be doing something else with
the book. And I think it's the indecision that always gets me, which is why,
with deadlines, I sort of just do them. And I'm grateful for a deadline because
someone told me they want me to do it, there's no wriggle room, there's no
option. I can't doubt myself because if I start doubting whether I'm going to
write a different column to the one The Times has told me I'm going to write
this week, then I've sort of finished my career. Yes, it concentrates the mind
wonderfully, doesn't it? One thing I always comfort myself with when I'm
procrastinating is that maybe it's a form of perfectionism and that by examining
the thing I'm trying to write from a thousand different anxious angles, I will
discover every single possible form with it. And when I eventually come to write
it, it will actually be a masterpiece because I've absorbed every possible
criticism that could be made of the project. Do you think we can comfort
ourselves with the idea that we're in a long line of accomplished writers or
artists or journalists who have been procrastinators? Or do you think the
tendency among people who really achieve stuff is that they just get on with it?
My answer to that, unfortunately, is the most boring one. It depends. But
certainly, yeah, you can feel yourself in the long tradition of people embarking
on works that are going to be so great they'll never be completed. So yes,
you'll be firmly in the tradition of Dorothea's husband, Casa Bon, in middle
march with his key to all mythologies. Yes, I mean, we're all prone to the Dylan
song. When I paint my masterpiece, you know, the idea that everything will be,
everything will be redeemed by this great work. But I think one of the other
problems with writing is that although I know there are writers who sort of plan
out their books in advance, writing is such a trial and error type business that
you just, you have to go about it in this sort of highly inefficient way. So is
it going to work better in the first or third person? Well, you can't work that
out in advance. The only way you can adequately resolve that question is by
writing it in the first person and the third person, and then you'll go for the
least worst option. Thank you so much for talking to us. Right, that's the self-
indulgent bit over. In the next episode of One to One, I'll be trying to find
out why deadlines freak out some people more than others and whether there can
ever be a cure for procrastination. One to One was produced by Beth Segar
Fenton. The editor was Chris Ledgart. In a few minutes after the news, we'll be
setting sail for the High Arctic with a story about searching for inspiration
and healing in the polar twilight. Voices From the End of the World is our drama
documentary this afternoon. And then coming up a little later on, we'll join
Hayley Hassell. On Weekend Woman's Hour this afternoon, we'll hear from a woman
who had to go to her GP and the hospital three times before being diagnosed with
incurable breast cancer. I kind of have made my decision to leave the GP
practise that I was at that misdiagnosed me. And now I've found my voice and if
anything presents or I find that my treatment isn't how I expect it to be, I
will speak up about it now. You can hear why black women in England are more at
risk of getting a late cancer diagnosis and what needs to be done to change
that.