TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT. Hello and Namaste. I'm Divina Gupta and this is Business
Matters on the BBC World Service. Today we are live in Australia and the US to
talk about business stories shaping your world. So coming up as US President Joe
Biden visits Kiev and promises more military and financial aid we take a look at
the cost of this Russia-Ukraine conflict to America and the world. And would you
fancy paying for a blue badge for your insta or facebook account? Tech
billionaire Mark Zuckerberg is betting that you would. But does this mean the
end for social media free business model? We talk about it all on Business
Matters here on the BBC but first the latest news. I'm Stuart McIntosh with the
BBC News. Hello. President Volodymya Zelensky has said a world order based on
rules and humanity depends on how events play out in Ukraine. Speaking after
President Biden made an unannounced visit to Kiev, he said Ukraine's victory
over Russia depended on resolve and he saw such determination in Mr Biden. For
his part Mr Biden said America would back Ukraine for as long as it took. Nomia
Iqbal in Washington has more on the President's visit. He and his Democratic
party want this to be seen as a great presidential moment of global leadership
and strength. It's a trip that sends a strong message to Moscow but also to
China which has been accused of supporting Putin. Mr Biden's words that the
United States will stand with Ukraine for as long as it takes continue to be
fully in line with public opinion here. But there is some resistance among
Republican politicians who are increasingly opposing continued aid to Ukraine.
Rescue services in Turkey are once again searching for people trapped under
rubble after a new tremor in the southeast. It's the same region where 46,000
people were killed two weeks ago by a much larger earthquake. Laura Bicker is
Antakya. A number of mayors from throughout the province here in Hatay are
calling for urgent help. They're asking for tents. They say more and more people
are now needing to be out of any of the damaged buildings and into tents. Others
really feel that this is a place they no longer want to call home. Tens of
thousands of people are thought to have died here in Hatay province and I think
it's a reminder again tonight that this is an earthquake zone and one they don't
feel safe in. Protesters have attempted to break through barricades in front of
the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, as MPs debate a controversial judicial
reform bill proposed by the far right-backed government. The proposed
legislation would allow the government more say over judicial appointments. Tom
Bateman is in Jerusalem. The reason there has been so much debates and
passionate argument and protest around all of this is simply the number of
Israelis that believe that the proposed changes by Israel's new right-wing
religious and nationalist government cut to the core of Israel's identity as a
democratic country. They think that the changes will effectively abolish the
checks and balances that the legal system provides against a government running
roughshod and doing whatever it wants without any oversight from the courts. The
army in Burkina Faso now says more than 50 soldiers were killed in an attack by
presumed Islamists in the north on Friday. The military had said earlier eight
had died in what it described as intense fighting in Udalan province. This is
the world news from the BBC. The number of people killed by flash floods and
landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Rescuers are searching the
mud and rubble for survivors after record rainfall devastated a stretch of coast
in Sao Paulo state. President Lula da Silva visited the worst hit area around
the beach city of São Sebastião to promise government support for
reconstruction. The storms struck as Brazilians were celebrating carnival. A
stroke survivor partially paralysed on her left side has been able to move her
hand and arm for the first time in a decade following spinal cord stimulation.
US researchers used new technology to stimulate Heather Renducley's spinal cord
in the neck area, enabling her to fully open and close her fist, lift and move a
can of soup and even cut a piece of steak. Dr Marco Capogrosso led the study.
Our patients recover but they don't become completely normal. So now they can
actually use their arm even if not perfectly. That means that they can recover a
lot of independence and a lot of quality of life just because they can use their
arm and hand now. The researchers say the procedure involves implanting a pair
of thin metal electrodes along the neck to engage intact nerve cells.
Prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges against the
Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting with a live gun on a
film set in 2021. It means that Mr Baldwin and the film's armourer will face a
maximum 18 month prison sentence if convicted rather than a minimum of five
years. Botswana says it's seen a big jump in rhino poaching. The tourism
minister, Filida Karang, told parliament that 138 rhinos were killed over the
past five years, though numbers dropped sharply last year. Official figures say
just two animals were poached in the five years to 2017. BBC News. World. So
thank you for your company at this hour. It's almost 105 GMT with me in the
gallery. Our Hannah, Alex, Louise and Solmaz. So give us a shout and wherever
you are in the world, do drop in a hi and tell us what you would like us to talk
about at world.business at bbc.co.uk. You can also listen to us on podcast. Just
search for business matters wherever you get your podcast from. And here's
what's coming up on the show. It's met us verified gamble as the company plans
to launch subscription service for Facebook and Instagram. Is it the end for
free for all and all for free business model for the app? Well, as you think
about it, there's another story that we have from Nigeria. I was scared. I was,
you know, there was a lot of trepidation coming with it, but I was confident in
my skill and I was fortunate with God on my side. I got a job in my field. Why
are so many young professionals leaving Africa's largest economy? We hear more
from these youngsters in a bit, but let's get our guests in from Australia. We
have Karen Percy, senior freelance reporter of joining us from Melbourne. Hi,
Karen. How are you? Hello, there. Really nice to speak with you, Karen. Let's
get our next guest. We have Peter Maurisi, economist at the University of
Maryland, joining us from the US. Hello, Peter. Hello. Nice to be with you both.
Well, nice to be with you both as well. And I'm here joining you guys from the
UK in Salford. And it's also an interesting week, Karen and Peter, because it
would be one week of Russia's invasion in Ukraine. And we would be talking about
this more later in the week. But just as we start this week, I was thinking
about the time what I was doing last year, this time. And I was in Delhi in
India, just going out and doing normal things. And suddenly this news comes in
and which shook us all by surprise. What were you doing, Karen, last year this
week? Yeah. Yeah, I was in Sydney. I was I sit on the board of the Walkley
Foundation, which is an Australian organization for excellence in journalism. We
were a day out from our big awards. So we were having a board meeting. And I
have a great interest in Russia having lived there and have friends there. And
my husband was a correspondent there. So I was sort of watching in the weeks,
months ahead anyway, but still quite shocked. And and we did at our awards
ceremony, paid tribute to our Ukrainian colleagues in particular, because, you
know, reporting in a war situation is so very, very difficult. So I do remember
hearing during that meeting when that invasion had been announced. And of
course, the life has not been the same for tens of thousands of Ukrainians
who've been facing this aggression. But Peter, what were you doing last year
this time? Well, I was trying to figure out the economic consequences of an
invasion because our president was predicting our intelligence people were
predicting it was going to happen, that the Russians weren't bluffing. And so I
was busy, you know, I write a weekly column for the Washington Times, another
one for Dow Jones. And I was really trying to figure out what it would mean in
terms of agricultural products, fertilizer, oil, all that kind of business. And
the world has seen a lot of that unfold in the past one year. So let's start
this conversation with what's happened in Kiev today. And this is where it
started. Well, that was a sound that greeted US President Joe Biden on Monday as
he left Saint Michael's Cathedral in central Kiev earlier today. He had visited
the place. And as the air sirens were sounding, that was how the situation is in
Ukraine right now. Still very much the Russian aggression continues there.
President Biden rode for 10 hours by train from the Polish border to arrive in
Kiev to meet Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky. He was wearing a blue tie
with yellow stripes, which are also colors of the Ukraine flag as the country
sees one year anniversary of the war with Russia this week. And US President Joe
Biden made sure that his message was clear. Later this week, we will announce
additional sanctions against elites and companies that are trying to evade
sanctions and backfill Russia's war machine. And thanks to a bipartisan support
in Congress, this week we're delivering billions in direct budgetary support.
Putin's war conquest is failing. Russia's military has lost half its territory
it once occupied. Young, talented Russians are fleeing by the tens of thousands.
Putin thought Ukraine was weak, and the West was divided. As you know, Mr.
President, I said to you in the beginning, he's counting on us not sticking
together. And one year later, the evidence is right here in this room. We stand
here together. Well, yes, President Joe Biden has also promised $500 million in
military aid to Ukraine, including artillery, ammunition, howitzers, and he
joins this with nearly $30 billion worth of aid that the country has already
given to Ukraine since February 2022. Earlier, I spoke with Mark Kancian, a
former US colonel who oversaw budgets at the Pentagon. He's now with the Center
for Strategic and International Studies to talk about what does it mean for
Ukraine's economy and what does it mean for America's economy? Many people focus
on advanced weapons, but it's important to keep in mind that there are no silver
bullets in this war. There's no single weapon that we can give Ukraine that will
bring victory. Victory will come from the cumulative military capability from
weapons and equipment to training that's provided to Ukrainians and the morale
of the Ukrainian people. What has been provided is the kind of things that the
Ukrainian military needs to continue its resistance, ammunition, anti-tank
weapons. This allows them to keep going for another couple weeks. Well,
President Biden said that America will back Ukraine and its fight against Russia
for as long as it takes. Now, how long can the US government realistically send
this level of support? We're talking about billions of dollars, which is also
costing America. Well, there's no question that the war is expensive over the
course of a year. It was about $70 billion, including the humanitarian and
economic aid. But you have to keep in mind that the US military budget is about
$800 billion, so it's not even 10% of the military budget. In theory, the aid to
go on forever. Many people have pointed out that there is some opposition
rising, both from the progressive left and the populist right. So far, they
haven't had enough numbers to change the aid package. What will be important
will be Ukraine's ability to show success on the battlefield. Everyone expects
them to launch an offensive leader in the spring. If that offensive is able to
gain some territory, I think that the supporters will be heartened and be
willing to continue the aid. If the offensive fails, and it looks like this
fighting's going to go on on the same line month after month, I think that the
prospect of a forever war will be very disturbing. There have been calls from
political spectrum about the accountability as well, over where this assistance
is going. Yes. So far, there hasn't been any indication that assistance has been
diverted, but that is a great fear. There's a lot of money, a lot of weapons.
The United States has stood up some oversight efforts, but I think that there'll
be a push to increase those. Nothing would be more damaging to the bipartisan
consensus for aid than to see some of it diverted and some of the weapons going
where they shouldn't. That was Mark Kansi and a former US colonel talking about
the aid that's been promised by the US to Ukraine, but we still have Peter and
Karen with us. So Peter, first up with you, we're talking about billions of
dollars of aid, which has already been given to Ukraine and much more will be
needed, as Mark was pointing out. It also needs diplomacy so that there could be
solutions to this invasion as well. But for now, what you were talking about
last year, the impact of this war on global economy, where do you stand today?
Well, it certainly has had a terrible impact on agricultural prices and on the
availability of food, especially in the third world. I don't know how much
longer the Ukraine can withstand, and not its army, but its domestic economy and
its people, the kind of bombardment that's been taken. My feeling is that we
give them a great deal of aid, but it brings the war to a stalemate. The West is
afraid that if the Ukrainians can strike at Russia the way Russia is striking at
the Ukraine, for example, we gave them missiles to hit their depots, to frankly
assassinate generals behind the border and so forth, that this would bring about
a war, a widespread war in Europe. And in some ways, Putin is holding President
Biden and the West hostage. My feeling is that to win the war, we're going to
have to give the Ukrainians a freer hand. We're going to have to give them the
aircraft that they want, the missiles that they need, and so forth. The kind of
aid we have given them so far just permits them to hold the Russians at bay,
because there's so many of them. There's so many more Russians. Karan, where do
you stand on this? Because obviously, there are two schools of thoughts that
only military aid will not help, and the second is that there has to be
diplomatic solutions as well. But seeing it from Australia and also from Asia, I
would say, for a larger part of the world, this war is Europe's war. Do you see
this as a war in which you do see global stakeholders coming together, taking
sides? I think there's been obviously a degree of coordination and unity and
cohesion on what the response should be, but I think we've also seen that kind
of taper away or breakaways over the past year. Australia has put in something
in the order of $450 million US dollars between these Bushmaster crafts that
we've sent, howitzers, drones, etc. Some training. We've got some of our
military in Ukraine training offices. But I think that there's definitely a
wavering whether this Biden visit and, let's face it, we've got to hear from
Vladimir Putin soon. He's expected to give a speech in the next little while,
and he's going to be saying something about this. So that may kind of set the
tone as to what is next, because this is clearly a very big signal that the US
is not afraid, that Kyiv is safe. So there are so many messages coming out of
Biden's vision. But to Peter's point, agriculture has been affected
dramatically. Supply of some foods, availability, etc. The Australian wheat
market had a bumper year last year because of the sanctions against Russia, but
also the problems with Ukraine getting its crop out. One of our biggest
companies, GrainCorp, is having its second biggest year. It'll have a net profit
of $140 million. That's despite significant logistical internal issues with
floods and roads and problems within Australia. So it's complicated. We've still
got obviously the issues with oil and gas. Australia is now selling more gas to
Europe, but that's putting pressure on prices. Australian politicians are trying
to ensure that that doesn't happen here. And of course, across the region, as
Asia Pacific, you've got demands on fertilizer and the inputs for the food they
eat. So it's quite complicated. And I guess I'm watching for what Vladimir Putin
is going to say as to where this goes and how much longer this goes on. But I
don't imagine diplomacy is going to work. But I also feel that an escalation of
military activity isn't helpful either. So it's really a difficult one. And of
course, sanctions have been part of a way of putting pressure on Russia as well.
Today, US President Joe Biden said there would be more sanctions against the
country, but he stopped short of telling and spelling them out for now. Earlier
last week, the European Union said that they would be putting the 10th round of
sanctions in place against Russia. And Peter, how far do these economic
sanctions then work? Because Russia's official figures for economy were released
today. And it seems that the Russian economy has contracted by 2.2 percent
versus last year. And this actually is not that bad compared to what analysts
had projected just this time last year when things had started to unravel, that
if the West steps in, if there are more sanctions, Russia's economy would
cripple. Well, the basic problem is that the sanctions may affect Russia in the
long run because of brain drain and people leaving and so forth. But in the near
term, Putin has managed to get his economy organized on a wartime basis. That is
really not all that bad, in the sense that he's not going to get a backlash at
home. I mean, let's face it, 2 percent of GDP, Britain suffering worse than that
because of Brexit. The West seems to think that sanctions are the bullet that
will make the difference, and they won't. The war has to be won on the
battlefield. And I think that we've become too enamored with the notion that
sanctions will solve the problem. The only way to defeat the Russian army is to
defeat the Russian army. Wars are fought in the present tense. And in the
present tense, I mean, those are your views. Here's a bigger question also,
Karen, because you have China's top diplomat, Wang Yi, who would be reportedly
meeting President Vladimir Putin this week. So it talks about China's now direct
involvement. It has stayed away, but it is not condemned Russia directly till
now. But this is the first time that you have Chinese official meeting Vladimir
Putin since the start of invasion from last year. And that goes on to say that
there are higher stakes. Absolutely. And that's a very clear message that's
being said by China as well. And everybody's nervous about China on lots and
lots of levels. But again, I think we need to, I guess, see what happens. You
know, sure, the sanctions in reality for those who've been targeted by them are
an irritation. They're an annoyance for oligarchs. And I think Peter is
absolutely right. Russians in the main, their lives have been affected. But the
one constant in Russia has been changed. They are adaptive. They are resilient.
They'll just kind of go, oh, can't get that in the supermarket. I'll just do
something else. So I do think that, like I say, I'm going to be watching what
Vladimir Putin says more so than the external factors. I think China coming in
is very, very important. And there'll be lots of people who'll be able to read
the tea leaves on that. But I think this immediate, it's not a provocation
exactly, but it's not designed to calm the waters either with Biden in keeps. So
I think the next little while will tell us more than perhaps this China meeting.
Well, this continues to be a top story. Well, Peter, I have to say this
continues to be a top story on BBC dot com. And you can read more about that
because I want to get into our next conversation. Just change the gear a little
bit here and talk about social media giant meta, which owns Facebook and
Instagram and has unveiled its latest feature for users. And it looks remarkably
familiar. The new subscription service called meta verified allows users to pay
between 12 and 15 dollars a month to have a blue tick next to their name. A lot
of people are calling it a badge as well. And it echoes sort of the rollout,
which is similar scheme to Twitter shortly after must take over as well. So I
want to actually get your thoughts on this, Peter, because blue badge, how would
you want to pay for something like this on Facebook and Instagram? I think that
organizations will pay for it. For example, if you work for a newspaper, the
newspaper will pay for it because the idea of verifying who you are is important
and that it'll provide that service. But for the vast majority of users, this is
going to be a nuisance. Simply already Facebook is prioritizing posters that it
promotes, that paid to be promoted and so forth above your followers. And I run
into that in Twitter. I mean, I log on to Twitter and I get a bunch of promoted
posts as opposed to the people I'm following. What this tends to do is to
discourage usage. So what they might gain on the one hand through subscriptions,
they're going to lose on the other through advertising buttons because people
will log on less. This idea that they always have to constantly grow. Facebook's
a successful business, but it can't grow indefinitely. It's kind of reached its
limits. Twitter's not successful, loses money and probably will go out of
existence at some point. But Instagram, and it's doing pretty well if you look
at the reels and the short videos, of course, meta overall is trying to get that
lost revenue back from ad spending. But Karen, in your view, because this
service is being rolled out in Australia and New Zealand for now, are there many
takers for these kind of paid subscription badges which also promise some
exclusive stickers, some more access for the story and reels? Not that I'm
seeing, and that's just anecdotal. And look, you know, I think to Peter's point
about news organizations, well, a lot of our news organizations have actually
really pulled back from social media more generally, just because it's so hard
to predict. Once upon a time, you can actually rely on the data that came out of
the clicks and the links, etc. And that's not so much the case. I think one
thing that's also really worth noting in the Australian context is that for
decades Australians resisted the idea of cable television. We had a very
thriving free to air so-called network where you didn't have to pay for it, or
you did through your taxes or your, you know, the advertising costs for, you
know, the goods that you bought. So Australians have been pretty slow to adapt
to that, but now they're very big on streaming. But they're also, every
Australian I know is juggling their streaming services. They'll go to Apple at
one stage when they know there's something they want offered. They'll shut that
down for a bit. So they're actually managing this. $12 on the web and $15 on
your phone. A, I don't know how you differentiate because I constantly go
between the two. That struck me as well. Why would you have, yeah, why are the
mobile prices higher than the web? I mean, I couldn't figure that out as well.
Peter, do you have any thoughts on that? You know, I really don't know why that
would be. Other than the fact that with the mobiles, they have to pay the store
some money. And so they're basically saying that if you do it through iPhone,
we're going to make you pay the fee that part of the fee that iPhone is charging
us. That's the only thing I can figure. When you sign up on your computer, they
don't have a middleman. Two, but, Garen, I don't know why the people have to- A
couple of years ago. Yeah, go for it. Australians remember a couple of years ago
when our government was talking about this mandatory bargaining code, making
Google and Facebook in particular pay for news content because they've taken
away so much advertising revenue from our traditional media organisations.
Facebook shut down news sites and the fallout of that was in fact, health
services, local community groups also got shut down. So, Australians kind of had
this idea of Facebook that it's a bit of a bully and a threat. And I'm seeing a
drop in functionality and I'm seeing a drop in certainly engagement. And I agree
with Peter, I'm seeing on both Twitter and Facebook much more promoted stuff.
And the stuff that's promoted on Twitter once upon a time was at least, I would
have called a quality advertiser. Now it feels like it's almost fungal to- But
to be fair enough, Garen, you'll see that there's a different age group. There's
a different age of age group as well. The demographic of FBE and Instagram and
Twitter, they're all different age groups, aren't they? But I think that's very
true. Sorry, so Peter, you should, I've been dominating. You should come on in
on this one. We have 10 seconds each for both of you. But go for it, Peter and
Garen. By service. Facebook is for older people. Okay, Garen, older people,
Facebook and gender and stuff. Is that how the day of- That's right. Except that
Instagram and chasing young people and predicting them is a mug's game. They
change their mind as soon as they're somewhere. I'd be very mindful of
predicting too much on young people. All right, but we can predict one thing.
Please do come back after this break and see you on the other side. This is the
BBC World Service with the first of two winning plays from the International
Radio Playwriting Competition. My play is an epic, Antarctic man on a mission
tale that takes us to a place we could not expect. Snow florries have the grace
of fairies. Small fairies become larger fairies. Dreaming with eyes wide open is
watching them today. Some are here, lest we forget. Wrapped up in fur, so thick
at a distance we look not like men, but- Haul, haul. What do we look like? Haul.
Ogres? Strange, fur covered snowmen? With that I can hear it again. The Snowman
at bbcworldservice.com You're listening to Business Matters from the BBC World
Service with me, Divina Gupta. Coming up in the next half hour from Nigeria, why
are so many young professionals leaving Africa's largest economy? And it's not
music to the ears for all the K-pop fans as there's a messy corporate battle for
control all about it after the latest world news. BBC News with Stuart McIntosh.
President Volodymyr Zelensky has said a world order based on rules and humanity
depends on the outcome of the conflict in Ukraine. After President Biden's
highly symbolic trip to Kiev, he said he'd seen Mr Biden's determination to
maintain US support in the fight against Russia. Rescue services in Turkey are
once again searching for people trapped under rubble by a new tremor in the
southeast near the border with Syria. This is the same region where 46,000
people were killed two weeks ago by a much larger earthquake. Three people have
died and 200 were injured. Israel's parliament has voted to continue a highly
controversial overhaul of the judicial system proposed by Benjamin Netanyahu's
religious nationalist government. The opposition has vowed to fight against it
after the bill was approved in a first reading. The number of people killed by
flash floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Record
rainfall has devastated a stretch of the coast in São Paulo State. There's been
an outcry in Colombia after a former member of the National Truth Commission
went into hiding after receiving death threats. Laina Palacios played a leading
role in the Commission's report on atrocities committed during the long internal
conflict. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over a botched order
for new commuter trains. They proved to be too wide to fit through non-standard
tunnels in the mountainous regions of Asturias and Cantabria. US prosecutors
have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges against the Hollywood actor
Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting on a film set in 2021. Mr Baldwin and
the film's armorer face a maximum of 18 months in prison if convicted and
Botswana says it's in a big jump in rhino poaching with 138 rhinos killed over
the past five years BBC News Hello and Namaste you with Business Matters I'm
Divina Gupta. It's a show where we connect with two guests from different
countries to talk about business stories that are shaping your world and today
we have guests from Australia and the US and we will be talking about why are
Nigeria's young skilled workers leaving the country also we'll be talking about
this It's one of the biggest corporate battles in the Korean entertainment
industry. We get to the details in a bit. We have Peter Maurice, economist at
the University of Maryland joining us from the US and Karen Percy, senior
freelance reporter joining us from Melbourne and we played this clip just a
while ago guys but Peter and Karen could you identify the songs there? Oh one
with Gangnam Style with Star but the other one I don't know. It's too recent for
me I don't know about you Peter. No I really can't help you on that I'm not into
that. So we guys had a bad internally here in the studio that you know how many
of these both the songs I mean if you'll be able to identify both the songs I'm
really happy Karen you understand the words in these pop songs as they go by.
This is exactly the demographics we were talking about earlier on the show Peter
so the younger crowd but anyways we get to that story in a bit. First up from
Africa's largest economy Nigeria now it's going to elections in just a couple of
days and one of the major issues that's affecting the country in recent times is
the mass exodus of young professionals who are now relocating abroad and this is
causing a severe brain drain and giving employers a nightmare. BBC's BC Atebayo
are some of those who have left the country why they took that step and here's
what she found. Nigeria home to over 200 million people with a young population
of over 70 percent a country regarded as Africa's most populous nation. At first
glance Nigeria has a lot going for it. Talk about a vibrant text scene a booming
entertainment sector a fashion and creative hub in Africa with a GDP of over 400
billion dollars but despite that millions of people are suffering from alien
infrastructure inequality and poverty and a high unemployment rate of more than
30 percent. This has forced many young professionals out of the country as they
seek better quality of life. They are primarily skilled youth including doctors
nurses IT engineers university lecturers and technicians and also journalists
like Victoria. It's this thing about Nigeria that just puts you in a box right
and so I wanted to get out there I wanted my kids especially to understand that
life can actually be different. She admits it wasn't easy to leave Lagos for
Regina in southern Canada but she feels she didn't have a choice. I was worried
I was scared I was you know I there was a lot of trepidation coming with it but
I was confident in my skill and I was fortunate with God on my side I got a job
in my field. Exact figures of Nigerians leaving the country is hard to come by
but data from the United Nations shows in 2020 there were 1.7 million
international migrants from the country and that's nearly doubled the number
from a decade earlier. Addition yes subtraction. One person who's getting ready
to pack her bags for the UK is Ola a school teacher in Lagos. Teaching is just
something easy for me I can work with children I it's fun working with them
really but because of the elimination aspect of it it's something good is not
really coming out of means you don't get paid well you don't really get all the
benefits you're supposed to get so why should I consider doing it I want to do
something new something that could change my status and make things better for
me. Now that's the view of some workers what about how this is affecting
employers a question I asked the director general of the Nigeria employers
consultative association Walis Mart. When you have the talent you know those you
call talent leaving your business in droves it compromises your ability to be
competitive it changes dynamics for an average business because those that can
or that could enhance your competitiveness they are living in droves leaving you
exposed and leaving you at the mercy of of so many so many dynamics that are not
within your control. He also told me his last three members of staff in seven
months and that the brain drain is causing a real challenge for recruiters when
it comes to finding the right person for the job. The conversation about our
employable are those that are left our employable are there that context will
come up and for those that have time unemployable you know also ask how how well
as the educational system and the colculum how well as it prepared them to be
competitive or to be employable so it's it's a mass of issues that underlines
the issue of people migrating out of the country. This is just a snapshot of the
issues affecting the jobs market in Nigeria but what would it take to persuade
those who have already left the country like Victoria or change the mind of
people like Olah who are getting set to leave. I don't know if a change in
leadership will be sufficient there has to be some drastic change in the whole
of Nigeria for me to want to go back. I want the economic situation of the
nation to be well ordered to be I and also the unrest that is everywhere that's
political unrest things have to be done about that. With the elections coming up
in a few days this is one of the big issues those who come to power will have to
deal with and it's one people like Victoria, Olah and Wale and so many Nigerians
in a similar situation will be keeping a close eye on. That was the BBC's BC
Adebayayo who was talking about the brain drain that's happening from Nigeria
and it is a global theme as well because Peter in the US it is a high level
country and high income country. You have people coming from all over the world
and I was going through the data of students who actually come to the US and
eventually settled there. India and China are among two top countries that
attract talent where talent is coming from in the US. Right we're getting talent
from all over the world because they come to my classroom was full of them and
that was great. They were wonderful students but Nigerians I have particular
experience with. We have a lot of Nigerians here in Washington and once they
come they may go home to visit but the economic opportunities here are so much
greater. For example as you folks know I do a lot of Fox TV and the driver they
send for me over these last 10 years is often a Nigerian. He's a very lovely
gentleman and he just makes enough money here that he can go home by a house and
what have you and he goes there on vacations and whatnot. The economic
opportunities here are much greater. Now I've also met others that have mid-
level skills not people that come to be students here but people that are
educated in Nigeria and for them often the skills are not as transferable. For
example if you're a financial analyst or what have you because the credentials
don't move so easily. The people that are most adaptable it seems are the lower
skilled workers and those that come here are students. Once they come the
opportunities here are just too much to bring them back. But do these skills
also translate into inclusive opportunities? Inclusive opportunities yeah I
think so. Washington is a very multicultural place whether we're talking about
gender or we're talking about race or ethnicity. There's a lot of opportunity in
this region for people. This is a very progressive area and I don't mean that in
terms of Democrats versus Republicans. I'm a conservative Republican and no I
think there is a lot of opportunity in that regard. Karen obviously high-income
countries attract more immigrants especially from countries with younger
population and when you see those skilled labor coming to Australia does it also
put pressure on resources within the country? That's been one of the biggest
debates. Yeah there's a lot of noise around that you know that it drives up
house prices that suddenly you can't you know drive on the highway and there's
no seats on the bus. But I've actually seen quite a bit of evidence research
saying that that's not so much the case. Certainly there can be pressures on
infrastructure but that's usually because governments have failed to actually
follow through on their promises to build new train stations or widen roads or
to actually build housing. We have a real issue here in Australia with Scott we
have some of the highest house prices on the planet relative to earnings because
of you know dysfunctional processes throughout our whole system. You know land
release corrupt processes etc. But there are real issues I think certainly in
the Asia Pacific region you know one of the most evident populations you see
across working outside of their country are the Filipinos. There are 250,000
Filipinos working in Australia. We see them in our health system in our aged
care and other caring sectors. You know the Philippines has anywhere from you
know 10 million plus people every year working overseas sending in remittances.
The Philippines economy would probably collapse without it but we are really
needing to be very mindful of yes in Australia we talk a lot about skilled
migrants but there is an impact that happens you know to those countries where
it's coming from. We only have a very small Nigerian population here and small
African diaspora more generally something in the order of 20,000 Nigerians. But
you know let's also think about Russia and Ukraine. Millions you know have left
Russia in the past year. They're middle class they're skilled you know opposing
Putin's war. Millions displaced in Ukraine who would love to go home but aren't
going to be in a position necessarily to do so for quite some time. So you know
that kind of problem comes from a lot of factors. But you know picking up on the
youth issue in Nigeria. I mean when you look at the age of some of those
election candidates and you know there's not a lot for young people. So I think
that there are systemic issues. There are blatant political issues involved but
we do as citizens of countries that benefit from the skills of others need to be
mindful of the impact it's having globally I think. Well yes go ahead Peter. The
other thing to remember is that Nigeria is an oil economy. Their oil production
is down considerably in recent years. But the problem with oil economies is they
don't create a lot of diversity in terms of opportunity. If you can connect it
to the oil sector it's great. Why is it that my driver can't earn the kind of
money that in Nigeria that he does here. Now part of it is level of development
but part of it also is that oil money does not tend to spread the way say
technology money does. And that's very unfortunate. You become captive of oil.
We call it the curse of oil in America. America well among economists. But if
you look at the Middle East countries as well the petrodollars is what's called
there the way which has fuel development. So of course it goes a lot deeper into
that. But I get the point what you were making Karen earlier as well about
younger Nigerians because 84 percent of them are under the age of 34. And that's
where the elections which will be around the corner now which are around the
corner now will determine the government that they choose which can lead to
those opportunities back home that Peter has been talking about. But looking at
Sydney now and this is a story that you actually shared with us Karen about
Sydney hosting World Pride 202 the biggest LGBTQ plus event in the world and
with more than 300 worldwide discourse and exhibits films and rallies and let's
take our audience to the place. I think that when people come to Oxford Street
they're walking into a history of like drag and queerness that has been
established for many many years and has a very unique Australian voice. So I'm
excited to people experience that and also the fabulous Indigenous culture that
we have. This is great not just for the people who are involved but it's great
for everyone in the community because it's going to support those little
businesses it's going to support the nighttime economy it's going to bring
people back to this iconic and amazing part of Sydney. There is no doubt that
this is a rainbow shot in the arm for the tourism industry. We could not be more
thrilled. All right rainbow shot in the arm well this year marks the 45th
anniversary of the first gay and lesbian Mardi Gras parade and the fifth year of
Australian marriage equality in the country. So Karen you've actually been there
as well and taken part in celebrations and you're planning to go again so I'm
truly jealous but tell us about the business of it and the fact that it's become
so big now. It has yes I was there at the weekend I had other business I was
there and some friends and I went out to a really fabulous live play a kind of
campy take on gentlemen's preferred blondes. It was really fabulous and a really
small theatre and you know it was you know Sydney was a wash with rainbow and we
were near Oxford Street where one of your earlier contributors talked about but
this is a very big event. The Mardi Gras parade itself has always been a great
tourist attraction for Sydney particularly in recent years it's televised you
know it's somewhat family friendly despite the fact that it can be quite risque
at times but world pride has kind of upped the ante like you say hundreds of
events this is expected to have in the order of 75 million dollars in economic
activity 80,000 people coming into the city and then hundreds of thousands of
locals also but and there's a real sense that you know now Australian it's
mainstream the lgbi tqai plus community you know it's now much more mainstream
than it was but some of those who go back to that first those first years they
call them the 1978s and that was a real protest movement it was actually you
know a protest to actually exist in the lives that they wanted to live you know
it started with 500 protesters in the heart of Sydney there was considerable
police backlash in fact violence a lot of those protesters ended up in prison so
there's a real question now about how commercialized it becomes that there is
still approaches there's still great discrimination for those communities but
there is no significant pink economy as well i mean the concept is from the 60s
in the u.s where it was seen that the lgbi tq plus community had more purchasing
power that's that's where the terminology pink economy is it a large pink
economy in Australia i think it has been but i think um now that you know same
sex marriage has been legislated i think you know you can't actually assume that
every um lgbi qa plus person is rich i think it used to be easier for rich
people to um you know live the lives that they live but i don't i think it's
hard to assume that everybody in those communities is rich and i think there's a
lot of evidence in Australia to prove that that's not that's not to say there
isn't this economy because there are events there are services there are all
manner of things that are catering to these communities um you know there's a
real concern though about rain rainbow washing if you like that some of the
communities that have been the most discriminating and the most harsh on the um
these communities the police some political parties some particular politicians
um even some corporates are now kind of you know putting their flag up their
rainbow colored flag but in fact they really haven't done um you know these
communities have you seen this feature as well rainbow washing the act of using
rainbow colors on everything that you would like to advertise apro accessories
landmarks yeah we have them all over the place but we also don't have rainbow
flags where things actually happen for example i was on the vestry of st john's
church in georgetown when we hired a uh a gay rector which is the head pastor
for people that don't don't aren't Anglicans or piscopelians uh and uh they're
pretty well represented the reason why the pink economy has so much purchasing
power is because they've done so well in the economy now what has changed is in
the old days we knew who they were but they had to be very discreet they were in
the closet so to speak but you knew who your friends were that were gay now you
can be openly gay and uh now it's not that way every place in the country but
it's that way in enough places in the country and in the places that matter new
york washington chicago los angel where there's money and opportunity that they
tend to you know gravitate towards those locations so you know in washington we
probably have a higher concentration of gays and and lesbians and so forth than
we would say in utah but there are a lot of opportunities here and uh you know
i've been uh connected with with folks from that community for about 35 years
now well estimates global estimators it's about four trillion dollar is the is
what uh pink economy generates each year globally and it's quite a bit of money
in fact so well i hope you have a great time karen when you go this weekend as
well and um enjoy the glamour the love and we need more of that in the world
isn't it well last i won't get to see me this weekend i might catch it in a
couple of weeks but this is the first year a sitting prime minister will attend
and walk in the mardi gras parade that's prime minister anthony albanese so
there's been huge evolution but there are certainly people who think the
revolution is not over yet well on that note let me take us take us through
another revolution and that one you were about to uh guess as well uh peter but
i think it was the call that got in the way you would have got the gangnam style
but let's talk about whether you're a fan of k-pop or not you will probably
recognize some of these songs all right we're talking about the korean pop songs
that have revolutionized the entertainment industry globally but now this
industry is seeing one of the hottest corporate takeover battle of the year sm
entertainment is one of the largest south korean entertainment companies which
has launched many k-pop stars and hype is known for the popular bts group from
south korea and now high wants to acquire majority shares in sm entertainment
they have the support of the company's founder but this move is being resisted
by other shareholders in the company including the management which wants to go
with another suitor and this is a complex battle that has been dominating k-pop
headlines k-pop fandom clubs and much more bernie cho is an is an industry
insider president of dfsb collective who has been following the skin leak the
battle royale between some of the titans of korea's music entertainment and
media industry really boils down to two words power and control now that in and
of itself is fine but where the problem started to arise was the fact that
although he wanted to unload all of his shares in sm entertainment he still
insisted on having power and control over sm entertainment as the chief producer
and as the chief creative and essentially as the chief officer and that was
something that rubbed a lot of people the wrong way and the current management
of sm entertainment in their sm 3.0 mission statement that they released on
youtube clearly stated they were moving towards a multi-label multi-producer
business model but made it clear that chairman lee was not to be part of this
new movement going forward that did not sit well with chairman lee and as a
result he turned around and sought investment from hype and so you have the
biggest music company in korea hype going head to head with the biggest tech
company cacao for the power the control of sm entertainment and hype many from
the global audience would know is actually behind the success of bts which is
the famous k-pop group could you tell us that what does this mean for a high for
many fans and even financial analysts they may see or know hype as purely a
music company the home to bts but the reality is is high is much more than that
high is not just only a music company but they've also emerged and evolved into
a tech company and so although a lot of observers are looking at this play for
sm entertainment and somehow away being an ip play or a content play or an
artist play it's actually much more than that it's really a tech play as well
and currently hype is making a very strong play a market leading play in both
fan community platforms and now in the web 3 metaverse and by virtue of making a
majority investments play for sm entertainment they're no longer going to be the
market leaders in web 2 web 3 platforms they're going to be the market standard
by taking on sm entertainment as part of the content portfolio they're looking
to consolidate in this k-pop web 2 web 3 space how are k-pop fans reacting to
this takeover battle globally not just financial analysts but more importantly
k-pop fans around the world are absolutely fixated on the drama that is
surrounding this battle for sm entertainment it seems to be lighting up twitter
and other social media platforms as to who's going to win who should win who's
at fault who's right but i think everybody whether it be fan or financial
analysts are looking forward towards march 6 which is when sm entertainment is
scheduled to have their shareholders meeting this is probably shaping up to be
the biggest korean tv drama that's not scripted well that was bernie chow
president of dfsb collective talking to us earlier but garen what's the k-pop
ball it seems to have so many fans around the world and it's traveled from south
korea globally um what's what's the attraction i think that you know it's a
distinctive sound but not too distinctive everything's kind of um like i the
equivalent was stock a stock ache and waterman when i was a young person
listening to you know and that was rick asley and that kind of thing they had
that kind of pop machine but it's nothing like this this kind of industry is now
on absolute steroids but you know there's a fabulous korean aesthetic you know
there it's pleasing to the eye it's pleasing pleasing to the ear are you going
to be listening back to this in 20 30 years time i don't know in the same way
that we all kind of go you know never going to give you up but having said that
the fact that i recognize sai maybe is undermining my own argument but um you
know they're pretty big here as well not as big as um you know i would have not
as big as elsewhere because we have a a smallish korean population and we're
actually quite insular despite being part of southeast asia but i can tell you
and i did have to google this blackpink is touring in june so take that pita all
right well pita have you have we managed to change your views just a minute at
least after the show please listen to one one kpop song i mean i i i've heard
the music it's just i'm not very very familiar with all the politics of it for
decades now soft rock has been very popular in america and this is soft rock
with an edge so it's it's kind of very generic in the sense that it appeals to a
lot i can see how it would appeal to a lot of people but as for this wrestling
of control we get this all the time you know no matter what we're talking about
it seems though the creators don't want to let go of control even when they sell
out for the money well that's all we have time on business matters thank you for
being with us this is the bbc world service with no place like nam on the 29th
of march 1973 all american forces will be withdrawn from south vietnam 50 years
later a small group of u.s veterans have returned to libda permanently we'll be
finding out why no place like nam saturday at 12 gmt in 30 minutes the
documentary what connects iceland and namibia two countries 10 000 kilometers
apart turns out one answer is fish i'm johannes del investigating how
journalists from two very different cultures work together to unearth an epic
corruption scandal