TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I want to meet you What words, wishes, and scenery Will make you smile and
happy? I don't have a map, but I'll walk and search I want to give it to you I
want to change the time and the path to you I want to give it to you I sent you
my bat number IWA I will introduce the contestant of the biggest festival in the
Japanese society, the cherry blossom festival. Please listen to the performance
of the contestant who represents Hawaii and aims to be a Japanese woman who
flies around the world. The sponsor of this program is Platina Sponsor JENKINS
Eye Care Gold Sponsor Dentist Richard Tamaru Valley of the Temples Silver
Sponsor H&H Wellness Alamoana Shopping Center Best Insurance Honolulu Realty
Yamamoto Drapery Sakura Matsuri Calendar Today, I will introduce three people.
The first person I will introduce is Kirsten Shiori Okuno. I will introduce her.
My name is Kirsten Shiori Okuno. I am 22 years old. I am currently working as a
medical scribe and medical assistant at Adventist Health Castle and will begin
my journey as a medical student this upcoming July. My name is Kirsten Shiori
Okuno. I am 22 years old. I am currently working as a medical assistant at
Adventist Health Castle. I will begin my medical studies this upcoming July. I
will introduce myself. My name is Kirsten Shiori Okuno. I am 22 years old. I am
currently working as a medical scribe and medical assistant at Adventist Health
Castle and will begin my journey as a medical student this upcoming July. So
when me and my two younger sisters came along, we began vocal lessons at a young
age and started performing alongside our parents on stage. Throughout my life,
this was a hobby that our family took part in together and something that really
bonded us as my sisters and I grew up. I will admit that I performed less on
stage as I went through high school, as I became busy in school, playing
volleyball and dancing hula. Then I went away for college and attended Creighton
University in Omaha, Nebraska to earn my Bachelor of Science in Biology and
apply to medical school. So truthfully, I do not perform on stage much at all
anymore, but looking back, singing certainly shaped the person that I am today
as someone who loves Japanese music and who is very close to her sisters and
parents today. We still love to sing and we do so a lot at home, especially on
Friday nights when we sing into our karaoke machine and compete with each other
to earn the highest score. I love singing Japanese songs as a second-grade
third-year student. When I was four years old, I sang a song called Yunohana
Kouta on a program called Utamatsuri, and that was my debut. Then I sang at
various cultural events for several years, and I participated in the junior
category for several years. That's what it means. When was that? I asked, how
many years ago? Kaizu? Maybe over 10 years ago. It was over 10 years ago. You're
22 years old now. Yes. My parents also met through karaoke. My mom was a
champion of the karaoke competition. My dad was a champion candidate. After my
two sisters were born, they sang at various awards and events. I took vocal
lessons when I was little, and sang Japanese songs on stage. My whole family
came to sing with me. It's been an important experience since I was little, and
it's become a part of me. But after I went to high school, I got busy with
schoolwork and studying, and I didn't sing as much as I used to because I played
volleyball and flam. And I got a bachelor's degree in biology at Omaha
University in Nebraska, and I prepared to enter the medical school, so I hardly
sang on stage. But I still love singing with my family, and we often compete at
home, karaoke, and everyone else on Friday nights. That's what I do. Let's hear
why you applied to Sakura Matsuri. I grew up knowing a little bit about the
Cherry Blossom Festival because I used to perform at public appearances that
used to be held at Marukai, and also performed for many years at the Hawaii
Japanese Culture Center. But I never actually considered being a contestant
myself until I happened to reconnect with a friend who was recently a
contestant, and she shared amazing stories about her experience in the festival.
I became really excited about the cultural classes, like learning martial arts
and pounding mochi, which were cultural practices that I have always wanted to
try, but never had the opportunity to. I thought about how I would never have
time off from school, like in this gap year, to try something new, and I knew
this window of opportunity would not last forever. So I decided that it was now
or never, and I sent my application in. I was very happy I did so because I was
going through the preliminary... Sorry, while I was going through the
preliminary application process, spending time with my grandmothers and my
family at home reminded me of all the cultural practices and traditions I loved
doing with my family growing up. I was very excited that if I was chosen as a
Queen contestant, I could feel reconnected with my upbringing and learn even
more about my Japanese heritage. I was very excited about experiencing this
journey with other women who also wanted to learn more about their Japanese
heritage because I really wanted to forge new and meaningful friendships,
especially since I had just moved back from home from the mainland, and I felt
like I was starting my life over in a new place. When my friend had mentioned
that this was a unique opportunity to grow personally and professionally, I saw
it as a great opportunity to push myself out of my comfort zone and prepare for
a career in medicine. I'm actually very shy and timid when it comes to public
speaking, and so I wanted to use this experience as a way to improve the way I
communicated, not only for my personal gain, but more so for the benefit of the
patients and families I would serve in the future as a physician. I was very
excited to think about participating in this competition. I had never taken a
long break from school, so I thought I would not be able to afford it for long,
and I thought I had to do it now, so I applied. While preparing for the
competition, I spent time with my grandparents and family, and I remembered that
I was doing music in my childhood traditions. If I were to be a Queen
contestant, I believe that being in the Under-15 group demands new thoughts and
new ways of thinking about life. I feel that each student has a카메리카 The proposed
nation plans to promote the work of Ufa school extremely quickly and then begins
the next phase of the project that has spent two decades in the Siyuan That
route is also a great opportunity for the future of the entire region I wanted
to learn about the roots of Japanese culture, and I thought that this would help
me build a good friendship. The last reason I joined was that I thought that if
I joined the Sakura Festival and grew, I would be able to help my medical
career. I was looking for opportunities to become a leader in high school and
college life, but I was actually very shy and didn't like to talk in front of
people, so I wanted to improve that. So this is a good opportunity. If I'm going
to do medical work, I have to be able to talk to people and answer them
positively. I heard that there was a class on how to talk and give
presentations, and I thought I would join it for the patients and families I
would meet at work. Now, let's hear what you're most interested in in Japanese
culture and customs. I would play Hanetsuki, which is a badminton-like game
where you use a wooden paddle called hagoita to hit a birdie. This is
traditionally a game that girls play on New Year's, but of course we included
our male cousins as well, and the games would get very competitive. We would be
red in the face with sweat in all of the family pictures we took at the end of
the night because of this, but it was so much fun. And then of course my
absolute favorite part of New Year's is enjoying all the delicious New Year's
food, some of my favorite being nishime, kimpira gobo, ozoni, makizushi,
kuromame, kombu maki, and of course mochi. Although we eat these foods each
year, I am embarrassed to say that I would not have the confidence to cook any
of these dishes on my own. I used to go over to my grandma's house to help tie
kombu and cut vegetables for the dishes, but the aji, or flavor, was always done
by my mother or grandmother. Now that I'm older, it is my goal to slowly learn
how to make each of these dishes so that I can cook for my own family in the
future and pass these recipes down to my own children. I would be so regretful
if I missed the opportunity to learn how to cook these dishes from my
grandmothers as these are family recipes that my two grandmothers brought with
them from Japan. So I think it's even more imperative that I learn these recipes
from them as soon as possible so that I can help pass on these traditions down
our family line. I like New Year's the most in Japanese culture. I get to meet
my grandparents, uncles, and aunts, and even my cousins. When I was little, my
mother's family spent New Year's Eve at my grandmother's house. My grandchildren
and I would eat dinner early and play a game similar to badminton, using wooden
paddles. Originally, it was a game that girls played on New Year's Eve, but of
course, boys and cousins also played. The competition was so intense that
everyone's faces turned red in the last photo we took together. It was so much
fun. And my other favorite New Year's dish is traditional Japanese food. I like
Nishime Kinpira-gorbo, Ozo-oni-maki-sushi, Kuro-mame-kobumaki, and mochi. I eat
them every year, but I'm not confident that I can cook them myself. I used to
tie and cut vegetables at my grandmother's house, but my grandmother and mother
did the seasoning part. I'm a grown-up now, so I'm going to learn the recipe
step by step and make it for my family and teach my children someday. How about
this recipe? It's a family recipe that my grandmothers brought from Japan. If
you don't remember it now, you'll regret it. I think it's important to learn as
soon as possible and inherit the tradition later. Now, please tell me what you
enjoyed and what you didn't like about the festival. What activity in the
festival have you enjoyed the most and the least so far? I really enjoyed taking
all of the different cultural classes, especially learning how to play taiko,
because this is a cultural practice that I've always wanted to try. As I
mentioned, I grew up singing on stage at various events, but my favorite
experience was performing every year in a show called Utamatsuri that featured
cultural performances including taiko, hanayagi dance, Japanese music, and live
singing by Japanese-American performers in Hawaii. Our last show was in 2016, so
it had been a while since I had last heard or saw a taiko performance. However,
when we had our first taiko class in January with Kenny Endo and Michiko, almost
immediately I was taken right back to our Utamatsuri show. It was such a
nostalgic feeling for me to feel the bass of the drums pounding in my chest
again, and I became very emotional. I feel so thankful that I have this
opportunity to learn how to play taiko after years of always wanting to learn
how to play. I will admit, though, that it was very challenging to learn at
first, and I was sore for the first couple weeks in using muscles I have never
used before, but the contestants and I have been working very hard for the last
month and a half to perfect this number, so I cannot wait for us to perform it
for all of our friends and family on Festival Ball Night, and I hope you are all
there to see the performance in person as well. As far as my least favorite
activity in the festival so far, there has not been a single experience that I
have disliked during my time as a contestant, so this is a very difficult
question. What I will say is that the most challenging of all of our experiences
has been answering our impromptu questions on stage at the various public
appearances we have had around the island. We did not know these questions
beforehand, so it was very difficult to prepare our answer prior to the moment
that we heard our question on stage. However, the communications classes that we
took with our coaches Will and Marissa were very helpful for me in practicing to
stay calm and compose, despite feeling scared or nervous on the inside. They
shared many wonderful tips and tools that has helped me to become a much more
confident speaker overall. My friends and family have even said how much of a
difference they see in my public speaking abilities from the start of the
festival to now. So for this, I want to say thank you to Will and Marissa for
helping me to come out of my shell and to bravely share my story with the public
at our appearances and events. I also want to say thank you to the HJJCC for
giving me the opportunity to have this growing experience as a Queen contestant
this year. I also want to say thank you to the HJJCC for giving me the
opportunity to have this growing experience as a Queen contestant this year. I
also want to say thank you to the HJJCC for giving me the opportunity to have
this growing experience as a Queen contestant this year. I was able to feel the
energy and passion of Taiko in my heart, and it was nostalgic and emotional. I
am very grateful for the opportunity to learn Taiko because it was an experience
I could not have had anywhere else. However, it was quite tough and I had severe
muscle pain for the first two weeks, but I was able to complete it in a month
and a half with the other candidates. I am looking forward to performing it at
the festival ball with my friends and family. I hope you all will come and see
it. I didn't have any experience that I was not good at, so it was difficult,
but the hardest part was that I had to answer questions that I wasn't prepared
for in interviews and in front of people. I didn't know what people would ask me
before I went on stage, so I wasn't prepared for the answers. However, the
communication class that Will and Marisa taught me was very helpful in teaching
me how to answer calmly even when I was nervous. I have become more confident in
the way I speak after receiving their advice. My friends and family told me that
I was good at speaking, so I really want to thank Will and Marisa. Thanks to
them, I was able to break my shell and speak in front of everyone. I would also
like to thank HJCC for giving me the opportunity to be a Queen candidate. Now,
please give a message to your family and friends. I never thought I would have
the chance to be in a cultural pageant like the Cherry Blossom Festival, but
when I saw the small window of opportunity, I jumped right through it, and it
has turned out to be an experience that I will cherish for a lifetime. Although
my time as a contestant is coming to an end, I feel blessed to walk away with
more confidence, a stronger connection to my heritage, and 14 lifelong
friendships. To Mom, Dad, Mayuri Airi, Grandma, Obaachan, Auntie Karen, Uncle
Lauren, and the rest of my family, friends, and supporters, Okagesama de. I am
what I am because of you. I could not have had this once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity without your unconditional love and support. There are no words or
actions that could ever demonstrate how grateful and indebted I feel to each of
you for supporting me along this journey. My heart will always feel full of love
and appreciation to have each of you in my life. Thank you so much. I love you
all and cannot wait to share my final moments as a Queen contestant with all of
you on Festival Ball Night. I would like to give some advice to the K-Zoo
listeners. If you have a new job or hobby in your life, or if you want to travel
somewhere, just do it. Life is short, so if you feel the need to sign before the
opportunity runs out, I think you should pursue your interest. I never thought I
would be able to participate in a cultural event like this, but I jumped in when
I realized I could. I had a much better experience than I had expected. When the
month of March ends, I will be more confident, and I will be able to think more
deeply about Japanese traditional culture. I think I will be able to continue
with my friendship with 14 people. My mother, father, Mayuri, Airi, grandma, and
other family members, friends, and my uncle and aunt, I am here because of you.
I couldn't have had a single opportunity in my life without your support. I
couldn't have participated without your love. Gratitude is something that cannot
be expressed in words. I am filled with love and gratitude for getting to know
you. Thank you so much. I love you all. I look forward to sharing the last
moments of Queen's Tour with you on the night of the Festival Ball. Thank you
for your time. This was Kansutin Shiori Okuno. Thank you. Thank you. I hope I
won't be overwhelmed by the cold of winter. I hope I can rise again with
someone's voice. A lump of life sleeping in the soil. Every time we meet on
asphalt, I miss the time when we couldn't meet. The two of us share the sun and
the moon. The flowers that don't bloom, the flowers that fall like buds. I'm
looking at the spring wind, looking at the future of you and someone else. Every
time the cherry blossoms fall, another unreachable feeling. I'm erased by tears
and smiles. And then I grew up again. The sadness of chasing after you, the
strong and pure sadness. It will never change. Don't lose the cherry blossoms in
you. You, who I saw in the city, were lonely. I was lost in the crowd. The light
in my eyes that I lived in that time. I hope I won't be dirty by the speed of
time. Don't say anything. It shouldn't be a word. The tears that flowed become
rain. Healing the wound in my heart. We are sending you the cherry blossom
festival calendar. We have already introduced the two of them. We have two more
people on standby, so I will introduce them. The song I sent you was called
Kobukuro Sakura. The time is 5 o'clock 29 minutes. It will soon be 5 o'clock 30
minutes. I feel the strength of living just like the number of petals. Even if
I'm hit by a stormy wind, the rain that doesn't stop is a lilac. Every time the
cherry blossoms fall, another unreachable feeling. I'm erased by tears and
smiles. And I became an adult again. The sadness of chasing is a strong and pure
sadness. I will never change. In you, in me, sakura. Let's name the nameless
flowers. So that I don't get hit by the cold of winter, which is the only one in
the world. So that I can get up again with someone's voice. This is Radio Keizu
AM 1210 Honolulu, Hawaii, where the time is now 5 o'clock 32 minutes. You're
listening to Keizu, KZOO, 1210 AM Honolulu, Hawaii. Now, I will introduce the
second person for the cherry blossom festival. Please. My name is Queen Chiemi
Tanaka. I'm 23 years old. I'm a freelance artist. Please introduce yourself. I
am a true artist. I grew up in visual arts and performance. An artist is a
little different from others in the world. This talent, small and fine, can be
seen in all things. I like to draw out the beauty of that person's power even
when I meet them. Why did you wish to enter the cherry blossom festival? I
wanted to experience various cultural activities that I couldn't do at other
festivals. I wanted to learn and experience art and culture that I can't see in
books or the Internet. What part of Japanese culture or customs are you
interested in? We've learned so much, both traditional Japanese and Hawaii
Japanese culture and customs. Though we're currently learning how to play taiko,
I still want to learn how to play other traditional wagaki. As someone who's
been around music most of my life, I think it's only natural that I'd like to
learn instruments relating to my heritage. What activity in the festival have
you enjoyed the most at the festival? There have been so many activities I've
enjoyed, but the food-related classes like ramen and sushi have been the ones
that I tend to think about the most. The food was delicious, but more than that,
something about sharing a meal with others creates a bonding moment that sticks
out. Though we were doing our own tasks throughout the class, there was a strong
sense of us being one. I can't say that there's any activity I particularly
didn't enjoy, but I will say that I could do without the body aches after the
physically active classes like the Okinawa Shishimai Dance and Kendo. However,
the body aches must mean I was giving it my all, pushing myself out of my
comfort zone, and being present, participating to the best of my ability. So if
I were to do it again, I would still take those classes. I'm not sure if I would
be able to do it again, but I will try. I'm not sure if I would be able to do it
again, but I will try. I'm not sure if I would be able to do it again, but I
will try. I'm not sure if I would be able to do it again, but I will try. Let's
try contacting the people we love. There have been many difficult times in the
past few years, but if we are together, we can overcome anything. I think the
love and support from friends and family during this time of the cherry blossom
festival showed the power to connect. The person who told me this story is Queen
Chiemi Tanaka. Thank you very much. The cherry blossom night breeze blows
through. Spring is already waiting for us there, quietly. What do these
unwashed, trembling days mean? The voice of the night invites me. When I start
walking, I leave it to the road. I don't have a place to go beyond the puddle. I
don't stop and I don't remember when I suddenly left for some place. Wipe away
the tears on the dog. Will you cry with me? The twinkling stars at the end of
the road are waving their hands. I walk along the cherry blossom street,
stumbling and without end. Is it a wilderness or a paradise? Where is the
destination where the stray dog runs? The people who are leaving, like this
road, if everything continues somewhere, I wonder if someday I can make a flower
bloom for the wishes I made with the season. The time is far away. The wind
gently carries the tears to the sky. The days that never return and the shadow
of a smile are gone. The time to fight in the night is already goodbye. The
cherry blossom night breeze blows through. Spring is already waiting there. I'm
listening to Keizu Radio, AM 1210. Now, Mr. Brooke, please. I'm Brooke
Yoshimura. I'm 27 years old. I'm currently in charge of graphic design for
Tanioka Seafood & Marketing. Please introduce yourself. How would you describe
yourself? What makes you unique? I actually have an identical twin sister. We
have the best relationship and are complete opposites in the best way. I'm very
bubbly and love to keep busy while she's more laid back and go with the flow.
Why did you wish to enter the Cherry Blossom Festival? I wanted to learn more
about my Japanese culture and was excited to take the different cultural
classes. This is a once in a lifetime opportunity and I knew that it would
benefit all aspects of my life. What part of Japanese culture or customs are you
interested in? Do you know which way? Long time ago. What was the most fun or
the least fun part of the festival? I don't care to compete with others and I
rather just enjoy the experience with the other contestants and whatever happens
I'll be happy. Any message for the Keizu listeners and your family and friends?
I just wanted to thank my family and my friends for all of their love and
support throughout this journey. It would not have been remotely possible
without them. Thank you for listening. The end of the Cherry Blossom Festival.
This program is brought to you by... Platinum Sponsor Sakura Matsuri calendar
Konoban gumi no teikyo wa Platinum sponsor Haku nai show yoku nai show shirokyo
say shizutsu nara saishin gijutsu de nihongo demo anshin no Jenkins Ikea Gold
sponsor Hawa inochi nichi a ryo go de anshin shinrai no saishin gijutsu dentist
Richard tamaru The world's most beautiful permanent management Valley of the
temples Silver sponsor Konodo Suiso Spray life H&H wellness Megane erabi nara
Anshin to shinrai no Aramowana shopping center Megane no parimiki Best na hoken
wo osagashi shimasu Hawaii life consulting Suda kumi Nagaten no jitsuseki de
Honolulu no fudo san wa omakase kudasai Uehara Yoshimitsu First Honolulu reality
Kyoto Kawashima Orimono no Made in Japan Yamaboto Drapery Ijou kakusha no teikyo
de okuri shimashita Morimoto Takero Standby News Sports Entertainment TVS Asano
Jouhou Hawaii Nichiyou Mokuyo This program is Brook Bakery Hawaii Charley's Taxi
Elders Hiroshi Denki Sato Seiyaku Medicare Specialist Kobayashi Kiwako Takeout
Catering Tatsuozu Ijou kakusha no teikyo de okuri shite imasu Del's Kitchen &
Bakery Soshite Mio Pastology ga onaji tennai ni One stop de takusan no menu ga
eraberu Makkari 11X Reasonable na onedan de Variety yutaka na takeout menu ga
sorotte imasu Del's Kitchen & Bakery dewa Mai asa yakitate no pan ga sorotte
imasu Agetate no aki katsu pureto ya Miso salmon nado oishii nihon no aji ga
sorotte imasu Teuchi men ga jiman no Mio Pastology dewa Mentaiko pasta ya Tomato
sauce ga toroori kakatta Boroneze nado honkaku ha no pasta wo otanoshimi kudasai
Basho wa Makkari to Young Street no kado Hiroi parking mo arimasu Denwa bangou
wa 808-840-0496 to 808-842-0496 808-840-0497 808-840-0497 Maenichi tabetai
Makkari 11X e douzo Makkari 11X e douzo Ruisu Reiko no Teinei ni ikiru Ruisu
Reiko desu Hibi no kurashi no naka de Watashi no omou seikatsu no hinto Chotto
shita kizuki o tsutaeshite ikimasu Chotto shita kizuki o tsutaeshite ikimasu Dai
ni mokuyou gogo Yoji han kara Saihousou Daiyon mokuyou gogo Yoji han kara desu
Oki de kudasai 888-840-0496 838-840-0319 License Bango BC 32084 License Bango BC
32084 Dream Kensetsu Dream Kensetsu Miki made Okigaru ni o denwa kudasai Kan
Taiheiyo no Bunka no Harmoni Onoruru Festival 3月11日と12日は 3月11日と12日は Hawaii
Convention Center for more cultural performances and activities. at Hawaii
Convention Center for more cultural performances and activities. Sake and Food
Festival 21 years of age or older can participate in free samples. From 12th to
4.30pm at Karakawa Odoori Grand Parade and Nagaoka Hanabi will color the sky.
festival spending me surpassing mid 50 one clouds go how tree I'm running
through the night, day and night From the cherry blossoms, now it's goodbye I'm
chasing after you from that day From the cherry blossoms, now it's goodbye Now,
the cherry blossom festival calendar Today, we have one more left I'll introduce
you three again I'll introduce you three again next Monday From Wednesday, 9am
From Monday, Wednesday, 9am From Friday, 9.30pm I'll introduce you three again
Today, after this, the live will continue Takaya-kun's live will continue Aloha
Academy and Noriya-san's Rainbow Story will continue at 6.30pm Please enjoy
K-Soft Noon. Thursday, today was Karin Ogura. I'll see you tomorrow. I'm Terrio
Warner, the CEO of Fogarty Real Estate. Since the day that Ginny Fogarty started
her real estate business in Hawaii for the first time as a Japanese, I've been
able to support the K-Zoo listeners for the 50th anniversary this year. I will
continue to do my best with gratitude. If you are interested in real estate in
Hawaii, please feel free to contact me. Fogarty Real Estate 808-955-5100 For
more information, please visit alohafriend.com Or call 808-688-8887 Please come
to Tokuyama. Hello, I'm Pure Nails & Beauty's manager, Naoko. We offer gel
nails, pedicure, curling, and extension services for your nails. If you have any
questions, please feel free to contact us in Japanese. We are located in Don
Quijote, Ala Moana. We are open from 9am to 12pm. You can make a reservation at
808-955-1121 or you can contact us by LINE. We look forward to your visit. Soho
New York Hair Salon offers the latest hair styles at a low price. The haircut
after careful counseling is $35 including shampoo and blow. All the stylists are
Japanese. The latest machines are also available at Soho Beauty. The number for
the hair salon is 808-944-8000 The number for the hair salon is 808-888-8000 The
number for the hair salon is 808-739-2222. K-Zoo K-Zoo has an announcement.
Let's spend more time for your health and do what you love. The improved version
of the new coronavirus vaccine has a high prevention effect against severe
diseases, hospitalization, and the worst-case results. The last vaccine will be
taken in September 2022. For more information on the improved version of the
vaccine, please visit vaccines.gov. We can do it. Paid for by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. We will be waiting for the day we can
see you again. We will be waiting for you. I'll wave my hand and shout No matter
how painful the time is Because I'm laughing at you Even if I'm about to give up
I felt like I could do my best In the fading scenery I can hear the song of that
day Sakura, sakura, now bloom proudly As fate scatters in a moment I'll wave my
hand and shout