TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC sounds. BBC News at 10
o'clock. The Royal College of Nursing is due to meet the Health Secretary Steve
Barclay to talk about pay. The RCN has paused its strike action in England for
the discussions. Figures out yesterday show the government received £5 billion
more in tax than it spent in January. Political editor Chris Mason says the mood
in government has now changed. That context yesterday of this surprise surplus
in the finances along came not many hours later this more conciliatory tone. A
joint statement even from the Royal College of Nursing in the Department of
Health which has seemed some way off up until now. But a different outlook from
the National Education Union. The strikes in schools in plenty of parts of
England and across Wales next week are going to go ahead because the National
Education Union not convinced that what the government is saying is
substantially different from what they have been saying so far. Shemeema Begum
is due to find out this morning whether she is allowed back to the UK. She and
two other schoolgirls from East London travelled to Syria to join the so-called
Islamic State in 2015. The Special Immigration Appeals Commission will give a
written judgement on whether she should get back her British citizenship.
Lloyd's Banking Group says its profits nearly doubled in the final three months
of last year. The lender made £1.8 billion before tax, up from £968 million in
2021. Part of the reason for the increase was the rise in interest rates. Sir
Tony Blair and Lord Haig are calling for everyone in the UK to be given a
digital ID. The former Prime Minister and ex-conservative leader want to pass
incorporating a person's passport, driving licence, tax records, qualifications
and right to work. They say technology needs to be at the heart of public
services. The BBC has announced the hosts for the Eurovision Song Contest in
May. The semi-finals will be fronted by Alicia Dixon, the Ted Lasso actor Hannah
Waddingham and the Ukrainian singer Yulia Senina. Graham Norton will join them
for the final. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. We've heard about Shemeema Begum in
the news just now and we continue her story in an hour. Someone close to
Shemeema Begum is looking for a way out of the so-called caliphate. That's in
our episode of the Shemeema Begum story at 11 o'clock. Now, time for Woman's
Hour with Nula McGavin. Hello, you are very welcome to Woman's Hour. Well, as
you've been hearing there, of course, we are awaiting a decision on Shemeema
Begum's future. The judges set to rule whether the removal of her UK citizenship
was lawful. Now, this is a case that has been the centre of so much discussion
about terrorism, trafficking, repatriation. We're going to speak to our
correspondent who is covering the case probably in about 20 minutes or so.
Shemeema Begum, you may know, is currently in a camp in northern Syria. We are
also going to talk about another consequence of the Islamic State Group, who at
their height, they held about a third of Syria, also 40% of Iraq. But the
consequence we want to talk about is the Yazidi women. They were targeted,
kidnapped and raped by IS. And many now still displaced in camps in Iraqi
Kurdistan. Those camps may now close. So our guests are asking, have these women
been forgotten? We also have with us the Irish musician, Eleanor McAvoy. She
will be in studio today performing live. My heart is low, my heart is so low,
it's only a woman's heart can be. So a little there of her most famous song, A
Woman's Heart, where we have lots to talk about music, yes. But also why did
Eleanor buy herself a purple aga cooker after a bad breakup? I want to know
about your purchases, big or small. What did you buy yourself after a breakup?
Typically, maybe if it was bad flowers, maybe a dog, radical new haircut, send
them in. You can text the programme. It's 84844 texts charged at your standard
message rate at BBC. Woman's Hour is another way to get in touch on social
media. Email us through the website, or maybe you'd like to lend your voice to
us. A voice note or WhatsApp message, 03700 100 444. Looking forward to reading
all about them. Now I want to turn to new research, however, before that from
Cancer Research UK and NHS Digital, which has revealed that black women from
Caribbean and African backgrounds are more likely to be diagnosed with cancer at
later stages when treatment is less likely to be successful. This study is the
first to show that ethnicity is a significant factor in late stage diagnosis and
to discuss the reasons for this inequality. I'm joined by Cruti Shrottri, who is
head of Policy Development at Cancer Research UK, and also Adobea Obiang, who
sought medical help three times over two years before she was diagnosed with
incurable breast cancer at 31. You're both so welcome to the programme. Thank
you for joining us. Cruti, let me start with you and this research. What were
the differences in late stage diagnosis between black and white women? So thank
you so much for having me on this programme, Nula. This report by Cancer
Research UK looked at several different cancer types. It looked at breast
ovarian, uterine, non-small cell lung cancer, colon and prostate cancer. And for
all of those cancer types, except prostate, because that's not relevant for
women, it found that black women are more likely to be diagnosed at a late stage
cancer. We know that early diagnosis gives the best chances of survival, so
these differences are deeply concerning and we need to address them. Also, can
we talk about the differences found for women from India and Bangladeshi or
Pakistani backgrounds? Yes, so the report also found that for some cancer types,
there was a difference in the stage of diagnosis for Asian women, those
particularly being breast anovarian. So not quite so extensive as for black
women, but they did exist. Interestingly, the study found that there were no
differences between Chinese women and white women. That is interesting. But with
the findings that you have, what are some of the reasons why women in certain
ethnic groups are being diagnosed at this later stage? We don't know exactly
what the reasons are, but previous research does give us some clues. We know
from previous studies that ethnic minority groups have lower awareness of the
signs and symptoms of cancer. And even if they do spot something, there are more
barriers that prevent them from going to their GP to get checked out. So for
example, we know that they are more likely to be embarrassed about talking about
these issues to their GP. And interestingly, black and Asian communities are
also more likely to have fatalistic attitudes towards cancer. So an attitude,
which is, well, there's no point doing anything about it because it's not in my
control. So I'm not going to go and see my GP. But something I think that's
really important is that while these behavioral factors are really important
component, it's not just down to individual behavior. That also seems to be
differences in access to care. So ethnic minority groups are more likely to
report having to go multiple times to their GP compared to white groups to get
referred for further tests. So clearly there is a systematic problem here that
we need to address. Well, I want to bring in Adobea. Welcome Adobea. For our
listeners, you are black. What was your experience of finding out you had
cancer? Hi, good morning. Thank you for having me. My experience was it was a
devastating experience, obviously. First of all, finding out that I had breast
cancer and then obviously finding out that it was a secondary diagnosis. And
unfortunately, like I say, my case incurable. Take us back to this journey that
you've gone through from your first inclination to visit a doctor. What was
that? So I found a lump in my breast in 2016. So I would have been 29 at the
time. And sort of my first thought wasn't, you know, oh, let me go and get this
checked out. It kind of was a small lump in my breast. And I kind of was getting
on with my day and my life. But I noticed that the breast lump was getting
bigger and I thought, OK, I need to get it checked out. When I first initially
went to my GP, had an exam, and I was told that it was just ordinary breast
lumps and it was nothing to be worried about. And because of my age, my GP
wasn't concerned. And I was sent on my way and I just continued on with life.
I'm just wondering after that, was it were you still worried or was there an
acceptance? OK, that's what the doctor says. After I'd seen the GP had my exam
and I was told by the GP there was nothing to worry about, I was like, OK,
there's nothing to worry about. Let me continue with my life. And I did so, you
know, until 2017 when the lump had grown, you know, even larger and I was
starting to notice it and I started to notice all the discolouration and the
dimpling, which, you know, at the time, like I say, I didn't I wasn't aware of
it. But at the time I was presenting all the symptoms of breast cancer and then
had to go to the GP again. And then I was told again that it wasn't anything to
be worried about. And it's just a breast lump. And if it becomes painful, then I
should come back. My goodness, my goodness. It continued. Tell our listeners
what happened next. So in April of 2018, I was going to work an ordinary Monday
and I had an excruciating pain in my chest, a pain I've never experienced
before. And I was finding it very difficult to breathe. Luckily, I was with a
work colleague and we went to my local accident emergency. And when I arrived
there, I was told by the doctors on duty there that I had muscular skeletal pain
and was given some painkillers and sent home. That following week, the pain was
getting even more excruciating. I was finding it difficult to move around, to
breathe. And I insisted again, when I went into A&E again, that I need a scan,
some sort of scan, because something is not right. And, you know, I need to find
out what's happening. I did have a CT scan done. And I was told in May of 2018
that I had breast cancer. And unfortunately, it had spread to my lymph nodes and
they were querying errors in my lung and my bone at the time. So yeah, that was
pretty much my journey. And it was an uphill battle because I had to insist that
I needed some sort of scan because something wasn't right. Adobia, I mean, it
must have been incredibly traumatic. But to bring you back at that point, when
you were told that, what went through your mind? I mean, up until the time I had
all sorts of the tests, I had to have a biopsy and a mammogram and all the tests
that you need for them to find out exactly what's happening. I was actually in
denial for a very long time. It was only once the oncologist said the words, you
have breast cancer, that I actually, you know, had to take a step back and
realize, wow, this is serious and I have this serious disease. But up until that
point, cancer, I wasn't thinking that I had breast cancer. I was going through
the words of the GP telling me that I'm too young and it's nothing to worry
about. It's breast lump. So yeah, it was a very difficult and traumatic
experience for me. And I want to hear more about your life. And thank you for
sharing that, Adobia. I'm sure it's very difficult. But, Crutty, what about
that, that experience that that poor Adobia went through? It's really difficult
to hear, isn't it? And, you know, the sad truth is that this isn't one instance
what research suggests is that this is happening systematically and it needs to
be addressed. What I would like to see is the government do more to make
tackling these inequalities a priority for the health community. And some of
that is going to have to include making sure that we have more data, better data
sets so that we can understand what's going on and we can address that. We can
actually understand what the barriers are and we can address the problems. It's
also going to need to be resourcing the health service properly because if the
health service haven't got the headspace to address these really important
issues, which they haven't at the moment, they are on the brink, then it's not
going to be possible to move forward. I'm going to read a little of the
Department of Health and Social Care statement that we just received. And more
patients are being diagnosed, they say, and start in treatment earlier with 92
community diagnostic centres open since 2021, delivering over 3 million test
scans and checks, including to detect cancer. We also recently announced a £10
million investment in more breast cancer screening units as well as software and
service upgrades. The NHS Help Us Help You awareness campaign includes
advertising targeted to reach Black, Asian and minority ethnic groups to address
challenges to earlier diagnosis, such as fear of what might be found. They go on
to say addressing cancer together with other conditions in a joint-up strategy
will allow us to focus where there are similarities in approach and ensure care
is focused on the patient. But that wasn't you, Adobea. It wasn't about a fear
of what might be found. No, it wasn't. It was, I mean, in my opinion, sort of
being misdiagnosed. Like I said, I was presenting all the symptoms of breast
cancer. I had obviously the lump, I had the dimpling, I had the discolouration.
The only thing that wasn't happening that I didn't have was the leaking from the
nipple. But I was presenting all symptoms of breast cancer. And unfortunately,
that wasn't picked up on. Why do you think it wasn't? I mean, I have different
theories, but I feel perhaps maybe the GP just didn't know what breast cancer
looked like on a dark skin person. So perhaps, you know, they weren't able to
just pick up on those symptoms on my body, unfortunately. Maybe they didn't have
access to the medical journals that shows how breast cancer presents on darker
skin. But I feel that had he have known what to look for, what it would look
like on my skin, maybe he may have been able to pick up on it sooner when I
first sort of went in. I'm so sorry to hear that. A question did come in from a
listener to you, Kriti. Does black women in your research include women of mixed
race? It doesn't. Black women, we are specifically referring to Caribbean and
African women. I understand. Adobe, let me go back to you. Your life now, that
was 21, 29, excuse me, when you first found the lump, 31, I believe, by the time
you were diagnosed. Tell me about that. Well, now I'm on a hormone targeted
treatment, which is working fantastically. I will be coming up to my sort of
five years of being on treatment and having my condition stable in May of this
year. But it has been, you know, it's been like I said, it's been an uphill
battle. I've had, you know, my down times, I've had great news, I've had bad
news, I've had, you know, emotional times as well. But I maintain on trying to
stay positive and just kind of having faith in the treatment that I'm on, which
is working wonderfully for me at the moment. Yeah, we wish you the best of luck
with that. Kriti, you know, Adobe mentioned black skin, for example, or not
being able to perhaps be familiar with the skin or some of the symptoms. What
else needs to be done to try and change these numbers that you've seen? Yeah,
there are a few things. So I think that it's really important that we do more
campaigns to raise awareness of the signs and symptoms of cancer targeted at
those communities where awareness is lower. There's been a great example where
black men are at higher risk of prostate cancer. And there have been a lot of
campaigns over the over recent years to raise awareness of this amongst both
black men and GPs. And we're seeing much better diagnosis rates, early diagnosis
rates among amongst them. Cancer Research UK run talk cancer workshops with the
with community leaders to help them have conversations about cancer with their
community. And these are aimed at breaking down barriers to get people to see
their GP if they have a concern. And it also emphasizes the importance of early
diagnosis. But as I said before, I do think that ultimately the government need
to do more at making addressing these inequalities a priority for the health
community. The government recently dropped their health disparities white paper,
and they committed last year to a war on cancer and a 10 year cancer plan, which
they have also dropped. Yes, we have a major condition strategy that they've now
committed to. But this is a catch all strategy spanning several conditions
health inequalities prevention. And we need to make sure that government action
is properly targeted so that we can move forward. Yeah, it does seem like a
different strategy. They talk about a joined up strategy. They talk about
treating the whole body just to let our listeners know that instead of the plan,
the 10 year plan of the war on cancer, as you discussed there. Just before I let
you go, Adobe, have you gone back to those doctors that didn't diagnose you?
Have you had that confrontation? No, I haven't. I thought I feel like I'm still
harboring some kind of resentment. Yeah, you know, and a little bit of a
disappointment and anger in that situation. I actually moved GPs as well. I
completely moved a GP surgery. I think, like I said, trying to maintain a sort
of like a positive mindset and kind of moving on and moving forward with my
life. It's not something that I'm thinking about going to sort of approach or
speak to them about. I kind of have made my decision to leave the GP practice
that I was at that misdiagnosed me. And now I found my voice and if anything
presents, I find that my treatment isn't how I expect it to be. I will speak up
about it now. And I think that's a good lesson that I learned from my
experience. And I know you share it as a fashion blogger as well. That is Adobea
O'Bing. An awful lot of listeners getting in touch, I should tell you Adobea as
well, sympathizing with you and your story. Also want to thank Crouty
Schroetree. Thanks so much for getting in touch and sharing the news research
that has just come out. We're going to be going to Eleanor McAvoy in just a
moment, but I do want to read a message coming in. This is, I'm listening to the
lady speaking on Woman's Hour. I'm so sad. I'm currently waiting to start
treatment for breast cancer. I was seen very quickly listen to Not Once
Dismissed. I'm a white woman under 50. I find it awful in 2023. We still have
these discrepancies in healthcare based on race. It is not acceptable. Thanks
for your comments coming in. We're going to be talking about what you bought
yourself during a bad breakup in just a moment. A lot of people responding to
that one as well. 8 4 8 4 4. But I mentioned Eleanor McAvoy. She is one of
Ireland's foremost songwriters. She's worked with the likes of U2, Sinead
O'Connor and Mary Black. She's the composer and co-performer of A Woman's Heart.
That was the title track of the best selling Irish album in Irish history. One
of Ireland's favourite folk songs. It also featured in Dairy Girls, if you're a
fan of that. Eleanor, she's currently on a UK tour. Her latest album is Give Me
Some Wine. It has themes ranging from breakups to motherhood, also female
friendship. She's with me in the studio. Good morning. Good morning. How are
you? Very well. Good to have you with us. Give Me Some Wine, the album. What
inspired it? Well, it was recorded and conceived of really during lockdown,
which is part of the reason why it's called Give Me Some Wine. The reason why
it's called Give Me Some Wine is of course the magnificent painting on the cover
by Chris Gullen. Wonderful British artist called Chris Gullen that I've been
collaborating with. He was painting paintings about my songs. I was then writing
songs about his paintings and we were going back and forth. Sadly he passed away
in 2017. That was how that came to be on the cover. In lockdown, like a lot of
people I think I reflected on my life and where I was and my role was in the
music business now as a 56 year old woman. How do I fit into them? We could see
what the doctors and nurses were doing. What was I doing? Without wanting to get
too new agey about it, I'm a huge believer in the healing power of music. I
think that my mission when I get up on stage is to make people who are down or
tired after work to transform them to bring joy into their lives. That's not to
say that you don't hit the darker spots. You address the more serious issues, be
they anorexia or breakups or whatever. If I'm not sending them home at the end
of the night with joy in their hearts, I feel I have failed. I feel there's so
much darkness out there. There's so much dark literature, dark theatres. That's
kind of my aim. Well, our listeners are going to get a little bit of a live
performance in just a few minutes time. Let's learn a little bit more about you.
You studied music at Trinity College in Dublin, played in orchestras I was also
reading. When did the songwriting come into play? To be honest, I was always
songwriting. It's just I never really sang them for anybody. I'd hundred the
songs written literally before I'd ever played one to any. I don't know what I
think. I thought I was, you know, Emily Dickinson or something and I was going
to die at 35 and they'd find all these thousands of songs in my bedroom. I don't
know what I was thinking, but it was odd because once I'd written the song, I
didn't feel the need to play it. For me, the joy was in the writing or the buzz
or the compulsion was in the writing part still is to be honest. But then when I
was in symphony orchestra, I played a track to my brother and he said, oh, I
wonder you got to be doing this, you know, get me, I borrowed his band and did a
demo and then just started to look for I actually had a turning point moment. I
walked into the symphony orchestra one day and I mean, you're on a salary when
you're in an orchestra and all that. But I had been and I was down the back of
the second violins, you know, and this gentleman had been moved down behind me
and he used to lead the orchestra, a very, you know, eminent violinist. And I
thought, oh my God, as you get older, you get moved back in this job. You know,
most jobs as you get older and get more mature and get more experienced, they
move you up the chain. But of course, your fingers go, you know, and I thought,
oh, Eleanor, give the songwriting thing a shot. Just try it. So that day I went
to the manager of the orchestra and said, look, I'm Patty, I won't be, you know,
I'm going to leaving my notice and, you know, don't be calling me again after
X-Men weeks. And I went to say now, I don't know, I haven't seen him for years,
actually. So I don't I put a very good. But some of the tracks going back to the
album are very personal to you. Yeah, you know, I had a time in obviously Covid
was a tough time for our industry. But to be honest, it was nothing compared to
what had happened to me prior to that. I had a lot of stuff happen at the same
time. You know, my dad died in a couple of weeks later, my relationship of 23
years, literally, just like that overnight went and it was an awful shock. And,
you know, it was it was very horrible and complicated. And it turned out he had
somebody else in another country the whole time he'd been with me. Yeah. So I
mean, it was you find out 23 years of your life has been a sham and it puts you
with certainly it put me into a very dark psychological place. I mean, I
experienced darkness. I don't think I've ever experienced in my life. So I had
to think, OK, how do you how do you how do you get yourself out of this? Or do
you know? So for me, I could just start again, start a new life. And for me,
that sort of worked. And by the way, don't worry, there's only two tracks about
it on the album in case anybody thinks. But it is. But it is an awful lot to
take on. And was this kind of towards the end of lockdown or? And no, it was
just before. So it was a year before lockdown. OK, so I had a year of kind of
trying to get over that and then lockdown hit. And, you know, I feel very guilty
saying this, but in a way, lockdown provided me with a bit of time to heal
because I was pretending to the world I was fine because, you know, in my
business, you've got to get up on stage. The show must go on. You know, if you
want to make a living, you've got to keep doing it. And I just had to kind of
withdraw a bit from social media and all that just to kind of, you know, start
again, essentially, and kind of reinvent myself. And and I decided, God, I know
this time, like, what decisions have you made in your life, girl, that have that
led to this? You know, and I. But that sounds like you're blaming yourself.
Well, you know, I've since had that again, I'm sounding very new age here, but I
did go for it. I actually did go for therapy and I have to say it was absolutely
transformed. And I wish I'd gone 20 years ago because I put up with stuff I
should never have put up with. It wasn't really a big thing in Dublin though in
the 70s and 80s. You know what it was like. You know what it was like back then.
God, I was just saying to you, you know, when I was in college, like I tell my
daughter now, you know, contraceptive was illegal when I was in college. And
like, it wasn't just frowned upon her heart. It was against the law. The
Students Union sold condoms one time. They got arrested, you know. So times have
changed. Yeah. We were looking at you guys over here. You had like the, you
know, in the NHS, you had for free. And it was definitely, and Ireland has
changed a lot, but that is so interesting that you've kind of started again, I
suppose, after lockdown. And what is it like then touring? Because you're in the
middle of it at the moment. It's great. It's I'm loving it, you know, but you
know, you're it made me look at like things like the song I'm going to do for
you south down the street, you know, it's a little tiny street off the street.
One day I was there and this is ages ago, but I met my ex, you know, from 30
years ago from college and show me age there. But anyway, and when I thought
about that, I thought during lockdown, I was thinking, God, the road's not
taken. What if I had gone that road instead of that road, you know, so it was
all of this kind of reflection. And yeah, maybe that's something that comes. I
know you went through that terrible breakup, but the an age that you reach as
well. You mentioned you're 56 that maybe there will always be that reflection of
the road not taken. I think there will. And I think it's easy to say, oh, well,
I wouldn't have ended up, you know, you don't know, you just don't know when
life things could have been worse. You know, you, you know, you have to take,
you know, the sliding door moments and just, you know, get up and get on with
it, you know. Well, you know, we talk about the breakup there. I believe there's
a connection to a purple agat that you have, the Coker stove range. Yeah, well,
after the breakup, I don't know, I got it. I got a I bought a purple agat and a
moment of I don't know, midlife crisis or something, but it is the best thing
that caused me far less grief than the man ever did. And I didn't run off with
other raggas or anything like that. So, yeah, I just love it. It's just people
said, get a neutral coloured one in case you want to sell that. I said, no, I'm
getting a purple one. I love my purple one. So yeah. Well, a lot of people,
because I threw it out to our audience, there's nothing that they are, if not
responsive. Let me see. After a breakup, I bought myself a plane ticket to East
Africa and had an adventure. Absolute winner. When I left my husband 35 years
ago, I bought a pink fluffy dressing gown. He hated pink and a piece of breaded
chicken. He was a vegetarian. All my dressing gowns are still pink and not that
my husband would notice. He actually has a new one now who loves her and is
happy with whatever she wears or eats. I dyed my hair red, says another. When my
ex told me he was leaving, he hated red hair. Oh, he's in my bad books too then.
I bought myself a lovely convertible BMW when the divorce was finalised. That's
Terry. Let me see, Amanda, a new lipstick. Essential. I also took the
opportunity to try something I've thought of for a long time, but never done. A
new hair colour. Nothing too dramatic. Oh, here we go again. But a bit of red
goes a long way. Is red the colour post-breakup? I don't know. There's another
call in segment. Let me see. Another post-breakup gift. I recently spent for my
husband. I bought myself a concert ticket and a hotel room to meet friends from
an online fan club of the same band. Not something I could have done before. And
I'm so excited. Isn't that wonderful? And isn't that a lovely segue to get you
to perform? South Ann Street for us now. Yes, South Ann Street. There's a little
street you will know. It's Alfgrafton Street. If you've ever been to Dublin,
there's a couple of bars there. You never know who you might run into. As
Eleanor was telling us, she ran into the ex from 30 years previous, was it,
Eleanor, as she pops on her headphones there. Can I go launch him? You can sure
can. Go for it. Well I almost didn't know him. I nearly passed him, boy. It took
us both a moment to get over our surprise. Then we hugged each other clumsily
and laughed a bit too long as the shoppers on South Ann Street hurried on. I
said I'd heard that he was married and living overseas. He said he'd seen my
posters on a billboard near his street. And he'd heard about what happened and
we both just looked away and headed from South Ann Street to Mac Dades where we
drank to ancient love for hours on end and raised our glasses to remember our
ups and friends. And we drank to chance encounters too long overdue on South Ann
Street on a Tuesday afternoon. And it felt just like it used to. Like we'd never
been apart. Like back when we were students on a bench in College Park. But I
felt something deep inside me. I really can't explain in a pub beside South Ann
Street in the rain. When we drank to ancient love for hours on end and raised
our glasses to remember our ups and friends. And we drank to chance encounters
too long overdue on South Ann Street on a Tuesday afternoon. We embraced before
we parted to walk into the night with the complicated sadness at this
complicated life. All were ships passing in the night occasionally meet at the
corner of South Ann and Grafton Street where we drank to ancient love for hours
on end and raised our glasses to remember our ups and friends. And we drank to
chance encounters too long overdue on South Ann Street on a Tuesday afternoon.
Yes we drank to ancient love for hours on end. We raised our glasses to remember
our ups and friends. Oh and sometimes if I'm lonely and I'm walking on my own
I'll detour down South Ann Street going home. Well done Eleanor. Lovely to hear
your song performing right there South Ann Street. Do you want one more story
that came in from our listener about what they did for their breakup gift? I
bought myself three rats. My partner and I always hated them so I thought I
could get over my fear of them and I could get over our relationship. Turns out
they were much better company than he ever was and they smelt less too. Thanks
so much for coming into us Eleanor. Give me some wine is her album and she is
touring right now in the UK until the 11th of March. Now I want to turn next to
actually a story just coming into us I mentioned Shmima Begum at the beginning
of the programme we are just getting the news that she has lost her appeal at
the special the SIAC which is the Special Immigration Court. It has been
dismissed on all grounds of Special Immigration Appeals Commission I should say.
So she has lost that. She was hoping to appeal the decision to revoke her
citizenship and that in turn may lead to her being repatriated but that is not
going to happen as she has just lost that coming in over the past few minutes.
But I want to continue talking about the Islamic State Group which of course was
a big part of the Shmima Begum story because it is almost nine years since they
announced they were establishing a caliphate in Iraq and Syria. That was back in
June 2014 would you believe. Many of their actions made headline news like the
public executions and also radicalisation but one element that perhaps we don't
talk about as much is what the UN have described as the genocide committed by IS
against the Yazidi people. It was the Yazidi women who faced some of the most
horrific treatment IS captured thousands of Yazidi women and also girls and
kidnapped and raped them. Eight years later Yazidi women and girls live in camps
of internally displaced people dealing with the trauma they experienced on a
daily basis. There are still around 3000 of these women and girls unaccounted
for and now the Iraqi government have made it clear that they want to close
these camps. My next two guests have just recently returned from visiting some
of the camps which are in northern Iraq. Rachel Wright is a freelance
journalist. Rachel Miner is the founder and CEO of the UK charity Bellwether
International whose mission is to protect the freedom of religion or belief in
areas across the world. I asked Rachel Wright to start by explaining who the
Yazidi people are. Well, the Yazidis are a sort of ethno-religious group that
have lived in the Kurdish areas of northern Iraq and Syria. For many years,
about 4000 years, we went to their most sacred temple and we found urns that
were used to make olive oil that were 4000 years old. But they've mostly lived
in Sinjar which is a mountainous region on the border between Iraq and Syria.
They've always been subject to oppression and attempted genocides throughout
their history because the Kurds want them to be Kurdish and the Arabs don't like
them. A lot of people call them infidels, especially Muslims because they're not
Muslim, they have their own religion. And their own religion is Zoroastrian.
Yeah, it's sort of a mixture of a lot of different practices. So it's very
specific and unique. There is no other religion like it. So there were always
issues with the Yazidis and after the Iraq war in 2003, the area was subject to
dispute between the new Kurdish government in northern Iraq and the Iraqi
government. So there were already issues. Then in 2014, ISIS came in and there
was a genocide. They shot, I think, thousands of men on the spot. They executed
them and they kidnapped the women and girls and some boys and took them away and
turned them into sexual slaves. The people that escaped, escaped up onto Sinjar
Mountain and various communities helped them to survive. And then they managed
to escape and they went out into northern Iraq and they are now, most of them,
there's nearly 200,000 displaced Yazidis living in their own country, but living
in what's called internally displaced people's camps. And just with the term
genocide, there's not a global recognition of the treatment by the Yazidis, by
IS, as a genocide. The UN have described it as genocide. So it just differs
depending on where you are in the world. So that brings us up to what they have
gone through when it comes to IS. You have gone to northern Iraq, however, to
visit camps where Yazidi families are, particularly women and children. What did
you see? I saw massive tent cities. I saw running open sewers. I saw people
living with nothing to do, very moving actually. I mean, I've been to a lot of
places in the world and I found this very, very moving partly because it's been
eight years since what happened happened. And these people have gone nowhere.
They have nothing to do. They have, nobody sort of is on their side. You know,
they're now, they can't go back to Sinjar because there's a whole host of other
people that are fighting over it. So they are, you know, they're displaced
within their own country. You know, we saw one particular camp where there was a
little boy eating from the rubbish. You know, we met this, this young girl who
was 11 who had been kidnapped by ISIS when she was six and used as a sex slave
for goodness knows how many years and then she's now celebrating her rescue. But
you know, the trauma that that little girl has gone through. So I found it
deeply moving. Yes. And with the term, I know it has been sometimes you sex
slave with Yazidi women and girls, but some people prefer that it's kidnapped
and raped is what happened to a lot of these girls and women. Rachel Miner, I'd
like to bring you in here. You founded the charity, Bellwether International
after learning about the Yazidi people. What was it in particular about their
story that was the catalyst for you to take action? The Yazidis are just like
us. They're just like a lot of groups in the world who are practicing either a
faith or belief, living in a community, trying to have a thriving economy. I was
astonished that the Yazidi genocide was somewhat of a silent genocide. I had no
idea that it had happened and I'd lived through it. And many of the women
affected were my same age at the time. And I was disturbed. I was appalled that
a genocide in the 21st century could unfold the age of social media and
technology. And yet a lot of these stories go untold. And a lot of the crisis
goes unresponded to as Rachel mentioned, it's been eight years and counting and
there's still 2,874 missing women and girls. And that's appalling. That's
striking. It's disturbing. I lose sleep thinking about these women who are just
like us, but in another part of the world who are destined to a different fate.
And as I mentioned, of course, what has happened to them, whether it's the term
genocide that is used or not, perhaps what has happened to them is seen
differently in different parts of the world as you talk about it. But you have
been working particularly with psychological help for some of the Yazidi women
that you have met. Talk us through that a little bit. And I suppose how
successful that has been. Bellwether's model is to work locally and through
partner organizations, most of which are actually Yazidi run and operated. And
one of the things that Bellwether focuses on is specific humanitarian gaps. So
when we came into the landscape and learned that the first thing that loses
funding is mental health response, trauma response, that was the gap we decided
to fill, particularly for young girls and youth. There were little to no
interventions around these lines. So we assembled a group of Yazidi social
workers to be true to our localized model. And they actually helped us design a
cognitive behavioral therapy model, which relies on narrative group therapy
sessions. And it's evidence-based. It's been validated in studies across the
globe. But the amazing part about our material was they were Yazidi-fied. We
took a lot of the Western medical language and made it local. We were mindful of
religious sensitivities, cultural sensitivities, and created a product with the
Yazidi community that reflected what they wanted. And then they were the
implementing power behind the intervention. So we trained Yazidi women to run
these CBT sessions. And there's a pre and post survey that helps us to measure
that impact. So we had really high scores on the trauma before these sessions.
After going through one intervention, these scores dropped by 45%. There was a
45% mental health improvement, which means that these women are able to function
in their lives and provide for their children. Many of the Yazidis displaced our
single mother families because the husbands are missing or have been killed. But
I am thinking about locally, because when you read about Yazidi women, those
that have made it back, for example, to their communities after being kidnapped
and at times going through rape and other trauma, they're not always fully
accepted from what I understand, or indeed the children that they may have had
with IS fighters. There's enormous stigma surrounding sexual assault in the
Yazidi community. And after the genocide, the Yazidi spiritual council actually
had to make formal statements about allowing Yazidi women who had been assaulted
back into the community, which is horrific, should never be the case. Women who
experienced this trauma also experienced enormous stigma, double jeopardy, and
all kinds of intersectionality. And over time, we do see some things being
destigmatized, like some Yazidis are brought back into the community, but
there's still many, many Yazidi women that remain on the outside, especially if
they have children born of rape. This is an enormous barrier for them to reenter
their community, to reenter a rocky society. And that's something that we hope
to target through these interventions is not only improve mental health
outcomes, but actually give women language and skills and give the community
language and skills to break down these barriers to come together so that they
can heal as a community. Why do you think, Rachel Wright, that these stories of
these women and girls have not been told? It's a very good point. I mean, when
Rachel approached me to come and see the Yazidis, I sort of, I thought, you
know, I haven't heard about them since 2014. And I really don't know. I mean, I
think people move on, the news cycle moves on. There's so many things to talk
about. And I guess, you know, Islamic State, they were so horrendous that people
were concentrating perhaps on defeating them and getting rid of them. And then
once they'd gone, maybe people thought, well, that's the end of that now. You
know, we don't have to worry about it. But the amount of people I've talked to
who have never heard of the Yazidis, and these are journalists as well. Young
journalists have, you know, because it, I don't know, it was eight years ago,
maybe that's a long time in people's minds. But I have been very surprised. And
that's why I'm so shocked when I went there. You know, it's a huge community.
There's 200 odd thousand people who are displaced living in these camps. We know
that the Iraqi government say they plan to close the camps, not know when that
might happen. What do you think needs to happen in the future for these women?
Rachel Miner? There's a lot. I would say that from the outside looking in, you
would say maybe there's nothing that can be done. But I push back on that.
There's actually quite a lot that can be done. And we've seen that the
international community can rally both to create awareness campaigns, like I
think of the Bring Back Our Girls during the Chibok kidnappings in Nigeria. We
could generate the same kind of campaign for the missing Yazidi women and girls.
And that's a matter of social media, political will, which we see trend and
transpire very quickly. So certainly the international community should keep
talking and continue talking about the Yazidis and these women and girls until
the problem is solved. And whether the genocide is acknowledged by every country
in the world or not, it is genocide. The UN convention has been triggered and we
have a duty to respond as citizens of the human family. Rachel Miner, CEO of
Bellwether International, and Rachel Wright, freelance journalist, thanks to
them. And to reiterate on the matter of whether or not the attack on the Yazidi
in 2014 is a genocide or not, we have a statement from the government. They say
the UK is a long-standing supporter of Yazidi women and advocated strongly for
the passing of the Yazidi survivors law. We provide financial support to women's
organisations in Iraq who provide vocational training and workshops for Yazidi
women and have committed over £278 million in humanitarian support to Iraq since
2014. Our long-standing policy is that any judgement as to whether genocide has
occurred is a matter of her competent national or international court rather
than for governments or non-judicial bodies. While staying with the Islamic
State Group, I was mentioning judges from the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission have decided the removal of British citizenship from Shmima Begum,
who left the UK as a 15-year-old school girl, to join Islamic State, was lawful.
In the hearing last year challenging the decision, her legal team says it
ignored the fact that she may have been trafficked into Syria. Let me bring in
our BBC Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford, who has been following the
story this morning. Good morning, Daniel. Good to have you with us. So was this
the expected outcome? I think it was the more likely outcome. You never know
when very, very clever judges get to sit on these very high-profile cases, but
it was always the more likely outcome. As you say, essentially Shmima Begum's
lawyers had argued that rather than voluntarily travelling across to Islamic
State and being a sort of full and whole-hearted supporter of the group, she had
in fact been trafficked essentially by being groomed and persuaded to travel to
Syria and that she had been trafficked for sexual purposes because on arrival in
Syria she was almost immediately married off to an adult Islamic State fighter.
They said that this was child trafficking for sexual purposes. And interesting,
although the Sayak court ruled against her legal team on all grounds, they did
say that they had some sympathy for those arguments. They said that there was a
credible suspicion that Shmima Begum had been trafficked to Syria within the
meaning of the relevant international law. And they also said that there were
arguable breaches of duty by her school, the local council and the police in
that they should have known that there was a risk that she might travel to Syria
after one of her school friends had already done so. But despite those clear
concerns that the judges had, they decided that in the end it is up to the home
secretary to decide whether somebody poses a threat to national security and the
trafficking arguments didn't overwhelm that and in fact weren't entirely
relevant because Shmima Begum is still in north-east Syria. And so they
concluded that it was up to the home secretary to decide if he poses a threat to
national security and as Sajid Javid, who was then home secretary, decided that
then there was nothing unlawful or incorrect about his decision. I can hear the
rain and the water behind you there Daniel as you speak to us from outside the
court. But many people will want to know, okay, this has happened, what would it
mean for her, I suppose, path as she tries to continue to return to the UK? Well
she does have the right to appeal so this isn't like the final, final, final
hurdle. She can appeal this decision and I would imagine given the sensitive and
high profile nature of the case that is pretty likely. If she was to ultimately
fail on all of her legal grounds then she has only one other path out of Syria
and that is if she exercises her right to her Bangladeshi citizenship and the
Bangladeshi government allow her to go there. This is of course a country that
she wasn't born in, a country that she's never lived in so she has very, very
few ties to Bangladesh other than through her parentage. But Bangladesh of
course have always said that they don't see that she's anything to do with them
and they wouldn't accept her. So that would then leave her in a camp in
northeast Syria effectively in permanent exile in a tent in the desert. And that
many people feel is an unsustainable situation for her and the many others who
are there because of course those camps which are effectively detention camps in
northeast Syria are permanent institutions. They're run by a kind of makeshift
government in a rebel part of Syria. It's possible to escape from them, it's
possible they could be overrun at some point in any flare up of the civil war in
Syria. So to have these tens of thousands of people in this situation in
northeast Syria isn't particularly sustainable many people feel and at some
point someone's going to have to grip it. There are countries, America,
Australia, some European countries who've started to return people who are their
citizens and maybe even people that had strong ties to their countries. But at
the moment the British government shows no sign of doing that. Daniel Sanford,
thank you so much to BBC's Home Affairs correspondent, persevering there even
with the rain and the noise around him to bring us an update on that story. What
a turn. Back in time. Back to 1838. A middle class woman, Mrs. Anne Sykes, she
was given a diary on her wedding day and over the years Anne filled it with
snippets of fabric from clothes and then annotated each one. The diary survived
and nearly 200 years later Kate Straston, a fashion historian, came across it
and spent six years researching the materials that were stuck inside. So turning
this Victorian scrapbook into her own book, The Dress Diary of Mrs. Anne Sykes
and piecing together really the lives that she encountered through these fabrics
as well. It's a lovely book. It's this window into a certain time through fabric
really. You're so welcome. Thank you for joining us Kate. Well talk to me a
little bit about how you came across it. It's a curiously woman's kind of story
really because I started to make lace when I was in my twenties and belonged to
a group in Devon where I'm from. A group of much older women than me and after
one of our meetings one of the ladies said, well I have some things that I want
to get rid of and I wonder if you'd like to come and have a look. And I spent a
very happy afternoon with her and the very last thing that she took out of a
trunk, a wrap that worked for her had come along at volume. The story of its
kind of journey was an amazing one. She had worked in the theatre world here in
London in the 1960s in the wardrobes and a guy that worked for her had come
along and said, oh I found this on Camden Market on one Sunday morning, paid a
few pence for it, knew nothing about it and he gave it to her and it was this
album that's just full of swatches, over 2,000 of them but no information about
where it came from and she passed it on to me. And the size of the book just for
our listeners to visualize? It's just over A4 size, covered in pink silk and
absolutely bulging with fabrics, it's just a unique object. So you have figured
out it's Mrs Anne Sykes, how did you figure that out first off? All of the
swatches are written in the third person which made me think that actually it's
just going to be a curiosity, a mystery, we'll never know. But thankfully just
once out of all of those swatches Anne identified herself, she revealed herself.
She wrote a swatch above one of the swatches, she wrote The Dress of Mrs Anne
Sykes, May 1840 and she said the first dress I wore in Singapore. So it was just
that one and only moment that she acknowledged this was her book and that was
what unravelled the whole thing. I love the word unravelled for this as well
when we're talking about threads and about fabrics. Why do you think she did
this? I think at the time women were, these kind of practices were quite common
in terms of gathering autographs or poetry and scrapbooking was a popular
pastime. She grew up as the daughter of a male owner in Lancashire and so
textiles were at the very heart of what she had grown up with. And I think it
was a way of memorialising the people that she met across her life, friends,
family, it's a real female network and it was her way of remembering people.
Talk to our listeners about like dressing. There's a lovely section in the book,
she lived for seven years in Singapore and her friend Fanny came to stay with
her, lived with her for a period of time and like dressing is this way in the
19th century, you often see photographs of sisters wearing the same clothes. But
just grown sisters, but occasionally you do get these non-blood relatives who
for whatever reasons I think is a kind of sign of sisterhood who are sharing
garments that are the same, whether it's ribbons, whether it's whole gowns and I
think it's a kind of a signal of attachment, sisterhood and it's as well as
conventional balls. There were so many and it's, it features in the diary. The
other part I loved was the Bachelor Ball, May 4th, 1848, as well as conventional
balls, there were so many fancy dress balls. Why do you think they had such a
fascination at that point in time? It was a brilliant way of being able to dress
in unconventional styles and it was complicated. They were really good at coming
up with all sorts of different costumes and there's a brilliant, the swatch in
the book is the dress of Dolly Varden. Dolly Varden was a character in Charles
Dickens' Barnaby Raj and she dresses, she's kind of on the fringes, Dolly Varden
of polite society, she's a barmaid and so the chance for this middle class woman
to dress up in slightly risque costumes didn't come along very often and it's a
brilliant swatch. I loved reading about them and also some of the mannerisms
that they would have or how they'd leave, I suppose, their norms at the door
when they dressed up. But also I was fascinated by the story of Mrs Margaret
Charnock, her cook, very unusual to have fabric from that woman. Really unusual.
The working class dress doesn't really survive in museums. It wasn't often
collected, it just didn't make it to that kind of space. So the census name that
kind of cropped up and I seemed familiar, I knew I recognised it and went back
to the book and found this name Margaret Charnock and yes, she had been Adam and
Anne's cook for a long time but you just don't see these kind of scraps and
there it is, this lovely colourful piece of cotton. It's just a window, I
suppose, and you begin to get an idea for life and you piece it together and
there's some stuff you know and of course some stuff that we don't know or maybe
we'll never know but you are a fashion historian and I'm wondering when you
thought about all the snipping that Anne did, whether there's somehow to apply
it to the here and now? I think it's a great lesson in valuing cloth actually.
We are used to a much more disposable way of looking at dress and thinking about
clothes and what this I think teaches us is that we could, in a much more
sustainable way, we could think about clothes much more carefully and I did
start to, I have got a book at home that I am toying with the idea of gathering
scraps from people I know because I think it's a very tactile way of remembering
people around us. And before I let you go, Victorian women, they might wear
several outfits in a day. How many would you say is the custom briefly? I think
probably for Anne she was changing three maybe four times a day and yeah there's
a lot of different gowns going on. And so of course then an awful lot of
swatches of fabric that also went into the book. Exactly, yeah it's a beauty.
And only one of two, is that what I read? There's one at the V&A, famous one by
Barbara Johnson, but yeah this is pretty unique. I haven't found any others
here. So lovely to have you in, Kate Strassen, fashion historian as I mentioned
and her book is The Dress Diary of Mrs Anne Sykes. Thanks so much for coming in.
A couple of messages coming in about what you bought yourself after the bad
break up. Sarah, I bought myself two rather expensive designer duvet covers
stocking fabric which I still love to this day. My ex couldn't see why we needed
luxuries. I also get my nails done every fortnight. Country Mouse, he just has
two words. What did she buy herself after the break up? A farm. It helped
hugely. I'll see you on Monday. Thanks so much for tuning in and for all your
messages today on Woman's Hour. Woman's Hour was presented by Nulam Agavan. It
was produced by Sarah Crawley and the studio engineer this morning was Michael
Milham. As you had earlier on Woman's Hour, Shami Mabegam has lost her latest
appeal for her citizenship if you'd like an even closer look at the background
to all this. We've been running a series called the Shami Mabegam story and we
have another episode after the news in a couple of minutes. On BBC iPlayer. Six
robbers have carried out an armed raid stealing almost three tons of gold.
Inspired by Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tons of gold?
Slowly. 26 million pounds worth of pure gold in the possession of people who
didn't expect to have it. If you could handle a job like this, then I'd have
heard of you. You only hear about the people who get caught. Stealing it was
just the start. We're looking for six robbers and three tons of gold. Every
ring, every watch. If you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The
golds. kh