TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Wednesday mornings at 9. BBC News at seven o'clock. Rishi Sunak has defended
the new legislation announced by the government aimed at reducing the number of
people crossing the channel on small boats. Speaking at a news conference in
Downing Street, the Prime Minister insisted the crossings would not end unless
those travelling to Britain unlawfully knew they would be detained, removed
quickly and banned from returning. But the shadow immigration minister Stephen
Kinnock told PM on Radio 4 the government had got it wrong and only a returns
deal with the EU would stop the boats. You've got to put yourself in the mindset
of somebody that wants to come over on the channel, is prepared to pay a people
smuggler five, ten, fifteen thousand pounds and to risk their lives coming
across. The only way that they will not do that is if they know that the moment
they arrive in the UK they will be sent back to continental Europe. We need a
deal with the European Union that puts that clearly in place. A court has heard
that a nine-year-old girl who was killed by a gunman told her mother she was
scared seconds before she was shot dead. Thomas Cashman denies murdering Olivia
Pratt Corbell at her home in Liverpool in August last year. Hundreds of people
are attending a vigil in Cardiff for three people who died when their car left
the road at the weekend and two others who were critically injured in the crash.
Police have confirmed that the five were first reported missing on Saturday
night but their car wasn't discovered until the early hours of Monday morning.
The family and friends of the group have accused officers of not doing all they
could to find them. Gwent police and South Wales police have referred themselves
to the Independent Office for Police Conduct. The senior Conservative
backbencher Sir Graham Brady has announced he'll stand down as an MP at the next
general election. He's overseen the appointment of three Tory leaders in his
role as chairman of the 1922 committee. And Eurovision fans have expressed
disappointment after tickets for this year's event in Liverpool sold out in 90
minutes. Organisers say demand was extremely high. BBC News. It's been 20 years
since America and Britain went to war in Iraq. There were horrible days. In a
new series I examine the build-up to the war. Although it looks as though 9-11
was the trigger, I don't think it really was. Hearing from insiders, some who
haven't spoken until now. Potential for regime change was very high on their
list of priorities. And I look at the legacy. I'm just sad because Iraq is a
great country. Shock and war. Iraq 20 years on. With me, Gordon Carrera. On
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Next Monday to Friday afternoon at 1.45. The actor
Daniel Mays talks about starring as Nathan Detroit in a new immersive production
of the musical Guys and Dolls in a quarter of an hour. And how accessible are
theatres and gig venues, not just for the audiences, but for performers, Front
Row finds out at 7.15. And then File on 4 investigates what happened to the 200
migrant children who went missing from hotels in the UK, used by the Home Office
to temporarily house lone asylum seekers. That's at 8 o'clock. Now on BBC Radio
4, Lily and Josh can't agree on anything. It's the Archers. Did you check out
Courtney's profile then? I did. So, does she get your seal of approval? She
wasn't exactly how you described her, Lily. What do you mean? You said she was
impossible not to like. She is. Look how many followers she's got. I'm not sure
I could live with someone who spends all her time making unboxing videos.
They're really popular, you know. They're stupid. Why would anyone want to watch
a stranger unwrap a load of deliveries? People do, though. I met her selling
kitchens. Now, she's pretty much a full-time influencer. Sorry, Lily, she's just
not housemate material. Are you sure? She'd wind me up, I know it. Well, I
haven't found anyone else. What about my mate Dom? I messaged you about him.
Right. He's one of the catering guys we sometimes use for the barn. Yeah, I had
a look at him online. And? I really don't think so, Josh. Why not? Every post
was of himself flexing his muscles in the mirror. Well, he's into fitness.
Classic narcissist. I think your friend Courtney might fit into that category.
Neither of them, then. That means we're back to square one. I really need to
find someone quickly, though. Absolutely. The sooner the better. Well, I'm
moving in at the weekend, whatever. Fine. Only I want to take some measurements
of the room, if I can. Yeah, sure. I'll be home around six, if that's any good.
I'll say I'm going to the ball with you and Ben. Hang on. You mean you haven't
told your mum you're moving out? Oh, Freddy. What? I know, I should. I think
mum's quite enjoying having me to herself without Russ being in tow. Only now
I'm leaving. And Freddy? Oh, I'm sure he'll take it personally. I just need to
break it to them gently. Lily, could you give me a hand with something? I've got
to go, Josh. Is that your mum? I'll see you later. Just tell her, will you? Bye.
Sorry, I didn't realise you were on the phone. Oh, it was no one. No one?
Nothing. It doesn't matter. You seem a bit... What? I don't know, unsettled.
Really? Lily, is there something you want to tell me? Look, I've been feeling a
bit restless, mum. Like I need to do something different. Like, you see, what
I'm trying to say is I'm moving out. Dad? In here, Helen. You in the middle of
something? No, I've just been on the phone to Jim. Oh? He's going on about these
plans for this electric car charging station. And? Have you been on the website?
No need. I've heard it all from Susan. So, what do you think? Well, it's bigger
than I'd pictured. Jim insists it's going to be a huge blot on the landscape. I
must admit, the size and scale concern me. It's bound to bring more traffic into
the area. And then there's the retail units. Oh, no. I mean, any number of
businesses could be going in there. Not necessarily anything to worry us,
though. Oh, I don't know. A charging station obviously has its environmental
advantages. Yeah. What does the website call it? A forward thinking scheme?
Yeah, but when big business is involved, I can't help feeling suspicious. We
sold some of our land to developers. We know the benefits of that sort of deal.
Yeah, I know. David and Ruth had every right to do what they did. They needed
the money, and I'm sure it helped enormously. There's already a lot of local
opposition, and Jim's determined to lead the fight back. People are wary, aren't
they? Well, just have to keep a close eye on how things develop. At the end of
the day, it could result in more footfall for us. Maybe. Unless a coffee shop or
a convenience store moves in, in which case... We'd have stiff competition. Oh,
who knows? Anyway, Dad, there's something else I wanted to discuss. Oh, yes? My
plans for the dairy. Less controversial, I hope. Actually, I'm really excited.
Adam's ideas for the forest garden have really inspired you, haven't they? He's
right. We should be opening things up where we can, give people more insight
into where their food comes from. Well, perhaps you can tell him what an
influence he's been. It might give him a boost. How do you think he's doing? He
said he's been trying to sort through Jennifer's belongings. Oh, really? Making
slow progress, though, by the sound of it. Well, he's certainly prompted me into
action. Let me show you what I'm thinking. The truth is, Mum, I wasn't even
looking for anywhere else to live. Honestly, I promise you. Lily... But when the
opportunity came up, it just felt right. Lily, it's OK. Really? Well, I have a
slight confession to make. You knew? Only since this morning. I told Josh not to
say anything. Oh, he didn't. It was Aunt Shula. Josh texted her to update the
contract, and she called to see what I thought. But you're fine about it? Well,
I mean, I'd rather have heard from you first. I didn't want to upset you, Mum.
Lily, I'm not... You'd tell me if you were upset, wouldn't you? Yeah, I'm not
upset, and you mustn't worry about me. I'm glad you're thinking about the
future. I didn't think that you'd live here forever, you know. But I do wish
you'd let me know how you were feeling. I might have helped. Thanks, Mum. I
guess it's been creeping up on me for a while now. Wondering if I'll ever move
on. From Rusty, you mean? It's a few things, I suppose. Nolotando was telling me
she's looking for a new place in Durban already. She's just forging ahead. I
mean, it's thousands of miles away, and they've only been broken up a couple of
months, whereas me and Russ... There's no right speed to move on. Sometimes it
takes a bit longer, that's all. Yeah, it's just being with him kind of
compromised things for me. Oh, Lily. I hate the thought of you feeling like he's
spoiled things for you, and this will always be your home, always. Of course.
And I know that, but... I'd be lying if I said I hadn't imagined a future for us
here at Lower Locksley. And now... Now I need a different future. Of course. I
just want to try something new. I need to. And you're so right to. I really hope
it's what you're looking for, darling. Thanks, Mum. So do I. I take it you
haven't told Freddy your plans? I will. He's in the office, if you want to catch
him. Maybe. What is it? I don't want to tell him just yet. I will, but I just
need a bit longer... to sort some things out. Your brother should know. Please
don't say anything, Mum. I'm not comfortable with that, Lily. It won't be for
long. Tell Freddy while I'm away, then. What? You haven't forgotten I'm going on
this course tomorrow. Right. So it'll just be the two of you until Friday
lunchtime. We'll be fine. Just make sure Freddy knows by then. OK. And don't be
so reluctant to share things with me in future, even if they might be difficult.
I'm sorry, Mum. Come here. I'm really going to miss you, Lily. I'll only be down
the road. Doesn't matter. She'll miss you all the same. It's certainly an
interesting idea, Helen. So the window would be here, along this wall, backing
onto the yard. And it would reach right across the dairy and the cheese room.
Yep. So people visiting the forest garden can come over here and see the team
churning the curds and whey. I think customers would love it. They can see how
we make their cheese, yoghurt, ice cream. So we'd be sharing the food journey,
as your mum would say. I found some other dairies online that have installed
similar windows. Restaurant kitchens have been doing it for ages. Right. They
look smart, Dad. Most importantly, they help to engage and educate. We can show
what we do in an organic farm dairy. It would definitely complement everything
we're trying to do here. It makes the dairy much more accessible without really
impacting production. I think it's a brilliant idea, Helen. Well, thanks. Have
you told your mum and Tom? Just now, yeah. They seem to love it. Tom suggested
some sort of shelter for the public in case it's raining. Yes. You'll need a
canopy above the window. So people can watch what's going on, whatever the
weather. We could have a rustic, corrugated roof. Oak beams. Give it that
farmyard feel. Oh, great thinking, Dad. Shabby farmyard agricultural chic. Well,
it sounds like we're all on board. Yeah, and the cost wouldn't be astronomical.
I think it will be a sensible investment, Helen. Exactly. When were you thinking
for installation? Summer, perhaps? Actually... Or even in time for the open farm
Sunday? I'd rather get going as soon as possible. I'm thinking as soon as. The
Easter holidays would be great. Well, that's a nice idea. Why wait? I think we'd
struggle to secure a builder at such short notice. Well, you say that. You
haven't found someone already, have you? I mentioned to Lillian that we needed
someone to do a bit of work for us, and she came up trumps. Really? I was only
hoping to get a quote, but this guy she knows through Amside had a job fall
through, so he could start as soon as we like. Well... Reckons he might be able
to finish the window in a couple of days. That quickly? Yep. He said he'd come
over for a recce tomorrow morning. You really do have the bit between your
teeth. Well, why hang around, Dad? Anyway, he seems as keen as I am to get on
with the job, and comes highly recommended by Lillian. I think you'd better warn
Susan and Clary, then. After all, you'll have to close the dairy while the
work's carried out. I'll see what the timetable is first. Will you just grab the
end of the tape measure, Josh? Yep. Got it. Great. I am sorry, Lily. Why? I
didn't realise Aunty Shula was going to tell your mum about you moving in. Not
that quickly. We can't keep things quiet in our family, Josh. You ought to know
that by now. True. Anyway, I should have said something earlier. Oh, you can let
go, by the way. Ow! Careful. I was just worried about upsetting Mum. Was she OK?
I think so. It's a big change for both of us. So, will your chest of drawers
fit? Should do. Now, all we have to do is find the ideal third person to
complement the household. Actually, I was going to talk to you about that. We
don't like each other's suggestions. Look, I really don't think you've given
Courtney a fair hearing. Veto. Hey! You veto Dom. Yeah, fair enough. Would it
really be so bad if we asked Freddie? I reckon it could work, the three of us.
No, it wouldn't. It might not be as bad as you think. You're right. It would be
much worse. Lily, please... OK, fine. Offer it to Dominic. What? I've changed my
mind. Tell him he can have the room. It's too late now, anyway. What do you
mean? Dom's found somewhere else. Well, there's got to be others. Ambridge isn't
exactly handy for most people. No, but... Our options are pretty limited. Why
not stop wasting time and just ask him? I'll put more effort into looking. It's
a hopeless cause. Please! OK. But if you can't find anyone by the end of the
week, I'm asking Freddie. That won't be necessary. Really? One thing's for sure,
Josh. I've not made this decision to have Freddie follow me here. And we're back
in Ambridge at the same time tomorrow when Kate confides in her dad. In just a
moment, an immersive guise and dolls and the scheme to make the TV industry more
open to the deaf and disabled cast and crew. Then at eight, it's File on 4.
Here's Libby Haddock. As Rishi Sunak announces plans to ban migrants from re-
entering the UK if they cross the Channel in small boats, File on 4 investigates
what's happening to unaccompanied children when they arrive on British soil.
More than 400 teenage asylum seekers who were staying in emergency hotel
accommodation have disappeared since arriving here. 200 are still missing,
raising concerns that some of them have been targeted by gangs and are being
forced into crime. So what's being done to find them? That's File on 4 with me,
Libby Haddock, tonight at eight. Now on BBC Radio 4, it's Front Row with Samira
Ahmed. Hello, tonight, zoot suits and Salvation Army uniforms at the ready.
We're in the world of guise and dolls with Daniel Mays, who could not wait to
get his Nathan Detroit in front of an audience. You get into week five of
rehearsals and all the actors in the room have heard the jokes and you don't get
any of the laughs anymore. You're like, I just need fresh faces. We look into
the big cuts to the BBC's music offering announced today with the BBC Singers
and a fifth of BBC Orchestra players in England losing their jobs. And our
disabled performers getting proper access to live venues and filming work. We
have a special report and hear how a scheme to train access coordinators is
changing the screen industry. Good old reliable Nathan, Nathan Detroit,
organiser of the oldest established permanent floating crap game in New York, in
Lesser and Lowe's much loved musical fable about Prohibition era gamblers and
girlfriends, guise and dolls, is based on the stories of Damon Runyon. In the
new Promenade production at the Bridge Theatre in London, the audience joins him
at the heart of the action in the Salvation Army mission with his long suffering
fiance Adelaide dancing at the Hot Box nightclub and down the sewers at their
secret dice game. For Daniel Mays, whose many acclaimed screen performances
include Vera Drake and Line of Duty, playing Nathan Detroit feels like the
perfect fit. It's a role that's been played by Frank Sinatra in the film and on
stage by Bob Hoskins and Nathan Lane. Earlier I went to interview Daniel Mays in
his dressing room ahead of tonight's performance and asked if, after playing
several tough uncompromising cops, he is enjoying being chased by them rather
than doing the chasing. I've played a lot of cops but I also feel like I've
played characters in the same vein as Nathan Detroit, you know. He's your
archetypal lovable rogue, Nathan, isn't he? And I guess I think I started out
playing rogues early on in my career and then I've progressed on to policemen.
So this does feel like it's something I've attempted before but certainly not a
Bronx accent and certainly not a musical. This is kind of like, it feels like a
whole new adventure for me personally. Yeah, but of course you trained at Italia
Conti. I did. I can't believe this is your first musical. Yeah, I mean it's not
like I have never attempted a musical before but I mean I was at Conti's like 25
years ago. So in many respects it feels like I'm doing it for the first time.
But you can dance. Oh, I can definitely throw some shapes, yeah. I would
describe myself as he's able to throw shapes and he can carry a tune. That's
about as best as I can do. So Frank Lesser said that Nathan Detroit should be
played as a brassy Broadway tough guy who sang with more grits than gravy. Oh,
I've never heard that quote. Maybe I would have played it completely differently
then if I'd have read that. You mentioned the Bronx accent which you really
nail. Tell me about the vocals. The cadences because the way he speaks, the
whole way that people speak in this world is so fabulous. Yeah, I think I've
just watched so many Martin Scorsese films. I took to it like a duck to water.
It's quite a throaty accent. Hey, how you doing? You're talking like this the
whole time, you know what I mean? It's a celebration of New York and the people
of New York and they have to shout to be heard, you know? You want to kind of
immerse yourself in the noise and the smell of New York, you know? And that has
to come through in the characterizations and you know, Nathan is your archetypal
gambler. He runs the crap game. Everybody knows him. He's you know, everyone
likes him, but he's a bit of a ducker and a diver. And so he's got his fingers
in a lot of pies and he has to just roll with it. You know, he's a very he's
street smart and intelligent and he's always one step ahead of the game. And I
think the way in which Nick Heitner is staged this whole musical with it being
such an immersive experience for the audience. I think you have to kind of be
it's I'm hesitant to say cartoonish because that would be doing it a disservice,
but it's it's big but it's truthful. Do you know what I mean? We need a jit,
paying all kinds of rent for a flat that can flatten the Taj Mahal. Call it sad,
call it funny, but it's better than even money that the guy's only doing it for
some doll. When you get into the second act and he's getting rinsed for all his
money down in the sewer, you know, you have real sort of elements of high pathos
and drama with him as well. And I think that's probably why they've come to me.
You know, I want to push the comedic element as much as I can. But when it does
get to the serious storyline, I, you know, he can't commit to Adelaide. He's
afraid of commitment. Lots of people couldn't identify with that. You want to
play that to the hill as well. Well, I thought it was a bizarre coincidence that
he's been engaged for 14 years to Adelaide. And you and your partner have been
together for 14 years. I know my wedding day was the best day of my life. If I
was any advice today for the draw, I'd say, what are you worried about? Just get
on and do it. You'll have a fantastic day. Yeah. But also your partnership with
Marisha Wallace, who plays Adelaide. Yeah. It's so moving because as you hinted,
it's not just comedic. You're both romantics. Yeah. And there's something very
genuine and touching about her, you know, great passion for you. She can't give
you up and her eternal optimism that one day you'll marry her. And you, you
know, tell me about your partnership because it's completely the heart of the
show. She is the whole package. She's a powerhouse. She's got the voice to back
it up. She's a fantastic actor. One level, it's superficially like a George and
Mildred sitcom where, you know, you're trying to run away and she wants to, you
know, she wants to be in control. But actually, it's not like that at all. It's
a beautiful, loving relationship. Yeah, they are. I mean, that's what's so
endearing about both of them is that they are, after 14 years, head over heels
in love with one another. I think lots of people can relate to their
relationship. You know, people that have been in longstanding marriages and
things like that. You know, you're intrinsically attached to one another and you
just have to get on with it. You mentioned the immersive staging. So it's like
Broadway is brought to life. People are wandering around and there are people
dressed as cops directing the traffic to close off areas where then the stage
arises and we were in the crack game or where, you know, we're with you in Cuba
or wherever, you know, it is that Skymasters and take Sarah Brown. How is it
performing a show like Guys and Dolls absolutely with the audience and also
delivering the jokes with that audience? I think the way in which we've staged
it is the thing that sets it apart. I have to give a huge shout out to the stage
management team and our ushers who, you know, move the audience around as the
stage shifts and moves. I think, you know, what they're doing is equally as
impressive as what we're up to on the actual platforms itself. So marriage of
both those things. It's been meticulously planned. I mean, you know, this has
been a year in the making that Nick Heitner has put together. So in terms of
what it brings to the actual production, I think it just elevates the joyous
nature of the whole thing. I think the audience themselves love being part of
the action. They love walking the streets of Broadway. They love being down in
the sewers at the crack game or watching Adelaide in the hot box or going to
Havana. Can I ask about the feel of the costumes as well? You have these great
threads. And, you know, the fact that the cadences of this world of Guys and
Dolls is so powerful. I always wonder if you come out and you kind of go home
and you call your missus. Hey, doll. She wouldn't stand for that. I know that. I
wouldn't get through the front door. Hey, doll, where's my dinner? No, no, no. I
wouldn't say that. I mean, listen, the whole thing is designed brilliantly by
Bonnie Christie. Christie O's, who's the costumes and the set and everything.
But I mean, as soon as you get into a three piece suit and the braces are on and
the trousers are up here, you know, you instantly you stand differently. And I'm
looking at Nathan's hat over there. That in many respects has come a great prop
to me. I'm flipping it around and spinning it. And I've just tried to I think,
you know, this is a long run. It's Guys and Dolls. And I'm like, let's just have
as much fun with this character in this production as you possibly can. I think
I thought is in the current age, there's a bit of an obsession with trigger
warnings. And it's interesting that Guys and Dolls superficially from the very
title would seem risky and would seem to be full of gender stereotypes. But
actually, the plot of it, the songs of it, it totally works. It carries the
audience. What's the secret of its enduring timelessness? The songs, I think
they speak for themselves. It's it's how the characters leap off. Damon Runyon's
creations are just a joy to bring to life. There's a timelessness about it,
without doubt. I think it's like a Shakespearean comedy of the 1940s and of the
up to some extent of the underclass, isn't it? Yes. And I mean, of course, it's
described as a as a fable of Broadway. Do you have a favorite moment or a
favorite number, favorite scene? I mean, I have to say throughout the rehearsals
and then when you finally have meet the orchestra and the band are there. And I
had a number of moments where the hairs on the back of my neck were standing up.
First time I heard Luck Be A Lady sung out was incredible. So let's keep the
party so light. So let's keep the party so light. Never get out of my sight.
Never get out of my sight. Stick with me baby. Stick with me baby. Stick with me
baby. Be a lady, Luck. But of course, the huge set piece in this show is Sit
Down, You're Rocking the Boat. And it's led by the phenomenal Cedric Neill,
who's playing nicely, nicely. It's the most thrilling thing I've ever been
involved in on stage. And it's a an amazing example of ensemble acting and
performing together. I have to say the first time we performed it in front of an
audience was the dress rehearsal. And there was only 150 people in the house. I
got ridiculously emotional halfway through because I suddenly went, this is why
we do it. This is the moment. This is why we had all of those rehearsals where
we were like pulling our hair out. We've got to do it again and again. But once
you get it in front of an audience and the reaction, it makes it so worthwhile.
Daniel Mays, whose stage partnership with Marisha Wallace is utter perfection.
Guys and Dolls is on at the Bridge Theatre in London until the start of
September. Major news today from the BBC about the future of its classical
orchestras and choirs and a furious reaction from many in the music world. The
BBC is shutting down the BBC Singers, their only professional choir, just six
months before its centenary. The BBC are also cutting a fifth of salaried roles
in the BBC's English Orchestra, Symphony, Concert and Philharmonic. The BBC said
it was part of a plan that prioritises quality, agility and impact and would
create agile assemblies to work with more musicians and broadcasting from more
venues around the country. Mezzo-soprano Jennifer Johnston has just said that
she is utterly shocked by the decision to close the BBC Singers, one of the
BBC's major assets, she says, and one of the world's finest choirs, short-
sighted and devastating. Well, Simon Webb is the BBC's head of orchestras and
choirs. He joins me now in the studio, along with Naomi Pohl, who is the chief
executive of the Musicians' Union, which has expressed their concern about these
decisions. Simon and Naomi, thank you both. Simon, first, how much money are
these changes going to save? We're saving 20% of what is invested in our
ensembles by the licence fee. That was a figure that was announced by Tim Davie
about a year ago. How much money, though, is that? What's the amount? We don't
discuss in these sort of interviews the actual numbers. It's in our annual
report and accounts how much those ensembles cost and the 20% of that. But
what's also really important in this, and it's why I'm so pleased, Naomi, you're
here, is that this is also the start of a consultation. We've said, I've said,
you know, we have this much money. This is what we can afford. We have to make
some tough decisions. We can't carry on as we are, and we need to do something
that means that we're serving our audiences. This is about reach. This is about
impact. And we have to make some really difficult decisions to deliver that.
You're cutting a fifth of salaried orchestra posts in England. Why that number?
We worked through, it wasn't the actual, the number of the fifth is where we
came to, to try to balance the savings we had to achieve. Now, what we've said
is, you know, what we believe is the maximum we would have to do to achieve
those savings. And now we open a consultation with Naomi and her colleagues and
we try to work out the best way through that. We've set out our stall. We've
said. But you're doing them. So consultation won't change that. Well,
consultation may change that. That's the nature of consultation, is that we will
talk to Naomi and her colleagues and say, what is the best way to achieve this?
We have to achieve the savings. What we have to do is say, we know what our
funding is in this licence fee period for 2027. That in a sense is a real luxury
to have, but we know it's not enough. So we need to do, we need to make changes
now to ensure that we are sustainable, financially sustainable into the
foreseeable future. The word agile, which comes up a few times, it's euphemism
for zero hours contracts, isn't it? No, that's certainly not the thinking behind
this. The point where I'm talking about agility, I mean, certainly that's how
some people would use it, but that's not our thinking. The thinking here is that
we want to be able to serve our audiences in different places, in different
audiences, in different venues. We want to take our ensembles to places we don't
go to now. And to do that, we need to be able to configure things differently.
We also want to be able to work with more collaborators, maybe from different
genres. And we already do this to some extent. But we think that actually,
whilst delivering these savings, we can create a model that allows us to do
that. So it is about being able to move in an agile way, as our orchestras
already do. I mean, let's be clear, our orchestras are very, very high standard.
What they do is extraordinary. We want to build on that base that we have. And
we already have a significant number of freelance musicians working in our
orchestras. These are important colleagues. These are part of the picture
already, as they are for every British orchestra. We're adjusting that balance
because we can't afford to keep working the way we do now. And we want to get
that right. Hence the discussion with the consultation. OK, one other issue, and
then I'll bring in Naomi. The decision to cut BBC Singers has really shocked
many, like Dame Sarah Connolly. It's 20 people. Amos Miller of the Birmingham
Conservatoire says, genuinely can't see how the relatively small cost savings on
an ensemble with so few members can possibly be worth the artistic cost. What do
you say? It was a very hard decision to make. And I spoke to the singers this
morning with my boss, with Lorna, and we went and we spoke to them in person
because it was really important. We knew people would be angry. We knew people
would be upset. And we wanted to front up to them and say, this is not an easy
decision. And people are absolutely right to challenge us. They should, of
course. What we're saying is we have a certain level of investment that we can
put into choral singing. The question we asked with the orchestras as well is,
what is the best way to spend the money we have to serve our audiences? And we
think we see up and down the country, there is choral singing in this country is
a great thing. There's great choral singing around the country. And we want to
find the best place for the BBC to broadcast to audiences and to reach audiences
with the new commissions. And that's how we chose to spend that money. Naomi,
what's the Musicians' Union response to these announcements? Well, obviously,
it's totally devastating for us. It's been a very emotional day. We've had calls
with the musicians who are potentially going to be affected by this. And yeah,
they're shocked. They didn't really necessarily see it coming. It's about
people. It's about people who have what they thought were quite secure jobs.
They've got mortgages. They've got families. They're very concerned about the
future. And we're here to support them individually, but also to think about the
wider impact of this on the sector and the BBC, which, as you say, is the
biggest engager and employer of musicians in the UK. So very dear to our hearts.
And we'll just be trying to save as many jobs as possible. What would you like
to ask Simon about these decisions? Well, I think that's a very good question
about the BBC Singers, because one of our first thoughts was it's a relatively
small ensemble. So you want to reach more parts of the country. You want to work
with more diverse music groups and choirs. Why can't you do that and continue to
employ the BBC Singers? And my answer to that is, as I say, we have a limited
amount of money and we have to find a way to spend that in the way that achieves
what we're setting out to do, exactly that, to reach as many people as we can.
I'm not going to say we didn't look at other options. We looked at all sorts of
options to deliver this and we tested those really hard. With who? How did you
test those options? Well, the first thing that we did was, in fact, but long
before I was in this job, there was a review of classical music provision from
the BBC and that was published last April, I think, quite a few months ago. And
that was a consultation with the wider sector. That was asked the question of
what role does the BBC play in the wider sector? Where do we sit in that place?
So we had that review and then we have the financial reality of a flat licence
fee settlement and how do we spend the money we've got? And what I am genuinely
really looking forward to, and Naomi, I hope, knows this, is how we then get
into the room and talk together to work this out because that consultation is
fundamental to this. You're absolutely right to challenge on this and we'll play
some of this out in this broadcast now, of course, but actually we'll be meeting
very soon to dig through the details. Yeah, no, no, it's useful to hear. It's
just puzzling because you've made some decisions like the BBC Singers, which
presumably is not reversible. Am I right? Or could it be? We've announced what
our plans are and we go into a consultation with the union. So it's a plan, but
there's consultation might in theory. Well, I think we have to go into a
consultation with, particularly, you know, as musicians with our ears open to
what comes our way. But there's no question that in this situation we have to
make some very tough choices. What those tough choices are is what the consul,
that of course behind, you know, in the consultation room we will have those
debates. Today's announcement makes a big deal of music education. Yes. Is it
really the BBC's job to solve the long-term crisis in music education in schools
when it seems to be coming at the expense of professional performance and
broadcasting to the nation and internationally? At the BBC, we've been committed
for a long time to education in music and in many, many other areas with
particularly our digital platforms now. This is about building on that, that we
already have. We can do more because we're the BBC. We can do more and we can
reach more people. And that's, I take that as a responsibility. And what we need
to be clear about is that that is part of what we will always do. And that is a
real priority for us. We've talked for some time about education being at the
heart of the BBC orchestras. And actually, I'm consistently challenged from
inside from my colleagues saying, really, is it there? And I'm saying, well,
actually, we need to do better. We need to do more to bring music to younger
people and not just younger people. We need to do more in that area. Naomi, what
do you make of that trade-off? Well, I agree that there's basically, we've got a
multiple funding crisis. So there is certainly an ask here for the government
that they, you know, you freeze the license fee. This is the impact of that.
We've had the Arts Council England decisions that were made at the end of last
year that were also had a devastating impact and there's not enough money for
music education. It's been deprioritized. So these are a lot of the asks that
we're going to have of government. We do a lot of lobbying and campaigning work
at the MU. But I suppose, you know, I'll come back to we want to try and save
jobs. There's got to be other ways to make cuts without having to lose so many
posts. Even if you put all this money that's being saved from these cuts into
classical music somewhere, conductor John Andrews points out it costs a lot more
to make things happen from scratch than with a salaried established
infrastructure in place, doesn't it? If I can just address the first point there
about putting all the money that's been saved back. We are delivering savings.
We're not putting everything back in because we have to make savings. We cannot
carry on at the level we're carrying on financially because the money simply
isn't available to do that. So that's important to understand that the savings
are the catalyst for this change. But actually, I mean, he's right to say if we
were starting from scratch, but we're not starting from scratch. There's
wonderful performances up and down the country, which are not broadcast and we
need to find a way to work with people where we can bring that into the BBC
broadcast onto Radio 3 to reach more people and we need to work with colleagues
to make that we already do this. We need to do more. But at this time, the BBC
has been cutting live broadcasts of concerts. So it sounds like, is this like
what happened with libraries, to use a metaphor, where you close down the
professional service and you expect it to be done, well, in this case by
freelancers rather than amateurs? I mean, it's the BBC giving up a claim to be
at the heart of the nation's music output and kind of the cultural institution.
We are certainly a cultural institution. And I think that's a really critical
part of what we do. There is no stepping back from live broadcast. There's no
stepping back from live performance. But by giving up things like the BBC
Singers, which is so acclaimed and it's so few jobs, and you know, you haven't
talked about the individual amounts of money. So people are saying, you know,
this does more damage than it could possibly save. That, I guess, is the view of
some in the classical world. And I acknowledge that view. And I think this is
the debate we do need to have. I'm not shying away from that at all. I would
say, though, that with the money that we do have, how do we best invest that?
And we have had a really strong model, which we now can't afford because the
money isn't there. Can I just say, it seems very refreshing that you are saying
you don't want to make these cuts, but you haven't got enough money after the
freeze in the licence fee. That's what you are saying. This is the simple truth.
Yeah. I, you know, I knew that there were tough choices to make when I took on
this job. And I didn't know what choices I would make. And people had
assumptions about what I would do. And what I've tried to do is bring a creative
response to, frankly, an impossible equation. And I think that's why I keep
returning to the point of the consultation, because, and I said to Naomi at the
Association of British Authorities Conference, we met there, we had a chat, and
I said, look, whatever I come up with to try to get through this, we then talk.
Okay. Thank you. What's going to happen next then, briefly? Yeah, well, we, I
mean, basically, this is going to be our key focus this week, but on an ongoing
basis. So we are going to be meeting on Friday. We're also going to be talking
to our stewards, who are the representatives of the musicians and the singers in
the ensembles. We're going to be consulting them. So we very much want to take
part in the consultation because we want to see if there's any way of saving
jobs. And we have to be creative. So we have to talk about income generation. We
have to talk about partnerships. We have to talk about ways that we can prevent
this plan going ahead, frankly. Okay. Naomi Poole, Simon Webb, thank you both. I
know that this is a subject we will talk about as you have more to tell us. Now,
two years ago, the acclaimed screenwriter Jack Thorne gave the MacTaggart
Lecture about the shocking ongoing treatment of disabled performers in the TV
industry. In one distressing example, he described how an actor friend had to
crawl around on set and not eat or drink because there was no disabled toilet.
Since then, there's been a concerted industry effort to improve things. Tonight,
we're going to talk about how. I'll be discussing the screen industry's
introduction of paid access coordinators shortly. But first, we're going to look
at the situation on stage. Carolyn Atkinson's been hearing from performers
who've had their professional opportunities limited. This is award-winning
actor-director Jamie Hale performing their show Not Dying. We both know that we
don't get by on our talent. We get by on how easily impressed people are by
every single ridiculous thing we do. Drink from a bottle of water. Oh, I love
how you just unscrewed that and drank from it. Look at a book. Oh, well done,
darling, but the children's section is over there. Get a job. You know, it's so
nice of them to let you work here. Speak. I didn't know that you could talk. But
last month, during a competition to take it to the Edinburgh Festival, as a
wheelchair user, they were unable to access the main stage where the other
shortlisted candidates were performing. Instead, they had to relocate to the
separate studio area, and so they decided to very publicly withdraw. I don't
have equality under the law, and I can't do this. So I'm withdrawing from the
competition, and I didn't know until I started speaking whether I would actually
have the courage to go through with this. But as a disabled person, I have been
faced in a situation that is fundamentally unequal, and I owe it to other
disabled people not to go through with this. It's brave. Across the road. Truly
brave. Go to the supermarket. It's absolutely inspirational. I get it. Access
for performers just isn't put as centrally in the industry as it needs to be. It
becomes an afterthought, and when it's an afterthought, situations like this
arise, in which disabled people are put in positions that aren't equitable with
those of our peers. It's unreasonable, and it limits our opportunities for
career development, professional development, and success. I think all creative
theatre roles are impacted. Ultimately, if we can't get onto the stage, or we
can't get to the lighting deck, or we can't use a toilet, or we can't get into
the building, if we don't have interpreters, so there's nobody who will
communicate with us, if we're not given information in formats we can
understand, how are we meant to have those opportunities? And I think the
industry is beginning to become aware of access for audiences incrementally, and
possibly more so for performers. But I think a lot of those other roles around
lighting, sound, direction, they're just seen as roles that it's impossible to
make accessible, and so disabled people don't get the opportunity to start out.
The competition Jamie Hale was taking part in was run by a company called Les
Enfants Terribles, or LET, who told Front Row it brought to the surface really
important issues that the industry needs to address, and they want to recognise
Jamie and the stand they took on behalf not only of themselves, but also others.
LET went on to say access for the event was below the standards they strive for
as a company, and for that they are sorry. Yeah, yeah, awesome! Come on, man! My
man! LET are now working with the wider industry to find solutions. The stress
and impact on the careers of some disabled artists goes beyond theatres and arts
venues. Sanjeev Mann has Duchenne muscular dystrophy and is a wheelchair user.
AKA Superman on the Beat, he is a music producer and DJ. I started making beats
in lockdown. So when I do sets, it's normally me playing the music that I've
produced with artists that I've got tracks with, so they sort of perform tracks
that I've got. So we turned up at the venue and my friend had told them two
months in advance that we need access to the stage. But then when we got to the
venue, they just said that we don't have a ramp, so you won't be able to perform
on stage. And it was really disappointing, just like how blase it was. They were
just like, oh, you just can't perform. That was it. I was like, well, it's not
really good enough just to say that. There's not really a reason. I thought I'd
give them a second chance because anybody can sort of make a mistake all over.
So I was just like, yeah, we could go again and see. So we told them I need a
ramp to get on the stage. So they said, yeah, that was fine. And a couple of
days before, they actually wanted me to pay for the ramp. So they told me how
much it was and I was just like, I don't think I should be paying to get on the
stage. I think it was around 150. It seems like it's an issue, like if that's
happening to me, then how many other people is that happening to? And I've seen
the email he received, which said, nowhere do we state that the stage is
accessible. But the law is on the side of performers like Sanjeev. The Equality
and Human Rights Commission, which covers England, Scotland and Wales, says all
venues like theatres, concert halls and clubs have to comply with the Equality
Act and make reasonable adjustments for employees as well as audiences. Sanjeev
has now launched a petition demanding the government provide funding to make
venues more accessible. And he's now got a monthly residency at a fully
accessible venue. It was really cool just to be on stage because I don't know
what this is like. So it was cool to actually be on stage with other artists
just alongside them, which kind of made me feel, yeah, it kind of made me feel
equal, like I was supposed to be there, rather than just like some guy on the
side sort of thing. So, yeah, that really gave me the positivity to really keep
going with it. So while some venues are ensuring creative performers and
backstage staff are supported, others certainly aren't. So what might a solution
be? The Greyeye Theatre Company, dubbed the National Theatre for Disabled
People, has led the way on making theatre work for everyone. Back in 1991, it
employed the first ever paid access coordinator to make sure all aspects of
access are included in the creative process right from the start. James Hadrill,
the Artistic Director of the Greenwich Theatre, where Jamie Hale resigned on
stage, thinks it could be the answer. In order for this to change across the
industry, what we need to buy into is a commitment to the employment of paid
access coordinators, because it is true at Greenwich, we only have a small team,
but we do have eight full-time staff, we don't have an access coordinator. And
it's true at so many other venues. So when you sit at a staff meeting around a
table, the marketing manager will advocate to spend the budget on marketing, the
green champion will do the same for green initiatives, the education officer
will do the same for educational activity, but there isn't anyone solely there
to wave the flag for access initiatives or access improvements. Those
conversations will happen, but no one will directly champion them. So an
industry-wide commitment to paid roles in that area, I think, would make a huge
difference. James Hadrill ending that report from Carolyn Atkinson. Well, as we
heard, Greyeye introduced the role of access coordinators back in the 90s, and
some other arts venues also employ them. And film and TV companies are now
coming on board. Joining me live in the studio is Sara Johnson, a former head of
drama at Sky and executive producer of The A Word on the BBC. And on the line is
actor Julie Fernandes, best known for her role in The Office, who is now working
as an access coordinator. They've been training the first cohort of access
coordinators in film and TV, funded by the industry training body UK Screen
Skills. So, welcome to you both. Sara, first, what's the status of this scheme
then within the screen industry? It's an old role, as we've heard, but emergent
and coming into productions now as a paid role. So people are signing up for it?
Broadcasters. It's part of the work that's carried on from Jack and the
McTaggart, and Jack and Katie and everyone in underlying health condition, that
lobby group, and the TV access project, which has member partners across
broadcasters and everybody. It's one of the things that is being... Julie,
you've been an access coordinator for a while. Can you spell out the range of
things you do? Sure. So an access coordinator hopefully gets on board as soon as
green light, so as soon as the commission starts. And there's three major parts
to it. So you get involved in the pre-production. And what that basically means
is as access coordinator, I will work with all cast, crew and production staff
members who are deaf, disabled and neurodivergent. It's my responsibility to
find out what their access requirements are. And then I work with all the
different heads of departments in a production, with a production secretary and
the stunt team, and support the production in putting all of those access
requirements in place. Then I will be on set during the filming process to help
everything run smoothly. And then I would get involved in the post-production
and marketing and PR. And it really is an amazing role. How, when you get
involved in the post-production and marketing and PR, I'm interested in what you
do there, because people just think about the literal physical access, don't
they? Yeah, you know, it's so different depending. So, you know, what the access
requirements of someone who's physically disabled or deaf needs is quite
different to what someone who's neurodivergent needs. So, I mean, ideally, if
you come in at the beginning as an access coordinator, you'd have a look at the
script and you'd advise on the tone and language for the era that the script's
written. You'd get involved in making sure that the writer's room is accessible,
the auditioning process is accessible, and then you would work with all the
heads of departments and look at making sure stunt scenes are accessible,
working with the production secretary to make sure that the hotels that they're
booking for, say, cast members, really are accessible. The big difficulty here
is lots of businesses, hotels, for example, will advertise themselves as
disabled friendly. But when you start digging down into the details, you'll
often find, for example, that there's no shower seat in the shower, which means
a disabled person can't clean themselves. And it's important. So, you know,
there's a whole range of stuff that we get involved in, in order to allow
disabled people to be creatively brilliant and not concerned about how am I
going to go to the toilet. Absolutely, thorough. We can take it all the way
through the process. So a lot of my experience is at channels. And if you are
employing deaf, disabled, neurodivergent cast members, then you want to make
sure that the language, that everything is accessible the whole way through the
process. And if you think about all of the pieces of how something comes to
screen, there's press junkets, there's language out there. You need to make sure
that you're having that disabled performer at the centre in their comfort zone,
making sure that you're appropriate and you understand everything from a 360
degree view. You know, there might be some people wondering, isn't there, I
mean, they are paid roles. So isn't there a cost to this that might seem right,
rightly or wrongly as unaffordable to some productions? We are working very,
very hard to make it affordable for production. It's never been more expensive
to film. And there are the industries trying to make itself better on every
level. And so what we're trying to do is formalise the process at the beginning
that Julie will go in three to five days, try to see what's there, what they can
put in place, the education piece, the practical side of things, and then set
themselves up ready to encourage disclosure. It's a process. Whether that
disclosure comes, whether people feel safe to disclose, means that the rest of
the job is ad hoc. Who's going to come through? What do they need? How can we
work? People are educated each time they use an access coordinator and will
carry that education forward. Julie, having the coordinators is one thing. I was
thinking about physical equipment, you know, accessible trailers. I was
astounded to read that apparently there are only two accessible trailers in the
whole country. Is this sort of thing changing? I mean, if you don't have the
things that you need to hire? I know it's ridiculous, really. I mean, I'm access
coordinating on Silent Witness, for example, and I've just access coordinated
for an amazing four-part drama for Channel 5 for Clapperboard. And it's great.
They've really taken to this role and they've really promoted it and taken it on
board. The difficulty often comes when we're dealing then with external
companies that we as a production need to be involved in, and the lack of
accessible trailers and toilets. And even, you know, like when we're out on
location, often when you're on location shoots, the lunch that gets brought in
from an external company, you have to climb steps to get on a platform, to reach
up to get the food, to climb down again. The whole process is really rather
inaccessible. So a big part of the work that Sarah and I are doing, but Sarah
especially, is working with a lot of the external companies to promote why they
need to have more accessible equipment. Let's face it, one fifth of the world
population is deaf, disabled and or neurodivergent. There's a lot of us out
there. And I'm plugged into... So I'm plugged into the work of the TV Access
Project and this pan-broadcaster, pan-industry response. They're looking at
every single part of this facility, studios, funding. Access coordinators are
one piece of the jigsaw that you can put in place now that ensures the dignity
and safety of people working. Julia's mentioned Liz Carr in Silent Witness, and
we celebrate great actors like her, of course, Sarah, and she happens to use a
wheelchair, partly because it's still rare. But how far do you think we will or
should notice on screen the impact of the work of this access coordinator
scheme? I think on screen, all the broadcasters are understanding that they need
to reflect society. And so I think on screen, diversity and disability
representation is potentially going to go quicker. As for realising the work of
the access coordinator, if you've got a happy deaf, disabled, neurodivergent
actor or presenter doing a job that they can concentrate on and be brilliant,
then let's hope that there's been an access coordinator behind the scenes.
Julia, I was thinking, you know, we do often, I think, or sometimes some of us
think about visible issues when you think of disability. And I wonder how far it
affects whether employees think that they need an access coordinator. Oh, we
don't need one. We don't think we have anyone who has any needs. And that's a
really good point, Samira. A lot of people that I work with as an access
coordinator are neurodivergent. So we're talking about a whole range of health
conditions that are invisible. And the vast majority of those people that I work
with initially don't want to disclose that they are neurodivergent for fear that
they're going to be discriminated against. But having a disabled access
coordinator, and I think this is absolutely key, that access coordinators are
themselves disabled because we speak the language, we understand the nuances and
we live it ourselves. So we can have that conversation to build confidence in
the people that we work with, as well as educating the non-disabled people on
the production to make sure people feel safe to disclose. Again, because it's
about supporting people to be creatively brilliant. Fantastic. Sadly, we have to
leave it there. But Julia Fernandes, Sara Johnson, thank you so much. Good luck
with the scheme. It does feel like it's a real game changer. On tomorrow night's
Front Row, Carol Churchill's classic play Top Girls, a new 40th anniversary
production opens at the Liverpool Everyman on International Women's Day. And the
duty of care that publishers and literary agents have to memoirists. Join Nick
from Salford at 7.15. Front Row was presented by Samira Ahmed and the producer
was Julian May. Studio Engineer was Sue Mayo. On BBC Sounds.