TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Dawn. Southern areas of the UK will be cloudy, with Shari Ray moving southwards
through the night. Hello, good evening. It's 10 o'clock. Welcome to The World
Tonight. I'm Rosia Iqbal. As China's top diplomat meets President Putin in
Moscow, what are the dangers of a military alliance between Beijing and Russia?
I think it is worrying, but I also think it's a strategic disaster for the
Russians that affectively. Russia is going to become a raw material colony for
China. Also tonight, why is Donald Trump visiting the site in an Ohio town where
a train derailment resulted in the spewing of toxic chemicals? 19 days ago,
tragedy struck this wonderful village and rocked the lives of people throughout
this area, long beyond this area. We'll examine the political fallout and
Starbucks says it's launching a new range of coffees infused with olive oil at
its stores in Italy. How will that go down? I am curious. I want to go and taste
it. Well, let's say that the whole generation of Italian, they will never go and
try it because they are very traditional. So they just order espresso. That's
all after the BBC News read tonight by Charles Carroll. The UN Secretary
General, Antonia Guterres, has condemned Russia, a permanent Security Council
member during an address in New York ahead of Friday's first anniversary of the
invasion of Ukraine. Kiev and its allies are hoping that an overwhelming
majority of countries will back a UN General Assembly motion calling on Russia
to withdraw from Ukrainian territories. Mr Guterres said the attack had
undermined the UN Charter and he also said threats to use tactical nuclear
weapons were utterly unacceptable. The one year mark of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine stands as a grim milestone for the people of Ukraine and for the
international community. That invasion is an affront to our collective
conscience. It is a violation of United Nations Charter and international law.
The Russian president Vladimir Putin appears to have confirmed that China's
leader Xi Jinping is planning to visit Moscow after holding talks with senior
Chinese officials at the Kremlin. President Putin then went on to address crowds
filling Moscow's main stadium for a patriotic gala from where our Russia editor
Steve Rosenberg reports. At the stadium which hosted the 2018 Football World Cup
Final, patriotic pop songs were the warm-up act plus speeches reminding Russians
that their country had defeated Napoleon and Hitler and would be victorious in
Ukraine. The Kremlin leader declared right now there is a battle on our
historical frontiers for our people. They are fighting heroically, courageously,
bravely. Three cheers, hoorah! Three cheers, hoorah! Not everyone here though
was so enthusiastic. In temperatures of minus 15, we saw large crowds streaming
away from the stadium even before Vladimir Putin arrived. The Home Office has
announced that 12,000 asylum seekers can be granted refugee status without ever
being interviewed face to face. Migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Libya, Syria
and Yemen who applied for asylum before last July will have their cases decided
on the basis of a questionnaire. The move is designed to reduce the asylum
backlog which the Prime Minister pledged to eradicate by the end of the year.
Our Home Editor Mark Easton reports. The Home Office insists this is an
effective way to process asylum seekers from five countries which have an
acceptance rate of more than 95 percent. All the usual security and criminal
checks will be conducted and biometrics taken, but for the first time a cohort
of 12,000 asylum seekers will not be required to attend a face to face
interview. Instead, if they applied for asylum before last July, they will have
to fill out a form. Having previously stressed the importance of in-person
interviews, the Home Office is likely to face criticism that the fast tracking
weakens checks for identifying individuals with no right to be in the UK.
Lawyers for Shmima Begum have said that they will continue fighting for her to
be allowed back into the UK after losing the latest stage of their legal battle.
Ms Begum's British citizenship was revoked after she travelled to Syria to join
the Islamic State Group as a schoolgirl. Today, the Special Immigration Appeals
Commission rejected her attempt to overturn that decision despite accepting that
there was evidence she had been a victim of trafficking. Here's our Home and
Legal correspondent Dominic Cagiani. Mr Justice J said Ms Begum's case had
caused the Commission great concern and difficulty. Not only had there been
credible evidence that Ms Begum had been groomed as a child to go to Syria to be
sexually exploited there, British agencies had also arguably failed to stop that
from happening. While those findings are unprecedented, the semi-secret courts
also concluded that the then Home Secretary, Sajid Javid, had used his powers
lawfully to strip Ms Begum of her nationality in 2019. The Commission said those
powers were squarely aimed at protecting the public and Parliament hadn't told
ministers to first consider whether someone was a trafficking victim. The
panel's admission that it struggled to resolve these complex legal questions
means that Ms Begum's lawyers are already planning to challenge the ruling. An
off-duty police officer has been shot in the town of Oma in County Tyrone. A
spokesperson for the Police Service of Northern Ireland has said the man was
injured at a sports complex just before eight o'clock this evening. He was taken
to hospital in Londonderry where his condition is not known. Tesco and Aldi have
become the latest major supermarkets to introduce limits on the sale of certain
fruit and vegetables, including tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. Asda and
Morrisons have already imposed restrictions because of stock shortages caused by
extreme weather affecting harvests abroad. Fraser McEvitt from the industry
analysts, Cantar, said prices at the tills could go up. One item in six in a
supermarket trolley is actually fruit, veg or salad and prices were already
going up at a really high rate before this latest shortage. So for instance
price of cucumber up 42 percent. Price of two and a half kilo bag of potatoes
was up about 22 percent. So these prices are really hitting people's budgets.
The U.S. State Department says it's extremely concerned about violence in Israel
and the occupied West Bank. The Israeli military killed at least 10 Palestinians
and wounded dozens of others in what it called a counter-terrorism operation. A
senior Palestinian official described the shootings as a massacre. And the Six
Nations match between Wales and England will now go ahead on Saturday after the
Welsh players dropped a threat to go on strike. They were angry about contracts
they'd been offered by the Welsh Rugby Union but a compromise was reached this
evening during talks between the two sides. The team's captain, Ken Owens, said
the players were relieved at the outcome. It has been tough but we are fronted
up in training. We've prepared as we would for any test match over the last 10
days since sort of the announcement came. You know, we're looking forward to
getting out on Saturday and I'm going to talk against England. And that was Ken
Owens. Charles, thank you. You're listening to The World Tonight with Razia
Iqbal. It's been a busy day for President Putin of Russia. Just two days before
the first anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine, he's held a rally or festival
in a football stadium, hailing Russian soldiers hundreds of miles away fighting
in Ukraine. He called on the crowds to chant Russia, Russia to show their
support for those he said were defending the homeland. And the stadium was
filled with people who were willing to show their solidarity with their
president and their army. Russia! Everything that is happening today, this
consolidation of national unity, is even reminiscent of the great patriotic war.
So we all have to be together. We have to support each other. And of course, we
have to win. The president really needs our support at this time. The support of
society, the support to be the leader of the nation. He is going in the right
direction. We fully agree with him and we want our country to end the war as
soon as possible. And for that, the people must be mobilized around the leader
of the nation. Today, the whole country is here. Well, President Putin also made
time for some important diplomatic engagement. He met with China's top diplomat
Wang Yi sent by President Xi Jinping to strengthen ties between the two
countries. First though, on the rally or concert. I've been speaking to our
Russia editor Steve Rosenberg. This concert, this rally that was organized by
the Kremlin, it wasn't advertised anywhere. You had to get tickets for it, but
it wasn't clear where you could get tickets for it. What I find fascinating is
the Kremlin claims that Vladimir Putin is super popular in Russia. But when it
tries to organize a sort of pro-Putin rally, it has to go to extraordinary
lengths to bring people out onto the streets. So people were busting from the
Moscow region, from factories and from state enterprises and from colleges. Many
of them were given the day off as encouragement. There were some reports that
some people were paid several hundred rubles to attend. And speaking to people
in the crowd where there were people who were very firm Putin supporters and
said that they supported their president and they supported the special military
operation in Ukraine. Other people seem to be just happy to have been given the
day off. What are we to make then of the messaging that came in the speech? What
was President Putin trying to say to people? I think basically one year after
the start of this operation, the invasion of Ukraine that he ordered, this was
an attempt by Vladimir Putin to appeal directly to the masses, to the Russian
people and to basically deliver a patriotic pep talk to say that what he'd done
was right and to talk about the heroism that he believes Russian soldiers are
showing in Ukraine. There are battles going on right now on our historical
frontiers for our people. Courageous warriors are fighting, just like the ones
that are standing here with us now. They are battling bravely and heroically. We
are proud of them. Let's give them three cheers. And away from the arena, away
from the festival as it's being described, the concert, there's been diplomacy
taking place between China's top diplomat Wang Yi and Mr Putin and the foreign
minister Sergei Lavrov. That's right. I mean, Vladimir Putin wasn't just putting
an appearance at a football stadium today. He had some diplomacy to deal with.
Russia and China obviously are close allies and there is talk about China trying
to play a diplomatic role here in resolving the conflict in Ukraine. Not exactly
an honest broker here. Also, China doesn't have a great deal of experience at
brokering peace deals. But the biggest problem I think that exists here in terms
of achieving peace is that neither Russia nor Ukraine really, I think, are
interested in making any concessions. That was our Russia editor, Steve
Rosenberg. Well, let's look at that diplomatic relationship in a little more
detail that's become particularly important and has deepened since Russia
invaded Ukraine a year ago. China abstained from the UN resolutions condemning
the act of aggression and in the past few weeks, the United States has expressed
fears that China may be considering supplying lethal weapons to Russia.
President Xi of China sent his envoy Wang Yi who said as he met President Putin
that the two sides would deepen political mutual trust and strategic
cooperation. Let's speak to Steve Tsang who is director of the Sowaz China
Institute in London. Good evening. Good evening. First of all, how would you
characterise the relationship between China and Russia now, nearly a year into
that invasion by Russia of Ukraine? It remains a strong strategic partnership.
They are not formal airlines, but the Chinese government is supporting Putin. In
fact, China's policy is one of declaring neutrality, but supporting Putin
without paying a price. And when we look at the fears and the anxieties
expressed by the United States very recently, the Secretary of State Antony
Blinken saying that China was considering supplying lethal weapons to Russia,
how much credence should we give to that and what would those lethal weapons be?
Well, I think at the moment, China is not ready to supply lethal weapons to
Russia. And the reason why is that the United States and Western powers have
made it clear that the supply of weapons will trigger secondary sanctions
against China. And the formulation of not paying any price will require China
not being subjected to sanctions, so they won't supply weapons. But is there
also some indication that some Chinese companies are supplying civilian drones,
which could be exploiting that kind of grey area between military and civilian
purposes? Oh, you are absolutely right there. Anything else that will not
trigger secondary sanctions, the Chinese are willing to supply to Russia. So
there are items which are very useful to the Russian military that would be
supplied by the Chinese. They are just not supplying items that will trigger
secondary sanctions. Okay, but is there… So the secondary sanctions are a red
line for China, but are there circumstances in that might change, which will
mean China's policy on this could shift? I think we are looking at a situation
whereby the Ukrainians will actually be invading Russian territory with the
support of NATO and the United States. If we should ever get into such a
situation, the Chinese may well review their situation. But anything short of
that, I don't think it is very likely. It is interesting, isn't it, that prior
to the invasion of Ukraine, Beijing had a good relationship with Kiev. You are
again absolutely right there. China did have a relationship with Ukraine, which
had signed up to China's Belt and Road Initiative and was an important source of
food security to China. So it was not in China's national interest for Ukraine
to be invaded to begin with. And if China is calculating or had calculated that
they were going to stay neutral in the invasion of Ukraine, there presumably was
an assumption that Russia would prevail. And the war on the ground is not going
as well for Russia as perhaps Moscow might have anticipated. Could that mean
that Beijing would be willing to cut Moscow loose? No, I think the Chinese
support for Russia is so strong at the moment because it is Xi Jinping who wants
to support Putin. And Xi Jinping would not want to see Putin risking falling
from power because of a major misadventure in Ukraine. Imagine what would happen
to Xi Jinping himself if he should invade Taiwan and fail. He's just not going
to allow that scenario to happen. Professor Steve Tsang, director of the Suez
China Institute in London. Thanks for joining us. Well, before we came on air, I
spoke to Bob Sealy, who is the conservative MP for the Isle of Wight. He was a
journalist in the former Soviet Union and also served in the British Army in
Iraq, Afghanistan and Syria. I asked him what he thought about the possibility
of deepening Russia-China cooperation. I think it is worrying, but I also think
it's a strategic disaster for the Russians that effectively Russia is going to
become a raw material colony for China. And Russia is in danger of just becoming
a bigger version of North Korea. I think Putin is doing this because his
virulent hatred of Western liberalism, NATO, the European Union, and I think he
is backing his country into a massive strategic dead end with this partnership
with China. Do you not think that the West should be slightly more guarded than
we have been to date about what appears to be a much more intense realignment
between Beijing and Moscow? Because it does feel as though China is one of the
few countries that can still influence Mr Putin. Yes, you make a very important
point there. Putin hopefully will not use nuclear weapons in the Ukraine war,
but one of the biggest blockers for him not using those weapons is going to be
China saying, this is for us a red line. And so the closer China and Russia
becomes, if that is China allowing Putin a greater leeway with escalation, that
is potentially dangerous. Although it might be that the more influential China
becomes in the Kremlin, the less likely that Putin will have Chinese support for
the use of those tactical nuclear weapons. So I'm not necessarily saying it's
good or bad. What I'm saying is that the Chinese lever over Russia is I think
one of the things that does significantly influence Putin's judgment. And in
your view, how concerned should we be generally speaking about this relationship
in terms of what the United Kingdom has already outlined in the integrated
review when it came to the intelligence services and what they see as the kind
of nascent threat posed by states, both Russia and China on this country in
particular? The 21st century is going to be dominated by a struggle between open
societies, so the United States, North American States, the UK, the European
Union, and closed societies and closed authoritarian societies that will use big
data and artificial intelligence to control human beings rather than liberate
them. And the more that we have an aligning of those closed societies, the more
that those divisions between an open world and a closed world come into stark
contrast. So that is what we are effectively seeing. The Chinese, of course, and
the Russians no doubt would back them in this, see this very much as a
multipolar world versus a unipolar world. They regard the United States
dominance of geopolitics as being the thing that needs to be counted. And in
that context, there could be an emergence of another, a second non-aligned
movement with countries such as South Africa and Brazil and India siding on the
part of Russia and China. I'm not sure they will side on the part of Russia and
China, although clearly there is a battle in the developing world for influence.
I would not assume that the Russian-Chinese alliance is going to be set on stone
because if there is a brighter future for Russia in the next few decades, it is
absolutely going to be re-finding that alliance or that accommodation with the
Western world and effectively becoming part of that Western world. In the
context of how important the United Kingdom s relationship in terms of trade is
with China, to what extent has the United Kingdom got any leeway in terms of
deterring that closeness between Beijing and Moscow? Well, we have more leeway
than we think because we have a very significant trade imbalance with China. So
one of the problems here, we don't have a cross-government approach to China, we
don't have a coherent approach to China. We're trying to deepen trade whilst at
the same time seeing China as a strategic threat. So above all, what we need to
do is have a much more coherent approach and a much more robust approach to be
clear in what we're doing, clear in what we're saying. We need to have Chinese
influence on the Russians so they don't do something really, really stupid in
Ukraine. But at the same time, we need to understand or the Chinese need to
understand that the open world will defend its values. We will trade with China,
but that doesn't mean we have to accept its values, nor indeed will we accept
its dominance. Conservative MP Bob Sealy. Now, the long-awaited white paper on
football governance is set to be published tomorrow. The paper is based on an
initial fan-based review, which was completed in November 2021. But you will
recall, there were a series of political crises and changes of leadership at the
top of government, which delayed the process. Let's speak to Vicky Sparks, who
is a sports journalist and football commentator. Vicky, let's start by getting
you to sum up what is looking like a huge moment for the game in England. Good
evening, absolutely. Yes, but for the first time in the long history of the game
in this country, a new independent regulator for men's football will be
established in law to, in the government's words, oversee the financial
sustainability of the game and put fans back at the heart of how football is
run. It's something that the Premier League in particular had insisted was not
necessary. They had promised to make their own improvements to the current
regulations, but the government disagrees. It believes an independent regulator
is necessary, and this will be a key step towards introducing the legislation
that will make this a reality. And what else, the fact that it was a fan-based
review means how central are the fans going to be in terms of consultation?
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, that is one of the recommendations that the government
will adopt. As you say, it comes off the back of this fan-led review, which was
chaired by the former sports minister, Tracy Crouch. And it had been on the
table for a while, but it was brought forward specifically after the aborted
attempt by several Premier League clubs to join the Breakaway European Super
League. So the review made a number of recommendations, such as new owners and
directors tests. As you mentioned, greater fan involvement in the running of
clubs and the flagship proposal, an independent regulator to oversee English
football. As you touched on, there were delays. It was supposed to be published
last summer at this white paper. We've had to wait until now, but it will
finally arrive and the ball is very much rolling. And what about women's
football? That's also going to be somewhere in this white paper. Tell us what
it's going to mean for women's football. Well, the focus is the men's game. So
they're looking at the men's league game down from the Premier League to the
National League. And there were calls in the fan review for a specific review to
also look at the governance of women's football, which is organised quite
differently in some ways to the men's game. But it's certainly something that
will be encompassed in the broader conversation. But in terms of this particular
review, and I think it's partly because I mean, for example, we've seen the
collapse of Berry and Macclesfield in recent years, you know, clubs with nearly
three centuries of football heritage between them due to financial
mismanagement. And this is going to be the real focus of this white paper is how
do we safeguard the financial stability and the future of clubs? Now, of course,
the women's game has challenges in that regard. You only have to go back to to
Knox County pulling out of the women's Super League for financial reasons. So
there are parallel concerns. But I think the idea is to have a specific review
that also looks at the government governance in the women's game. Vicky Sparks,
sports journalist and football commentator. Thanks. Let's speak now to Niall
Cooper, CEO of Fair Game, an organisation of professional football clubs
campaigning to change the governance of football in England and Wales. He's also
a board member of the Dons Trust, owners of AFC Wimbledon. Your reaction to
this, the white paper? It's fantastic news. I mean, it's exactly what football
was needed for such a long, long time. When you look at the problems that have
been beset at the game for ages, things like the European Super League was just
the latest example. But, you know, fans of Derby and Bolton will be realising
how much there is a problem with financial sustainability. And obviously, we're
looking at South End potentially facing a winding up order in the next few
weeks. We need a regulator to really look at these fundamental problems within
the game that's created a gambling culture that really needs to be addressed.
And at the same time, things such as the heritage of football, which, you know,
that's what fans really care about and really love, you know, needs to be
addressed. And we had Cardiff City almost being toying with the idea of playing
in red. We had Hull looking at being renamed without any consultation with the
fans. And obviously, the example of Wimbledon being moved 60 miles to Milton
Keynes. All those things are things that an independent regulator would help
stop. And that's got to be welcomed. It's what football's needed for a long
time. The football authorities haven't been able to do it for ages. So this is
the right first step towards delivering something that is a fairer future for
football. You've mentioned some of the smaller clubs there. I mean, in the end,
this is about the allocation or the fair allocation of money trickling down from
the Premier League. I mean, that is an element of it. That is fundamentally
important because when you look at the difference between a club that gets
relegated from the Premier League, they get around 50 million pounds. That is
actually more than every club in League One, League Two, the National League,
National League North, South and the top two tiers of the women's game get put
together. That's one club for effectively failing in the Premier League, getting
more than 140 others. And that's a clear example of where football's financial
flow is failing at the moment. And the independent regulator, the creation of an
independent regulator, I mean, are you concerned that that will be enough that
needs to have what surrounding it for it to be effective? I think the key there
is really looking at what it monitors and how much teeth it has. And it needs to
have significant teeth for this to work. What we need to look at is having real-
time financial monitoring. We need to have that regulator having the teeth to
put proper penalties in against clubs that fail on their financial
sustainability. And ultimately, what we need to look at is looking at that
financial flow and start rewarding clubs that are well-run. That's the thing
that will lead to culture change. So if you started to say a club that scores
well on things like financial sustainability, good governance, equality
standards and founding community engagement, those are the clubs that should be
rewarded and that will deliver culture change. And that's not far-fetched as an
idea at all. All of those metrics already exist. And at Fair Game, we created
something called the sustainability index. It has begun to rate all the clubs in
the top four divisions on that. That's the thing that we believe is the way to
change football. Start rewarding well-run clubs. And I think if we give that to
the independent regulator or something to do to actually control football's
financial flow, then we will see that fairer future that fans want, that clubs
want. Naa Cooper, CEO of Fair Game. Thanks for joining us. Now, it is hard to
imagine, but Starbucks has announced a line of coffee drinks that have a
spoonful of olive oil and they want the Italians to embrace them. Will they? A
question for Francesco Sanappo, a champion Italian barista and co-owner of Dita
Artiginale, a roastery in Florence, of course. I love every new idea in coffee.
I am curious. I want to go and taste it. And for sure would be something
interesting. We do a lot of experiments with our R&D. We introduced in the past
year coffee together with cheese coffee combined with beetroot. People at the
beginning, they just take us as a crazy. But then when they taste it, it was one
of the most sell in our shop. And then we also make a drinkable coffee miso, a
drinkable tiramisu. We love to experiment. Francesco, you don't sound like a
typical Italian coffee lover because you are so keen on experimenting different
tastes. But what do you think the typical Italian coffee drinker will think of
this? Well, let's say that the old generation of Italians, they will never go
and try it because they are very traditional. So they just order espresso. For
the new generation of Italians, that probably can be approaching in a different
way. The new generation are more curious and probably they go there and try it,
but not the old generation. I'm pretty sure they will never try espresso with
olive oil. Can you really call it coffee if it has olive oil in it? Olive oil is
the fatty product. It's a fat. So the texture will change. I mean, it's a coffee
cocktail, it's an ingredient in coffee to create a cocktail, to create a
signature beverage. Francesco Sanapo, a champion Italian barista. To the United
States now and the state of Ohio and the town of East Palestine, a train
derailment which spewed toxic chemicals has become the focus of an intensifying
battle between Republicans and Democrats over environmental regulations. While
Joe Biden has been in Europe making speeches about democracy and freedom, the
former president Donald Trump has stepped into the middle of the situation in
Palestine. He was there today after the train derailments left some residents
fearful of contaminated water and upset about the lack of government response.
19 days ago, tragedy struck this wonderful village and rocked the lives of
people throughout this area, long beyond this area. It's been weeks since
Americans have been inspired. They've just watched this over the weeks. They've
been inspired by your strength and your courage and how you've come together to
stand up for the families in your area and the families of this village and
beyond. That was Donald Trump. Let's speak now to Mike Wendling, BBC's US
national digital reporter. Mike, just explain why Donald Trump has chosen this
place to go to and say what he's saying. Well, the short answer is that these
are his people. To set the scene, this is the eastern part of Ohio. It's part of
the Rust Belt post-industrial area. It's home to a lot of the people that Trump
calls the left behind people. He received a pretty raucous reception in the
town. People came out to meet his motorcade. But the former president himself
has some questions to answer. He loosened rail safety regulations when he was
president. The Republican Party also received millions in donations from Norfolk
Southern. That's the rail company that's involved in this derailment. He was
kind of skating on an edge today. What is it that people are saying about his
visit? All of this happened nearly three weeks ago, the train derailment. But
there's been an awful lot of talk about this. Yeah. It's partially because of
some big news events over here that it's kind of picked up steam. The response
by the government and the company has been criticized for being very slow. And
that criticism has come from a lot of people, not just Republicans or Trump
supporters. A lot of people say it should have gotten a lot more attention when
it happened. And there's these lingering questions over the environmental
effects. Now, the federal environmental authorities say the air in the water is
safe in the area. But then some residents are still reporting that they have
lingering health effects. And so they really want answers. And it didn't really
help that the company, Norfolk Southern, their officials pulled out of a public
meeting recently and they cited security concerns. People on the ground there
really, really want answers. But hasn't there also been misinformation which has
led to all kinds of different theories that people are believing in? Yeah,
absolutely. There's been a range of different theories and misinformation. I
mentioned that perhaps this story should have gotten a lot more attention.
There's been more wild accusations about supposed media blackouts when really
there was just some big stories in the news that may have crowded this out.
There was stuff that was circulating on social media. And of course, a film on
social media, a video on social media that shows somebody showing a dead fish
doesn't necessarily mean that it's been caused by a chemical. Or even is from
the town itself. There's a lot of fake videos that are floating around too.
That's not to say that there aren't legitimate concerns because there are a lot
of legitimate and outstanding concerns and unanswered questions about what went
wrong and the cleanup and what responsibilities people have for it. And have the
Democrats ignored it or are they also going to be visiting? Is Donald Trump
making political capital out of this? He's definitely making political capital
today, but the response comes tomorrow that Transportation Secretary Pete
Pudejic will be coming to the town. And he's going to be coming. We think that
he's going to be proposing a range of tougher safety measures, bigger fines for
breaking the rules. That's going to be the Democrat response that we'll hear
about tomorrow. Mike Wendling, BBC's US National Digital Reporter. Thanks for
being with us. To the Middle East now, and Israeli troops have killed at least
11 Palestinians and wounded dozens more during a raid in the occupied West Bank.
Troops entered the old city of Nablus, sparking armed clashes with Palestinian
gunmen. Our Middle East correspondent, Tom Bateman, joins us from Nablus. Tom,
just bring us up to date. Tell us exactly what happened, why the Israeli troops
went in. Well, this has been in fact the deadliest Israeli military raid into a
city in the occupied West Bank. Now in nearly two decades. We've seen these
raids intensify over the last year as Israel has experienced the spate of
Palestinian attacks. And despite attempts to try to ease tensions, they only
appear to be getting worse. Now, what happened this morning was the Israelis
went in here in Nablus into the old city mid morning. So the place was packed
with people. These are narrow streets. They're very busy with families and
people shopping at that time of day. The Israelis said they had real time
information about three militants, senior militants in a house that were
involved in the killing of an Israeli soldier last year. And also they said
planning imminent attacks. But what we saw, what happened was militant gunmen
firing at the troops, very fierce gun battles. And Israelis used shoulder launch
missiles to partially destroy this house. Three militants killed. But outside
even more people were killed, including civilians, a 72 year old man among them.
And the death toll rising to 11 tonight as a 66 year old man also died in
hospital. And Tom, just give us the context to all of this. A new Israeli
government, the most right wing government in Israel's history. To what extent
is all of that informing how they are dealing with what's happening in the
occupied territories? Well, there is a sense of continuity with the Israeli
raids. I mean, these are led by the Israeli military and the Israeli border
police and indeed special forces. You know, these have been going on at this
level of intensity since last spring. However, we have now seen in the last two
months two of the deadliest incidents, but both here in Nablus and in Janine
over the last couple of months. And what it is triggering is, as you say, we
have a very right wing nationalist Israeli government, members of whom are ever
calling for sort of fiercer action against the Palestinians. And now, you know,
the official Palestinian authorities has called what's happened here today a
massacre. We've had Hamas talking about retaliation and tonight Islamic Jihad
saying it will not hesitate to retaliate. So when there were already fears of
spiraling tensions, of more escalation to come, that now feels even more
imminent. We understand there are international attempts underway to try to ease
tensions, but in the sense that's been going on for the last few weeks. And yet
the situation only seems to be getting worse. Tom Bateman, Hamidly's
correspondent, joining us live from Nablus. Now on Friday, it will be one year
since the beginning of Russia's full scale invasion of Ukraine. And this week
we're hearing from people who've lost friends and family in the war. Anna
Yakno's four year old son, Sasha, died with his grandmother when they tried to
escape from a Russian occupied area of Northern Ukraine in March. The small boat
they boarded to cross the Nipah River capsized. Sasha's grandmother, Zoya, was
found dead the next day. Sasha's body was eventually found 26 days later. My
Welltonite colleague James Komorosamy has been speaking to Anna who now lives in
England. She didn't want to talk about how her son, whom she calls Shashanka,
died, but she did want to share her memories of him. Shashanka was an incredible
kid. He was very kind. He was really easy going kid. He loved nature, animals,
people. And when I tried to remember the best memory, I can't do that because
every moment that we spent together, it was the best memory. So all this period
when we were together, when I was his mom, was the best period in my life. And
you talked about his love of nature. I think he Lego and cars as well. Yes, yes.
He loved cars. He loved Lego. He loved to paint pictures. He loved to play games
with me, with our family. Yes, he was really, really, really nice boy. But he
never played in war. He never played with tanks. He was a peaceful boy, a peace
loving boy. Yes, yes, totally. I still remember his last words when he said
that, I will come to you when they stop fighting. So, yes, he understood
everything that happened in our country. He was only four, but he understood
everything. You're watching all of this from afar from this country. How does it
feel to watch what is happening to Ukraine from England? I just came to England
four months ago. And of course, when you are not in home, you feel it even much
more painful. And Anna, your experience is yours. No one else's. But there are
many, many families in Ukraine who are at the moment grieving, suffering. They
have lost people, children, brothers, sisters, parents, and not all of them will
have found the courage or the desire to speak about their emotions like you have
done. What is your advice to people, if I can ask you that way, who have
suffered a tragedy like yours, to try and cope? What are the best things that
people can do at the moment? Of course, at first, I want to say that I'm still
feeling not very nice. And for me, still very hard to talk about this. But I
understand that it's very important. That's why I'm here now. And I just want to
have nice advice for people. I want to say that peace will be soon. And the main
thing never give up. Even when it's very hard to understand, even when it's very
hard to find things which give you power to move, we should move. Because
everyone is important. Every life is important. How do you remain positive after
what has happened to you? What is it do you think that is keeping you positive
and hopeful? I think that a very important thing that from the spring I started
to work with a psychologist. I had medication and I think it helped me to feel
better. So I know that a lot of people afraid to go to doctor when they feel
bad. But I think if you can find a nice doctor, of course, he will help you.
Another one is for me, I was happy to do something useful. Like I tried to help
volunteers. I painted pictures and I donated them to the auction. And the last
one was sold for $4,300. And this money will go for buying equipment for
Ukrainian defenders. When I'm helping someone, it helps me at first. So this
work that you're doing to help others, you're aware it's helping you to cope?
Yes, it's helping me because I understand that I'm doing right things. And when
I'm far away from my country, I really want to try all my best to help
Ukrainians, to help my country. I am a small woman, but I can do something good.
The indomitable spirit of a mother, Anna Yaknow, talking to James Kamrasamy
about her son, Sasha, who died in Ukraine last March aged four. Just time for
our closing headline. The UN Secretary General has condemned Russia ahead of the
anniversary of its invasion of Ukraine on Friday, saying that the attack was an
affront to the world's collective conscience. He also condemned Vladimir Putin's
threats to use nuclear weapons, calling them utterly unacceptable. The Home
Office has announced that 12,000 asylum seekers could be granted refugee status
without being interviewed in person. That's the world tonight. I'm Rosia Iqbal.
I'll be back again tomorrow at 10 from me and everyone on the programme. A very
good night. Studio Direction was by Alison Purcell-Davis. The editor was Jack
Hunter. In a quarter of an hour, we've got another modern ghost story. Tonight,
we discover the horrors that may lurk inside our apps and gadgets. The Haunting
is just after 11 o'clock. We've got stories of a less frightening sort tomorrow
evening. The master of satire, David Sederis, is back with his unique blend of
wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of themselves at
funerals because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the third option. The
humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been studying Japanese and I'll say
something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you know that this is how you say and he
says we're only going for four days. A new series of Meet David Sederis starts
tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Well now on Radio 4 we
continue our reading of Pushkin's Eugene Onyekin. Lenski takes Onyekin to visit
Olga's family. Olga's sister Tatiana has been longing for romance and Onyekin
makes a big impression on her. She resolves to write him a letter. I'm writing
you this declaration. What more can I in Canada say? It may be now your
inclination to scorn me and to turn away. But if my hapless situation evokes
some pity for my woe, you won't abandon me. I know. I first tried silence and
evasion. Believe me, you'd have never learned my secret shame had I discerned
the slightest hope that on occasion but once a week I'd see your face. Behold
you at our country place. Might hear you speak a friendly greeting. Could say a
word to you and then could dream both day and night again of but one thing till
our next meeting. They say you like to be alone and find the country
unappealing. We lack, I know, a worldly tone but still we welcome you with
feeling. Why ever did you come to call in this forgotten country dwelling, I'd
not have known you then at all nor known this bitter heartache swelling. Perhaps
when time had helped in quelling the girlish hopes on which I fed I might have
found who knows another and been a faithful wife and mother, contented with the
life I led. You filled my dreams and sweetest trances as yet unseen and yet so
dear. You stirred me with your wondrous glances. Your voice within my soul rang
clear and then the dream came true for me. When you came in I seemed to waken. I
turned to flame. I felt all shaken and in my heart I cried, it's he. Are you by
angel of salvation or hell's own demon of temptation? Be kind and send my doubts
away for this may all be mere illusion the things a simple girl would say while
fate intends no grand conclusion. So be it then. Henceforth I place my faith in
you and your affection. I plead with tears upon my face and beg you for your
kind protection. You cannot know. I'm so alone. There's no one here to whom I've
spoken. My mind and will are almost broken and I must die without a moan. I wait
for you and your decision. Revive my hopes with but a sign or halt this heavy
dream of mine. Alas with well deserved derision. The letter trembles in her
fingers by turns Tatiana groans and sighs. The rosy ceiling wafer lingers upon
her fevered tongue and dries. Her head is bowed as if she's dozing. Her light
chemise has slipped exposing her lovely shoulder to the night. But now the
moonbeams glowing light begins to fade. The veil emerges above the mist and now
the stream in silver curves begins to gleam. The shepherd's pipe resounds and
urges the villagers to rise. It's mourn. My Tatania though is so forlorn. She
takes no note of Dawn's procession just sits with lowered head remote nor does
she put her seals impression upon the letter that she wrote. But now her door is
softly swinging. It's grey Philatievna who's bringing her morning tea upon a
tray. It's time my sweet to greet the day. My pretty one you're up her ready.
You'll still my early bird. Last night you scared me upon my word. But thank the
Lord you seem more steady. No trace at all of last night's fret. Your cheeks are
poppies now my pet. Onas a favor please and hurry. Oi sweetheart anything you
choose. You mustn't think and please don't worry but see. Oh nanny don't refuse.
Has God's my witness dear I promise. Then send your grandson little Thomas to
take this note of mine to oh our neighbor nurse. The one you know and tell him
that he's not to mention my name or breathe a single word. But who's it for my
little bird. I'm trying hard to pay attention but we have lots of neighbors
call. I couldn't even count them all. Oh nurse your wits are all befuddled. But
sweetheart I've grown old. I mean I'm old. My mind it does get muddled. There
was a time when I was keen when just the master's least suggestion. Oh nanny
please that's not the question. It's not your mind I'm talking of. I'm thinking
of. Oh niegan love. This notes to him. Now don't get roiled. You know these days
I'm not so clear. I'll take the letter. Never fear. But you've gone pale again
my child. It's nothing. Nanny be at ease. Just send your grandson. Will you
please. The day wore on. No word came flying. Another fruitless day went by. All
dressed since dawn dead pale and sighing Tatiana waits. Will he reply. Then
Olga's suitor came a wooing. But tell me what's your friend been doing. Asked
Tanya's mother full of cheer. He's quite forgotten us I fear. Tatiyana blushed
and trembled gently. He promised he would come today said Lensky in his friendly
way. The male has kept him evidently Tatiana bowed her head in shame. They all
thought her to blame. It was dusk and on the table gleaming the evening samovar
grew hot. It hissed and sent its vapour steaming and swirls about the China pot.
And soon the fragrant tea was flowing as Olga poured it dark and glowing in all
the cups. Without a sound a serving boy took cream around. Tatiana by the window
lingers and breathes upon the chilly glass. All lost in thought. The gentle lass
begins to trace with lovely fingers across the misted panes a row of hallowed
letters E and O. And all the while her soul was aching. Her brimming eyes could
hardly see. Then sudden hoofbeats. Now she's quaking. They're closer. Coming
here. It's he. Oh Negan. Oh and light as air. She's out the back way down the
stair from porch to yard to garden straight. She runs. She flies. She dare not
wait to glance behind her. On she pushes past garden plots. Small bridges lawn
the lake way path. The wood and on she flies and breaks through lilac bushes
past seed beds to the brook. So fast that panting on a bench at last she falls.
He's here but all those faces. Oh God what must he think of me. But still her
anguished heart embraces a misty dream of what might be. She trembles burns and
waits so near him. But will he come. She doesn't hear him. Some surf girls in
the orchard there while picking berries filled the air with coral song as they'd
been bidden. An edict that was meant to see to keep sly mouths from feeling free
to eat the master's fruit when hidden by filling them with song instead for
rural cunning isn't dead. Having read Tatiana's letter. Oh Negan was profoundly
stirred. Her maiden dreams had helped unfettered a swarm of thoughts with every
word and he recalled Tatiana's pallor her mournful air her touching valor and
then he sawed his soul alight with sinless dreams of sweet delight. Perhaps an
ancient glow of passion possessed him for a moment sway but never would he lead
astray a trusting soul in callous fashion. And so let's hasten to the walk where
he and Tatiana had their talk. Some moments passed in utter quiet and then
Eugene approached and spoke. You wrote to me do not deny it. I've read your
words and they evoke my deep respect for your emotion your trusting soul and
sweet devotion. Your candour has a great appeal and stirs in me I won't conceal
long dormant feelings scarce remembered but I've no wish to praise you now let
me repay you with a vow as artless as the one you tended. Hear my confession too
I plead and judge me both by word and deed had I in any way desired to bind with
family ties my life or had a happy fate required that I turn farther take a wife
had pictures of domestication for but one moment held temptation then surely
none but you alone would be the bride I'd make my own. I'll say without wrought
up insistence that finding my ideal in you I would have asked you yes it's true
to share my painful sad existence in pledge of beauty and of good and been as
happy as I could in all this world what's more perverted than homes in which the
wretched wife bemoans her worthless mate deserted alone both day and night
through life or where the husband knowing truly her worth yet cursing fate
unduly is always angry sullen mute a coldly jealous selfish brute well thus am I
and was it merely for this your ardent spirit pined when you with so much
strength of mind unsealed your heart to me so clearly can fate indeed be so
unkind is this the lot you've been assigned for dreams and youth there's no
returning I cannot resurrect my soul I love you with a tender yearning but mine
must be a brother's role so hear me through without vexation young maidens find
quick consolation from dream to dream a passage brief just so a sapling sheds
its leaf to bud a new each vernal season thus heaven wills the world to turn
you'll fall in love again but learn to exercise restraint and reason for few
will understand you so and innocence can lead to woe thus spake Eugene his
admonition scarce breathing and bereft of speech gone blind with tears in full
submission Tatiana listens to him preach he offered her his arm despairing she
took it and with languid bearing mechanically as people say she bowed her head
and moved away they passed the gardens dark recesses arriving home together thus
where no one raised the slightest fuss for country freedom to possesses its
happy rights as grand as those that high and mighty Moscow knows Roshan stone
was reading from James E. Phelan's translation of Pushkin's Eugene Oney again,
it was...