TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Tina Ritchie. The United Nations Refugee Agency
has launched a blistering attack on the UK government's plans to stop people
crossing the Channel in small boats to claim asylum. Under the proposed
legislation, asylum seekers arriving illegally would be detained, removed from
the country and face a lifetime ban from returning. The RMT Rail Union has
called off planned strikes next week by its members who work for Network Rail,
but industrial action by those employed by the train companies is going ahead. A
man has gone on trial accused of murdering a nine-year-old girl who was shot
dead at her home in Liverpool. Football's European governing body UEFA is to
give refunds to thousands of Liverpool fans caught up in disturbances at last
year's Champions League final in Paris. And also tonight, relief and
disappointment as thousands try to buy tickets for Eurovision. The government
has set out its plans to tackle illegal immigration and stop people crossing the
Channel in small boats. Under the proposals, anyone who enters the UK illegally
will not be able to claim asylum. Instead, they'll be detained, removed to
what's deemed a safe country and barred from re-entry. Speaking at a news
conference in Downing Street, Rishi Sunak said the new proposals were tough but
necessary and fair. He also said the government believed the bill was lawful and
would meet its obligation to the British people. Now I understand there will be
debate about the toughness of these measures. All I can say is we have tried it
every other way and it has not worked. So I say again, my policy is very simple.
It is this country and your government who should decide who comes here, not
criminal gangs. Conveiling the plans, the Home Secretary Suella Braverman said
the UK asylum system was in urgent and obvious need of reform. In a letter to
MPs, she said she was confident about the bill but that there was more than a 50
per cent chance it was not compatible with international law. But the United
Nations Refugee Agency said the legislation would be a clear breach of the
Refugee Convention and would undermine a long-standing humanitarian tradition of
which the British people were rightly proud. Our political correspondent
Jonathan Blake reports. A perilous journey for tens of thousands of people
trying to reach the UK every year, a political problem that governments have so
far failed to tackle. Rishi Sunak has made stopping small boat crossings one of
his five priorities. In the Commons, the Home Secretary told MPs the continued
rise in the numbers arriving illegally under laws that came into force last year
showed an obvious and urgent need for reform. Schemes for people coming from
Ukraine, Afghanistan and Hong Kong provided safe and legal routes, Suella
Braverman said, for those fleeing harm. But she acknowledged the asylum system
was overwhelmed and that the government's efforts to deter people from crossing
the Channel so far had not been enough. They will not stop coming here until the
world knows that if you enter Britain illegally, you will be detained and
swiftly removed. Removed back to your country, if it's safe, or to a safe
country, a safe third country like Rwanda. And that is precisely what this bill
will do. That is how we will stop the boats. She said new laws would create a
legal duty on the Home Secretary to remove those deemed illegal entrants and
significantly narrow the number of challenges and appeals that could be made.
Migrants would be detained until they could be removed, without bail or judicial
review, within the first 28 days, Ms Braverman said. Only those under 18, unfit
to fly or at risk of serious and irreversible harm would be able to delay their
removal. There would also be an annual cap set by Parliament on the number of
refugees the UK would accept. Labour says the plans are unworkable. In the
Commons, the Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper was scathing. Enough is enough.
We can't afford any more of this slogans and not solutions, just government by
gimmick, ramping up the rhetoric on refugees, but picking fights simply to have
someone else to blame when things go wrong. This bill isn't a solution. It is a
con that risks making the chaos worse. Britain deserves better than this chaos.
Britain is better than this. The SNP spokesperson Stuart C Macdonald said the
government's plans wouldn't lay a solitary finger on people smugglers, but harm
those who'd already suffered. Some Conservative backbenchers urged ministers to
further limit the influence of the European Court of Human Rights on UK law in
order to tackle migration effectively. More than 3,000 people have reached the
UK in small boats so far this year. Most of those making the crossing arrive on
the Kent coast. Our correspondent Duncan Kennedy has been speaking to people in
Dover. The Kent coast has been the main point of embarkation since the start of
the large-scale migrant crossings, and yesterday saw another 197 people brought
ashore here. Towns like Folkestone and Dover, more used to large car ferries
than small dinghies, have absorbed many of those who want to make the UK their
home. Some people here support the government's plans to reduce illegal
migration. We've got veterans, we've got people on the street, and yet these
people we are paying for to live in hotels when they have come from safe
countries. I think it's a step in the right direction, not necessarily the right
way to go about it, but we have to do something to curb it. I understand why
they're trying to get away, but I think the government need to strengthen it and
stop it happening. But others take a more sympathetic line. Those like Kay Marsh
from the refugee charity Samphire, based in Dover. She believes attempts to ban
migrants and criminalise them from returning to the UK are unfair and wrong. It
doesn't matter what side of the argument you sit on, stopping the boats is a
priority. People risk their lives taking these journeys. But the way we do that
is to offer safe legal routes. Currently we don't have adequate safe legal
routes and that's what pushes people into small boats. Until we offer these
people an alternative, the small boats will not stop. On average, around 120
migrants arrive by small boat every day last year. Nearly everyone agrees
something must be done to stop it. In coastal places like Dover, which see the
issue at close quarters, any action seems welcome as long as it's prompt and
effective. Hundreds of people in the camps around Calais in France are still
waiting for their chance to cross the Channel to the UK. Our correspondent Lucy
Williamson has spent the day with them. A policy designed for impact had little
impact in the camps of northern France today. Those that were aware of the new
UK policy said it made as little difference to their plans as the policies that
came before it. So nothing here. UK whatever they do, we are going there. Omar
was sitting with friends around a small fire in the Sudanese camp in Calais. If
the UK government says you can't claim asylum, will you stop trying? No, I never
stop. I never stop. I never give up. On the outskirts of the camp, Salah watched
his friends play football as he waited to charge his mobile phone at a power
bank provided by a local charity. I will go to England if the police took me in
prison. He told me he'd prefer prison in the UK to freedom here in France. If
they send people to Rwanda, will you still try and go to the UK? Yes, I will go
to the UK. That's my ambition, my dream. I will not return to Rwanda if that is
happening. I can kill myself in England, but I am not returning to Africa,
Rwanda. Aid workers say they've seen a rise in suicides among migrants here over
the past few years as immigration policies have tightened and conditions in the
camps have worsened. And for many people here, policy announcements alone won't
dim the appeal of British shores. Suella Braverman has described the
government's approach as robust and novel, but admitted the bill is testing the
limits of international law. Our home and legal correspondent Dominic Cacciani
has been reading through the 66-page document. Suella Braverman told MPs that
the government's new plan to stop small boats was novel, but the most important
words are on the front page of this enormously dense document. There, the Home
Secretary admits, the plan may not be compatible with the European Convention on
Human Rights. That means she's been advised by her lawyers that this legislation
is more likely than not to collapse under the weight of challenges in the
British courts and be declared by judges to be legally unworkable. Even if the
plan becomes law, there are more practical and legal hurdles. If the Home
Secretary tries to detain almost everyone who crosses the English Channel for at
least 28 days, nobody knows where they will be held. Last year's 45,000 arrivals
are equivalent to half of the UK's prison capacity. And with few returns
agreements in place since Brexit, immigration judges may face a flood of claims
for false imprisonment if ministers cannot prove the migrants are definitely
going to be removed imminently. The UN's refugee agency has urged MPs and peers
to block what it called Rishi Sunak's profoundly concerning plan to tackle small
boat crossings. Our correspondent at the UN in Geneva, Imogen Fowkes, reports.
The UN refugee agency is still studying the UK's new legislation, but says it
has profound concerns. At first sight, the proposals look, the agency said, like
an asylum ban, which would violate the UN Convention on Refugees. Matt
Saltmarsh, the agency's spokesperson, explained. From what we've seen, it
violates both the letter and the spirit of the Convention on Refugees. It
violates the letter because there is within the convention no prohibition or
penalisation of asylum seekers on account of their irregular arrival, which in
this case would mean people arriving by boat. The convention, which the UK was a
key founder of, says everyone seeking protection has a right to have their claim
for asylum heard, even if they have arrived illegally. Denying that right would
undermine the very purpose of the convention, the refugee agency said. Instead,
it called for global cooperation to find compassionate solutions for what it
said was now a global crisis in which 100 million people are displaced. The RMT
says strikes by its members who work for Network Rail have been suspended
because of a new pay offer. They'd been due to walk out next Thursday and
Saturday, but industrial action on the same days by RMT members who work for the
train operating companies is going ahead. A strike on the London Underground
next Wednesday will also still take place. The government said the announcement
from the RMT was positive news, but it urged the union to make a similar
decision for its other members. Our transport correspondent Katie Austin
reports. Last month, the RMT's National Executive Committee rejected offers from
both Network Rail and the group representing train companies. Since then, the
dispute had appeared deadlocked. But this surprise announcement means that
Network Rail employees will no longer take part in the strike on the 16th of
March, nor a series of overtime bans afterwards. There will be a vote on whether
to accept the offer, something the government and industry had been calling for.
However, as things stand, RMT members working at train companies will still walk
out on the 16th, 18th and 30th of March and on the 1st of April, meaning there
will still be disruption, but it will vary by operator. A man's gone on trial at
Manchester Crown Court, accused of the murder of Olivia Pratt-Corbell. The nine-
year-old girl shot dead at her home in Liverpool last August. The jury was told
that Thomas Cashman, who's 34 and from Liverpool, had been in ruthless pursuit
of his intended victim, a convicted burglar. He faces five charges, including
murdering the schoolgirl, wounding her mother and the attempted murder of the
man he was chasing. From Manchester Crown Court, Judith Moritz reports. Olivia
Pratt-Corbell was tucked up in bed when she heard gunshots. The nine-year-old
was terrified, the court heard. Her street had become a crime scene, a gunman
running along it, chasing his target. As they went down the road, they reached
the area outside her house. The prosecution says that the gunman was Thomas
Cashman, who was armed with two firearms, a pistol and a revolver. He was
chasing a man called Joseph Knee, who was fleeing for his life, having already
been shot once. Having heard the commotion outside, Olivia's mother, Cheryl
Corbell, opened her front door and Joseph Knee ran towards it. She tried to
close it again, but as she did, the gunman opened fire and his bullet went
through the door and through Ms Corbell's hand before hitting the girl. In
court, Cheryl Corbell wiped away her tears as the detail of what had happened to
her daughter was read out. Olivia, bleeding heavily, was picked up by armed
response officers and taken to hospital where she later died. For the
prosecution, David McLaughlin, KC, told the jury, this is serious business, as
you'll appreciate. It's about the ruthless pursuit by Thomas Cashman to shoot
Joseph Knee at all costs, without any consideration for anyone else in the
community. Mr Cashman is also charged with the attempted murder of Mr Knee and
the wounding with intent of Olivia's mother, as well as two counts of possessing
a firearm with intent to endanger life. He denies all the charges. The United
Nations says it estimates that the cost of the damage caused by the earthquake
in Turkey last month will exceed $100 billion, or £84 billion. That's three
times higher than initial forecasts. The 7.8 magnitude quake, which also
devastated parts of Syria, killed at least 52,000 people and left more than 1.5
million homeless. Concerns have also been expressed about the amount of money
coming in from the international community. Louisa Vinton from the UN
Development Programme said donor support had been, at best, patchy. We have a
new update on the number of destroyed buildings, which is 214,000. So the needs
are vast, but the resources are scarce. And of the $1 billion flash appeal that
was released in the wake of the disaster, only 9.6% has been funded to date. But
already it's clear that the damages alone will amount to more than $100 billion.
Ukrainian prosecutors have launched a criminal investigation into what appears
to be the shooting of an unarmed prisoner of war by Russian forces. Graphic
footage, which has emerged online, shows a Ukrainian soldier saying, glory to
Ukraine, before apparently being shot by his captors. From Kiev, here's our
diplomatic correspondent, James Landale. It is an horrific piece of video. A
Ukrainian soldier is shown in some woodland, standing in a shallow trench. A
cigarette hangs from his lips, a hat pushed back on his head. He looks defiantly
at those who are filming him. He says, Slava Ukraini, glory to Ukraine, and he's
brutally cut down by automatic weapons. A voice in Russian is recorded saying,
die, bitch. The footage is difficult to verify. We don't know when or where it
was taken. And the identity of the man is uncertain. Senior Ukrainian officers
named him as a prisoner of war who'd gone missing near the eastern city of
Bakhmut in February. But others identified him as a different soldier, whose
body had already been returned to his family. Ukraine's army accused Russian
troops of breaking the rules of war. Prosecutors in Kiev have launched a
criminal investigation, and the government has asked for the International
Criminal Court to get involved. On television, President Zelensky vowed that
Ukraine would find the murderers. The 12-second video has gone viral on social
media in Ukraine, and the man has become yet another symbol of his country's
resistance. Russia has consistently denied allegations that its soldiers have
committed war crimes in Ukraine. Israeli forces have killed at least six
Palestinians in a raid on Jenin in the occupied West Bank. The Israeli military
says one of the dead is a militant suspected of killing two Jewish settlers last
week. Our Middle East correspondent Yolande Nell reports. The Israeli military
says it used shoulder-launched missiles as the wanted man barricaded himself
inside a building. In a video message, the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu praised the operation, saying it had eliminated the gunman who shot
dead two brothers in their car in the village of Hawara. The suspect has been
identified as a man of 49, who belonged to Hamas and had previously served time
in an Israeli jail. Palestinian officials have condemned the Israeli operation,
warning it could lead to a new escalation in tensions. Police have been told to
investigate whether the Scottish Prison Service should be prosecuted for the
death of a man in custody. Alan Marshall, who was due to go to jail for 30 days
for unpaid fines and breaching the peace, died after being restrained face down
by 13 officers at HMP Edinburgh in 2015. An inquiry later found the officers had
been mutually dishonest, but they could not be prosecuted because they'd already
been granted immunity. Our Scotland social affairs correspondent Lucy Adams has
been speaking exclusively to the family. At the time of the fatal accident
inquiry, the 13 prison officers involved in restraining Alan Marshall were given
immunity from prosecution. Exactly a year ago, the head of Scotland's
prosecution service, Lord Advocate Dorothy Bain, met Mr Marshall's brother and
aunt and promised to review the case and re-interview all the witnesses. She has
now apologised to the family for the way they were treated and for the fact that
the officers were granted immunity. She has completed the review and told the
family she cannot prosecute the individual officers, but has ordered an
investigation into the Scottish Prison Service on the grounds of corporate
responsibility, including corporate homicide. If it goes ahead, it would be the
first time in the UK that a government body has been prosecuted for corporate
homicide. Mr Marshall's aunt, Sharon, told the BBC she was relieved the
prosecution was looking to hold the prison service to account, but she was angry
that it had taken so long to get to this point. It's unbelievable to me that
they gave a licence to kill. They think they're above the law and then the
powers that be just cover up for them. Liverpool supporters who were caught up
in the chaotic scenes at last year's Champions League final in Paris are to get
refunds. The club's fans were initially blamed for the disorder outside the
stadium, which saw large crowds locked behind metal fences and some clashes with
police. But an independent report later criticised European football's governing
body UEFA for what it called failures which almost led to disaster. Our sports
correspondent Joe Wilson reports. The final at the Stade de France was delayed
by more than half an hour. French police were filmed using tear gas outside the
stadium, and many Liverpool supporters gave deeply troubling testimony about
their experiences. An independent report said UEFA bore primary responsibility
for what went wrong and praised Liverpool supporters for preventing more serious
injuries and deaths. Now UEFA says its refund plan will cover all of Liverpool's
ticket allocation for the game. That's more than 19,000 supporters. It follows
campaigning by Liverpool Football Club and fans including the Spirit of Shankly
Supporters Union, chaired by Joe Blott. Money certainly won't heal the hurt of
those people who were traumatised or injured or attacked in Paris last year. But
of itself it's a real victory for fan activism. It's a first step on the road
for UEFA to accept their culpability. UEFA describes the compensation scheme as
comprehensive and fair. Real Madrid fans and neutral supporters also qualify for
refunds if they were in the most affected areas of the ground. The inquiry into
the final included a series of recommendations to prevent similar incidents in
the future. Liverpool supporters now say their focus is ensuring those measures
are enforced. Cricket's Independent Disciplinary Commission for England and
Wales has retired to deliberate on charges relating to the racism scandal at
Yorkshire County Cricket. Seven individuals are accused of bringing the game
into disrepute over racist language first revealed in 2020 by the former
Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq. They include the former England captain Michael
Vaughan, who's appeared before the commission to deny the charges. Our sports
editor Dan Rowan has been at the hearings. One of the most divisive and damaging
scandals in the history of English cricket is nearing a conclusion. On the final
day of the disciplinary hearing, the ECB's chief counsel, Jane Mulcahy KC, said
it was inherently probable that the former England captain turned broadcaster
Michael Vaughan had said, too many of you lot, we need to have a word about
that, to his then Yorkshire teammate Azeem Rafiq, the chief witness in this
case, and three other Asian players before a match in 2009. Vaughan denies
making a racist comment, but in her closing submission, Ms Mulcahy said he had
posted historic tweets with a similar tone that were essential to this case and
pointed to the fact Yorkshire had admitted systemic racism from 2004 to 2021.
She also referred to an extraordinary amount of bitter and inaccurate
correspondence from Vaughan's legal team complaining about the disciplinary
process. For Vaughan, Chris Stoner KC then criticised a woefully inadequate
investigation by the ECB, due process, he said, has gone on holiday. Mentioning
the impact this case has had on Vaughan's health, Stoner added, the shape of his
life to come and his livelihood are at stake. A judgement on the case is
expected before the end of the month. The Science Secretary, Michelle Donilon,
has promised a package of measures in response to a report which criticised the
UK's ability to conduct scientific research. The author of the review, the Nobel
Prize winner, Sir Paul Nurse, says there are serious and long-standing problems
which need to be fixed if Rishi Sunak wants to achieve his goal of making
Britain a science superpower. Sir Paul is calling for a revolution in the way
research is conducted. Our Science Editor, Pallab Ghosh, has been speaking to
him. Sir Paul says that UK research is fragile, in jeopardy and needs fixing. He
found that the UK spent less on research as a proportion of its GDP than the
average of other high-income countries. The UK ranks 27th in a list of 38
nations in terms of government research spend. Sir Paul also denounces
successive ministers for short-term thinking by announcing shiny new institutes
instead of having a stable long-term plan for science. But he reserved some of
his strongest criticism concerning claims reported by BBC News last week that
the Prime Minister was considering renegotiating a cut-down association with the
European Horizon Research Programme, with the money saved spent on a UK-led
alternative. The UK will find it extremely difficult to be an effective research
power if it stands alone and is not part of the European research network.
Frankly, alternative arrangements that are being discussed elsewhere will be
utterly inadequate in comparison. Sir Paul said that lack of access to Horizon
was putting off some of the brightest overseas scientists from applying to work
in the UK, with many telling his review that Britain was no longer perceived as
a welcoming place to work. Some, he said, had left the country to find jobs
elsewhere. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day down 10 points at
7,919. In New York, the Dow Jones closed down 575 at 32,856. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.185. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.121.
That makes a euro worth 89.2 pence. And now for a first look at the morning
papers. The Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail say the BBC is under pressure to
take action against Gary Lineker after he said on social media that ministers'
rhetoric about migrants was not dissimilar to that used by Germany in the 1930s.
The corporation said its staff were aware of their responsibilities relating to
social media. According to the Daily Mirror, a deal to settle the pay dispute in
the NHS could be reached by tomorrow. The paper says there's optimism that the
government will come up with a new offer. And the Times highlights the
assessment by US intelligence that Ukrainians and Russians opposed to President
Putin are the most likely people to have organised attacks on the Nord Stream
gas pipeline last September. However, Washington thinks Kiev is unlikely to have
been directly responsible. A Twitter employee has used the platform itself to
ask its owner Elon Musk if he still had a job at the company. The man resorted
to directly messaging his boss after trying unsuccessfully for nine days to
establish whether he was still employed. Twitter has laid off thousands of
employees since Mr Musk bought it for $44bn last October. Here's our technology
reporter, Shona McCallum. A week and a half ago, Hallie Thorlofsson, a senior
director in product design, was locked out of his work computer after getting no
answer from the Human Resources Department. He tweeted Elon Musk to ask if he
was still an employee. Mr Musk replied, asking what work he did. When Mr
Thorlofsson explained his role, Mr Musk responded with two crying with laughter
emojis. And shortly afterwards, HR contacted Mr Thorlofsson, confirming that
yes, he'd been fired. Mr Thorlofsson, who has muscular dystrophy, sold his
business to Twitter in 2014 and is now concerned the terms of that deal won't be
honoured. He told the BBC the situation was extremely stressful because the deal
was a way to take care of himself and his family as his disease progressed.
Tickets for this year's Eurovision Song Contest final in Liverpool sold out in
36 minutes when they went on sale at midday. They're already being resold online
for thousands of pounds each. Our Eurovision reporter Daniel Rosny has more. A
hundred and sixty million people may watch at home, but only around 6,000 have
been lucky enough to get a ticket for each of the nine shows. Let the Eurovision
Song Contest begin! Fans went online to try to bag tickets for the three live
shows, the two semi-finals and the grand final, as well as six previews doubling
up as rehearsals. Sasha was one of the lucky ones. We are so, so excited. My
credit card is crying right now. That was one of the most stressful experiences
of my life. It's the first time in 25 years the competition is being held in the
UK, which hasn't yet announced its act for Liverpool, who's hosting Eurovision
on behalf of Ukraine, which won last year's event. But there was disappointment
for many fans who didn't get through, Nicola among them. And I don't know which
is worse, the heartbreak or the anger. Outside the arena, there are planned
events during the first two weeks of May across Liverpool, including a
simultaneous rave between Liverpool and Kyiv. The UK government has set aside
3,000 tickets for Ukrainians living in the UK displaced by Russia's invasion.
And as Sam Ryder, last year's UK entry, said... It's Ukraine's party. We're just
inviting them to throw it at our house. Daniel Rosny reporting. The headlines
again. The UN Refugee Agency has condemned the government's plans to detain and
deport people arriving illegally by boat, saying it would amount to an asylum
ban and clearly breach the Refugee Convention. Rishi Sunak said he was confident
the government would win any legal battles over what he called the tough but
necessary and fair measures. The RMT union has called off a planned strike next
week by members who work for network Rail after receiving a new pay offer. But
industrial action on the same days by RMT members employed by the train
operating companies is going ahead. A man's gone on trial at Manchester Grand
Court accused of the murder of a nine-year-old girl shot dead at her home in
Liverpool last August. And refunds are being given to Liverpool supporters who
were caught up in the chaotic scenes at last year's Champions League final in
Paris. BBC News. Read Tonight by Tina Ritchie. Now for a look at the weather,
here's Darren Bett. Hello there. So far most of the snow that's been falling has
been across more northern parts of the UK, especially northern Scotland. And
this is where we've got some more snow and ice through the rest of the night.
But across more southern parts of England, the cloud is thickening up. We'll see
a mixture of rain sleet and some snow. There could be a couple of centimetres of
snow in places, especially over the moors of the southwest. Temperatures will be
close to freezing across southern England. Head further north and where skies
are clearer, there'll be a widespread sharp frost. Temperatures could be as low
as minus 13 in the glens of Scotland. There'll be fewer snow showers in northern
Scotland on Wednesday and much of the country will be dry with plenty of
sunshine. Largely dry, I think, for Northern Ireland and northern England. Fewer
showers here as well with some sunshine. Move further south across England and
Wales and it's going to be more cloudy here on Wednesday. We start with that
wintry wet weather in southern England. It'll soon move away, but we'll see more
rain coming into the southwest of England and south Wales during Wednesday
afternoon. And that will be turning to snow as well as we engage that colder
air. It is going to be a cold day once again for all of us. Temperatures again 3
to 5 degrees. We need to focus though on that wet weather that's coming in
across southern parts of England and south Wales. That'll push its way eastwards
across the south midlands towards east Anglia during Wednesday evening. And we
could see some more significant snow in places as well. Perhaps 5 to 10
centimetres, especially the likes of the Chilterns. It could mean some really
tricky travelling conditions across more southern parts of the UK during
Wednesday evening. A lot of that wet weather then does move away overnight. We
see some more rain and snow coming back into the southwest of England and Wales
by the end of Wednesday night. And as we move into Thursday, the snow is going
to be further north across the UK. A weather front will move northwards and take
wet weather northwards. Across southern parts of England and Wales, the snow, if
there is any early snow, will turn back to rain as it gets milder. But across
north Wales, north midlands, northern England and northern Ireland, snow will
continue through much of the day, mounting up really over the hills. Some snow
eventually could reach some southern parts of Scotland. Now on Radio 4, we
continue Dasher Kipper's Travellers to Unimaginable Lands, a series of case
studies that blend science with lived experience to explore dementia. The reader
is Teresa Gallagher. In Greenwich Village, along one of the pleasant streets
that converge near the Jefferson Market Garden, there is a small Italian
restaurant, intimate, dimly lit, with red and white checked tablecloths and
candles in the Chianti bottles. Sometimes, after work, Elizabeth Horne would
meet her husband Mitch for a cocktail and dinner. Elizabeth would usually arrive
to find Mitch highball in hand and joking with a waiter. They'd kiss and she'd
order a tancaré and tonic. They had been friends before becoming romantically
involved, and bantered back and forth without missing a beat. Anyone looking at
their table might well have envied them, never suspecting that Elizabeth dreaded
these pleasant get-togethers and their aftermath. Elizabeth, a tall, elegant
woman in her late fifties, talks about those evenings in a composed, confiding
tone, which only makes her story more uncanny. Because once the meal was over,
Mitch would invariably give her a wary, skeptical look and say, Now you'll go to
your place and I'll go to mine. Hearing these words, Elizabeth would nod meekly,
duck into the bathroom, take off her heels, put on a pair of sneakers, and run
out. She'd cross the street and wait for Mitch to emerge, making sure he was
headed in the right direction. It always struck her how normal Mitch appeared,
casually strolling along in his sport jacket and Rolling Stones t-shirt, looking
pretty much like the man she had fallen in love with. It was herself she barely
recognized, the nervous, frazzled woman hiding behind lampposts, following a man
who looked so at ease in the world. Then, with a burst of speed, she managed to
get back to their apartment a few minutes before he did. Arriving home, Mitch
always gave her the same cheerful greeting, Hey, honey, how are you? He had
already forgotten their rendezvous. The nightmare would officially begin after
Mitch had made himself comfortable. Without any warning, he'd look up from a
magazine or the TV, stare at Elizabeth, and ask her to leave. Calmly at first,
he'd order her out of her own home. When she tried to convince him that she was
home, he'd scoff. How could it be her home when he lived there? Although he
sensed that they knew each other, he had forgotten they were married. Moreover,
he felt threatened by her presence. In the early stages of the disease,
Elizabeth had refused to give in. She'd point to things in the apartment and
remind him where they came from. Look, she'd say, our wedding picture, too.
Unfazed, Mitch would reply, Yeah, you must have planted it there. Nothing she
said did any good. When patients have an answer for everything, caregivers get
caught in a loop. It's surprisingly hard not to be goaded by a patient's
responses. Even if the answers are nonsensical, the patient's ability to provide
them suggests that we are still dealing with a functional mind. Indeed, that
part of the mind which helps patients produce a steady stream of answers remains
intact. It was this part, what the neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga has termed
the left brain interpreter, that Mitch was now leaning on. The interpreter is an
unconscious process responsible for sweeping inconsistencies and confusion under
the rug. Although we rely on facts and logic in our daily lives, we tend to
massage them when they fail to conform to our expectations. We see the same
process in our visual system. When the visual interpreter falls for optical
illusions or smooths over visual glitches, it does so in accordance with certain
preconceptions. Similarly, our left brain interpreter fills in cognitive blind
spots, hiccups, ambiguities, and gaps. Thus, the dementia patient will blame the
aid for misplacing a purse or insist that people are conspiring against them.
When they feel internal discord, their unconscious mind searches for an external
source, and this source gives shape to their paranoia. So when Mitch was
confronted by the wedding photo, evidence that Elizabeth was his wife, which
contradicted his impression that she was someone else, his left brain
interpreter found explanations for that evidence. For instance, that it had been
planted in his apartment. The mind's propensity to create believable narratives
is all too human. In a 1962 study, Stanley Schachter and Jerry Singer
administered a synthetic hormone to their subjects. The hormone narrows blood
vessels and can produce anxiety, shakiness, and sweating. Some participants were
informed that they had been given a vitamin that had no side effects. The others
were told that the pill could produce a racing heart, tremors, and flushing.
Those who knew about the possible side effects immediately attributed their
discomfort to the drug. Those unaware experienced agitation and blamed their
environment, even thinking that the other participants were responsible. This
need to ascertain cause and effect is yet another function of the left brain
interpreter, and it plays out in many ways. We'll twist facts, defend
misconceptions, and opt to believe whatever makes sense of what's happening
around us. Sadly, caregivers like Elizabeth must contend with people who are
simultaneously lucid and confused, impaired yet oddly nimble, themselves and yet
not themselves. Much like their patients, such caregivers do not take this
confusion lying down. After all, the healthy mind also abhors inconsistencies,
contradictions, and ambiguity, which of course is what dementia disorders
regularly throw at them. In effect, patient and caregiver are locked in a
battle, each one determined to fend off the chaos the other one represents. So
the more desperate Elizabeth sounded as she tried to convince him she was his
wife, the angrier Mitch became, as if he was the one indulging a delusional
person. Some evenings, he flew into a rage, grabbed her by the neck like a stray
cat, and pushed her out the front door. And there she'd sit all night in the
hallway. Soon, her exile became almost a nightly routine. She took to carrying a
spare key in her pocket and would let herself in when she thought Mitch had
fallen asleep. Telling me all this, Elizabeth added, people always ask about the
patient. How is Mitch? How is he doing? Let me tell you something. The patient
is fine. It's the caregiver who's going crazy. During one of their nightly
battles, Mitch made good on his threat to call the police. He dialed 911 and
claimed that a strange woman was in his apartment. Twenty minutes later, two
cops arrived to find an incensed Mitch and a sobbing Elizabeth, at which point
something totally unexpected happened. Mitch became Mitch again, Elizabeth told
me. How so? I asked. He suddenly remembered me. After the police left, Elizabeth
realized that social stimulation reminded Mitch of who she was. Human
interaction had washed away the agitation in his body and the chaos in his mind,
thus leaving the left brain interpreter with no discord to interpret. And
because Mitch seemed to know her when people were around, their friends
initially didn't understand what Elizabeth was going through. This, in turn,
made her worry that people thought she was exaggerating her husband's dementia,
since he seemed so normal and company. At one of our first meetings, Elizabeth
remembered a particularly harrowing confrontation. Instead of throwing her out,
Mitch had suddenly relaxed and turned on the TV. He flipped through the channels
but stopped at the opening credits to Dr. Chevago and, hearing Lara's theme,
reached out for her hand. Imagine, she said to me, we were holding hands. I
pictured them together, sitting on a couch as romantic music filled the air, a
scene that would be touching if I didn't consider what such moments did to her.
I was like an abused woman, she told me, always on edge. I never knew which side
of him was going to come out. It was the perpetuation of the sweet Mitch that
kept her off balance, because alongside the man who didn't recognize her was the
man who might stroke her hair and ask how she put up with him. Alongside the man
who threw her out the door was the man who made a video for their anniversary in
which he confessed how lost he'd be without her. If that Mitch did not exist, if
Elizabeth had had only the delusional Mitch in her life, she would have had less
to contend with. Instead, her brain was badgered by inconsistency and
uncertainty. Early in our development, we attribute to other people a permanent,
deep-down self. And though our understanding of people becomes more complex as
we grow older, our belief in a true or real self persists. The reason that
Elizabeth kept arguing with Mitch is that she was appealing to the real Mitch,
the good Mitch, the one still in there, who in the past would have come to her
aid. For caregivers, the idea of a real self can be a double-edged sword. If, on
the one hand, it encourages us to argue with afflicted loved ones in the hope of
breaking through to their real selves, it can be a source of great frustration.
If, on the other hand, we start to doubt the existence of an essential self, how
can we account for the person we're caring for? Who is it that we are suffering
and sacrificing for? Seeing continuity in people is entirely natural and real or
not, the idea of an essential self has valuable, even practical, applications.
If we weren't built to believe that other people have essential selves, it would
be too easy to become disconnected from family and friends. Nowadays, Mitch is
much calmer. His confusion has ebbed along with his cognitive capacity, and so
has Elizabeth. Even so, at our last meeting, Elizabeth told me that he can
still, on occasion, become upset. One day, when Mitch was filling in a coloring
book, something he previously would have found beneath him, he looked up and
said, I think there's something wrong with me. Well, honey, Elizabeth said
gently, you have something called Alzheimer's, and that's okay. I'm here for
you. Mitch furrowed his brow. No, that's not it. I don't have that. Why would
you even say that? Elizabeth immediately retreated from the statement. I felt
awful getting him agitated like that, she told me. It's hard to resist, I said.
You were trying to give your husband permission to feel confusion by explaining
the source. Yes, she said, that's true, but you're giving me too much credit. I
just wanted him to get it so both of us would know, so we could be in on it
together. I nodded. For a moment, she believed she had glimpsed the old Mitch,
the true Mitch, so she had confided in him in the way she had in the past,
thinking he'd understand. But the moment passed, and she reprimanded herself for
forgetting the lessons the disease had taught her. As she talked about it, her
eyes began to well up, and I thought she was going to acknowledge, as so many
caregivers do, how hard and lonely it was to take care of her husband, how there
was a part of her that wished it would end. What she said took me aback. You
know, I'm very grateful for this experience in a way. Don't get me wrong, it's a
terrible disease and I wouldn't wish it on anyone, but I've learned a lot about
myself. I've learned about my limitations and I guess I've learned I can
survive. I have more patience than I thought. I didn't expect to, but I've
learned there's still love, and love doesn't go away. Alzheimer's can't take it
away. Travellers to Unimaginable Lands by Dasha Kipper continues tomorrow when
we delve into the impact of delusions on caregivers. It was read by Teresa
Gallagher and abridged by Christine Entwistle. The producer is Kirsty Williams.
And now, the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the
Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Wednesday 8th March. There are
warnings of gales in Portland, Plymouth, Biscay, Fitzroy, Sol, Lundy, Fasnet,
Shannon, Bailey and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at 1800. New lows
both 987, expected white and Fasnet by 1800 Wednesday. The area forecasts for
the next 24 hours. Viking north at Cira, south at Cira. Variable four or less,
becoming northerly three to five at first in Viking and later elsewhere. Snow
showers, good, occasionally very poor. Forties Cromerty, fourth Tyne, Dogger,
Fisher. Northwest three to five, becoming variable four or less, except in
Cromerty. Snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. German Bight, Humber.
Northwest three to five, becoming variable four or less, then east three or four
later. Snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Thames Dover, variable four
or less, becoming east five to seven for a time. Rain or sleet, good,
occasionally poor. White, east four or five, becoming cyclonic five to seven,
perhaps gale eight later. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Portland Plymouth,
cyclonic four to six, becoming southwest six to gale eight later, perhaps severe
gale nine later in Plymouth. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Biscay, southwest
six to gale eight, decreasing four to six later. Rain, good, occasionally poor.
Trafalgar, southwest four to six, rain, good, occasionally poor. Fitzroy, Seoul.
Southwest five to seven, occasionally gale eight in Fitzroy and later in Seoul.
Rain or showers, perhaps thundery later. Good, occasionally poor. Lundy, Fasnet.
East, becoming cyclonic five to seven, occasionally gale eight at first in Lundy
and until later in Fasnet. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Irish Sea. East four
or five, increasing six for a time. Snow showers, rain or sleet later in south.
Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Shannon, east, becoming cyclonic six
to gale eight, rain, good, occasionally poor. Brockhall, east four to six, snow
showers, good, occasionally very poor. Malin, Hebrides. East or northeast three
to five, snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Bailey, northeasterly four
to six, increasing seven or gale eight in northwest. Snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Fair Isle, Faroes. North or northeast four to six,
occasionally seven in Faroes. Snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. South-
east Iceland. Northeasterly six to gale eight, perhaps severe gale nine later.
Snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Light icing. Now the weather reports
from coastal stations 42300. Tyree Automatic. North-east two, thirty-five miles,
nine nine nine, falling slowly. Stornoway. North-east by north six, heavy rain,
five hundred metres, one thousand, now rising. Lerwick. West, north-west three,
more than thirty-eight miles, nine nine six, falling slowly. Wick Automatic.
North-west by west two, thirteen miles, nine nine eight, now rising. Aberdeen.
West by north three, twenty-two miles, nine nine eight, now rising. Lucas.
North-west by west two, more than thirty-eight miles, nine nine eight, now
rising. Boomer. West three, nine nine eight, falling slowly. Bridlington. North-
west by west two, nine nine eight, falling slowly. Sandetti Light Vessel
Automatic. South three, five miles, nine nine nine. Greenwich Light Vessel
Automatic. South-east four, eleven miles, nine nine seven. St Catherine's Point
Automatic. East by south five, nine nine seven, falling. Jersey. South-east by
east three, rain, one and a half miles, nine nine four, falling quickly. Channel
Light Vessel Automatic. South-east five, nine nine four. Silly Automatic. South-
east by east seven, slight rain, one and a half miles, nine eight nine, falling
more slowly. Mulford Haven. East by north three, more than thirty-eight miles,
nine nine five, falling. Aberporth. East south-east three, more than thirty-
eight miles, nine nine six, falling. Valley. East north-east two, fifteen miles,
nine nine eight, falling. Liverpool Crosby. South-east two, five miles, nine
nine eight, falling. Valencia. East north-east three, slight drizzle, sixteen
miles, nine nine two, falling. Ronalds Way. North north-east two, nine nine
eight, falling. Fallon Head. North by east one, twenty-seven miles, nine nine
eight, falling slowly. Macrahanish Automatic. South-east by east two, more than
thirty-eight miles, nine nine eight, falling slowly. Now the weather forecast
for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the
following twenty-four hours. The general situation. A band of rain will be slow
moving over the channel before temporarily moving north-eastwards through the
second half of Wednesday and again through Thursday, bringing some sleet or snow
on its northern edge. Further north, a cold and unstable northerly airflow will
continue throughout the forecast period with snow showers and hail at times.
Cape Wrath to Rattray Head, including Orkney. North-westerly or north-westerly
three to five, occasionally six in north. Snow or hail showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North-west, veering
north-east for a time, three to five. Snow showers, good, occasionally very
poor. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. Variable mainly north, two to four. Snow
showers, good, occasionally very poor. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. Variable two
to four, becoming east or north-east, three to five. Snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Variable three or
less, becoming easterly four to six, then backing north-easterly three to five
later. Snow showers in north, occasional rain or sleet in south. Good,
occasionally very poor in north and poor in south. North Forland to Celtsey
Bill. Easterly four to six, occasionally seven at first, backing northerly or
north-easterly three to five later. Rain or sleet at times, moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Celtsey Bill to Lime Regis. East five or six, becoming
cyclonic five to seven for a time, then north-east three or four later. Rain,
moderate or good, occasionally poor. Lime Regis to Lanzende, including the Isles
of Scilly. Easterly, becoming cyclonic four to six, occasionally seven in south,
then decreasing two to four later. Rain, moderate or good, occasionally poor.
Lanzende to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. South-easterly five
or six, becoming cyclonic five to seven, then decreasing three to five later.
Rain, moderate or good, occasionally poor. St David's Head to Great Ormhead,
including St George's Channel. East four to six, wintry showers, then rain or
sleet. Moderate or good, occasionally poor. Great Ormhead to the Mull of
Galloway. Variable three or less, becoming east three to five. Snow showers,
then occasional rain or sleet later. Good, occasionally very poor, then poor
later. Isle of Man. North or north-east, veering east or north-east, three or
four, increasing four or five later. Mainly fair, mainly good. Lockfoyle to
Collingford Lock. East or north-east three to five. Snow showers. Good,
occasionally very poor. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth
of Clyde and North Channel. Easterly or north-easterly three or four, increasing
five for a time. Snow showers. Good, occasionally very poor. Mull of Kintyre to
Ardenhamircom Point. East or north-east three or four, occasionally five in
west. Snow showers. Good, occasionally very poor. Ardenhamircom Point to Cape
Wrath. North-easterly three to five, becoming variable four or less for a time.
Snow or hail showers. Good, occasionally very poor. And Shetland Isles. North
four to six. Snow or hail showers. Good, occasionally very poor. And that
completes the Shipping Bulletin. That brings us to the end of our day here on
Radio 4. In a moment we'll be joining the World Service for a few hours, but
Radio 4 will be back at twenty past five. Thank you for listening with me
tonight. I'm Amanda Litherland. I'm here at Broadcasting House in London. I hope
that the rest of your night is a very peaceful one, wherever it is that you are.
Evie, good night.