TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
It's two hours, GMT. I'm Charlotte Gallagher and this is The Newsroom. We'll be
live in Mexico as the police and army search for four US citizens kidnapped by
gunmen. Also… There's hardly any buildings left in the centre of the city that
are intact. Most of the population has long fled and it's truly a hellscape. The
destruction of Bakhmut seen from the front lines as Ukraine pledges to defend
the embattled city. Bruce Willis' wife pleads with the paparazzi. For the video
people, please don't be yelling at my husband, asking him how he's doing or
whatever, the woohooing and the yippee-ki-yays. Just don't do it, OK? But do
photographers in Hollywood have to follow any rules? And… We hear about the dark
side of Japanese pop music. All that to come, first the news. BBC News, hello,
I'm Gareth Barlow. The Mexican president, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, has held
talks with the US ambassador to Mexico over the kidnapping of four US citizens
in the border city of Matamoros. The FBI and Mexican authorities are working
together to locate the US citizens. Opposing drugs cartels have been engaged in
a violent conflict in Matamoros for months. Will Grant is in Mexico City.
President Lopez Obrador went a bit further than his US counterparts when he
spoke at his morning press briefing. He said that the Americans had been sort of
caught in a confrontation between two groups. He said that they'd crossed the
border in order to buy prescription drugs or medication, something that's very
common in US border states where coming into Mexico border towns, the
prescription drugs are available at a fraction of the cost. But that's not
something that's been confirmed by the US authorities so far. He said he was
hopeful that it would be resolved soon. The UN Children's Agency, UNICEF, says
the number of pregnant women and girls who are suffering from malnutrition has
soared by a quarter in fragile countries like Somalia, Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
UNICEF estimates that more than a billion women and adolescent girls across the
world are malnourished. It's worried that crises in the past two years,
including war and the pandemic, may have made it increasingly hard for women and
girls to get the food they need. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said he's
instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find the forces to boost the defence
of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Russian forces have bombarded the eastern
Ukrainian city for months and now surround it on three sides. James Landell
reports from Kiev. President Zelensky said the fighting in eastern Ukraine was
painful and challenging. That's because Ukrainian soldiers are dying to protect
a city that largely lies in ruins. Independent analysts have suggested Ukraine
might be considering a limited withdrawal from eastern Bakhmut. But Mr Zelensky
met senior commanders and his office said they spoke in favour of continuing the
defensive operation and strengthening their positions in the city. He and they
know this battle is costing the lives of thousands of Russian soldiers and they
hope their enemy will emerge substantially weaker, regardless of who ends up
controlling the city. Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan will face a single
opponent in May's presidential election after opposition parties agreed on a
joint candidate. Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the leader of the secular Republican
People's Party, has promised an opposition alliance that would govern Turkey
through consensus and consultation. The door of the nation alliance is open to
everyone who shares our common Turk stream. I salute our 85 million people
regardless of belief, thought, ideology or identity. World News from the BBC.
Officials in the US state of Georgia have charged 23 people with domestic
terrorism offences. Police in Atlanta say these suspects were part of a
coordinated group who threw petrol bombs, fireworks and bricks at officers on
Sunday during a protest against a new police training centre. Activists in Saudi
Arabia say they're worried about an Islamist preacher who has publicly
criticised on Twitter entertainment reforms in the country, which he argues are
against Islamic values. Some of his supporters believe the preacher, Ahmad Al-
Mubayyad, has been detained. Sebastian Usher reports. In a video posted on
Twitter a few days ago, Ahmad Al-Mubayyad expressed his opposition to the
opening up of Saudi Arabia to the kind of entertainment that not so long ago
would never have been permitted there. Such dissent from the current line in the
kingdom is dangerous. Mr Al-Mubayyad swiftly posted another video rowing back on
his criticism. That was four days ago. Activists say he's not been heard from
since. Saudi security has announced that an unidentified man has been arrested
for posting video content which it said contained false information that
undermined public order. Activists believe the unnamed man is Ahmad Al-Mubayyad.
The defence ministry in Peru says five soldiers drowned and another has gone
missing during a confrontation with anti-government protesters in the city of
Ilave. It said the corporals had been swept away on Sunday while trying to cross
a river to avoid hundreds of demonstrators. A judge in the US state of
Massachusetts has ordered a 33-year-old man to be held without bail over a
disturbance aboard a United Airlines flight from Los Angeles to Boston.
Francisco Severo is alleged to have tried to forced open an emergency exit door
and then attempted to stab a member of the flight crew with a broken metal
spoon. He was restrained by passengers and flight attendants. An initial court
appearance said there was no comment from the defendant's lawyer. BBC News.
Hello, you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me,
Charlotte Gallagher. A major search is underway in Mexico for four US citizens
who've been kidnapped by gunmen. They were taken after crossing the border and
being shot at. The FBI has offered a $50,000 reward for their safe return and a
$1,000 fine. Mexico's President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador says the Americans
got caught up in a fight between rival gangs in the city of Matamoros. They're
United States citizens that, according to the information we have, crossed the
border to shop for medication in Mexico. There was a confrontation between
groups and they were detained. Our correspondent in Mexico, Will Goodman, is
live in the studio. Our correspondent in Mexico, Will Grant, joins us now. And
Will, what more do we know about what happened? Well, Mr. Lopez Obrador there
gave a little more information than the Americans wanted to, particularly
regarding this idea that the group had crossed in search of buying cheaper
medication available in Mexico, cheaper than you can find in the US. Quite
common for people who live in US border states to dip into Mexico, buy cheaper
prescription drugs there. But Matamoros isn't a city where that's very
advisable. It's always dangerous and currently in the grip of kind of fighting
between two splinter groups from the Gulf cartel. So if it is the case that they
were caught up in the middle of this, it is a very, very worrying period for
their families. And of course, for the US authorities in this country and in the
United States, the US embassy here is is saying that it is their key duty, their
main priority to keep US citizens safe. And presumably, there's a huge search
now going on for these people and the people that took them. Yes, they were
apparently traveling in a minivan, a minibus with plates, licensed plates from
North Carolina. That's obviously been left at the scene that they were abducted
from. And now it's a question of trying to track down leads. There is a
combination of the FBI, Mexican federal forces, Mexican state forces in the
state of Tamaulipas, theoretically working hand in hand. Now, those
relationships aren't always as smooth as they should be or as each of those
agencies might like. But when it comes to something like this, it will be quite
honestly, the priority in terms of bilateral relationship. While this is going
on, there is really no other issue that the US ambassador will be bothered about
until this is resolved. So yeah, it is a it does sort of set the tone for the
relationship. And I think that the Mexicans will be doing everything they can to
send people door to door and track down leads on where these people might be.
And you mentioned that people regularly cross the border from the US into
Mexico. Do you think this sort of thing? It's so high profile will put people
off traveling to Mexico? One would think to traveling to Matamoros, it probably
would yes. And Tamaulipas in general is a very, very dangerous state. Now people
do the same journey from say San Diego into Tijuana very regularly. And there
are other border crossings, where it's relatively common people move backwards
and forwards all the time every day. Some people live one side of the border and
work the other. These are porous borders. It's just that Matamoros is especially
dangerous. And let's not lose sight in the middle of all this, that the current
immigration policy suggests that all those who fail to make it into the United
States for coming in on the wrong paperwork or not, or not having the paperwork
will be made to wait in these in these cities. And their claim is that it's too
dangerous for them. I think this underlines that these are extremely dangerous
border cities all along Mexico's northern border. Well, thank you. That was Will
Grant in Mexico. To Ukraine now where one of the fiercest battles of the war is
continuing for control of Bakhmut. The besieged eastern Ukrainian city has
become a focal point for Russian commanders who've struggled to really deliver
any military victories in months. President Zelensky says he's told military
commanders to find the forces to boost Bakhmut's defences. I told the commander
in chief to find the appropriate forces to help our troops in Bakhmut. There is
no part of Ukraine about which one can say that it can be abandoned. There is no
Ukrainian trench in which the resilience and heroism of our warriors would be
disregarded. The occupier kills for the very fact that we are Ukrainians.
Rumours of the imminent fall of Bakhmut have been growing louder by the day as
the Russian paramilitary group Wagner has sent waves of men into the fight. But
Wagner has complained of not having enough ammunition. And there are reports of
Russians armed only with shovels. So what's happening there? Yaroslav Trofimov
is the Wall Street Journal's chief international affairs correspondent. And he's
just back from the front line. Yaroslav Trofimov, Wall Street Journal The city
of Bakhmut, which is a small city of only 70,000 people before the war began,
has really been the focal point of fighting in Eastern Ukraine for the last
several months. And that's where Wagner, the Russian paramilitary organisation,
has been really trying to push through Ukrainian defences. And it is the only
place along the entire front line where Russia has managed to advance since last
summer. So Wagner has been able to seize about 40% of the area of Bakhmut as of
now. They are now in control of the entire eastern bank of the Bakhmutivka river
that runs through the city. And the Ukrainian forces there are in a very
difficult position because the remaining two paved roads into Bakhmut are under
artillery control by Wagner, which means that any movement there is extremely
dangerous. And so all the resupply and evacuations have to go through dirt
roads. And this time of the year, obviously the soil is wet and nearly
impassable for wheeled vehicles. I spoke to a couple of Wagner soldiers, former
prisoners, recruited in prison camps who were captured in the last few days. One
of them told me they had one weapon for the three of them sometimes. They're not
giving rations. But they are sent forward with infringing tools. And what they
do is they dig the trenches for the next wave to come in, even if everybody in
the first wave is killed. And the small groups of five, six people advance, then
they put in machine gun positions, and then the next wave can come in and move
ahead. The Ukrainians don't have as much ammunition as Russians do. In trying to
regain land, the Ukrainians cannot afford the same tactic because the Ukrainians
do care about the lives of the soldiers and they just cannot send them to
certain death the way Wagner does. Russian artillery has been found in Bakhmut
since July. So there is hardly any buildings left in the centre of the city or
pretty much anywhere else in the city that are intact. Most of the population
has long fled and it's really a hellscape. That was Yaroslav Trofimov. The UN
says the number of pregnant women and girls who are suffering from malnutrition
has soared by 25% in the last two years in fragile countries such as Somalia,
Ethiopia and Afghanistan. The agency has blamed COVID-19, wars and new Taliban
policies in Afghanistan. Here's our global health correspondent, Naomi Grimley.
UNICEF estimates that around a billion adolescent girls and women across the
world are malnourished, so this might mean that they're underweight, have
anaemia or stunted growth. The agency is worried that the various crises around
the world in the past two years, from war to COVID-19, have made it increasingly
hard for women and girls to get the food they need. So girls in Afghanistan, for
example, are no longer getting weekly iron and folic acid supplements due to a
ban on attending high school. In sub-Saharan Africa, many maternal nutrition
programmes have been knocked off course because of the pandemic and then rising
food and fuel prices. So UNICEF says these trends could continue unless urgent
action is taken and it's calling on countries like the UK to provide extra
funding to tackle this nutrition crisis. Naomi Grimley. South Korean K-pop has
taken the world by storm, but have you heard of J-pop? Like the name would
suggest, it's Japanese pop music and here's a sample. But there is a darker
side. A new BBC documentary is examining the legacy of the Japanese music
executive, Johnny Kitagawa. He founded a male-only talent agency which has
produced many of Japan's biggest boy bands. However, multiple allegations of
sexual abuse have been made by boys and men who once worked with him and aspired
to make it in the Japanese pop market. Mobin Azar told me about the documentary.
The documentary tells the story of a man called Johnny Kitagawa. Now, he was the
architect of J-pop. So J-pop is Japanese pop and what many people might know as
idol culture. I mean, he essentially invented it and he founded a company called
Johnny and Associates in the 60s and that came to entirely dominate the market
of J-pop. So the company is like a boy band factory actually. So it produces hit
after hit and then a lot of the boys in these bands go on to get these very
lucrative sponsorship deals. You can see their faces on billboards all over
Tokyo. They'll be advertising everything from real estate to coffee to mobile
phones. But there's a much darker side to this story because we heard that
Johnny Kitagawa used to use his male-only talent agency to abuse boys who at the
time were in their early teens. He had a massive level of control over their
careers. They were vulnerable. So one man who spoke to me anonymously said that
some of the other boys told him, you have to put up with it if you want to
succeed. And did anyone complain at the time? Well, they did. But the thing
that's really unusual about this is not only did people complain, but actually
the claim that Johnny Kitagawa was abusing boys in his agency was actually
upheld during a libel case in a Japanese court all the way back in 2003. So back
then, Outspoken magazine ran an investigation where multiple former agency
members came forward. And yet this wasn't really picked up anywhere else in
Japan. And in fact, Johnny Kitagawa continued to have this kind of national
treasure status all the way up to his death in 2019. In fact, he's so revered in
Japan even today that when I asked someone in the streets of Tokyo, this man
said, well, he is God. And why is this not been reported in Japan then? Well,
it's hard to know for sure. But what I got a really clear sense of is that
Johnny & Associates has a lot of influence over the broadcasters of magazines
and across the media. If you upset them, for instance, by criticising Johnny
Kitagawa, they could stop offering you access to their bands. So the boy bands
who are called Johnny's or Johnny's Boys appear on around 40 TV shows a week.
They're a massive part of Japanese culture. And when I was making documentary, I
contacted music producers, entertainment reporters, journalists from newspapers,
and even the public broadcaster. And none of them would speak to me about the
story. And you contacted Johnny & Associates, didn't you? I did. In fact, I made
multiple attempts to contact the company, Johnny & Associates. I asked for an
interview in one phone call. I was just told it wasn't company policy for anyone
to do interviews. Since the allegations are obviously so serious, and since the
company is so well respected in Japan, I really wanted to speak to someone
senior. I tried all the formal routes, and eventually I gave up on those and I
went to the company headquarters directly. How did that go? Well, the head of
global marketing, who was someone that I'd had email correspondence with, and
I'd spoken to on the phone, who'd previously said the only response that they'd
really give is that they didn't have a comment, reiterated this. After that,
though, I did hear from the company's CEO. She's called Judy Fujishima, and she
said the company is working to establish highly transparent organizational
structures, adapting to the times in compliance with laws, regulations, and
strengthened governance with impartial experts. That was Mobine Azhar. Just a
few weeks ago, the family of Bruce Willis announced the actor had been diagnosed
with dementia at the age of just 67. But now his wife, Emma Hemming Willis, has
been forced to plead with paparazzi photographers in Los Angeles to leave him
alone. This one is going out to the photographers and the video people that are
trying to get those exclusives of my husband out and about. Just keep your
space. I know this is your job, but maybe just keep your space for the video
people. Please don't be yelling at my husband, asking him how he's doing or
whatever, the woohooing and the yippee-ki-yays. Just don't do it, OK? Let's go
to LA now and speak to our correspondent there, Peter Bowes. And Peter, what
else did she say? Well, she has a quite simple message. She's saying back off
and show some understanding of the position her husband is in. And she explains,
she says, if you're someone who's looking after someone with dementia, you know
how difficult and stressful it can be to get them out in the world and to
navigate them safely. And she says it's clear that a lot of education is needed,
she says, photographers and video people that are trying to get these exclusives
of her husband, as we've just heard, keep your space. And she says her goal is
to raise awareness around dementia. Is it surprising she's having to do this?
All photographers there, do they have free reign to do what they want? I mean,
you think shouting at someone with dementia, nobody would do that. Well, the
paparazzi, paparazzi photographers are allowed to take photographs of anyone
they like in a public space in Los Angeles, and indeed much of this country. The
law tightens, of course, when photographers trespass onto private property. But
she is clearly referring to something that happened in public outside a coffee
shop. Is it surprising that she feels that she has to say this? Well, excuse me,
excuse me, probably not. Because I think some would say it's simply a sad
reflection on the lack of understanding by the paparazzi in this case about the
impact of all of the shouting that it could have on her husband, who has clearly
been, I think it's fair to say, a magnet for the paparazzi for much of his life.
There's nothing new there. But now he's in a very different place. Someone with
this kind of dementia, which affects the part of the brain that's associated
with language, they are very much more likely to be upset by a stressful
situation like this than someone who is entirely healthy. And she asks people in
similar situations to send in any advice on how to cope. And it's interesting in
the comments to her post, many people are praising her for her honesty and
attempts to raise awareness of the disease. Peter, thank you. That was Peter
Bowes in Los Angeles. The sports news now comes from Andy Barwell. Thank you
very much. Well, we start with news that Brentford extended their unbeaten
English Premier League run to an impressive 12 games, and they moved to a point
of second, a seventh place side, Fulham, a race for European qualification for
next season. And Brentford still have two games in hand after beating their West
London rivals 3-2. Now, the victory would have been more emphatic for Thomas
Frank's side if they hadn't conceded a goal deep into added time. I think it's
more the big derby and I think it's more that we really, as you said, maybe just
badly want to come out to play again. And build on that confidence and momentum
we have. Bruno Fernandes will be facing FA disciplinary action for his behaviour
towards a match official in Sunday's 7-0 drubbing at Liverpool. Manchester
United say that their skipper wasn't asking to be substituted toward the end of
that game, but was purely seeking clarification on positioning. Well, after what
happened at Anfield, the former Premier League striker Chris Sutton says that
Fernandes shouldn't be captaining Manchester United ever again. I think that he
shouldn't ever put on the armband again for Manchester United. The least you
expect is for a player, your team is being humiliated, and especially not just
any old player, your captain, we know Harry Maguire is club captain, but you
expect any player to show a bit of courage and guts and track back and a bit of
anger and passion. If that's your leader, then I mean, heaven help you. The UEFA
Champions League later today will reveal the first two teams through to the
quarter-finals. The German Saarbrücker Dortmund travel to Stamford Bridge to
play Chelsea with a 1-0 advantage from the first leg, and after winning their
last 10 games in all competitions, their boss the very confident Edin Terzic.
It's about us and it's a very important game for us as a club, and we want to
show that we can compete on this level and that we are ready to fight to be one
of the top eight teams in Europe. But by the end of the day, we just want to
deserve it. If we deserve to go to the next round, we're going to be happy. And
the Portuguese side Benfica are in the driving seat, 2-0 ahead from the first
leg, and their attempt to club Bruges. Thanks Andy, that was Andy Barwell. Sir
David Attenborough's latest television series, Wild Isles, will feature the
behaviour of some British wildlife never before captured on camera. Justin
Rowlett has had a preview. Welcome to a place that is astonishing. At 96 years
old, Sir David Attenborough is back on the road, visiting a series of remote
locations to bring you the British Isles as you have never seen them before.
There are some stunning scenes. Their strategy is one of surprise. Orca, killer
whales, hunt seals off the coast of the Shetland Islands. It wakes up and flees,
but there's a pup here too. The orca takes its catch out into open water and
there shows younger members of the pod how to drown it. The imagery is
spectacular. The BBC has put the same sort of resources into this as to a major
international series such as Planet Earth. The series has captured animal
behaviours that have never been filmed before, including our biggest bird of
prey, white-tailed eagles, hunting barnacle geese in flight. The goose is so
heavy, the young eagle has to struggle to hold on. And the series has a powerful
conservation message. Sir David warns our wildlife is under threat. So rich in
places, Britain as a whole is one of the most nature-depleted countries in the
world. Never has there been a more important time to invest in our own wildlife,
to try and set an example for the rest of the world and restore our once wild
isles for future generations. That was Justin Rollach reporting on Sir David
Attenborough. Finally, a Canadian brother and sister born at 22 weeks have been
certified as the world's most premature twins. They were born 126 days early and
spent six months in hospital. And Jyotiang reports. Joy and celebrations greeted
parents Shakina Rajendram and Kevin Nadarajah when their twins were finally
discharged from hospital six months ago. Now, Adia and Adria have celebrated
their first birthday and Guinness World Records has certified them as the
world's most premature twins. Most hospitals don't try to save children born
before 24 to 26 weeks. Shakina said that when she began labour at just 21 weeks
and five days, she feared the worst. But luckily, the couple were able to move
to Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto, which is a specialist neonatal intensive
care unit. Even then, the timing had to be perfect. At Mount Sinai Hospital, the
team informed us that if the babies were born that day, it would be a death
sentence for the babies if they were born before 22 because they did not have
the capacities to resuscitate babies before 22 weeks either. I was experiencing
a lot of bleeding and I didn't know if I could hold the babies until they got to
the 22 week and zero mark. But I knew that I had to hold the babies in because
if I didn't, they wouldn't be alive. Amidst all that scenario of being told that
the chance of survival is pretty much zero percent, the chance of disability and
that too significant disability is really high. We were just clinging to our
hope and faith, trusting in God. At birth, the babies weighed less than 500
grams each and videos shared online showed them tiny, frail and covered in
bandages. They had other complications and one of them needed more medical
attention after the pair were discharged. But they survived. Now their mother,
Shakina, has a message for other parents whose babies are admitted at neonatal
intensive care units. I would say to other parents going through the NICU
journey, just being there, being present for your babies makes a huge difference
on the outcomes. Speak positive words to them, tell them about how much you love
them, tell them about all of the things you hope and you dream for them. Be
present for your babies, be brave to advocate, to stand up for what your babies
need. The parents also hope their record will be broken and that their
experience will promote a wider debate about how early in pregnancy a hospital
should try to save the life of a premature baby. That was Andrew Ochieng. You've
been listening to The Newsroom with me, Charlotte Gallagher. This is the BBC
World Service with letters from mothers to daughters. I'm Namlanta Kombo and
this is season two of Dear Daughter with more advice, more stories and more of
your letters. So my letter is a reflection on how much I missed my dad who was
very good at disappearing and how much I cherish what my daughter has. So would
you read it to us? Dear daughter, apart from life, the most special gift that I
will ever be able to give you is your dad. You run towards him and he'll lift
you. I hear you both giggling over a book. The little everyday moments you have
were completely unreachable to me. You don't have to waste your dreams on
wishing for someone else's love. You can take a bigger leap. Love, your mum.
Dear Daughter, Saturday at 18.30 GMT. I'm Natasha Loda, Health Editor of The
Economist, and this is The Long Haul of Long Covid on the BBC World Service.
Around one in ten who get Covid-19 will develop long Covid and some of these
people remain unwell three years after being infected. We hear from scientists
in India, South Africa, Europe and the US about the research, drug trials and
challenges of finding a treatment. All after the latest BBC News. BBC News with
Gareth Barlow. The Mexican President Andres Manuel López Obrador has held talks
with the US ambassador to Mexico over the kidnapping of four US citizens in the
northern city of Matamoros. Mr López Obrador said the Americans have been caught
up in a gun battle between rival criminal groups. The UN Children's Agency
UNICEF estimates that more than a billion women and adolescent girls across the
world are malnourished. It says crises from the war to Covid-19 have made it
increasingly hard for them to get food. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said in
his nightly address that he's instructed Ukraine's military commanders to find
the forces to boost the defence of the besieged city of Bakhmut. Russian troops
now surround it on three sides. Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan will
face a single opponent in May's presidential election after opposition parties
agreed on a joint candidate. Kemal Kılıçdoroglu leads the secular Republican
People's Party. The Nicaraguan authorities have closed down the country's
largest business association, COSEP, once a support of the left-wing President
Daniel Ortega. COSEP is the largest organisation to be subjected to a crackdown
on opponents. The defence ministry in Peru says five soldiers drowned during a
confrontation with anti-government protesters in the city of Ilave. It said
they'd been swept away on Sunday while trying to cross a river to avoid
demonstrators. Brazil's justice minister and the country's tax department have
opened two more investigations into the former President Jair Bolsonaro after
media reports alleged that he tried to illegally import jewellery worth more
than three million dollars. And officials in the US state of Georgia have
charged 23 people, including a Frenchman and a Canadian, with domestic terrorism
offences. Police say the suspects were part of a coordinated group who threw
petrol bombs and bricks during a protest. BBC News. At first, when I got COVID,
I thought I'd be back after 10 days. Sorry. Then it was a month. Then I started
to think three months. I'm sorry. It's okay. Anne Baerer, a palliative care
physician in Montreal, Canada, caught COVID in December 2020 and has yet to
recover. She has long COVID and she's not alone. A report in January estimated
that at least 65 million people across the globe will develop long COVID. That's
one in 10 of those infected. Long COVID is defined by the World Health
Organization as having symptoms that persist for longer than 12 weeks. But for
some, like Anne, it can be years of ill health. I'm Natasha Loder and this is
The Long Haul of Long COVID on the BBC World Service. We'll be hearing from
scientists about ongoing drug trials, what lies ahead and what we're learning
about how long COVID affects the body. There's a group who present with just
enormous fatigue. When we exercise those participants and we walk them up and
down just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the end, their muscles are
working as hard in a six-minute walk up and down the corridor as someone who's
run the marathon. It's three years since the WHO officially declared a pandemic.
As health editor of The Economist, I've been following the story since the new
coronavirus emerged at the end of 2019. Today we have vaccines against the virus
known as SARS-CoV-2 and a less severe strain of the coronavirus in circulation.
Nevertheless, COVID continues to kill people, recently sweeping through China.
It would be easy to assume that this health crisis is best viewed in the
rearview mirror. That would be a mistake. COVID's trail of destruction to human
health is only gradually becoming fully apparent. Dr. Béret, for instance, has
been unable to work for two years. Her throat requires injections of Botox to
relax her voice. Even her ability to speak is limited. In order to give us this
interview, for instance, she couldn't talk for the rest of the day. When I
caught COVID, I had fever, I was really fatigued, I was short of breath, I had
pain everywhere, was coughing a lot, I had what's called now brain fog and I had
a rapid onset of what's called abductor spasmodic dysphonia, which seems to be a
rather rare sequelae of COVID. So I had trouble talking. Now having medications
for POTS, which is postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, and some heart
issues have really helped me be able to talk more, think more, and be involved a
little, even though I'm still limited, into research to try and help others with
long COVID. How long was it after you caught COVID? Did you have that
realisation that you weren't getting better and that you might have a problem?
The first 10 to 14 days were really awful, but as days and then weeks were
passing, I saw that I was not becoming better. So I started to wonder what's
going on. Scientists around the world are still trying to answer this question.
But when around 200 symptoms are associated with long COVID, affecting multiple
organ systems, it's not easy. One common symptom, however, is that so-called
brain fog. Dr. Walter Koroshetz is the co-director of the Recover Study Program
into Long COVID in the US, the largest study of its kind in the world. He's also
director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Brain
fog and fatigue, they're definitely related. What it tends to boil down to is a
problem with processing speed. So we take it for granted that we can go from one
idea to another in this conversation very quickly, but that's not an easy task
for the brain. When you are sick, you can't do that and you slow down. And you
can get that from many different conditions. Any kind of inflammatory stimulus
will cause that. Many drugs will cause it. And so it's not specific, but it does
indicate that there may be either a problem in the brain or probably more likely
something circulating in the bloodstream that is affecting brain function. Do we
know yet how long people can expect these sorts of cognitive issues to persist
for when they have long COVID? Well, I think that's the million dollar question
for people. Over the past two and a half to three years, there has really
emerged a neurological health crisis of persistent cognitive impairment
following COVID. Michelle Mongier is a professor of neurology at Stanford
University in the US. She studies what's known as chemo brain. These are
symptoms of cognitive impairment, such as loss of memory and concentration that
is similar to brain fog. They occur after cancer therapies cause an inflammatory
immune response in the brain. When the pandemic started in the spring of 2020,
seeing how very inflammatory the response to this virus seemed to be, I was
actually very worried that there was going to be somewhat of an epidemic of
cognitive impairment resulting from the inflammation induced by COVID. And
indeed, within months of the pandemic beginning, it became very clear that this
was going to be a major, major problem, that people were coming to the
neurologist office in droves, complaining of persistent cognitive impairment,
that mirrored exactly the clinical symptoms that we see in the cognitive
impairment syndrome that happens after cancer therapies. And for long COVID,
what sorts of treatments are kind of off the shelf in terms of cognitive
impairment? I mean, do we have anything that we can offer? In cancer therapy
related cognitive impairment, there are symptomatic tools for management. We
have ways to help improve attention and concentration, but we can't yet robustly
reset things so that the brain cells work together properly. In the laboratory,
we've begun to develop anti-inflammatory and targeted strategies that do improve
cognition after exposure to certain neurotoxic chemotherapies that can rescue
cognitive function in the laboratory. And there are beginning to be clinical
trials to test those strategies. And I'm very hopeful that what we learn about
brain fog syndromes, either after cancer therapy or after COVID or other
inflammatory challenges, will inform each other. Do the brains of children and
adults differ in their responses to long COVID? Whether long COVID induces
different neurobiological consequences at different ages is a pressing question.
It's something we're actually studying in my laboratory. There are very few
epidemiological studies examining cognitive impairment in children after COVID,
but there was one recently that did very clearly demonstrate that children can
have a period of time of cognitive impairment after COVID. That study suggested
that children recover after about a little over a year. But what that means for
their long-term neurodevelopment, I think, is really unclear. And we need to
understand better how COVID may be affecting children and their
neurodevelopmental trajectory. There must be a concern that with children who go
through particular phases of brain development, that should they get some sort
of long COVID, that it's going to have an impact, including potentially their
mental health conditions? That is certainly a concern, and it really calls for
urgent study of exactly what is happening. I'm here in the heart of central
London, opposite St Pancras Station, and behind me is the Francis Crick
Institute, one of Britain's leading biomedical research centres, leading
research into long COVID. I'm Dr Emma Wall. I'm a clinician scientist and
consultant in infectious diseases at University College Hospital London, and I'm
a senior research fellow here at the Francis Crick Institute. Emma's enlisted
some mechanical help to speed up research in their high-throughput screening
lab. Here we've got a robot that's for handling large numbers of samples, so we
can scale up the number of samples we can put into a research plate for
analysis. And then what are you going to look at in each well? We're incubating
the antibodies in someone's blood in this experiment with live virus, and what
we're looking at here on the computer is cells as they're popping up, and when
they're green it means they're full of virus. The virus is replicating, we're
staining for virus being produced. Dr Wall is part of the Stimulate ICP trial, a
two-year study of long COVID, which began in September 2022. Up to four and a
half thousand people will take part, involving over 30 organisations and six
sites across the UK. The trial is currently testing three medicines, a blood
thinner, an anti-inflammatory and a combination of two antihistamines. We've
clustered our participants by their symptom group, and we have one group that
presents predominantly with chest pain, there's one group that presents with
predominantly neurological symptoms, orthostatic hypotension, dizziness when you
stand up effectively, along with brain fog, tingling in your fingers, feeling
particular muscle fatigue, and then there's a group who present with just
enormous fatigue. And for me they're the most interesting group, because when we
exercise those participants and we walk them up and down just for six minutes
and we do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like they've run the London
Marathon. And I've worked in A&E during the London Marathon, so I know what
those blood tests look like, and these patients look the same. When you look at
their blood, what sort of biomarkers are you looking at? We're particularly
looking at the level of an acid in the blood called lactic acid, and that's when
the muscles switch into a way of working where they don't get enough oxygen.
It's called anaerobic respiration, and the cells instead put out lactic acid
into the blood, and that makes your blood actually acid. And that can be very
dangerous if you're very sick or you run the marathon and you're collapsed in a
heap. For these patients, their blood clears that acid after a while, but
clearly there's a disconnect between the good levels of oxygen we see in their
blood and the amount of oxygen that can get into their muscles. And the focus of
our laboratory-based research is partly to understand what is that disconnect.
How is it that those patients can't get that oxygen into their muscles?
Presumably one of the hypotheses must be that it's something to do with
metabolic dysfunction. Yes, and our preliminary data coming out of the whole-
body MRIs is showing that patients do have quite profound metabolic dysfunction,
but also we're looking at the lining of the blood vessels. And there's an area
within long COVID about this idea of micro clots, that patients don't have big
blood clots in their lungs, but for some reason the virus has stimulated their
very small blood vessels to have these really, really tiny clots, and that's
impeding the flow of blood and then oxygen. We've published a couple of papers
and one of the drugs we're including in the drug trial is a blood thinner to try
and test this hypothesis at scale to say if we give a thousand people a low dose
of this blood thinner, does their fatigue get better? Can we improve blood flow
to their muscles? In South Africa, another long COVID study is underway. Dr
Wassila Jassat is a public health medicine specialist in Johannesburg at the
National Institute for Communicable Diseases, where she's leading on long COVID
surveillance. We began our study in late 2020 and recruited over 3,700
participants. So some of the findings of our study is that at six months,
overall 39% of participants who had previous COVID still experienced persistent
symptoms. It was higher in hospitalized participants, so 47% of those who were
hospitalized had persistent symptoms, and in non-hospitalized participants, 19%
had persistent symptoms. And so we see a difference in terms of the acute
COVID-19 severity. We also reported other risk factors for long COVID, which
included older age, female sex, race, in terms of people who were not Black,
people who are white of mixed race and Indian race had a higher chance of
reporting long COVID than those who are Black. And then interestingly, we looked
at the data across the different waves, and we found that people infected during
the Omicron wave had a lower likelihood of having long COVID compared to those
who had been infected in earlier waves. Gosh, there's a lot there I'd love to
unpack with you. One of the questions I'm really interested in is how you think
what you found in South Africa compares to other countries. We actually compared
our data in terms of the prevalence of long COVID at six months, and found that
it compares very well with other studies in Italy, China, Switzerland, Saudi
Arabia, Russia, the US and France and Norway and even China. Another thing that
comes out of your study is that women are much more likely to suffer from long
COVID. What's the theory here? We probably need more studies to understand if
it's biological, genetic, social, behavioral. One of the things we can say is
that men are more likely to die of COVID-19, acute COVID-19. So it might be the
survivor effect and those who had severe disease, more likely men died in higher
numbers. And so those who survived, it was women who are more likely to then
report long COVID. But I don't think that tells the whole story. And I think we
need more research to understand why that might be. Even the differences we see
amongst ethnic groups. I think we don't quite understand whether these are
purely biological or genetic differences, differences in access to healthcare
and the way that they report health conditions, or if it could be related to
some other factors. With regards to the comment you made about black South
Africans being less likely to suffer from long COVID, what you're saying is that
could be a real effect, or it could actually just be that they are not being
reported within the health system. Yeah. And again, black people were more
likely to have severe disease from acute COVID, but then were less likely to
have long COVID. And there could be just cultural reasons to explain why some
groups report ongoing symptoms more than other groups. But even the research
that has been published internationally have been conflicting. And several
studies found differences with minority age groups being at higher risk. Other
studies concluded that race and ethnicity were not associated with post-COVID
condition. So I think it's not very clear. Scientists are on firmer ground,
however, when it comes to sex. Dr Maria Theresa Ferretti is a neuroimmunologist
based in Austria, and the chief scientific officer of the Women's Brain Project.
She has some ideas about why sex might cause different outcomes in long COVID.
This paradox of completely different effects in men and women in the acute phase
and in the long term phase of a viral infection, it's seen in COVID and long
COVID, but it's been also seen in other post-infectious syndromes, especially
the post-infectious syndromes tend to affect more women than men. Biologically,
we do have explanations for that, even though we don't have completely the full
pictures, but we have quite a good number of indications. It all goes back to
the fact that women, thanks to their genetic makeup, and especially thanks to
estrogen, have something that is described often as a stronger immune system.
And this helps us fight in the acute phase of the infection. We are more
efficient in fighting and hopefully clearing the virus. But this has also
another side to it, right? So this very strong immune system is what actually
puts women at higher risk for autoimmune disorders in general. And this is
exactly what most likely is happening in long COVID as well. So an over-
efficient immune system that at some point goes out of control. In relation to
long COVID, how does this play out for the two sexes in terms of the symptoms
they experience and how long they go through it? Difference number one is that
women are at higher risk of long COVID. Consequent to this, the frequency of
long COVID is much higher in women. For people under 60 years of age, studies
have shown that they can be two to one. So there are two long COVID women for
every man. So it's really overwhelmingly affecting women in that age range. With
the Women's Brain Project team, what we have found that is robust in the
literature is that, first of all, women tend to present a higher number of
persistent symptoms. And very interestingly to me, also the type of symptoms are
different. And the neurological and the psychiatric symptoms that go with long
COVID. So everything that is related to the fatigue, the brain fog, but also the
depression, psychosis, sleep disturbances, these type of symptoms that affect
the brain are mostly reported by women. Like there is a very clear sex
difference there, which somehow tell us that our female brains are somehow more
vulnerable to this, to the effect of long COVID. My name is Sue Griffiths. I'm
from the UK, but I'm currently in hospital in a place called Gordulith just
outside Bilbao in Northern Spain. I came to visit family for the new year, but
unfortunately I became ill with a bronchial flu, which developed into an asthma
crisis and a pseudomonas infection. I was admitted on the 2nd of January. It's
now the 24th of January. And I'm still here. This was Sue's second
hospitalisation, three years after being diagnosed with COVID in March 2020. She
already had psoriatic arthritis and mild controlled asthma. But after COVID,
everything went haywire. I had a pulmonary embolism as a result of the COVID. I
haven't been well ever since. I've had the cough that wouldn't go away. A change
in smell and taste, extreme fatigue, brain fog and forgetfulness, muscle and
joint pain. I have also got rheumatoid arthritis, derealisation and blurred
vision. I've got that at the moment, so it's proving difficult to record this.
Breathlessness, migraines, a hoarse voice, skin rashes. I've had extreme
reactions to treat positive for COVID. I've had extreme reactions to tree pollen
and grass pollen now. And I also have had an extreme reaction to a bee sting,
which needed antibiotics. A simple cold for someone else can now put me in a
life-threatening situation. What is it like living with long COVID? Difficult is
the answer. If I wanted to go out with friends, I'd have to do nothing
beforehand and nothing afterwards. And I'm talking even including having a
shower. That's an activity. Everything has to be planned, otherwise it's just a
disaster. Long COVID has really completely ruined my life as I knew it, but I'm
still hopeful that life will improve, even though it's left me with severe
asthma. Severe asthma is the thing that's likely to end my life, I think. Many
of Sue's health issues are respiratory. Dr. Lansalot Pinto is a consultant
pulmonologist at the PD Hinduja Hospital in Mumbai, India. And he's treated a
number of COVID and long COVID patients and come across a range of symptoms.
Shortness of breath, especially if the lower respiratory tract was involved in
COVID. Cardiovascular abnormalities like having postural hypotension, so when
they stand, they suddenly feel a little bit of dizziness. Having palpitations,
that's perceiving your heart rate going at a very fast rate with trivial
activity is something that we've seen in a fraction of individuals. Some of the
other things that I have specifically noticed among my patients, because I see
respiratory patients, is individuals with asthma, individuals with allergies who
were relatively well controlled pre-COVID seem to have had their asthma flare up
post-COVID and seem to have become a little more brittle when it comes to the
control of their asthma. We've also seen individuals have their blood sugars
rise during COVID. Either they develop diabetes for the first time, or
individuals who were diabetic and were well controlled, kind of lose control
over their sugars post-COVID. And that tends to result in the need for stepping
up medications. We've also seen some individuals with high blood pressure
manifest for the first time either post-COVID or individuals with pre-existing
high blood pressure. Individuals with pre-existing high blood pressure have a
worsening of their blood pressure control post-COVID. So these are some of the
things that we've seen in terms of the long after effects of having COVID
infection. I think the challenge with long COVID very often is that with the
lack of formal clinics or lack of formal specialties that very often handle it
in India, individuals could see a wide variety of physicians. So there is no
common roof under which all patients who have these debilitating symptoms would
present. Long COVID patient groups and social media have played an essential
role in bringing together people with so many different symptoms. The presence
of fatigue is thought to resemble diseases such as myalgic encephalomyelitis or
chronic fatigue syndrome, sometimes known as ME-CFS. The connection is something
that the US Recover long COVID trial is keeping in mind about the task ahead.
Dr. Walter Koroshetz. The Recover was put together with the idea that the answer
is not going to be easy. We thought that if there's going to be a quick
solution, it'll come up around the world, people stumble into it. But we knew
from ME-CFS that if this is what we think it is, this post-viral condition, this
is going to be hard to get an answer to. And so the Recover was put together to
leave no stone unturned so that five years from now, if we don't have an answer,
it's not because there were things we didn't try, we just weren't smart enough.
My name is Benjamin and I'm 25 years old. I am from Switzerland near Basel.
Before I got long COVID, I was a competitive athlete at international level and
worked as a PE teacher while studying sports science. All that came to a halt
when I became ill with long COVID in July 2022. For the future, I hope that
society will begin to recognize this disease in its full extent and the doctors
will take it seriously. Long COVID is a health crisis. I am optimistic that the
scientific and medical community is increasingly paying attention to this, that
there is excellent science being done across the world and a number of
laboratories focused on better understanding this and providing therapeutic
strategies to mitigate it. It's unfortunate that while we were trying to douse
the fire, so to speak, proverbially, that was COVID, a lot of effort went into
vaccination, a lot of effort went into trying to develop new drugs. But there
was this small fraction of individuals who, in terms of numbers are not trivial
at all, was ignored and was not paid enough attention to. Hopefully that's
changing, I think, because now that the world feels that we have a better
control over the pandemic, hopefully all our energies will be directed towards
improving the quality of life of individuals who seem to have debilitating
symptoms over the years. My daily pill intake is just shocking. What have we got
in the morning? Two, four, six. Despite the huge challenges ahead, scientists
are clear that progress is being made, albeit slowly, and that the ongoing
trials and further research will help people like Sue Griffiths. Three days
after she spoke to us from her hospital bed in Spain, Sue was discharged and is
now, a month later than expected, back in the UK. I feel very hopeful because I
know there are some great scientists out in the world working on it for
everybody. I would say that gradually over the last three years I have been
going downhill. I'm still completely exhausted and so I'm still hopeful that
there'll be some medication or something that will be able to help me. You've
been listening to The Long Haul of Long Covid. I'm Natasha Loder and the
producer was Sue Nelson. This has been a Boffin Media production for the BBC
World Service. This is the BBC World Service and here's what's happening in the
studio this week. The poet Ada Limon has just been given a unique commission.
She's been asked by NASA, the American Space Agency, to write a poem that will
be sent into space. We follow Ada's creative process. She's been asked to write
a poem that will be sent into space. She's been asked to write a poem that will
be sent into space. She's been asked to write a poem that will be sent into
space. We follow Ada's creative process as she writes a poem for NASA. In the
studio today at 11.30 and 23.30 GMT. In 50 minutes, witness history. This week
we're telling stories about women's history and today we'll hear about the life
of Octavia Butler, one of the first African-American women to successfully write
science fiction. I've been speaking to one of her closest friends. Next, it's
Outlook. This is the BBC World Service.