TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's six o'clock on Monday the 27th of February. Good
morning. This is Today with Justin Webb and Michelle Hussain. The headlines this
morning. The head of the European Commission is coming to Britain today to
finalise a deal about trade in Northern Ireland, but it is not clear whether the
DUP or indeed the Prime Minister's own MPs are going to back his agreement. We
will hear live from Westminster, from Belfast and from Brussels. The health
safety watchdog says NHS staff in England cried when they were asked about their
working conditions. A survey has revealed a significant distress, particularly
among ambulance dispatch centres. And also in today's programme. One of the
things he most famously said was, I wanted to show the world that homosexuals
aren't cowards and can be as brave as anyone, which seems to us obvious, but
back then wasn't obvious at all. Stephen Fry on his film about forgotten heroes
of the Dutch resistance. And the Northern Lights were seen as far south as
Somerset last night. Your surroundings don't even bother you. It was minus one
outside and it was just absolutely stunning. I could have stood there all night.
The colours, the magic, the darkness. It was just special. Why, though? Why did
the Arctic phenomena appear in our night skies so far south? And can we expect
more tonight? The BBC News is read this morning by Vijay Allis. Rishi Sunak will
meet the President of the European Commission this afternoon in Berkshire, amid
expectation that they will finalise a deal on post-Brexit trade in Northern
Ireland. The current arrangements have caused friction and some unionists have
refused to restore power sharing in Northern Ireland unless they're changed.
Here's our political correspondent Ian Watson. After hundreds of hours of
discussions, Downing Street is hopeful that these will be the final talks before
an agreement is reached. The Cabinet is expected to meet immediately after the
Prime Minister and the Commission President conclude their discussions. And such
is the confidence that a deal will be struck. Plans are being put in place for a
joint press conference, followed by a statement to Parliament from the Prime
Minister. An agreement with the EU would ease trade between Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, but it wouldn't in itself restore power sharing government at
stormont. That would only happen if the largest unionist party, the DUP, agreed.
So today may well be a landmark moment in the EU and UK's post-Brexit relations,
but a rockier road to solving Northern Ireland's political problems could lie
ahead. An Australian company has bought the collapsed battery maker British
Volt. The start-up business had been planning a £4 billion factory in
Northumberland before it went into administration last month, with the loss of
300 jobs. Our business editor Simon Jack reports. British Volt's downfall was
blamed on a lack of battery experience, unproven technology and no customers or
revenue. The new owner looks similar in some ways. Recharge Industries is owned
and run by a New York-based investment fund with no automotive background. The
new owners will keep the British Volt brand name but have very different plans
for the future. The company intends to start by focusing on batteries for energy
storage and hopes to have those products ready by the end of 2025. It then
intends to produce batteries for high-performance sports cars. The prospect of a
much-needed plant that can produce batteries for high-volume car makers in the
UK still looks many years off. Safety investigators say that doctors, ambulance
dispatchers and other NHS staff in England have faced significant distress and
harm over the past year as a result of long delays in emergency care. The
Healthcare Safety Investigation Branch said many staff broke down in tears when
they were asked about their working environment. The watchdog said there was
likely to be an impact on patient safety. Dr Salwa Malik is an A&E consultant
and Vice President of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine. I've had nights
where you go over the scenarios in your head about patients or whatever problem
that you were in and it can be really difficult to sleep. And if you're on edge
for, you know, 10, 12 hours a day, at the end when you walk out you can kind of
crumble. NHS England says it takes staff well-being very seriously, while the
government said the number of ambulances and hospital beds was being increased.
Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have set fire to Palestinian houses,
shops and vehicles. A Palestinian man was shot dead earlier. Two Jewish brothers
had been killed in the same area near Nablus. The energy regulator Ofgem will
give its latest decision on the quarterly price cap for England, Wales and
Scotland later this morning. Although domestic gas and electricity bills are
protected by a government guarantee, Ofgem's announcement is likely to reopen
debate about the level of support being offered. Here's our Cost of Living
correspondent, Kevin Peachey. A typical household's annual bill will rise in
April under current plans, going up from £2,100 to £3,000. Ofgem's price cap
will show that without current government support, bills would have been higher.
Forecasts suggest about £300 a year more. But it will also confirm that the cost
to the government of providing this help is likely to be less than initially
expected because of a fall in wholesale energy costs. Campaigners say the
Chancellor now has an opportunity to offer more short-term help to cushion the
blow for bill payers. But Mr Hunt recently told the BBC he was unlikely to have
the money for a major new initiative. The UK's major supermarkets are expected
to meet the Farming Minister today to discuss shortages of some fruit and
vegetables. Several retailers have begun rationing certain products. Here's our
business correspondent, Esselt Carr. Some shoppers have been facing empty
shelves with low availability of things like tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers.
Both the industry and the government are blaming extreme weather, disrupting
imports from Spain and Morocco. The National Farmers Union says other issues,
such as high energy and fertiliser costs and labour shortages since Brexit, have
also hampered production by growers here. Today, the Farming Minister is
expected to meet representatives of the UK's biggest supermarkets to discuss
what can be done to improve supplies. Cricket. On the fourth day of the second
test in Wellington, New Zealand's men were balled out for 483 in their second
innings, setting England a target of 258 runs for victory. At close of play,
England had reached 48 for 1 in reply. They lead the two-match series 1-0.
Vigie, thank you very much. Six minutes past six now. Ben Rich, how's the
weather? Morning, Ben. Good morning to you, Michelle. Thank you very much. Well,
it's been a very dry February so far. In fact, in parts of southern England,
we've only had 10% of the rainfall that we would normally expect in the month.
It's only northern Scotland that's had anything like the rainfall it should have
had, and with high pressure remaining in charge through this week, I have to say
there was not a huge amount of rain in the forecast, and some places really
could do with some. That said, we've got a few showers around this morning
across parts of south-east England, eastern England and north-east England. It
is quite a cloudy start, and that cloud is producing some showers here and
there. And as we go through the day, those areas of cloud and the odd shower
will drift a little further westwards, I think, across maybe parts of the
Midlands, parts of north-west England, Wales. South-west England could see the
odd shower and generally more in the way of cloud, but there will be some sunny
spells as well. For northern Ireland, for south-west Scotland and for eastern
Scotland, here really a mix of patchy cloud and sunny spells. It will be largely
dry through the day. The best of the sunshine through today will be found across
northern and north-western parts of Scotland, blue skies overhead for much of
the time. The winds will be light for many, but it will be quite breezy for some
eastern and southern coasts, and temperatures really wherever you are, between 6
and 9 degrees. That's about the norm for the time of year. Overnight, we'll keep
large areas of cloud, some clear spells too, where we see those lengthiest clear
breaks. North-west Scotland particularly could see a touch of frost. Tomorrow,
another dry day for many, patchy cloud and sunny spells, but we will see some
quite sharp showers across parts of southern England. Ben, thank you. Eight
minutes past six is the time. Let us look at the papers and the news websites.
Can Soonack sell his Brexit deal is what the Daily Mail calls the burning
question as the European Commission President heads to the UK for talks this
afternoon. It says a new agreement on northern Ireland trade could trigger what
it's calling another Tory civil war. The Daily Telegraph also warns that a
revolt is brewing, reporting that unionists and Tory Eurosceptics are refusing
to back a deal unless EU law is expunged from northern Ireland. The Times says
the Prime Minister has been on a charm offensive to sell it to MPs. The paper
has a guide to what it calls the tribes that need taming within the Tory ranks,
along with a danger rating for how likely it is that each group could scupper
the deal. This could be the most perilous week of Rishi Soonack's political
life, says the Guardian. The Daily Express quotes the Prime Minister as
promising the accord is best for Britain and will prove that Brexit works. The
Financial Times has been told the deal could enable pets to travel freely
between Great Britain and Northern Ireland without the need for microchips and
passports. Energy Nightmare reads the front page headline of the Daily
Telegraph. It carries a call from campaigners for the government to prevent an
expected £500 rise in the typical annual energy bill from April. The paper says
an increase will push an extra 1.7 million households into fuel poverty. The
Guardian, meanwhile, features a demand from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and
the Trussell Trust for the government to reform the welfare system after their
calculations showed that the basic benefits given to low-income households fall
short of the real cost of food, energy and other basics. Students sitting the
International Baccalaureate will be allowed to use the artificial intelligence
chatbot, chatbot, chat, GPT, to write their essays, according to the Times. It
says the qualification body will allow pupils to quote work that is generated by
the technology as long as they credit it. The idea, it says, is to enable
children to use the tool ethically, just as they have learnt to use technology
such as calculators and translating apps. Do you think it could do our cues? I'm
quite tempted. But not stylishly, Michelle, at least not yet. A picture of a
triumphant Manchester United lifting the Caribou Cup features in the Daily
Mirror, which says the club are in Wembley Dreamland after their 2-0 victory
over Newcastle. The Sun heaps praise on their manager, Eric Ten Haag, with the
headline, Haag bags first cup. The Guardian, not a terribly imaginative
headline, but anyway, the Guardian offers sympathy for the losing side, pointing
out that Newcastle missed out on the chance to land their first trophy since
1969. And animal lovers are causing conflict between cats, badgers, hedgehogs
and other wildlife by leaving out food in the garden. That's a study that is
cited by The Telegraph. This morning, indeed, we'll be talking to the author in
another hour's time. But the way the paper puts it is that researchers at
Nottingham Trent University and the University of Brighton have analysed videos
recorded by the public to investigate the interactions between different
species. They found animals would often get into fights over the scraps, with
badgers usually coming out on top, although hedgehogs do surprisingly well.
Eleven minutes past six. Pictures from Calabria in southern Italy show broken
planks scattered along a beach and what is left of the wooden boat that fell
apart as it was trying to come into shore with a terrible loss of life. Bethany
Bell is a Europe correspondent for the BBC. Bethany, where does the death toll
stand and where were these people coming from? We know that at least 59 people
died, including 12 children. One of the children was a baby. When this boat
crashed against rocks near the southern Italian coast in Calabria, the boat had
set sail from the Turkish port of Izmir about four days ago. It had been spotted
off the Italian coast late on Saturday by a plane that had been operated by the
European border agency Frontex. And they sent out patrol boats to try and
intercept the boat, but the weather was so bad that the rescue boats were forced
to return to port. And then this boat crashed against rocks off the coast with
this loss of life and 20 to 30 people are still feared missing. We're more used
here, of course, to the inflatable dinghies that are crossing the channel,
wooden boats of this kind traveling a long distance from Turkey to Italy. How
common are they? At the moment, this is this is they say that there is a route
now between Turkey, people trying to get to Italy and it's the Italian prime
minister blamed human traffickers. She said that they were offering migrants the
prospect of the false prospect of a safe journey. And it's the whole this whole
incident has really reignited a debate in Italy about migration in Europe and
whether the EU needs to do more to try and combat human trafficking and the
causes of migration. And, of course, you know, the Italian government is a right
wing government and they came to power very much on a message of fighting human
trafficking. Others are saying that their hard line approach isn't working and
that everybody needs to really focus on trying to stop people making these very,
very dangerous trips across the Mediterranean. We're on this at half past seven.
Bethany, thank you. 30 minutes past six. What's it like to be an ambulance
dispatcher at the moment? The answer appears to be quite appalling in many
cases. Jim Reid's our health reporter. What where does this information come
from, Jim? What what what is the size of the survey? Who have they talked to?
Morning, Justin. I think it's significant because of where this report comes
from. So this is not from a think tank or group representing staff, a union or a
trade group. This is the Health Care Safety Investigation Branch. It's an
independent organisation. It's funded by the Department of Health. And normally
it produces these very technical reports into subjects like the placement of
gastric tubes and that kind of thing. This report is very different. It's part
of a wider piece of research into delays in emergency care. It specifically
looked at the impact of staff over the last year or so. And they said they had
to change their whole approach in this study on the advice of a health
psychologist because of the significant distress they found that the staff were
hearing. So they said staff in interviews were crying or many staff or
displaying other extreme emotions. That's in their words. It gives that example
of 999 call handlers in particular. This is a quote from the report. Many were
worrying how many people are we going to kill today because of their frustration
and just not being able to send out ambulances quickly enough because they're
being delayed at hospitals. They talk about challenging decisions. The doctors
also had to make an A&E about which of those patients in ambulances queuing
outside are going to be treated first. So much of this report really does make
some pretty hard reading when they look at the experience of staff, not just
over the winter, actually, but over the last year. But I think the significance
is it's come from an organisation you wouldn't necessarily expect to publish
research in maybe such a frank manner using such such blunt language, Justin.
And the impact might be what? Well, they talk about three things. So they talk
about stress and the working environment, exhaustion, but they also pick out
something called moral injury. And by that, they mean emotions. They define it
as emotions like shame, guilt, sadness faced by doctors and nurses because they
could not just could not give patients help in the way they wanted. They talk
about staff not being able to sleep at night, not being able to get through a
working shift. And then they talk about the impact. And this is the important
thing, the really important thing for them is the impact on patients' safety of
all that, because they say that this can lead to increased staff absence. So we
know that the most recent figures about 25 percent, a quarter of all days lost
in the NHS through absence are down to stress, anxiety and depression. And they
worry that there is a worry, at least, that that could spiral. So as you get
more of this stress, more staff take time off. So more staff. So therefore,
areas like A&E are even less well staffed because of those absences. I should
say that NHS England responded to these points, saying that they accept that
staff have faced significant challenges recently, but they do say there's a
range of support available. The government said there is more money. There's
been another 750 million pounds over the winter in England to try to reduce some
of these pressures. And they have just published a medium term plan to increase
the number of hospital beds, increase the number of ambulances to try to reduce
some of this pressure, at least in time for next winter. Jim Reid, thank you. 17
minutes past six. We will learn a figure this morning that will affect domestic
energy bills in April across Great Britain. Sean's with us now to take us
through what's expected from Ofgem. Morning, Sean. Morning, Michelle. Yeah, it's
a big announcement from Ofgem. But how much it will affect bills will remain to
be seen. Because at the moment, of course, we have this government cap on how
much customers are charged for each unit of energy. Now, this announcement from
Ofgem will talk about the theoretical maximum that energy companies can charge
households on that variable rate that many people have fallen onto in recent
years. But of course, the government cap, the limit on how much we get charged
per unit of energy that we use in our households is still in place at the
moment. I've got Dermot Nolan, former chief executive of Ofgem from 2014 to
2020, now senior advisor at the consulting firm Fingalton. Morning, Dermot. Good
morning. How are you? I'm well, thank you, Dermot. Why are Ofgem doing this
today, making an announcement about energy price caps when we know right now
households have got a cap in place on how much they're charged per unit of
energy? It is complicated, but every three months Ofgem announces what the
maximum price is that can be charged to any household. Now, for the last three
months, the actual maximum price has been £4,200 per year, which is obviously a
lot of money, about three or four times what it was even two years ago. But the
government said, well, the average household isn't going to pay any more than
£2,500. So if you like, there was about £1,700 on average being paid for by the
government directly. What's going to happen today, we think, is that Ofgem is
going to say, well, prices are actually falling, so it'll go down from about
£4,200 to maybe even £3,200. And yet, ironically, households will end up paying
more because the government guarantee is going up from £2,500 to £3,000. So even
though the actual price of energy is falling, and that's a good thing, actually
households for the next three months are likely to pay on average about £500
more. Is it a good thing that that confusion exists? Is there a better way of
doing this? I mean, I'm not sure if there is in some ways. I have to say, I
think any kind of government intervention was absolutely needed over the last
year. People used to pay £1,200 a year for their energy even two years ago.
Vulnerable households can't pay £4,000 a year. They just can't. The government
had to intervene and it had to do something. So I completely agree with that.
And, you know, I know it's maybe a little confusing, but still the government
was trying to intervene. And I think that was a good thing. I think the question
is for the next three months, is it reasonable or fair that the government
should have increased it from £2,500 to £3,000? That's a difficult question. In
some ways, it doesn't seem fair at all. And a lot of people have opposed it. And
yet, just listen to your last item about the pressure on the NHS. You know, you
would say, well, maybe the government can spend more on the NHS if it spends
less on energy guarantees. These are difficult choices to make. One thing I will
say, which I think is positive, is that three months after this, and I know this
is still a time away, it's likely prices will fall again, probably around almost
£2,000, £2,100. So the direction of energy prices is falling, and that's a good
thing. But even then, in the long run, over the next year or so, we would still
expect that prices are going to be much higher still, maybe about £2,000 a year,
than they were, you know, two years ago. Why would you expect that? Why can't
people be thinking, well, hang on, everything seems to be steadily heading back
towards where we used to be. Why aren't my energy bills getting to that level?
Because I think in the medium, now anyone who can tell you, this includes, very
much includes me, anyone who tells you with surety what the price of energy is
going to be in a year from now is an idiot, because it's too unclear. You're
trying to tell us for the summer though, Dermot, I'm not accusing you of
anything, but you know, people are making predictions. People are making, for
the next three to six months, it's actually reasonably clear, I think, because
the way the energy price cap is calculated, it follows prices after a few
months. So for the next few months, it will fall, definitely. But in so much as
I'm guessing, and I stress I'm guessing, I may be the idiot I've just referred
to, but I'm guessing that prices will stay certainly lower than they were. But I
don't think they're going to fall back to about £1,200 a year, because quite
simply, there isn't, we still produce a lot of our electricity through gas, and
all our heating is gas. So I just don't think there's going to be enough gas in
Europe to actually see it drop down to the prices that we saw two years ago.
Dermot, thank you. Dermot Nolan, former chief executive of Ofgem, now advisor at
the consulting firm Fingalton. I've got Rohan Malik with me, managing partner
for the UK and Ireland at the accountants EY. Morning, Rohan. Morning, Sean.
Energy prices having a big impact on how the economy is doing right now. And you
guys at EY have got your regional economic forecast out. And this lays out this
morning, as you see an economic divide between London and the rest of the UK.
You're thinking that is expected to deepen due to the rising cost of living and
weaker consumer spending. But how are you expecting that exactly to play out and
in which parts of the UK? So, Sean, we expect a mild recession in 2023 and
employment is expected to fall in almost every UK region. Now, what's been
interesting is a region sector makeup is really important to its economic
performance. So London, as an example, key sectors are information and
communications or professional services, less reliant on consumers and less
affected by the cost of living squeeze. Other parts of the UK have got much more
exposure towards those sectors which rely on consumer spending right now.
Indeed, we believe four of the five slowest growing areas are in the north with
Durham, Hull, Rotherham, Hartlepool and Plymouth, all trailing the rest of the
country. When you see what we're expecting to hear more from the Labour Party
today, we're going to be hearing from the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves,
before eight o'clock ourselves about Labour's plans for the economy. And we're
seeing the headlines already this morning that Labour says the UK risks falling
behind Poland. And we've got a better idea, it seems, of how Labour expects to
set its own targets, looking at the size of the economy per person in the UK and
how that intends to grow. Are we lagging so much? Do you see those numbers play
out that we could well be falling behind the likes of Poland in the years to
come? So, Sean, I, on a Monday morning, I'm a glass half full person right now.
So UK has retained second place in EY's annual ranking of European countries by
their ability to attract foreign direct investment. Now, what makes me
optimistic right now is the proportion of investors looking to back projects in
the UK is at a record high. Also, the number of new projects secured by the UK,
which typically generate more jobs and higher levels of investment, was not up
on the year before, but was the highest level in Europe. So it seems the UK's
focus on attracting greater value FDI projects over volume is starting to bear
fruit, building on our recent successes in research and development and digital
technology. And how does that play out in a regional breakdown, Rohan? Is that
evenly spread around the UK? I'm afraid not. I'm afraid not. That's where I
think you go back to the the advantages of London, effectively, as well, where
London has got many things or Southeast, I would say, playing for it right now.
So it's a great template for rest of the country. But the advances are not
replicable. It's the capital, it's the global finance center and a major global
tourist destination. So I would imagine that the key thing which this government
needs now is a plan for a regional economic performance, which is balanced
across the whole of the UK. Thank you, Rohan Malik, managing partner for the UK
and Ireland at the Accountants EY. Colleen McHugh is chief investment officer at
Wealthify. Morning, Colleen. Good morning, Sean. Are you investors keeping an
eye on how Labour plans to hold itself to account, how it wants to grow the
economy, looking in particular at the growth of the economy per person around
the UK? That seems to be the metric it's going to go with. Yeah, I mean, listen,
when does he start? Look, it's a laudable objective. Something definitely needs
to be done. I'd like to think of myself as a half glass, glass half full type of
person as well. But a little bit of reality here at the moment, for example,
average real wages in the UK, they've stagnated since 2008, making the UK among
the worst performers in the G20, with only Italy seeing worse real wage
performance in that period of time. So definitely, definitely something to be
done for sure, Sean. We're going to be hearing plenty more today as well about
what is it going to be a confirmation of a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland.
I just wonder what you would be looking out for there in the small print of the
deal. Well, what we'd really like to see is this topic finally being resolved
and to allow the UK government to begin focusing on other issues. Your previous
caller mentioned the dreaded recession word. Certainly that's playing on markets
at the moment. Markets have been very topsy turvy year to date. And, you know,
ironically, they've been up on this whole sort of good news is bad news. So
we've had some really strong economic data come through. But what you've seen is
markets pull back on that data, on the notion that, oh, my goodness, we haven't
actually reached peak interest rates. The economy is still really strong. So it
looks like we may have a little bit further to go. Yeah, I see the FTSE 100 at
7,879 this morning. And just this breaking news we've had on British Vault.
We're going to be hearing more from our business editor, Simon Jack, about this
before seven. But, Colleen, the idea, you know, this is confirmed. Australian
company Recharge Industries has bought British Vault out of administration. Are
we going to get that four billion pound battery plant? What does this mean for
the UK car industry? Well, it's a very positive move for the UK car industry. As
we move to production of EV vehicles, it's crucial. I mean, the most important
component of an EV car is the battery. So to have that battery plant in the UK
is just so, so important. So I think it's good news story, Sean. Colleen, thank
you. Plenty of attempts for optimism there from various guests this morning.
Colleen McHugh, chief investment officer at Wealthify. After seven o'clock, I'm
going to be speaking to the chief executive of Thames Water. They're announcing
a very big investment today, but of course, not without controversy in recent
years. Sean, thank you. 28 minutes past six. To Jonathan Ledge, Admiralsport.
Morning. If you are waking up expecting news of another famous victory for
England's cricketers in New Zealand, sorry to disappoint, because the second
test is nicely balanced after the hosts scored 483 in their second innings.
That's England 258 to win. And at the close, England were 48 for one. Stephen
Shemmelt has all the details. Yeah, it went from the sublime to the ridiculous,
Jonathan. Those are the bare facts you've just given with the scores. But
England could have been chasing a lot more than that 258. Harry Brooke bowling
wasn't exactly a last throw of the dice. It was just a way to give some respite
to the weary bowlers. But amazingly, he got Kane Williamson caught down the leg
side for 132. It'd been a chanceless century by Williamson. Brooke's first test
wicket, and that sparked a collapse of five for 28. Now, England still need to
make the highest score ever made by a team enforcing the follow on to win a
test. They're probably the favourites to do so, but there's also a chance that
they become the first England team to lose a test after enforcing the follow on.
48 for one, need another 210 to win the series 2-0. Enjoy tomorrow, Stephen.
Thank you very much. Australia made it six wins out of seven when winning the
Women's T20 World Cup against the host South Africa yesterday. And a piece of
history in the men's T20, Isle of Man dismissed for 10 yesterday as they were
beaten by Spain in the final game of their tour. Spain won in two balls, two
sixes. That was it. Do you want a refund? Man United goalkeeper David de Gea
says that United have the chance to achieve more success after securing their
first major trophy in almost six years. They took the EFL Cup with a 2-0 win
yesterday over Newcastle in the final at Wembley. It's difficult to describe the
words. It's been a bit emotional as well, because it's been for me a long time
without lifting a trophy. So it's great. I'm so, so happy. Proud of the team, of
the players. So happy to see the fans enjoying. It's a great moment for us. More
on that in an hour. The Celtic manager Ange Postacoglu has hailed their 2-1
victory over Rangers in the Scottish League Cup final as the catalyst for a
special season. They have a nine-point lead over Rangers in the defence of their
Premiership title. Another Premier League defeat for Chelsea has left manager
Graham Potter admitting he can't rely on boardroom support indefinitely. Chelsea
lost 2-0 at Tottenham. But in the women's FA Cup, the holders Chelsea knocked
out Arsenal 2-0. Only Ireland can now land a Six Nations Grand Slam after
Scotland's 32-21 defeat by France, a stirring match in Paris. And in tennis
overnight, a notable success for Britain's Cameron Norrie. He's beaten the world
number two Carlos Alcaraz to win the Rio Open to claim his fifth ATP singles
title. Two winners for you today, let's hope. Two selections, Plumpton 335
number two, Blue Bikini, and Air 350 number three, Glenn Truan. Thanks,
Jonathan. Blue Bikini? Blue Bikini. Why do you say it in that strange way? We've
had odder horses, let's face it. I've had odder presenters. Thanks very much.
And now to something for music fans. Six Music. The year is 1978. Kate Bush
releases her seminal debut album. The Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th
anniversary, we're celebrating the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep dive
into The Kick Inside. You can find archive interviews and exclusive
performances, as well as playlists and programs featuring artists she's
inspired. She was in her own world that she had created herself. Way, way ahead
of their time. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds, click the music tab and
scroll to find Kate Bush's artist icons collection. You're listening to Today on
Radio 4, Michelle Hussain and Justin Webb. The time's 28 minutes to 7. Vijay
Alice has the news. The Prime Minister will meet the President of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire this afternoon to try to finalise
a deal on post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. If an agreement is reached, it
will be announced at a joint news conference after the Cabinet has been updated.
An Australian company has bought the collapsed battery maker British Volt. The
business had been planning to build a £4 billion factory in Northumberland
before it went into administration last month. The new owners will keep the
British Volt brand name, but will focus initially on batteries for energy
storage, rather than electric vehicles. Safety investigators have warned of the
significant stress on doctors, ambulance dispatchers and other NHS staff in
England, caused by long delays in emergency care. They said many staff
interviewed broke down in tears when they were asked about their working
environment. The energy regulator Ofgem will give its latest decision on the
quarterly price cap for England, Wales and Scotland later this morning. Although
domestic gas and electricity bills are protected by a government guarantee,
Ofgem's announcement is likely to reopen debate about the level of support being
offered. The government is creating Jobcentre League tables, with staff being
given cash bonuses for getting people off benefits and into work. Sixty
Jobcentres where the schemes being piloted are to be ranked by performance, with
staff in the leading ones being awarded £250 each. The Farming Minister is
expected to meet representatives of the UK supermarkets today to discuss how to
address the current shortages of some fruit and vegetables. Several retailers
have put limits on how much of certain products people can buy. Anyone under 18
will no longer be able to get married in England and Wales. The previous legal
age of marriage was 16. The change is designed to protect vulnerable children.
Under the new rules, adults who allow or arrange the marriage of anyone under 18
could face up to seven years in jail and a fine. Fiji, thank you. It's 27
minutes to seven now. In the next few hours we should learn what is in the text
of the new version of the Northern Ireland Protocol, an attempt to address the
problems in what Boris Johnson first negotiated in 2019 and then brought in a
bill to counter. First to Nick Hurdley, our chief political correspondent. Nick,
talk us through the choreography first, the sequence of events, and what we
should read into that choice of what comes first and what comes after it. Well,
we're told that there are still final talks to take place between the Prime
Minister and the President of the European Commission, but the fact that she's
in Berkshire today I think means it's all but certain that by this afternoon we
will be pouring over some text of a new Brexit deal. And then we will get a big
sell from number 10 over the next few hours. It will be Cabinet first, then a
press conference from the Prime Minister and Ursula von der Leyen, and then a
statement to Parliament this evening. And it may be the last of those that is
actually the trickiest for the Prime Minister, not getting this agreed with the
European Union, that seems to be all but certain, but getting it past his own
MPs and persuading the DUP. I think his big sell to the country is going to be
that this solves most of the issues on trade that have made it cumbersome to get
goods from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. He will argue that it puts
safeguards in place for the Union and gives Northern Ireland more of a say over
what rules apply there. But fundamentally, it's going to be about the specifics.
And I think a lot of Brexiteers and the DUP are withholding their judgment this
morning because they want to see those specifics before they give their verdict.
Stay with us, Nick. On that point about the DUP, I want to bring in Chris Page,
our Ireland correspondent, who's on the line from Belfast. So they haven't seen
the text in line with others, Chris, but what will they be looking for?
Michelle, they've been emphasising really over the last few weeks that the
biggest point for them probably is what they call the democratic deficit. In
other words, in their view, laws which are made for Northern Ireland, which
elected representatives from Northern Ireland don't have any say over. So it'll
be the role of EU law, including the role of the European Court of Justice, that
they will be looking at, I think, most closely, as well as the overall picture
as regards the lifting of trade barriers between Great Britain and Northern
Ireland. I would say that they've been stressing they'll want to look at the
detail. They have, I understand, lawyers on standby to analyse some of the more
complicated parts of the legal text. So all that is pointing to the expectation
that we're not going to get a quick response from the DUP. I think it's most
likely the party will say they want to go and consult with their grassroots,
make a judgment on the agreement whenever, if there is one, whenever the time is
absolutely right. And they are convinced of its merits or indeed otherwise.
Those seven tests they set out, Chris, they didn't put the European Court of
Justice per se within that. Does that suggest to you that there is some wiggle
room that although they're famous for saying no, that they are under pressure to
find a way to agree to this and therefore to go back into government? I think
that the seven tests may well have been designed in order to give some wiggle
room. I mean, indeed, DUP sources would say they were supposed to give
negotiators some space to try to get the best deal here. Though in recent days,
it has been senior DUP figures, the likes of the MP Sammy Wilson, the DUP's
former Westminster leader, Lord Dodds, who've been speaking particularly about
the democratic deficit, as they call it, and the role of EU law. So that points
to, I suppose, the other side of the equation, that the seven tests could be
viewed as something that could give the DUP the opportunity to harden their
position if they felt they needed to. One domestic political dynamic in Northern
Ireland, which I think is very important here, the council elections will be
held on the 18th of May. The electoral threat the DUP sees isn't from more
moderate, if you like, political forces. It's from a more hardline party, the
traditional unionist voice. So for that reason, I think the DUP will be
particularly wary of being seen to compromise too soon. So perhaps what the
government can expect the best result for them would be that the DUP wouldn't
reject any deal out of hand, but would instead adopt a wait and see approach.
Let's return to Nick. And on the Westminster point, Nick, Dominic Raab was asked
about this yesterday on the BBC, but do we know for sure whether MPs will get a
vote on what the Prime Minister agrees with the EU? We don't because number 10
won't tell us at the moment, Michelle. I have to say, I was speaking to some
Brexiteers last night who were being actively lobbied by Downing Street and
senior cabinet ministers. They were under the impression they would get a vote
at some point, though not necessarily within the next couple of days. That hard
sell has been going on for the last few days after the toing and froing we saw
at the start of last week. I think there are some Brexiteers who won't be won
over, who have set the bar extremely high, and it looks unlikely that that will
be met. The question is how many of them there are. The others will want to see
the text today and look at the DUP response, see if there's any prospect of
power sharing instalment being restored before they deliver their judgment. But
one prominent backbencher I was chatting to last night said the bottom line for
them is that if this doesn't result in power sharing resuming, it's not
worthwhile. That's a fairly high bar as well. There is one shadow that is often
cast over all of these Brexit debates, Michelle. It's one Boris Johnson who is
also reserving his judgment but has reserved the right, let's say, to criticise
this if he doesn't think it's up to scratch. So it's high political stakes for
the Prime Minister today. Nick, thanks very much. 20 to 7, we get the quarterly
price cap announcement today for energy with some implications for the
government's support package for consumers as well. Theo Leggetts, our business
correspondent, what are we expecting, Theo, and what happens then as a result of
it to household bills? Well, what we'll get today, Justin, is Ofgem saying what
its new default tariff price cap is going to be. And this is going to go down,
and it's going to go down quite a lot. Now, this is the level that regulators
say is a maximum that energy retailers can charge the average household on an
annual basis. So that's going to go down from about £4,300 a year to about
£3,300, we think. But this won't directly affect households because the price
that households pay at the moment is covered by a separate limit. That's the
energy price guarantee introduced by the government, which currently stands at
£2,500, with taxpayers making up the difference between those two figures. But
the controversy comes because although wholesale prices for gas and electricity
are coming down, and that's why the default price tariff cap is coming down, the
amount that consumers are going to pay is actually going to go up because in
April, the energy price guarantee, the government's guarantee, is due to go up
from £2,500 to £3,000. And an extra subsidy of £400 that the government's put in
over the winter is also coming to an end. So we have the situation where the
cost to the government of its subsidy scheme is going down. The cost of energy
is going down. But households are going to face, or a lot of households in any
case, those on variable tariffs, are going to face a steep increase in their
bills from April, even though energy costs are falling. Clearly explained, Theo.
And we'll go back to this. We'll talk a lot more about it after seven o'clock.
Theo Leggett, thanks. Let's have a look now at the papers and go back to how
they are looking at the Northern Ireland Protocol situation on this day, that we
will hear what this new text that the Prime Minister has negotiated might look
like. The Daily Telegraph, EU chief flies in to seal Brexit deal as revolt
bruise. It mentions one Eurosceptic MP saying Downing Street had kept them and
colleagues out of the loop because it wanted to set everything up and present
the deal to MPs as a fait accompli. But the Telegraph also quotes Lord Howard,
former Tory leader, leading Brexiteer, who is urging Tory MPs to back the deal,
even if it is rejected by the DUP and contains some limited role for the
European Court of Justice going forward in order to help make Brexit a success.
Lab leak, most likely origin of pandemic, says US, as a headline on the front
page of the Telegraph. The Covid-19 pandemic most likely to have originated from
a laboratory leak, a US government department has concluded. A study carried out
on behalf of the Energy Department in America is considered authoritative as it
oversees a network of 17 laboratories encompassing research in advanced biology.
And it comes, the Telegraph says, after the Federal Bureau of Investigation also
blamed leak from a Chinese laboratory for the pandemic. The Times reports this
morning that the reviewer of terrorism legislation, Jonathan Hall, is going to
say today that Shamima Begum and other British women who joined Islamic State
should be brought home. Because that's the position taken by key allies,
including the United States, he's also going to highlight concerns about a new
generation of extremists being reared under the cubs of the caliphate programme
in northern Syria. And there is a lot about those appalling deaths at sea off
the coast of Italy on the front pages of a lot of the papers. The Financial
Times saying that the vessel had apparently set out from Turkey several days
ago, was carrying people from countries including Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Somalia. The Coast Guard officials saying as well that 80 people have been
rescued, although 58, at least 58, have died. At a quarter to seven, our main
news this morning, the Prime Minister and the European Commission President are
meeting in Berkshire this afternoon in the clearest sign yet that a deal is
about to be sealed on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. The
Australian firm Recharge Industries has brought the defunct battery maker
British Volt, brought them out of administration. British Volt had plans, of
course, to build a very big car battery plant, four billion pound car battery
plant near the port of Blyth in the Thumbland. It collapsed last month, running
out of money, downfall blamed on the lack of battery experience, lack of
technology, lack of customers, lack of revenue. Our business editor Simon Jack
joins us now. So what, Simon, can Recharge Industries suddenly provide in the
way of all of those things? Well, they can provide the same name. The company
retains the same name, British Volt. But you are right that British Volt was
going to be championed as this fantastic battery factory, which is going to be
crucial to the car industry. It was going to be great for that area near Blyth
in the northeast. But as you say, it had no technology, no customers, no
revenue. So it went bust. Now, this new company has a similar profile in some
ways. It has no experience in making batteries. It is a startup company. It's
Australian, but ultimately owned by a small U.S. investment fund. But I've been
speaking exclusively to the new chief executive of the company, and he explained
to me why it might be different this time around. What we're bringing, which is
different to the prior British Volt, is we're bringing validated technology. So
that process has already started. U.S. defense has also validated the
technology. It's actually already supplied to the U.K. Navy through a
subcontractor over here. Anyone who's waiting for batteries to come off your
production line, which are going to slot into a JLR or a Nissan or a BMW, that's
not happening anytime soon, is it? No, but the strategy is for any of the
manufacturers listening, they can actually start that now, albeit in the interim
period it will be imported from America. And that American facility will then be
able to supply until the U.K. facility steps up and comes online. Do you
understand why people are a bit nervous about this? Because you've got a
financial services background in capital markets and banking. You've got a small
headcount. You run basically like a private equity group. You've tried to bring
in bits of expertise, academics in the U.S., what have you. But what people
can't see is a Tesla, General Motors, Ford, Volvo, BMW, those kind of people
involved in this. And that's where people were hoping this was going to go.
Yeah, well, I think, number one, they all started somewhere before they became
big. We've got accelerated growth and have been successful all along the way. At
the end of the day, those are customers for us. And so we have some of those
names in our base of customers. So a lot of them don't all come in and build
batteries. Some of them do. And a lot of them use other technologies. What we
will need is the people locally, the contractors that will re-engage, that will
start employing. And we have the benefit of picking up and leveraging a lot of
the stuff that was in place as well as a lot of the stuff that was already
underway. Obviously, there's a lot of focus on this because it's seen as an
important part of the jigsaw of future manufacturing here in the UK. Have you
spoken to anyone in government? I appreciate how important government is. So
we've spent a lot of time, for starters, with the Northumberland County Council.
And I just want to say they genuinely just want a gigafactory built and the best
thing for their people. And I came in with no history, but that's the way that
they've done it. And they think you're the best person to do that? I think they
definitely do. At the end of the day, it was a very short process. And we put
forward our case and made it through the process. I'm not saying I'm the best
person in the world to run this project. I think the legal obligations from the
administrators very much are to get the best return for the creditors. I do
think they care, though, as individuals, about what the future holds. And we've
put forward our case and we've been nothing but successful in everything we've
set out to do so far. So are you saying you don't need UK government support?
There was £100 million on offer to the previous owners, conditional on hitting
certain construction milestones. You're saying you don't want or don't need that
money? About anyone will take free money. What I want is bipartisan support. And
we have that on Australia and the US. When does the first shovel go in the
ground? Yeah, the first shovel will go on the ground as soon as I can. Probably
some testing of the site soils and things like that. But the plan is to get
through the 100-day plan. Once that's assessed, if you will, because we have to
go through that process to make sure it aligns, you're talking within the next
six to 12 months. David Collard there, the boss of Recharge Energy, which has
bought the British Vault site. And important to remember, the administrators had
to choose who to sell it to. All they care about is getting as much money for
their creditors as possible. They've got no real interest in the long-term
manufacturing plan for the UK. And by the way, they bought it in the low single-
digit millions. They've got £4 billion to raise to build the factory. So this
is, I would say, the beginning of the process, not the end. Simon, thank you.
It's 10 to 7. A BBC Panorama investigation on air this evening has found that
some pregnancy advice centres are giving advice to women. That is about abortion
that is not in line with NHS advice and sometimes referring to an unrecognised
condition, post-abortion syndrome. Divya Talwar is the reporter who's been
investigating and she is here. First of all, Divya, how many centres did you
look into? Well, we identified 57 crisis pregnancy centres in the UK advertising
online. Undercover reporters contacted all of the centres posing as pregnant
women, seeking advice about their options, including abortion. 34 of the centres
gave impartial advice. Two wouldn't speak to us without a positive pregnancy
test. But 21 of the centres, that's more than a third, gave advice described by
the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy as manipulative and
unethical, which could potentially dissuade women from having abortions. Several
centres claimed abortion could increase the risk of breast cancer and
infertility, while some said women could get post-abortion syndrome, a
completely made-up, non-existent disorder. Just to be clear, the NHS says
abortion does not increase the risk of breast cancer, infertility or mental
health problems. One of the women I spoke to was Melanie, who's 25 years old.
She spoke to the Pregnancy Crisis Helpline last year and says that the adviser
she spoke to made her feel pressured not to have an abortion. She definitely did
some fear-mongering around the process of a medical abortion. You can heavily
bleed for months on end. She had said about the likelihood of me being infertile
after having an abortion and that I might not be able to have children again.
And she said, you will always be a mother. And whilst that's something I
disagree with, that does stay with you. The Pregnancy Crisis Helpline says it
supports women in a safe, pressure-free environment and it works hard to offer
women the highest possible standard of support. And the centres that you found
overall giving out the questionable advice, were they linked in some way, part
of the same organisation? Were you able to find out anything about their
funding? So most of the centres we investigated don't appear to be linked. The
majority are registered charities funded through a combination of donations and
money that they've raised themselves. What we do know is that two centres in the
UK are part of an influential anti-abortion organisation in America. Now the
Charity Commission in England says that it's assessing the information provided
by Panorama. And the Department of Health and Social Care says it's important
that women facing these unplanned pregnancies do get that impartial, accurate
information. But as things stand, there's little or no regulation of the quality
of advice and counselling offered by these centres. Panorama Crisis Pregnancy
Centres Uncovered is on BBC1 at 8 o'clock tonight and on the iPlayer, Divya,
thank you. Eight minutes to seven is the time. The rest of Britain has long
forgotten the drought conditions that we all suffered months ago. Two regions
that have not, the result's pretty devastating, at least in one of them. Devon
and Cornwall is one of those regions. The others East Anglia where farming is
facing conditions that are highly unusual, to put it mildly. Izzy Raine is on
the line who farms Highland cattle at Bates Moor Farm in Fulsham and Norfolk.
Good morning to you. Morning. I say highly unusual. I mean, have you ever known
conditions like this before? No, I think that this is probably the driest it has
ever been in February. And it feels a bit ironic because it's actually raining
this morning. But we actually haven't had a decent amount of rain for the last
three weeks. And here in our little part of Norfolk, it's really heavy clay land
and we're actually like our meadows, like a drained moorland. So in the winter,
usually we can't get on the meadows from probably about November till April
because they're so boggy, like you can't drive on them. You can't get on them
because they just turn into a swamp. And right now I'm actually in the middle of
refencing the whole farm. And I thought, oh, God, I won't be able to get going
to at least March, you know. But we've been driving on the meadows in
teleporters, which is really heavy machinery to pull fences out because they're
so dry. So in a strange way, it's beneficial because I can get on with jobs I
thought I wouldn't be able to for the next few months. But it is pretty scary,
you know, how changing this environment is and basically the landscape. And with
a long term impact, presumably, potentially. Yes. Well, like you said, the sun
was devastating. I've got native cattle and basically they thrive in most
conditions, but even here, you know, they should be able to go out in April and
they should be able to just live outside until October, November without me
having to feed them. I was having to feed them from July, which, you know, is
crucial that they're fed because by then they're obviously sucking a calf that's
probably five months old. They've also got a calf in their belly that's three
months, you know, going into their second trimester. So I had to be feeding
them. So it was like really costly as well. I was having to run feed out every
day. So I worked out was about 400, 500 pounds extra. I was having to pay a week
plus, you know, I'm also renting land, which I couldn't even use because it was
dry and it's far away because I then was like I have land that's 20 minutes
away. If I'm then having to cart feed every day in a teleporter, the cost of the
fuel, it was just the whole thing was just cost ineffective. OK, Izzy Rainey,
thank you. Listening to you is Regan Harris from Anglian Water. Good morning to
you. Good morning. Well, it is a dismal situation, isn't it? Well, I mean,
Izzy's completely right. I mean, we have had very little rain, certainly in the
last sort of month to six weeks, probably pretty much since mid-January. And
that comes on the back of what was a very, very dry summer last year. In fact,
going into this winter, which is a water company, we usually say is our refill
period. So it's when our rivers, reservoirs, groundwater sources get topped up.
We're actually going into this winter with the fourth driest groundwater
situation in almost 200 years. So, you know, we have had little rain and
particularly in that North Norfolk area, the kind of further west of our region
has topped up nicely this winter. But, you know, Norfolk is been particularly
dry and they are very dependent on groundwater there for their public water
supply. How are you doing with reservoirs? Because we've mentioned on the
programme in recent months that we're not good at building reservoirs. We
haven't built one, have we, in England since the early 1990s. Would you like to
have more reservoir space and are you having trouble getting it? So, for England
Water, we've actually got just in the early stages of building two new
reservoirs in our region, one in South Lincolnshire and the other in the Fens.
What difference will they make when they're up and running? Well, they will make
a huge difference because, you know, we know that for the east of England, it's
the driest part of the country. We get less rainfall than anywhere else. And to
put it bluntly, if we don't build these reservoirs and this new infrastructure,
then we will not have enough water to move around for our customers and to
support other sectors like agriculture as well. Particularly the reservoir in
the Fens that we're building in the next sort of 10 to 15 years will be multi
sector. So it will support other water users as well as public water supply. So
these reservoirs are really, really crucial for the future. Regan Harris from
England Water and Izzy Rain as well, who farms in Norfolk. Thank you both. And
Ben Rich can take us through what the weather is like in Norfolk and elsewhere
today, Ben. Well, yes, indeed. And picking up on that dry theme, actually, we've
parts of south east England have seen only 10% of the rainfall they would
normally expect in the month of February. And I don't think this week is going
to top up those rainfall levels very much because we've got high pressure, which
will stay in charge of our weather. That means a lot of dry conditions out
there. There will be some spells of sunshine, some quite large areas of cloud as
well and a few showers. We have got some showers this morning across eastern
England, parts of south east England, north east England as well. Quite a lot of
cloud, one or two showers. And I think as we go through the day, that cloud with
the odd shower will spread a little further west across the Midlands, into parts
of north west England, Wales, south west England as well. So really, it's a
mixture of patchy cloud and sunny spells with just the odd shower. For Northern
Ireland, for south west Scotland and for eastern Scotland, here patchy cloud and
sunny spells as well. I think most places will remain dry. For northern and
north western parts of Scotland, well, that's where we're going to see the best
of the sunshine during today. The winds for most of us fairly light. It'll be a
little bit breezy for some eastern and southern coasts and temperatures
generally. A cold frosty start this morning. We'll get up to between six and
nine degrees by this afternoon. Tonight, a mixture of patchy cloud and clear
spells, a touch of frost for some, dry for most tomorrow, but some showers in
the south. Ben, thank you. Let us look ahead now to the end of the week. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. We will be
talking about the Arctic phenomena hitting our hitting our night skies and
speaking to you.