TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's time for the Science Hour now here on the BBC World Service and in half an
hour Crowd Science takes on the topsy-turvy topic of which way is up for plants.
They are able to perceive the signs very well and modify their development,
their physiology and their growth pattern and climb very efficiently to acquire
more light. But of course there is more as you can hear later in the hour.
Before that, Science in Action is mostly concerned with the drought in East
Africa where for the third year running the long rains are failing, cattle are
dying and food is running short and as you can hear it's all because of heat
building up in distant oceans and that's because of... It's all about global
warming. So if you look at ocean temperatures in the Western Pacific you see
this big trend. Climate change is building up this extra heat. Climate change,
oceans and drought. That's after the BBC News. BBC News with Sue Montgomery.
China's annual parliamentary session is opening for nine days of meetings that
are expected to tighten President Xi Jinping's grip on power still further. Viv
Marsh reports. This meeting of the National People's Congress will erase another
link with the era before Xi Jinping. The Premier Li Keqiang, who was seen as
aligned with China's previous leader Hu Jintao, will step down during this
session after delivering the government's work report. His job and many others
are expected to be filled by Xi Jinping's allies. The Chinese leader himself
will be confirmed as president for a third term after he secured five more years
as head of the Communist Party and military last October. Up to 200,000 people
have been taking part in demonstrations across Israel in the largest protest so
far against the government's planned judicial reforms. This man said he was
defending the independence of the judiciary. We came to express our democratic
rights and to fight for what's right and to hope that there will be a
constitution and the separation of authorities will remain as it is and will
improve without impulsive reforms and without crazy people in the parliament.
The demonstrations were largely peaceful but footage showed some protesters in
Tel Aviv breaking down police barriers and igniting fires as they blocked major
roads. Police used water cannon to clear the crowds. Journalists have taken to
the streets in Guatemala to protest against censorship and government
intimidation, after a judge ruled that eight reporters covering a high-profile
trial should be investigated for obstruction of justice. The ruling was
announced as the editor of the prestigious El Periodico, José Rubén Zamora,
appeared in court. Mr Zamora, who has published several reports on government
corruption, faces charges of money laundering. The British government has said
it will do whatever it takes to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small
boats. The British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and his Interior Minister Suella
Braverman have been speaking to a number of British newspapers about legislation
that's expected to be proposed in the coming week. Here's Helen Catt. Rishi
Sunak has made stopping small boat crossings one of his five priorities for
government. He's expected to announce it with the Home Secretary Suella
Braverman next week. Newspaper reports suggest it would include making asylum
claims inadmissible from those who travel to the UK on small boats and placing a
duty on the Home Secretary to remove anyone who arrives that way as soon as
reasonably practicable to Rwanda or a safe third country. It's reported that
arrivals will be prevented from claiming asylum while in the UK and that there
are plans to ban them from returning. Some organisations have raised concerns
about whether this would be compatible with human rights laws. BBC News.
Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation
on corruption allegations involving President Guillermo Lasso. The vote is non-
binding but it could eventually lead to impeachment proceedings against Mr.
Lasso. The President, a former banker, has experienced turbulent relations with
Congress since he was elected two years ago. He's been accused of involvement in
a corruption scheme, something he denies. There's been another spate of
suspected poisonings in girls' schools in Iran. Pupils in at least 15 provinces
have reported symptoms including respiratory problems and nausea. The first of
the attacks, which have been blamed on toxic gas, was reported in November. Some
believe the attacks are an attempt to stop the girls receiving an education.
Others suggest the authorities may be punishing girls who played a leading role
in anti-government demonstrations. The Tunisian director Youssef Chebbi has won
the top prize at the Pan-African Film and Television Festival known as FESPACO,
ANA Aslam reports. Youssef Chebbi's Ashkal follows two detectives down a rabbit
hole as they investigate a series of mysterious deaths. The film is set in an
abandoned port of Tunis after the fall of President Ben Ali in 2011. The judges
unanimously awarded it the coveted Golden Stallion of Yenenga and Chebbi was
handed the prize by the country's military leader, Captain Ibrahim Traore. The
awards for the second and third-placed films went to two female directors, the
Burkina Beja Apolline Traore for Syrah and Angela Wamai from Kenya for Shimoni.
The French football star Kylian Mbappe has become the top goal scorer in the
history of his club Paris Saint-Germain. The 24-year-old World Cup winner scored
near the end of PSG's victory over Nantes on Saturday. It was Mbappe's 201st
goal in all competitions for the club. BBC News. Welcome to Science in Action
from the BBC World Service with me, Roland Pease. And much of the programme
today will be taken up with the drought crisis coming to a head in East Africa.
But we do also have time to ponder the standoffish gas, helium. Helium is
actually called inert gas and in Chinese we actually call them lazy gas. So all
these names are actually describing the same properties that they do not involve
in chemical reactions. Despite that, it's extremely useful and we don't have
enough of it. And Annie Chung may have a solution. Keep listening. The warnings
from the humanitarian agencies could scarcely be more dire. The Horn of Africa
is facing an unprecedented three-year drought with catastrophic humanitarian
impacts, said a joint communique from the World Food Programme, UNICEF and
others recently. Continuing. The occurrence of another poor rainy season between
March and May 2023, as forecast by some meteorological agencies, would have
devastating consequences for communities. Millions are at risk in Kenya, Somalia
and Ethiopia as the rains there threaten to fail for the sixth wet season in
succession in three years, as I heard from Daniel Njapek Mwana, a caseworker for
Plant Village in the Maasai area. Very very serious and just to give you some
perspective of how serious it is. Just from the field like an hour and 30
minutes ago and I came from around seven homesteads which had more than 73
carcasses of cows already died out of the drought. When I say carcass, I mean
these are the only source of livelihood. Maasai people are known to only do
pastoralism so the seriousness of the drought is going to an extent of the
families here going up to six days without a meal only depending on little wild
fruits here and there like cactus or other sources of food that are not
reliable. So the seriousness of drought here is really really. I cannot put it
to a magnitude or to a quantifiable measure but it is just beyond everything
that I could describe. And the news is that there will be continued drought for
the next three months probably. What are they telling you for that? They're
devastated. They're really devastated because for them to hear that they really
feel heartbroken because they're not prepared and did not know what the future
hold. They do not know whether they can make it to the next day. Whatever they
do this day is survival of the next day but when there is news of having drought
in the next two or three months for them it's like an end to everything that
they've been doing in the rest of their lives. So although they had some little
rainfall here and there for the last two three days it's really devastating for
them and I will just say that they hope that the news can change and the major
problem here is the fact that these people are not exposed to information which
can help them make the right decisions on how to prepare or even mitigate the
drought. Daniel Njapet Mwana. Sharon Nicholson is a climate scientist at Florida
State University whose career has been dedicated to understanding the
vulnerability of East Africa to these massive climate swings. There's little in
past records to match the extended drought the region is currently experiencing,
she says. Well, what is unprecedented is how frequent the droughts have been,
how many they have been and also you have two rainy seasons over there. The
March, April, May rainy season and then you have the October, November rainy
season. They are called the long rains and the short rains respectively. Now
it's always been assumed that the long rains have been relatively steady and do
not change greatly from year to year while the October short rains has been
extremely erratic. So there are two things that are different. One the fact that
you have such variability in the long rains right now and the fact that you have
so many droughts one after another. That is a very unusual situation. And what I
hear being blamed for this is the fact that La Nina, this state of the Pacific
Ocean, which is a huge distance away, has been persistently in this La Nina
phase now for three years. That would absolutely make sense. And the paper that
you would ask me about, we indicated that this connection to La Nina was
actually weak in the past and it's become very strong in the last maybe 20 years
or so. And yes, I think that La Nina really is a major player here. I mean, how
deep has the drought been then these past three years? Well, it appears that it
extends over almost the entire area of East Africa from maybe southern Kenya
through Somalia and much of Ethiopia. And it appears that it's been most intense
in Somalia and Ethiopia. But the departures have actually been tremendous
compared to what we've seen in previous years. So there are greater deficits,
greater degree of drought, more frequent drought, and possibly extending over a
larger area. The other thing is that the short rains are known to have what we
call spatial teleconnections throughout the region. The long rains, what we're
seeing now that's producing drought, normally did not have that large spatial
scale. This tended to be localised in terms of wet or dry conditions. And in
this particular case, the spatial extent of the drought is also very unusual.
The study Sharon mentioned there is the distillation of years of intensive
research into the drivers of East African drought, led by Chris Funk, director
of the Climate Hazards Centre at the University of California, Santa Barbara.
It's this analysis that has allowed Chris and his team to give months of warning
of the coming rainfall deficit, giving relief agencies and governments precious
time to prepare. And it also reveals that conditions beyond the far end of the
Indian Ocean, those La Nina episodes in the Pacific, are able to control the
rains thousands of kilometres away in East Africa. And they found, he says, a
distinct change in the influence starting 25 years ago. Back in 1997, that was
an incredibly strong El Nino year. And for some reason that is not well
understood, that really strong El Nino event, combined with climate change,
pushed us into this era of extremely warm Western Pacific sea surface
temperatures. So there was a really strong El Nino, that triggered a really
strong three-year La Nina event. And in a sense, since that time, things have
been in a really La Nina-like kind of base state associated with really warm
ocean temperatures on average in the West Pacific. And then what happens when we
have a La Nina event in the fall? So say October, November, December, if we fast
forward to the next March, April, May rainy season, we almost always have a
drought in East Africa. So in a sense, what you're saying is that after that
strong 97 El Nino in the Pacific, that's left a kind of a memory, it's left a
mark, a watermark almost, in the Western Pacific. And that's sort of around
Indonesia and Australia, that sort of area. And that's reorganizing the
circulation as far away as East Africa. Yeah, which is just really downwind of
it, essentially, right? So when you have a strong Pacific sea surface
temperature gradient and warm water in the West Pacific, to the west of that,
you have dry, sinking air over East Africa. So these past three years, there's
been this La Nina. And essentially, is this saying that the La Nina effect has
just simply become stronger in its sort of remote impacts? Yeah. And this latest
research that we've done has found a really clever way of quantifying that. And
what we do is we look in the atmosphere around Indonesia, add up all the things
that heat the atmosphere. So there's energy released during rainfall, there's
energy that's trapped by greenhouse gases and water vapor, there's energy, heat
energy that converges due to the trade winds. And we can add that all up and
show in a very reliable way that when that heating increases, the probability of
drought during the East African long rains goes up by a lot in years that follow
October, November, December La Nina. And it seems, I have to say, a fairly
remarkable thing that you're looking at the conditions over the Pacific several
thousand kilometers away, several months earlier, but you now have the
connections to be able to say there could be problems in East Africa, you need
to start making preparations now. And that's a game changer, is it? It's huge.
And the lead times are really incredible. You know, basically in September, we
put out alerts saying that we think in March, April, May of 2023, we're really
likely to see a drought. So there's a lot of predictability in the climate
system that we can leverage. I want to go back to the driver of all this. You're
saying that there was a change in Pacific behavior 25 years ago that seems to be
part of the signature of what you're measuring. We always end up asking this, is
this any way related to global warming, particularly because I've heard a lot
about how much more heat is being stored in the oceans these days than it used
to be? It's all about global warming. I mean, so if you look at a time series of
ocean temperatures in the Western Pacific, you see this big trend. And you're
absolutely right. Climate change is building up this extra heat in the oceans
and the atmosphere. And you know, it's also moving around. So one good news is
that we can track that heat and predict it quite well with our climate model.
But it's very possible that in eight months or 12 months, 16 months, we'll be
looking at a climate change enhanced El Nino. Well, when you talk about El Nino,
and I've seen more and more forecasts saying that there could be an El Nino
starting at the end of this year, is anything that we've been talking about
going to help predict the outcomes of that in East Africa? In other words,
whether there may be enhanced risks of flooding and the problems that might
cause? Yeah, absolutely. The flip side of this is that a lot of these wet events
are very predictable, especially during the October, November, December season.
But these climate extremes pose risks, but they also provide opportunities. So
that could provide a good opportunity for farmers in the Eastern Horn to have a
good harvest. You know, perhaps, you know, in the next October, November,
December, in Ethiopia, where we have kind of the inverse relationship to La
Nina, you know, they've been getting lots of good rains and during their summer
season. And so, you know, there's been a lot of drought in the Eastern Horn. But
the flip side of that is there's also opportunities for farmers elsewhere. And I
think we could do a better job of highlighting those opportunities and trying to
urge farmers to take it. And in the long term, given current trends with global
warming, are you expecting to see more of these extremes in general, more very
dry, more very wet years? Yes, absolutely. We're going to be facing a lot of
challenges. But you know, we do have good opportunities to use the latest
climate science to try to anticipate and monitor them. Chris Funk of the Climate
Hazard Centre in California. Daniel Njabit Mwana echoes his sense of urgency as
global warming threatens to make things worse. It's high time that we not wait
to do remedy but start working on prevention because some of the things that
we're experiencing in here today are things that can be controlled. Let me just
give you Ronald an example that a few days ago we have in communities, Masai
communities lining in schools to receive relief food because they cannot afford
any in their homestead. So the schools are not only feeding kids and children,
they're also feeding their families. And you could get queues up to 100 women
queuing to receive just little food, a meal a day so that they can survive to
the next day. So my greatest urge is if we can only find a way and a solution to
the climate crisis that we're having today, because the real effect is down here
to the people that are actually mostly very innocent. They participated zero to
the climate crisis that you're facing today, but they're the greatest receivers
of the severe problems that we are facing from the drought. So we need a
solution that is not remedy, but preventive so that we can be able to predict
what happened next and how we can actually help these people so that they can
deal with the devastating state of the drought here. Daniel and Chappie, moana.
And of course, we will return to the topic of the drought if there's anything
for us to add. Helium ought to be remarkably boring, a tiny atom. It partakes in
no chemistry, it's invisible, has no smell, and it slips away with infinite
ease. And yet the world has an enormous appetite for it, as I found, for
example, when I visited one of eight liquid helium plants at CERN's Large Hadron
Collider with broadcaster Adam Hart Davis. You have to be careful because it is
in production. Our guide was plant engineer Serge Clodet. What is here is about
100 tons of equipment. And how much helium do you look after here? In total for
the LHC, a bit more than 120 tons of helium, about 10% of the European market
per year. So would that fill a swimming pool? I mean, not that you'd necessarily
want to, but is it that sort of amount? In liquid form, I've got to think a bit.
So we have 400,000 litres of liquid helium. If the swimming pool is 400 cubic
metres, so it's 1,000 of reasonable size swimming pool. 1,000 swimming pool?
Yes. That's a lot of helium. Yes. Those huge volumes of helium were being pumped
around the LHC to cool magnets there to within a couple of degrees of absolute
zero. One of helium's magic properties is to be the coolest refrigerant around.
It's used in medical MRI scanners around the world for the same reason. And the
fact that it's chemically unreactive actually gives it other vital uses as an
inert filler gas in manufacturing where our normal atmosphere would corrupt key
materials. So demand is huge, but supply is limited. And unless you're careful,
it's so light it floats away like a helium balloon to the top of the atmosphere
and beyond, lost forever. Fortunately, new volumes are constantly created under
our feet, which is how Oxford University geologist Ali Cheng has found a new way
to meet global demand. So helium is generated from radioactive decay of uranium
thorium that is naturally existing in the rock. So they are generated at a very,
very slow rate, but there is a dense rock from mantle to surface, which we call
them crystalline basement. They're millions or billions of years old and likely
more than 30 to 40 kilometer thick. This old age and large volume of crystalline
basement basically make them a perfect kitchen and also a storage room for
helium. And then this helium that is produced and also the associated nitrogen
that is produced which is dissolving water in this tiny pore space between the
crystal. And they will slowly migrate up to sediments that is laying over the
basement. And so your paper talks about Williston Basin, is it some region in
North America? Yes. Williston Basin is an intracratonic basin, which means that
basically it is a very, very old basin. One important factor is that the water
inside is quite old as well. So there is not much of this freshwater turnover in
the past geological history. So this is the basin that we have been used to
calibrate our model. Are you saying that the water is absorbing the helium? So
the water in the pore space, they dissolve helium. So it's like sparkling water
when they're having CO2 dissolved in the water. So they're just having helium
and nitrogen dissolved in this pore water. I love the idea of this stuff fizzing
with helium beneath our feet. I mean, this is known, is it? I mean, the people
have drilled down there or is this just an idea? So the reason why we choose
Williston Basin is because it's actually been drilled and that is one of the
first helium production well. And for that particular well, it is enriched in
nitrogen, which is like 90% nitrogen and about 1 to 2% of helium. That is really
high comparing to many other currently producing helium reservoirs. That's high.
One or two percent is a high percentage. That is indeed. So the economic
threshold is usually 0.3%. However, in some other like fields, when there is
special technology available, even lower percentage of helium is economically
favourable. So basically your paper is coming up with a recipe. Find some very
old undisturbed basement rock, a nice cap of sediments of some kind, is that
right? And then see if you can find the helium there. Well, I would hope that I
could actually be able to find reservoirs. That's simple. But the thing is, each
system is very unique. It needs a big, good combination of all different factors
and also the formation of this gas systems. So the gas formation is actually the
key because it is very likely that we're going to have large amount of helium
stored in the pool water, in the ground, in the deepest unit. But it is just not
economically favourable to just extract the water and produce the helium from
the water. So we need to form a gas phase that is just easier for production. It
would just be drill the hole and then the gas just flows out. There are armies
of economic geologists who go around looking for reserves in that sort of way.
At the moment, helium, as I understand it, is collected as a byproduct from gas
fields and so on, natural gas fields for methane and so on. Is there a need to
find new sources? I presume you wouldn't be doing this work if there wasn't.
Yeah, exactly. There is a need. So currently we're actually facing the forced
supply crisis of helium. So a funny thing is our lab, who's actually trying to
find helium, we received a letter just before Christmas saying that we are non-
crucial users, so we are restricted with our helium supply. And also, as you
have mentioned before, helium is a byproduct of hydrocarbon gas and well
production. So that means it is associated with large carbon footprint. And then
we actually want to find this special kind of gas reservoirs that is just formed
with a new concept and that is unchanged from carbon. Is there this crisis
because the known reserves are becoming harder to find or is it because demand
is growing? I think it's both. So we need to find helium that is high enough so
that is economically favourable to produce. But also the current global
development just requires a large amount of helium as well. So the industry
production of fibre optics and semiconductors requires helium. So as you can
imagine, that is our tablets, that's our phone. Furthermore, the supply of
helium is geopolitically controlled. The biggest supplier so far includes
America and also Russia. So there is definitely a geopolitical constraint on
that. And if you can get gases like helium, you mentioned nitrogen as well in
these deep reserves, are there other gases that would be useful? So this is a
very good question. So the production of helium, as I mentioned before, is
actually through radioactive decay. But at the same time, the decay will
actually provide energy to split up water and form hydrogen. So helium and
hydrogen are sharing many similar physical properties. And therefore, this
analysis for helium transport and accumulation can also be applied for hydrogen
to understand how hydrogen is generated and migrated and accumulated. And then
it can potentially help us find this natural hydrogen reservoir. And that is
something that we want to keep on studying. And if you have a good memory,
you'll remember we talked about the prospect of mining raw hydrogen back in
September 2021, a year and a half ago. How time flies. We've put a link to that
edition of Science in Action on the webpage for today's at BBCWorldService.com,
along with links to Annie Chong's noble work at Oxford University and more on
everything else we've been talking about. With that from me, Relm Pease, and
producer Sophie Ormiston. Thanks for listening. After the break, CrowdScience
looks into the sense of direction in climbing plants. This is the BBC World
Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club.
This month we're in France to talk about a most extraordinary, daring and
original novel called Pigtails. When it was published in 1996, it created an
enormous stir. It's not a feminist pamphlet. It's a feminist book. It is. But
I'm not telling you what to think, I hope. It's the story of a lovely young
woman who submits to the sexual demands of the director of a perfume company.
Her body gradually begins to change, growing more and more like the body of a
pig. At some points, she's very animal. At some other points, she's very human.
She oscillates according to the level of aggression against her. She's not
stable. Nobody's. It's a story of that, you know. World Book Club with Marie
Dariasek at bbcworldservice.com slash worldbookclub. The Science Hour continues
in a moment here on the BBC World Service with CrowdScience taking on the topsy-
turvy topic of which way is up for plants. They are able to perceive designs
very well and modify their development, their physiology and their growth
pattern and climb very efficiently to acquire more light. But of course, there
is more, as you can hear after this. BBC News. China's annual parliamentary
session has just opened in Beijing. The Chinese Premier Li Keqiang has begun to
deliver the government's work report. The session is expected to tighten
President Xi Jinping's grip on power still further. Officials and ministers,
including Mr Li, are expected to be replaced by Xi loyalists. Up to 200,000
people have been taking part in demonstrations across Israel. In the largest
protests so far, against the government's planned judicial reforms. Footage
showed some protesters in Tel Aviv breaking down police barriers and blocking
major roads. China has agreed to give United Nations inspectors more access to
its nuclear facilities. The head of the UN's nuclear watchdog held talks in
Tehran after the discovery of uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at an
underground site. Journalists in Guatemala have demonstrated against censorship
and government intimidation after a judge ordered eight reporters to be
investigated for obstruction of justice. They were covering the trial of a
newspaper editor charged with money laundering. Congress in Ecuador has voted
overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation on corruption allegations
involving President Guillermo Lasso. The vote is non-binding. The British
government has said it will do whatever it takes to stop migrants crossing the
channel in small boats. It's expected new legislation will push for the quick
removal of such migrants to Rwanda or another country. Major international Red
Cross workers have been kidnapped in northern Mali. It happened in an area
that's long been a hot spot for violence by Islamist militias. The Tunisian
director Youssef Chebbi has won the top prize at the Pan-African Film and
Television Festival FESPACO. BBC News. This is Crowd Science from the BBC World
Service. I'm Marnie Chasterton and I'm in a warm and humid greenhouse at Kew
Gardens in London and I'm here surrounded by loads of really beautiful climbing
plants because of a question about a climbing plant on the other side of the
world. I have a tree which stands some 15 feet high. Meet Eric from New Zealand.
It puts out tendrils towards another tree some 10 feet away. There's nothing
between the two trees. The tendril goes straight for the other tree. How does
the tree send its tendril so accurately? It must have some sort of ability to
sense. It has no organ that I'm aware of supplying that sense. Please tell me
how this is accomplished. Can I ask what type of tree it is? Can you describe it
for us? It's a wisteria. So beautiful flowers. Yes, yes. But the tendrils go out
and they always go out somewhere very specifically. It's very obvious. Whichever
way they're going, they're going heading somewhere. Do you think it deliberately
can sense that there's something and it grows towards that or is it just that
it's growing anywhere where there's empty space? No, no, it's quite clear. It's
quite clear. Any tendril that goes out is definitely going somewhere. It's not a
haphazard thing. It's quite specific. So do you have an explanation? Do you
think that the tree can decide? I don't know. It sounds weird. Do you think the
tree is doing a very slow version of putting its arm out in front of it? I'm
asking you because I don't know how this is accomplished. I can see what it's
doing. I can't explain why it's doing that or how it's doing that. I have no
explanation whatsoever. I am very excited to go and investigate this because I'm
a secret tree fan. Yes. You hug trees, do you? I was a tree surgeon before I did
radio. I did tree surgery and I did botany at university. So the chance to go
and ask anyone questions about trees is a delight. So thank you for this, Eric.
Oh, I think they're just fascinating. Mariana Sousa Baena is a Brazilian plant
biologist. She specialises in climbing plants so she can explain how Eric's
wisteria decides to grow in a particular direction. They are able to perceive
the environmental signals, signs very well and modify their development, their
physiology and everything about their growth pattern and find a support and wrap
around it and then climb it very efficiently to find light, you know, to acquire
more light, which is necessary for their proper development. So they've got
certain adaptations because they don't have the ability to support themselves or
get where they need to be using their own structure. Yeah, that's true because
they are not able to support themselves for long, like because they can support
themselves when they are tiny little seedlings, perhaps some plants even until
they reach like more than one metre long, they are still able to support
themselves. But after that, they just cannot do it anymore. And if they don't
find a support to grab, they will fell on the ground. So they have to have this
to perform this broad movements with their tips and with them they search the
environment for support, for a supportive structure. So they have to be able to
move like that and like to bend their stems to make the movement broader in
order to be more successful to reach some supportive structure. So yes, they
function differently from the other plants that are, for example, trees or
herbaceous plants. And does a climbing plant have specific bits that other
plants don't that help it find this support? Actually, they do because they are
really successful like always and they even can like if they find a support and
they, I'm going to use this word here, but of course they are not like animals
or they are not, they don't have consciousness. But if they find a support, they
grab it and they don't like it because perhaps the diameter is wrong or
something is not good. They can unwrap their bodies from it and search another
one. So yeah, but how do they do that? Like we actually don't know exactly, like
in the last decade I would say, people are more interested in investigating what
is going on in terms of gene expression, in terms of hormones and signalling
across the different parts of the plant to try to, you know, uncover what is
going on. But actually we don't know exactly. Plants are amazing. That's Ilia
Leach, a scientist at Kew Gardens in London. They are certainly in a way, many
ways, much cleverer than us because, you know, they're stuck in the ground and
they have to survive in that one spot all of their life. They've got to find
food, they've got to fight off predators, they've got to stop being eaten,
they've got to attract a mate. You know, we would be dead in a few days. But a
plant, you know, some can live for thousands of years. Ilia Leach and Tom
Freeth, head of plant records, are showing me some of the climbing plants in one
of the many conservatories at Kew, home to the largest single collection of
living plants. That's about 5% of all the plants in the world. Climbing plants,
many of them produce structures called tendrils, which are sort of growths out
of the stem of the climbing plant. And these tendrils are specially adapted.
They have the ability that when they are touching the plant that they want to
grow around and to climb up, they trigger a response called thigmotropism.
Thigmos meaning touch and tropism meaning to grow or move towards something. And
that touch sensitive triggers a whole cascade of reactions, which enables the
stem from being straight to start curling around the stem and to give it support
so it can climb up higher. And Tom, you've got an example here. What is this? So
we're looking at a passion flower, species of passion flower, Passiflora. And
this is a really, really good example of the thigmotropism that Ilia spoke
about. The young tendrils will, if you look at them in time lapse, they'll whirl
around looking for a support. And then when they touch their support, one end of
the tendril will coil clockwise and the other will coil counterclockwise. And so
one end grabs and the other end pulls towards. And if you look at any of the
passion flowers that you grow in your garden, you'll be able to see this
happening. May I have a play? You may. Wow. That's, it's really beautiful. This
is like a tightly coiled spring. And yeah, one direction and another direction.
So it just pulls the thing towards it. So clever. That's really clever. So do
most climbing plants have some version like that? Yeah, there's, there's lots of
variations on the theme. Some twirl, so they'll, they'll hit the stem and then
the plant will lengthen on the opposite side that it wants to twirl around. So
if it's twirling sort of counterclockwise, it'll lengthen on the, the, this side
outside the pole, if you, if you think about it, or the stem, and that will
cause it to then grow around. I haven't tested this, but anecdotally, two
species of wisteria, one twirls clockwise and one twirls anticlockwise. Okay.
The big question, how, how are these climbing plants curling themselves round
various things? What's their strategy? I'm not sure about a strategy, but in
terms of the underpinning mechanisms that enable them to do this, often they
involve plant hormones. So chemicals that influence the development and the
growth of plants. This is something which is still a lot of debate about in the
science world, but one of the mechanisms which is thought may be responsible
involves a plant hormone called auxin, which some people may have heard of
because it's often found in rooting powder. And what happens is that when a
tendril, for example, touches the plant that it's hoping to grow up, it triggers
a redistribution in the amount of auxin. And the effect is that the cell walls
of those cells on the outer edge start to loosen their cell walls more. And that
means that the cells can expand and grow more than those which are touching the
stem. And so you get the stem curving around and it's that movement as it goes
around, you get the tendril being able to climb up the plant. So our listener in
New Zealand, Eric, he's observed a wisteria 15 foot high, and it's growing
towards a tree that's 10 feet away. And he wants to know how it sends the
tendrils so accurately. So have you observed this behaviour in climbing plants
in Q? What do you think the answer is? Well, without observing Eric's case
directly, can't say for certain, but what it sounds like, what we do know is
that the tendrils of plants and the stems of plants react to light. So plants
consume light through photosynthesis, so they're very, very sensitive to light
levels. And some of the work done shows that tendrils, when they're young, go
towards light, and then when they're old, they go away from light. Moving away
from light helps them find a host or a structure to climb up, and that's what we
think might be going on with Eric's tree. So light might be the key here. But
how exactly does Eric's wisteria use light to work out where it's going? It
turns out that plants, although they don't have eyes, are really clever at
picking up light across the spectrum, including ultraviolet and far-red light,
neither of which we can see. And they do it using photoreceptors, a bit like the
photoreceptor cells in the back of our eyes, only a plant's photoreceptors are
scattered all over their surface. So there is a family of photoreceptors which
is present in all plants, which are called phytochromes. And these
photoreceptors sense two wavelengths, red light that we can also see and far-red
light. That's Christian Fankhauser, a plant biologist at the University of
Lausanne. Something you should know about plants, they absorb the red light and
they also reflect far-red light, and that alone is enough to tell them an awful
lot about what surrounds them. Even before a plant is actually shaded by other
plants, because of this far-red which is reflected by these plants, it will
sense that there is a neighbour growing nearby. And I think one reasonable
hypothesis is that this is one part of the answer to your listener's question,
because this far-red which is reflected from this tree will presumably be sensed
by this wisteria, and it will indicate to the wisteria that there is another
plant not too far away from it, and that this might be a good direction to which
it should grow. Just to make sure I'm getting this, so each plant absorbs red
light but reflects far-red light, and so one plant can tell if there's another
plant nearby from how much extra far-red light they're picking up? Yes, that's
true. And if we think about this question of growing towards the support tree in
this wisteria, in this case it actually presumably uses this information to grow
towards the shade, which is a little bit counterintuitive, right? But for that
plant it is important because it needs this support to then grow up, while in
other plants typically this signal will also be used not only to grow a little
bit more but then also to grow away from that direction. And that suggests that
this light is being perceived by the plant with a sense of direction, right? It
can say the light's coming from north or this way. Yes, and the major
photoreceptor which is actually giving that information are not the phytochromes
that we discussed now, which are receptors which sense red and far-red light,
but there are another family of photoreceptors known as phototropins. They
actually control the directional growth of the plants, but these two classes of
photoreceptors through mechanisms that are not very well understood cooperate
to, on the one hand, control the extent of growth and on the other hand, the
direction of growth. So if I may make an analogy, you would have one of them is
the steering wheel and the other one is the accelerator. Okay, so one's the
steering wheel, the other's the accelerator. That means the plant decides to
grow in a particular direction. It sounds a little bit, Christian, like plants
are doing maths here. Well, that's what some people say, yes. They indeed
integrate a lot of information about their environment to take, you know, the
best possible decision. And how that works is not fully understood and it's
probably also done in a very different way from how animals do these things
because unlike animals, they don't have a central nervous system where all of
this information is typically computed to reach a new decision. Plants tend to
be, how should I say, less centralized in the way they organize things. They act
more as modules, let's put it that way, but somehow they also manage to do
remarkably complicated tasks. And as we know, you know, they have basically
conquered pretty much every spot of this planet. So they are successful. They
manage to grow pretty much everywhere, even in places where it really doesn't
look like it's a great place to actually live. Clever plants. The fact that each
plant absorbs red light and reflects far red light means that in a garden each
plant can sense the presence of other plants in a way that is totally invisible
to us just because a space with lots of greenery will have different ratios of
these two types of light. You're listening to CrowdScience from the BBC World
Service. I'm Marnie Chesterton. So plants don't have a nervous system. They
don't have brains or consciousness, but they appear to be able to make decisions
processing complex information. Climbing plants can work out where to go and
even change their minds. Not that they literally have minds to change, of
course. Eric mentioned his plant seeming to know where it was heading, which is
a puzzle. At this point, I want to introduce Silvia Guerra, a scientist at the
University of Padua in Italy. She wanted to see how climbing plants, pea plants
actually, go about attaching themselves to supports and set up an experiment
using thin sticks and thick sticks. We plant the seed into the pot, OK, and the
plants start to grow and we put from the beginning a stick in front of the
plant. Silvia and her colleagues observed that the plants actually changed their
behaviour and the speed with which they move, depending on whether the stick is
thick or thin. They are faster when they have to approach to a thin stick
compared to a thicker one. So hang on, in the approach to a thin or thick stick,
so it's sensing the dimensions of the stick before it's even reached it? This is
amazing. These results suggest the plants are able to perceive before touching
the support. So how's it sensing it if it's not touching it? From our results,
we can just suppose the possible mechanism underlying this process in plants. So
a plant may actually be sensing its support stick before we see it reach out to
grab it. That may sound like telepathy, but one possible mechanism is via the
subterranean parts of the plant. Silvia is convinced that roots play a key role
and, with the research team, designed a simple experiment to test this. She grew
pea plants near support sticks and at a certain point, lifted those sticks up,
away from the roots. We just lift the wooden stick from the ground and when the
stimulus is lifted, plants are not able to localise their potential support.
When Silvia and the research team raised the support stick so it was only
available to the shoots, the pea plant continued spiralling and then fell over.
The research suggests that the roots are somehow sending information to the rest
of the plant, not only telling it if there's a support nearby, but also what the
dimensions are. So Eric's wisteria may not only be able to sense that there's a
tree nearby, but also the width of its trunk. There's one name that keeps coming
up as I've been talking to scientists about climbing plants, and that's Charles
Darwin. Not someone you might immediately associate with plants perhaps, or
climbing plants. Everybody thinks of Darwin as a zoologist, right? We all think
of him about pigeons and evolution by natural selection and maybe about worms.
That's Sandra Knapp, a scientist at the Natural History Museum in London. But
actually, the highest proportion of books that Darwin wrote were all about
plants. He wrote two about the movements of plants, one of which is called,
actually to give it its title, The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants. Why
was he interested in climbing plants as opposed to normal plants? I'm not sure.
He doesn't really say. He doesn't really say. I mean, it's just, I think he
actually was interested in plants. He was really a kind of closet botanist. I
mean, actually, if you look at plants at all, climbing plants are fascinating,
aren't they? I mean, how do they do that? What do they do? How do they know what
to do? How do they know where to put their tendrils? How does it work? What are
they growing towards? Which brings us nicely to modern day and our listeners'
question in Eric in New Zealand. He in Darwin, it sounds like, would have been
fascinated by exactly the same thing. They would have been chatting for hours.
In My Garden in New Zealand is a wisteria and appears to know where it's going.
Imagine that being the basis of a correspondence. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. I
can imagine him writing to Darwin and Darwin saying, well, actually, I've been
growing wisteria and hops next to my bed while I've been ill. And this is what
happens. You know, it's so interesting because I think we often think of plants
as being non-sentient and there's lots of debate about whether plants have
consciousness or whether plants don't have consciousness. But you know, people
didn't used to think that invertebrates had brains or were intelligent. And look
at octopuses. They don't have a brain as such? They have a brain. They've got a
brain. It's decentralized. It's a decentralized brain. And plants don't have a
brain that we recognize. But that doesn't mean that there isn't, you know, I
don't know. You know, there's so many things about the natural world that we
don't understand. And that's what I think is great about being a scientist is
that there's just so much that we don't really understand. So I can look over at
Eric's wisteria heading confidently towards a tree that it can support itself on
and say, that's pretty smart. And I'm not wrong. Well, I, yeah, it's in a way
it's kind of, and this was the beauty of the way Darwin articulated evolution by
natural selection is that you can imagine two wisterias, one of which heads
towards the dark, which is perhaps heads towards the dark. I mean, I don't
really know how wisterias work, but let's say two binding plants, one of which
heads towards the dark or something that is a support. And the other of which
just kind of heads off in any old direction. The one that gets to a support is
going to go up, have leaves that get the sun, photosynthesize more, flower,
fruit and leave offspring. Whereas the other one's just going to get trampled by
deer. And so that's how natural selection works is it's not so much that they're
smart, it's that through the sort of chemistry that is regulated by the genes,
those are the ones that survive and reproduce. So the thing about evolution by
natural selection is it's not so much about survival, it's about reproduction.
Did Darwin come up with any theories about why climbing plants climbed? Not how
they developed bits of their tendrils or not? No, he just described them. I
mean, in terms of natural selection, he does very much feel that climbing plants
climb because it gets them closer to the light. That makes sense. Which of
course makes sense. It's one mechanism, but you can imagine it's not the only
one. That's why there's some climbing plants and other plants don't climb. I'm
back at Kew with Tom Freeth and Ilya Leach to talk about how clever these living
organisms really are. And I've spotted something familiar. There's one of these
in my bathroom. Christmas cactus. Christmas cactus. He's called Grandfather.
He's 65 years old. Well done. And he spills out into the bath. So having a bath
with Grandfather is actually, sounds weird, but yeah, he's almost as big as
this. I think this is where you come into a philosophical debate as to whether
they have consciousness or not. It would almost be better if they didn't have
consciousness. So you didn't have to have a bath with Grandfather. And also
literally all of our horticulturists couldn't live with themselves if plants had
consciousness. So you have to kill a plant three times before you know how to
grow it. So yeah. But they do. They have all their senses. They have all of
these senses and they have senses that we don't have, but they're not
concentrated in particular organs like ours are. So it's a weird one,
consciousness and plants. Yeah. Can they think like we do? No, absolutely not.
They don't have brains. They don't have a nervous system. Can they sense? Do
they have behavior? Yes, absolutely. It would almost be absurd if they didn't.
How do they survive this long being rooted to the same spot for evolutionary
timescale without developing these very, very acute ability to sense and react
to their environment, albeit on a slightly different timescale to humans and
mammals. So we've got all of these beautiful blooms from orchids at our feet,
but also a load of fantastic climbing plants climbing up the walls of this
greenhouse. Can I get you to pick your favorite and tell me why? My favorite
group of climbers in here are the pipe vines, the Aristolochia, Dutchman's pipe
they're known as for this shape here. Ah, it looks like a pipe. Exactly. Yeah,
it's great, isn't it? It's great when names do actually what they're supposed
to. It's a really, really bizarre floral trait that all members of this genus
share. So this is a trap like a carnivorous plant. So quite often you can pull
these apart and find a load of dead flies in the bottom. So you can say that
it's kind of indirectly carnivorous because when the flower will die, it'll hit
the ground and then that'll rot away and feed the roots. I just think this is
fantastic adaptation, which you can see in all of these plants. Now I didn't
think to do that, but it does it. It's intelligence of a kind. Yeah, I just
think they're amazing. Thank you. That's fantastic. That's such a good story.
Animals, meal, plant, one. So we've come a long way from our listener Eric's
wisteria to the fly trapping world of climbing plants. Scientists know some of
the story, how climbing plants can tell when they're near other plants that
might make a good support to grow on. Scientists don't know all the mechanisms
and the science unravelling these is new and ongoing. But I think we can safely
say that climbing plants clearly do know where they're going and how to get
there. They're supremely clever. It's just a different kind of cleverness from
the human kind. And perhaps because they live at a different tempo, we just
don't give plants the credit they so clearly deserve. Here's Christian
Fankhauser. We tend to think that they're passive, that they're just sitting
there doing nothing. It's just because we're not patient enough to look at them.
We tend to believe that they are there helpless, just waiting to be eaten by
whatever herbivore. But in reality, they don't because otherwise the earth
wouldn't be green. So they can defend themselves against all kinds of organisms.
They can decide where to grow, how to grow, depending on the conditions. So they
have really very sophisticated senses. And we have a hard time relating, right?
They're so different from us. And so when you can't relate, it makes it
difficult sometimes to appreciate the abilities that they have. That's it for
this episode of CrowdScience from BBC World Service. The question was from me,
Eric in New Zealand. The show was presented by Marnie Chesterton and produced by
Joe Glanville. If you have a question on any science subject and you want
answers from the team, why not email lowercasecrowdscience at bbc.co.uk. This is
the BBC World Service examining the challenges we face from long COVID. We'll be
hearing from scientists trying to unravel the cause of the condition and finding
out what the latest research on some sufferers is showing. When we exercise
participants just for six minutes and we do blood tests... We are making changes
to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and
platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by
mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this
message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile,
this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.