TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at six o'clock. This is Caroline Nichols. Good evening. The Prime
Minister says he's struck a landmark deal to end the deadlock on Northern
Ireland trade rules, a source of tension since Brexit. We have now made a
decisive breakthrough. Together we have changed the original protocol and are
today announcing the new Windsor framework. Rishi Sunak promises smoother trade
with the rest of the UK and greater safeguards on sovereignty. But the
Democratic Unionists say key issues still remain. We'll have full analysis and
assess whether the deal could lead to a return to power sharing in Northern
Ireland. The energy price cap is to fall by nearly £1,000, but most domestic
bills will still go up. The death has been announced of one of Parliament's most
colourful figures. Politicians remember Lady Boothroyd, who went from being a
dancer to the first woman Speaker of the Commons. And pioneering or pantomime,
Tommy Fury celebrates victory over Jake Paul in a bout which has divided boxing.
After years of tension, talks and negotiations, Britain and the European Union
have unveiled long-awaited new post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern
Ireland. The protocol has been replaced by the Windsor framework. Speaking at a
joint press conference in the town, the Prime Minister said the deal would allow
for the smooth flow of goods from Great Britain, improve product ranges in
Northern Ireland and provide Stormont with a veto on new EU law. The European
Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, said what had been agreed was
historic. But in a move that may anger Brexiteers, she explained that the
European Court of Justice would still have a role in administering the deal. Our
first report tonight comes from our political correspondent, Ben Wright. A deal
devised in secrecy over many months will take time to digest, but the agreement
tied up at Windsor is a very big moment. Since Boris Johnson signed up to a
Brexit deal that put a trade border down the Irish Sea, the Northern Ireland
protocol has angered businesses and unionist politicians, enraged some Tory MPs
and caused bitter rows between Westminster and Brussels. But just four months
into his premiership, Rishi Sunak has clinched an agreement with the EU that his
predecessors could not. Standing alongside the President of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, Mr Sunak said they had made a decisive
breakthrough. Now these negotiations have not always been easy, but I'd like to
pay an enormous personal tribute to Ursula for her vision in recognising the
possibility of a new way forward. The United Kingdom and European Union may have
had our differences in the past, but we are allies, trading partners and
friends. The Prime Minister said the deal would ensure smooth flowing trade
within the whole of the United Kingdom. At the moment, customs declarations are
required on all goods moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Rishi
Sunak said a new Green Lane at ports would sweep away bureaucracy for
supermarkets and wholesalers selling into Northern Ireland. There will be a
separate Red Lane for goods at risk of travelling on into the Republic of
Ireland and the EU. Along with changes to VAT rules, Mr Sunak claimed the deal
would remove any sense of a border in the Irish Sea. Questions of governance
dominated negotiations too. And the Prime Minister said the Windsor Framework
would ensure politicians in Northern Ireland had a bigger say over the EU laws
that apply there. The Stormont break goes further and means that Stormont can in
fact stop them from applying in Northern Ireland. This will establish a clear
process through which the democratically elected Assembly can pull an emergency
break for changes to EU goods rules that would have significant and lasting
effects on everyday lives. The new mechanism is a striking part of the deal. But
Ursula von der Leyen stressed that the European Court of Justice would continue
to have the final say on issues to do with the single market. The two leaders
have clearly struck up a rapport. At one point, the Commission President said
she and dear Rishi agreed solutions were needed. Solutions that would make a
practical difference. The same food will be available on supermarket shelves in
Northern Ireland as in the rest of the UK. The new Windsor Framework will
permanently enable all medicines, including novel ones, to be available in
Northern Ireland at the same time, under the same conditions across the UK. We
have agreed on strong safeguards that will protect the integrity of the European
Union's single market. Other changes could flow from this thaw in relations and
Ursula von der Leyen said Brussels would immediately begin the process of
readmitting the UK to the EU scientific research programme known as Horizon.
First, the Prime Minister needs to sell this deal to politicians in Belfast and
his own backbenchers at Westminster. But with Labour promising to back the deal,
it's a political hurdle Rishi Sunak may be confident of clearing. The power-
sharing executive at Stormont has not met since February 2022. Our Ireland
correspondent Chris Page assesses whether the Windsor Framework will help lead
to its return. The very name of the deal may well be designed to appeal to
unionists. To them, Windsor is synonymous with royalty, Britishness and the
Union. But the DUP has indicated its response will be determined by the
substance rather than symbolism. An hour after the agreement was published, the
DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson said progress had been made but key concerns
remained. He highlighted one in particular, that EU law would still apply in
some sectors of Northern Ireland's economy. We need to look at the legal text,
we need to get legal advice on that, we need to make our own assessments and
come to a considered view on this. As I have said, I hope that we can do that
within a reasonable time frame, but let's face it, it has taken months to get to
this point. A key aspect of the DUP's response will be its assessment of the
extent to which the Stormont Assembly will be able to block additional EU
regulations here. The party will decide whether Mr Sunak is right to claim that
what he calls the Stormont Break will safeguard Northern Ireland's sovereignty.
Michelle O'Neill of Sinn Féin will become First Minister if the DUP lifts its
veto on power sharing. She said the Stormont Executive should be restored now.
All political parties need to be sitting around the Executive table taking
decisions that impact on people's lives. That's where we should be today. There
shouldn't be any delays in that. Vincent, we have a health service in crisis, we
have public sector workers out on the picket line. Where we need to be is making
politics work and standing up for the people that we represent collectively and
I think that's where all energies and efforts need to be now. Stormont hasn't
been fully functioning for more than a year. Most Assembly members want to
return to devolution immediately. But under power sharing rules, whether and
when the devolved government does come back is down to the DUP. Party
strategists will be mindful there are council elections in Northern Ireland in
May, when the biggest threat is likely to come from more hardline unionists who
are opposed to power sharing with Sinn Féin at all. The Northern Ireland
Minister and former chair of the pro-Brexit European Research Group of
Conservative MPs, Steve Baker, explained why the emergency break clause was
significant. If sovereignty is the power to say no, as I think it often is, this
is a terrific achievement. I'm delighted. As late as yesterday, I still thought
I might have to resign. But this is the, in the end, the mechanism by which I'm
sure I can back this wholeheartedly. The shadow business secretary, Jonathan
Reynolds, said MPs now needed to get behind the deal. I think this is the way
forward and I hope it is one that will command the support of people across
Northern Ireland. But I do think, frankly, it could have been done sooner. And I
think the barrier has been the internal politics of the Conservative Party,
which is why we made the offer that we did. If this is in the national interest
and it meets what Labour has called for to resolve these problems, it will have
our support. The original agreement covered products including British sausages,
cheese and eggs. And Northern Ireland business and economics editor, John
Campbell, considers whether the new deal will ease trading arrangements. The
protocol has made it more difficult and expensive for companies to move goods
into Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK. All commercial shipments require
customs declarations. There are additional processes for food products. The main
impact has not been the physical checking of goods. It's all the added
bureaucracy. Ciarán Sloan runs a deli in Belfast. We've had to pick up more
local suppliers here. We're selling more local stuff than ever before. We're
still getting a lot of stuff in from across the water, but it's very, very
limited. And the companies are very limited. We have to do these mad things
like, you know, to get cheese across. It has to be a certain price, a certain
weight. That's just proven to be a bit of a nightmare. The new deal will create
so-called red lanes and green lanes. Goods which are moving through Northern
Ireland into the Republic of Ireland will use the red lane. They will be subject
to full checks and controls. Goods staying in Northern Ireland will use the
green lane. It will mean reduced paperwork and no routine checks. The documents
which explain the fine details of all this have only just been published. Stuart
Anderson, who speaks for Northern Ireland business groups, says they will need
to understand the practical consequences of what's been agreed. I think the
litmus test for us will be a very basic, are the products that are available on
the shelves in supermarkets in Birmingham available in Belfast as a result of
today's deal. We've seen certain products removed from the shelves over the
course of the last two years because of EU-UK divergence. So I think the
question will be, will they be returning to our shelves as a result of this
deal? The EU's price for these reduced checks is enhanced labelling of retail
goods that will be phased in over the next two years. With her assessment of
today's deal, here's our Europe editor Katja Adler. This joint appearance by
Rishi Sunak and the European Commission president was warm and smiley, very
different to EU-UK Brexit negotiations of old. And it's already viewed in
Brussels as a turning point, what the EU and UK leaders today both described as
a new chapter. Brussels views Rishi Sunak, yes, as a Brexiteer, but also as an
outward-looking pragmatist, in stark contrast, EU leaders believe, to his
predecessor Boris Johnson. Revising the Northern Ireland deal in close
cooperation has been an exercise in rebuilding broken trust. If implemented, it
removes the looming threat of a trade war, paving the way instead, as the two
leaders were quick to point out in their press conference, for further
cooperation on scientific research, but also financial services and immigration.
The EU wants to work more closely with the UK on defence and security. Russia's
invasion of Ukraine and the conundrum of how to handle China has served as a
reminder of the many priorities the two sides share. Police investigating the
shooting of a detective in County Tyrone last week say £20,000 is being offered
for information that helps to bring the attackers to justice. Six people are
being questioned about the shooting of John Caldwell, who was off duty at a
youth football training session in Oma when he was attacked. The new IRA has
claimed it was behind the shooting. At a news conference, Detective Chief
Superintendent Eamon Corrigan gave this update. John remains in hospital, where
his condition remains critical but stable. We continue to treat this as a
terrorist-related incident and our primary line of inquiry is that this has been
carried out by dissident Republicans calling themselves the new IRA. The energy
regulator Ofgem says its price cap on gas and electricity bills will drop by
nearly £1,000 from April to £3,280. Typical households in England, Scotland and
Wales are still likely to see their annual charges rise because government
support is becoming less generous. Ministers are facing increased pressure to
extend help beyond winter, with Citizens Advice saying an increase in bills will
spell catastrophe for millions of people. Here's our Cost of Living
correspondent, Kevin Peachey. A household using a typical amount of gas and
electricity currently pays a bill of £2,500 a year, double that of a year ago.
Without the government's energy price guarantee, that annual bill would have
peaked at more than £4,000. But the mechanics of Ofgem's price cap and falling
wholesale prices paid by suppliers mean the cost to the government of providing
support will be less than it had once expected. Governments also putting plans
to make the guarantee less generous this spring under intense scrutiny. Under
current policy, a 20% rise in bills is expected in April, just as a winter
discount on everyone's bill also comes to an end. Mohamed Adil is struggling to
make his payments. I'm going into debt every month. Every month the bill
increases. The energy provider, they basically said at the level that you're
paying us, it's not sustainable and we're going to have to increase your
payments. The government support is absolute pittance, to be honest with you. It
doesn't even cause a ripple in the overall balance. It's just so minimal.
Opposition parties want the current plan to continue from April. The consumer
finance campaigner, Martin Lewis, believes the government may grant that wish. I
do not know it will cancel that rise, but I'm more hopeful than I was after some
Roon reading. I think there is a better than 50% chance that it will cancel that
rise. Forecasts suggest that it would only need to be a temporary change in
policy. The cost of wholesale energy and the price cap could fall sufficiently
by July to make the government's guarantee redundant. It could even lead to
competition among suppliers for customers through new fixed deals. But so far,
bills are still scheduled to rise before they fall and the Chancellor, Jeremy
Hunt, has said there's unlikely to be the money available for additional help
for households. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4. The main
news so far. The Prime Minister is to give the Commons details of a new deal on
post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland, which he says represents a decisive
breakthrough. The Democratic Unionists say there are still key issues of
concern. Still to come. It wasn't a masterpiece. There wasn't a lot of ring
crap, but there were a lot of guts, a lot of heart. And all we asked for in
boxing is that the two men or women in the ring give us everything they've got.
The fallout from a boxing match like no other. The first female Speaker of the
House of Commons, Betty Boothroyd, has died at the age of 93. She was the Labour
MP for West Bromwich West before she was elected as Speaker. In the role, she
became well known for her no-nonsense style of controlling the House. The
current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, said she was an inspirational woman who'd
broken through the glass ceiling with panache. Our political correspondent,
Helen Catt, looks back at her life. Betty Boothroyd described the moment she was
selected as the Speaker of the Commons in 1992 as the greatest experience of her
life. She was the first woman to hold the role and, just as importantly for her,
she said, the first Speaker in more than a century to be chosen from the
opposition benches. Born in Dewsbury in Yorkshire, Betty Boothroyd had been a
professional dancer, one of the famous Tiller Girls dance troupe, before working
as a secretary to politicians including the Labour Cabinet Minister Barbara
Castle. Her steeliness, as she put it, was on display from very early on in her
political career. She became an MP on her fifth attempt, when she was elected in
1973 as the Labour Member for West Bromwich. In the 1980s, she served on the
party's ruling National Executive. As Speaker, she ditched the traditional wig
but upheld most Commons traditions, although some younger MPs were disappointed
that she opposed moves to make the hours more family friendly. The Labour MP
Dame Margaret Beckett said Baroness Boothroyd had been full of life. She had
this tremendous personality and she had a great sense of humour and she could
just take people with her but also there was that formidable side of her. They
didn't cross her. People didn't defy the Speaker or if they did, it lasted about
two minutes flat. The Conservative MP Michael Mates was one of those who felt
the full force of her formidable side. He'd ignored her warning that his speech
might prejudice a court case, so Madam Speaker shut him up. If one cannot speak
in this place, not about innocence or guilt, not about trial, not about sub
judice, but what has gone wrong with the system, then Madam Speaker, then Madam
Speaker, I'll be here. It is after the trial that the Honourable Gentleman must
give this information. That is the point. Betty Boothroyd retired after eight
years in the Speaker's chair, entering the Lords the following year as Lady
Boothroyd. She took her forthright manner with her to the Red Benches where she
fiercely opposed coalition proposals for an elected House of Lords and was a
vocal critic of Brexit and, on occasion, Boris Johnson. Palestinians have
accused Israel's security forces of failing to protect them after a man was shot
dead during violent clashes in the occupied West Bank. Israeli settlers attacked
villages, torched buildings and destroyed cars following the killing of two
Jewish brothers yesterday. Our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman has been in
one of the places caught up in the riots. I'm on the outskirts of the town of
Hawara. I'm standing next to a completely charred and blackened, burned out
four-storey building and next to that dozens and dozens of cars, a garage where
people worked. They're all ash-cloaked, burnt out and ruined. Israeli settlers
went on a rampage that lasted several hours. Palestinian residents told the BBC
they were armed with iron bars and rocks and attacked property and torched
homes. Abdel Nasser al-Junaidi said he rushed his children up to the rooftop to
keep them safe. The army did nothing to protect us. They protected the settlers
instead. The shooting was from both soldiers and settlers, a double attack. It
was horrific, a barbaric attack. A 37-year-old Palestinian man was killed by
Israeli gunfire. The rampage began after hours earlier in the town a Palestinian
gunman shot dead two Israelis, brothers aged 19 and 21, from a nearby
settlement. Later settlers called for a march in revenge. The Israeli army said
it contained the violence, but human rights groups have long blamed an
atmosphere of impunity surrounding many Israelis in the West Bank, which they
say has been amplified by the far-right, pro-settler component of Israel's new
government. Visiting an outpost today, the National Security Minister Itamar
Ben-Gavir told people not to take the law into their own hands, but called for
full force by the state. The enemy must be crushed, the heads of the instigators
and the heads of the terrorist organisations must be taken down by targeted
eliminations. The attacks coincided with a rare US-brokered peace summit in
Jordan, but now there are fears of an even worse descent into violence. The
independent reviewer of terrorism legislation has urged the government to
reconsider its ban on the return of British women who are being held in camps in
Syria because their suspected Islamic State supporters. Speaking a week after
the courts backed the decision to strip the former schoolgirl Shamima Begum of
her citizenship, Jonathan Hall warned the UK was increasingly out of step with
its allies. Our home and legal correspondent Dominic Cacciani reports. This
speech from one of the most important voices in the UK's counter-terrorism
debate adds to diplomatic pressure on ministers to rethink the policy of
strategic distance, which means that scores of British citizens who went to
support IS won't be allowed home. Jonathan Hall said comparable nations, backed
by the United States, were repatriating women and children and using a
combination of measures to manage any risks they posed. Delay, he warned, could
see British children who were languishing in detention camps becoming a new
generation of jihadist fighters. The uncertainty over their fate could become a
dangerous propaganda win for extremists who would describe the conditions as
Britain's Guantanamo. Pressure has also come from the former Supreme Court
Justice Lord Sumption. In a letter to The Guardian newspaper, he said it was a
real scandal that Shamima Begum had been stripped of her nationality and
marooned forever thanks to the legal fiction that she could ask Bangladesh to
take her in. The President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has asked for
forgiveness for delays to rescue operations in the wake of the devastating
earthquakes that struck the country earlier this month. More than 50,000 people
are now known to have died there and in northern Syria. Zakir Starmer has said
he's not talking down Britain after warning that Poland is on course to overtake
the UK within a decade in terms of the size of its economy per person. The
Labour leader made the comments as he set out his party's economic strategy to
business leaders and economists in the City of London. Our economics editor
Faisal Islam was listening. The Labour leader was trying to sound upbeat about
Britain's economic potential but at the same time make the case that current
policy is contributing to a cycle of decline. Labour's analysis said by 2040
Poland, Bulgaria and Romania could overtake the UK if current trends for the
size of the economy, adjusted for the population and purchasing power were to
persist. It is a simple extension of current trends over a lengthy period. Zakir
denied he was talking down the UK economy. I think what's talking down Britain
is having absolutely no plan, burning through three prime ministers and four
chancellors in one year. And my main concern has been that we've got fantastic
potential and talent and skills and innovation in Britain but we haven't got the
growth that we need. As to flesh out what the reset in relations with the EU
would mean in practice, the Labour leader reiterated that his party would not be
rejoining the European Single Market or Customs Union but did say he wanted to
pursue every opportunity for trade deals with countries across the world. Little
has become the latest supermarket to limit sales of some fruit and vegetables to
prevent stock from running out. It's introduced a cap of three items per person
on fresh peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers. Here's our business correspondent Emma
Simpson. Bad weather in southern Spain and Morocco has disrupted supplies of
fresh produce, leading to shortages on supermarket shelves. Little says whilst
it has good availability across most of its stores, it's seen an increase in
demand and so it's taken the temporary decision to join Tesco, Aldi, Asda and
Morrisons in placing a limit on what shoppers can buy. The UK has long relied on
imports for salad items at this time of year. UK growers have also planted fewer
crops because they can't afford to heat their greenhouses, which hasn't helped.
The Food Minister Mark Spencer has been meeting with representatives from the
main supermarkets to discuss how they are dealing with the problems and to see
if any lessons can be learned. The current shortages are expected to last
another two to four weeks. Thousands of British teenagers studying for the
International Baccalaureate will be allowed to use work generated by an online
chat bot in their essays. The Baccalaureate is equivalent to A-levels and is
recognised around the world. Until now, use of these bots has been regarded as
cheating, so the new stance represents a step change, as our technology editor
Zoe Kleinman explains. ChatGPT has taken the world by storm since it launched
last November. The AI chat bot answers questions online in text form in a human-
like way and it can also write its responses in different styles, such as, for
example, that of a student writing an essay. Some teachers are worried about how
many of their pupils are using it to do their homework for them and have written
to parents warning them about it. Others say they can spot its pros and there
are now tools being released which claim to be able to differentiate human text
from that written by artificial intelligence. But the cat is out of the bag and
now the International Baccalaureate says its students can take advantage of the
tech, just like using a calculator to work out a maths problem, as long as they
admit to it by both crediting ChatGPT in the text and adding a reference note at
the end. Here's Olli Pekka Heinonen from the International Baccalaureate
organisation. We are not getting rid of essays. The thing is that how do we
incorporate the use of chat bot in the essays in a sustainable and ethically
good way? It means that they need to be referenced. Good news for students, but
ChatGPT's knowledge database only goes up to September 2021, so it's not very
useful on topical subjects. And as it gets its information from the internet, it
can also be inaccurate. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day up 56
points at 7,935. On Wall Street a short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 160
points at 32,977. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20.5.
Against the euro, sterling is at 1 euro 13.7. That makes a euro worth 88 pence.
A boxing match between two celebrities widely known for their social media
status is dividing the sport after generating extensive publicity. Tommy Fury
beat Jake Paul in Saudi Arabia last night. Some believe it will bring a new
audience to boxing, but one former world champion said it made a mockery of the
professional sport. Here's our sports correspondent, Joe Wilson. Tommy Fury is a
half-brother to the famous heavyweight Tyson. He's a former resident of Love
Island. Jake Paul of Cleveland, Ohio, influences people on social media. They
spent eight rounds throwing punches at each other in a boxing ring in Saudi
Arabia before Fury was declared the winner. Look at their boxing records, you'll
see matches in single figures. Their social media reach extends to millions.
That's apparently what counts. Boxing reporter Steve Bunce was at the fight. If
millions and millions of new eyeballs watch the sport, they're not all going to
disappear when the boxing's over. Some of them are going to stay. So how is
maybe 250,000 new potential fans, how's that going to hurt any sport, whether it
was tiddlywinks or whether it's boxing? It has to be positive. Some accuse Saudi
Arabia of sportswashing, using the bout to distract from their human rights
abuses. But the boxers earned millions, they may fight again. Jake Paul
apparently also wants to take on the former world champion Carl Froch. Froch is
not impressed. Of course I'd fight him, of course I'd take the money. But it's
not realistic, they're kind of making a mockery out of professional boxing. It's
a pantomime and you've got the influencers and the YouTubers, but they cannot
fight professional fighting. They're not professional boxers, they're YouTubers
and they're just playing at it. At the elite boxing club in Bolton, coaches and
aspiring fighters train for fitness and for careers. For them, is the celebrity
Saudi match an inspiration? You know it's a bit of kick in the teeth for them
sometimes, you know, because there's a lot of good prospects out there. They
never get the exposure as these guys get. As a boxer myself, if I could be a
YouTube star and make multi-millions from it, then I would. Boxing exists in a
broader sporting sphere, concerned about concussion and a wider world worried
about social media influence. But if two famous people fight each other, there
is an audience. Returning to our top story again. The UK and the European Union
have unveiled new arrangements for post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. The
Windsor Framework gives Stormont a veto on EU law, but the European Court of
Justice will retain some involvement. With his assessment, here's our political
editor, Chris Mason. After months of negotiations and plenty of noisy
speculation, a day of very careful choreography. A lunchtime meeting at a posh
hotel near Windsor, close to where Magna Carta was sealed in 1215, which set a
limit to the powers of the king and his government. This gathering, centuries
later, also about the demarcation of power between the UK and the EU. At the
news conference that followed in Windsor's Guildhall, a notable warmth between
the leaders. The European Commission president referred to the Prime Minister as
Dear Rishi. The relief in the demeanour of both leaders was obvious in both
doing a deal and attempting to reset relations between London and Brussels.
Privately, senior government figures are confident they can win around sceptics
within the Conservative Party and beyond. But that jeopardy still hangs in the
air tonight. Deals have been done before between the UK and the EU, only to be
rejected at home. The Prime Minister is emphasising progress, whatever happens
next. But the real test of this deal will be whether the Democratic Unionist
Party in time accept it and return to power-sharing devolved government in
Northern Ireland. That is the marker of true success here. Our political editor
Chris Mason. BBC News. Read by Caroline Nichols. The antique heavy bronze doors
of the Museum of Curiosity will swing open in a few moments and this week there
are donations ranging from the never was, the maybe and a jar of marmalade.
First, here's something to look forward to on Friday mornings. Lem Sisse is a
one-off. Are you the poet? A woman said to me in the street. Lem Sisse isn't
anyone else. Now I can say, she said, that I've finally met Benjamin Zephaniah.
Lem Sisse explores uniqueness. You are a visible original, a pinnacle of
miracle. We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room. He
just said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem Sisse is the one
and only. Are you that poet? Tony Walsh. On Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4
and BBC Sounds. Now we're returning to the mysterious halls of the Museum of
Curiosity where John Lloyd and the series curator Anna Tashinsky are joined by
three new guests armed with donations from the delicious to the discombobulated.
The Museum of Curiosity. Hello, my name's John Lloyd and I'm the Professor of
Ignorance at the University of Solent. Welcome to the Museum of Curiosity where
we've just opened our new metaphorical wing. Based on Plato's cave, here you can
cosy up to Russell's teapot and of course, Occam's razor has been put where
you'd most expect to find it. But now storming the museum's security measures by
means of a series of dangerous pulley systems and armed with Chekhov's gun, here
comes our curator Anna Tashinsky. Hello John. Hello Anna. What have you been up
to in the museum this week? Well, Professor, I have just finished dumbing down
all of our smartphones. As you know, I'm a technophobe. So yes, you're back to
the Nokia 3210. Great. And our Twitter account? Well, obviously I've just
replaced that with a lot of people shouting over each other in a small room, but
I don't think you'll know the difference. Yes, probably for the best. Well let's
meet today's curious committee, physicist and philosopher, Professor Carlo
Rovelli, actor and satirist Rosie Holt and former barrister turned pastry chef,
Olivia Potts. Hello. Hello. Hello. Carlo, in your book on the ancient Greek
philosopher Anaximander, just published here in the UK, you argue that the
foundation of science is not certainty, but I'm pleased to say, ignorance. So
exactly how much don't we know? Well, almost all of it we don't know. And I
guess unless we have a good professor for ignorance, never going to learn
anything new because we would imagine that we know everything. So we have to
stop learning. So you're saying we need to all accept that we're complete
ignoramuses. I mean, Rosie, how important have total ignoramuses been to your
career? Invaluable. I welcome them all. So Olivia, criminal barristers, which
you've been and pastry chef, which you are, which can we generalise more aware
of their ignorance, do you think? Well, I think despite our smugness, the whole
point of being a criminal barrister is really ignorance. That dreaded dinner
party question that you get, what do you do if you know your client is guilty?
Unless they tell you, which they tend not to, you don't know anything apart from
what they tell you. So I guess it has to be criminal barristers. Sorry, I'm
ignorant. I'm not British. A criminal barrister is a barrister who is a
criminal. Yeah, sometimes. So, Rosie, you're a classically trained actor who
starred in Shakespeare and in Bronte. You then transferred into stand up and
rocketed to fame during lockdown, performing sketches, lampooning the
government. When one of your videos regarding last year's mini budget was taken
seriously, Reuters had to write a fact checking article confirming that it was
in fact a parody. Now when you see a new political scandal, and there have been
many of them recently hitting the papers, does it fill you with glee in getting
more material or do you despair for the state of the nation? I think it fills me
with gleeful despair or despairing glee. A kind of morbid excitement. I mean,
obviously, you're witnessing more damage being done to our country, but it does
give me more material. It's a very sad and tricky balance. What I really love
about your stuff is that people, they tune in and they think you really are that
person. Isn't that right? I've found a few examples of that, I think. I'm
astonished at people you've managed to fool. You must feel so smug. So I think
former UKIP leader Henry Bolton, the philosopher AC Grayling, author Philip
Pullman. How does it feel to have tricked all these, well, very intelligent
people and the UKIP guy? That's a bit embarrassing. So Carlo, many people, as
you've heard, think that Rosie's characters aren't a satirical device. But
that's not the reality in science and indeed in everyday concourse. Do you think
people are struggling to recognise what's real and what isn't? Oh yes,
definitely. I think in science is the question that has been posed from the very
beginning. The history of science is a long history of unmasking things we
thought were real and they are not. You see the sun setting down and going down
and entering the water of the ocean. And it's wonderful. It's fantastic. But the
sun is not moving at all. So you're just changing your idea of reality. That's
what is science. Finding out that what you thought is real is not real. Olivia,
speaking of establishing what's real and what's not, have you ever baked one of
those cakes that looks like a completely different object? No. I know my own
limitations. In fact, I mean, to be honest with you, I am sufficiently greedy
that it is far more likely that the opposite would happen. That you'd start
eating a hoover or something? Yeah, I'm embarrassed to say. I went to a ramen
restaurant a few years ago. They had all those little pots of, you know,
condiments and chilies and vinegars. And I got to the last one and I couldn't
work out what it was. And it looked like some kind of, like a vanilla bean, but
it didn't smell of anything. And it was only when I put it in my mouth that I
realised it was in fact a hair tie to stop you getting your hair in the noodle
soup. So I do have form, I'm afraid. So Rosie, you've had great success on
social media, I think, but what's your preferred platform? Twitter. And what
about all the other stuff? Sat Nav, Uber, dating apps, that kind of kit? Oh God,
dating apps. I very briefly was on some dating apps and I hated them. But what
ended it for me was, so my phone went and it said, we found your perfect match.
And you always get a bit excited because you think maybe they know, maybe they
know. I clicked on my perfect match and it was my brother, Charlie. Oh my God.
And how did it go between you guys? So we're really good. We're in a really good
place and we've got loads in common. Do you get on with your brother? I do.
Just, you know, it's just the whole incest thing. This is Radio 4, Anna. I don't
think you should go into this. I'm not suggesting. I'm just saying, well done
algorithm, if you like each other, you know. He's found someone now, but it's
fine. I'm moving on. Well thank you, Rosie. I hope your next family reunion
isn't too awkward and it's lovely to see someone keeping up the tradition of
truly fantastic British political comedy characters like Malcolm Tucker, Sir
Humphrey Appleby, Liz Truss. What a bunch of clowns. Coming to you now, Carlo,
you are a theoretical physicist known for your work in quantum gravity. Born in
Verona, you've worked in the United States, France and Canada and written global
bestsellers including seven brief lessons on physics, which has been translated
into more than 50 languages. You've been included by the magazine Foreign Policy
in the list of the hundred most influential global thinkers and you've also
hand-reared a goat called Lucretia. And all of these require time. So tell us,
what is time? Oh, an easy question. Look, time is the cradle that nourishes us,
right? It's where we swim into. It's our little home. And then it's a killer at
the end of the day. So time is not something we can look from the outside. It's
something we can only look from the inside. That's the view of time I have.
Okay, well let's go back in time for a minute and imagine ourselves on the Greek
hillside where Anaximander would have been wandering, thinking about the
universe. It's always baffled me how such a small place that ancient Greeks
could have come up with so many extraordinary ideas. Do you have any idea how
that is? What happened, I'm not sure. I think that one of the things is that the
first time there was a civilization that was not structured around big
monarchies. It was very fragmented and still connected to the older, previous
civilization. So the knowledge was there and it was a civilization that believed
in ignorance, believed in discussion, believed in the fact that what we know is
not definitive, we can learn more. And that I think is what opened the
democracy, philosophy, science, all that. Olivia, I was just wondering, because
I think you're the spectator's vintage chef. I am. How vintage have you gone?
Have you learned any lessons, culinary lessons from the ancient Greeks? The
problem is, is that most of the stuff we make today is pretty old in its origin.
But like in a really prosaic way. So if you drill down into any of the charming,
very neat, entirely implausible origin stories of a dish that always seem to
involve some clumsy, probably quite beautiful and enterprising young chef who
drops something or burns something or gets the ingredients wrong, but then
magically serves it anyway and voila, the tartar tan was brought. And they're
all rubbish. Sadly, they are almost all complete nonsense. Well, listen, rushing
straight up back to the present through time, Carlo, finally, I'm sure everyone
listening be well aware of this already, apart from me, but on the off chance
they're not, could you please explain your theory of loop quantum gravity? Are
you sure it's needed? I think everybody knows about loop quantum gravity. So
it's very easy. How would I put it? If you swim underwater, you see around you
water, which is liquid and continuous, right? It's all attached to one another,
the water. But we all have been to school and we know that water is made by
molecules and the molecules are little grains. The same is true about space. The
space in which we see around us, it's made by little grains and that's
granularity. It's loop quantum gravity. And the loops come because each grain is
connected to the next one by a little link. So you can start from one grain and
jump to another, another, another and loop back to yourself. And that's a loop.
There we go. Is it like string theory then? Like a little bit like string
theory? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Don't confuse. Oh no. This is like, you
know, Juventus and Milan in Italy. Let me give you the one line difference. The
strings are little things that move in space, right? The loops are little things
that make up space. Oh, that's brilliant. Yeah. Thank you. Well, thank you,
Carlo. I think you've changed the way we think, well certainly the way I think
about the world. I mean, it's all Greek to me, frankly, but given the subject of
your book, perhaps that's no bad thing. Thank you so much, Carlo. Thank you,
John. Over to you now, Olivia. You grew up in Newcastle in a family of
solicitors before reading English at Cambridge. You were elected president of
the Cambridge Union in 2008. You practiced as a criminal barrister for five
years before turning to baking and attending Le Cordon Bleu. You've since
published your memoir, A Half-Baked Idea, and you write widely for the press.
Have you found any transferable skills between your widely different careers? I
mean, weird headwear. I mean, happily, there isn't a huge amount in common
between them because I wasn't a terribly happy criminal barrister and I am quite
a bit happier now. Since you mentioned the headwear, do you miss the silly wig?
Yes, I do. But only because I have a very large head and I looked quite good in
a wig. And it turns out that the Le Cordon Bleu only have one size of hat. And
not only is it way too small for my large head, every time you wash it, it gets
just a little bit smaller. So by the end of it, it was like I was wearing a
pillbox hat on the top of my head. And it's not a great look. Whereas I feel
like I really kind of carried the wig off with a bit more panache. Carlo, what
about you? Have you ever considered a drastic change of career? You mean besides
giving up raising goats? Of course. Yeah, when I was younger, I wanted to be a
poet. I wrote poetry. I was very full of myself. And then one day, we had a
radio with students, Politico Radio in Bologna. So with friends, I decided to
read my poetry at the radio. And I realised that it was awful, was absolutely
horrible. And so definitely, I was not good as a poet. And in the meanwhile, I
was sort of doing quite well in math and physics. So I said, well, theoretical
physics, I've been pushing a little bit, could be like poetry. It was a second
choice, theoretical physics. I failed as a poet. So I tried as a physicist. Wow.
There's a wonderful book by a guy called G.H. Hardy called A Mathematician's
Apology. Have you ever read that book? Yeah. Hardy was the guy who discovered
Ramanujan, the great Indian mathematician. He said, a mathematician, like a
painter or a poet, is a maker of patterns. And so really, you do that. Well,
Rosie, what about you? Have you done any really weird jobs in your time? I've
done so many weird jobs. I did a job as a drill demonstrator. I had to
demonstrate. A dentist, a trainee dentist. They were like really big drills. And
it was quite dangerous because I didn't have a clue what was going on. And I
think the people who'd come to see me demonstrate the drills could tell that and
no one felt safe. But you don't mean a dentist. You mean a ground type drill?
No, I mean like a big drilling… For oil? Buildings. Oh, OK. I don't know. For
walls. You've gone too big now. You started too small, John, and you've gone too
big. Yeah. The in-between drill. I was drilling, yeah, planks of wood. It was
terrifying. Speaking of strange non-sequiturs, Olivia, finally, you've written a
book celebrating butter and its power to transform almost any dish from good to
transcendent. That's amazing. How has butter changed your life? I mean, butter
has completely changed my life because when I was this sort of 25-year-old
unhappy criminal barrister, I couldn't cook at all. I lived on supermarket pasta
and supermarket sauces and the occasional kebab. And then my mother died very
unexpectedly and I started cooking and specifically baking. And that was kind of
my introduction to butter. I mean, like most children from the 90s, I grew up on
spread. So it was only when I started cooking myself as a grown-up that I kind
of discovered how amazing butter was. And I mean, anything that tastes good,
anything, it's because of butter. Because I discovered that, that's why I fell
in love with baking and that's why I left the bar and that's why I'm kind of a
much happier person now. Well, Olivia, I'm sure you know there is a line going
through Europe, east to west, and above north of this line is butter and south
of this line is olive oil. And so there's a big cultural debate here. I was born
in Italy and raised in Italy, of course, and I'm in fact near the border of this
line. And below this line, everything that tastes good is because there's a lot
of olive oil in it. Yes, no, that is fair. I will concede that olive oil has its
moments. But buy the book on butter. Buy the book on butter. Don't buy the olive
oil book. Yeah, yeah. And what's the book on butter called? Butter. How did you
come up with that title? I know, it took a lot of workshopping. It's called
Butter, a Celebration. A Celebration. Well, thank you, Olivia. You've certainly
sold us on the idea of butter in a way that Johnny Rotten could only dream of.
Well, it's time once again to open the museum for donations. Anna, can we unlock
the vault, please? We can, but before we do, you are going to need to get past
my new security system. I thought you were against technology. I am. Would you
mind just ticking this box that says I am not a robot? Sure, ticked. Great. I
now declare the museum open for donations. Rosie, what would you like to donate
to the museum? I would like to donate the second half of the 1816 poem Kubla
Khan. When I say the second half, I mean the unwritten second half. It sadly
doesn't exist, but it should exist and it does exist somewhere in the ether.
Where? In the now deceased brain of Samuel Taylor Coleridge? Exactly, yes. And
why is it that you would like to donate that then? So, I mean, I studied this
poem donkeys years ago, but I think what really appealed about it was not so
much the poem itself, which is a great poem. I'll give him that. He's written a
good poem, but is the whole story that went with it, which was that he'd fallen
asleep after he'd had a few drops of opium, as we all do, and he dreamt about
this fantastical land. He'd woken up and had hundreds of lines of poetry in his
head, ready to write down and show to the world. And he wrote 54 lines and then
this man, or a woman, not specified, this man from Pollock, I think it was from
Pollock. I've got that wrong. Porlock. Porlock. Thank you, John. From Pollock,
interrupted him and he lost the flow of his thoughts and he never finished the
poem. So, I really want to donate the second half that we never saw from. And
also as a creative person who often is about to unleash, I mean, absolute gems
on the world. And then I am stopped by a person from Pollock barging in. So
that's what I'm donating to the museum. It's an interesting thing, isn't it?
There's a whole catalogue of things that are supposed to have been invented in
dreams, aren't they? Paul McCartney's Yesterday, famously. Abraham Stoker's
Dracula. He dreamt about a lot of sexy women bearing their fangs and he woke up
and thought, yeah. Even the periodic table I remember reading somewhere. That's
a boring dream, isn't it? Yeah, what a boring dream. I mean, come on. So, Carlo,
have you ever had a person from Pollock in your life like Rosie? I think that
Pollock, it should be huge because there's plenty of those people. Imagine how
high achieving we'd all be if we didn't have these Pollocks all over the place.
I know, they're really the scourge of society. Is it a real place? Yes, I
believe it is. Oh, OK. So, sorry for the people of Pollock. I apologise. No,
listen, they've misbehaved and they should feel sorry. They know what they've
done. Rosie, just to pick a small bone with you. You've donated something that's
not been written. So essentially you've donated nothing. Small quibble. Yep. So
thanks a lot for coming. How are we meant to display this? Nothing. Is it
nothing or is it something? I think, you know, get people along, they can make
their own mind. Well, thank you, Rosie. And a warm welcome from the Museum to
the unwritten second half of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's Kublai Khan. So Carlo,
what exhibit would you like to donate to the Museum? A white hole. Imagine you
take a film of a black hole and you show the film backward, in reverse. That's
what you see is a white hole. And white holes are pretty dear to my heart.
Recently I've been spending a lot of time trying to understand these little
things. And so I would like to just have one walk to the Museum and I hope you
prepare a nice room for it. OK, but am I right in saying that a white hole, and
I don't want to raise the same quibble as I had to with Rosie, but is currently
a hypothetical thing and we don't know if it exists. Yeah, it's pretty right.
But look, let me say something about black holes first. Black holes are a
solution of the equations that Einstein wrote long ago. And when I was a
student, I studied these solutions and people said just exactly the words that
you said a moment ago. They, oh, well, these are just hypothetical things. It's
just a solution of the Einstein equations and we have no idea whether they
exist. And now we see black holes all over the universe. We have pictures of
them, we have evidence of them, we're sure that they are around. So what about
white holes? Well, it's exactly the same story. So they are solutions of
Einstein equations and for the moment, they're hypothetical, but I'm pretty
confident. Don't they sort of vomit stuff out, Carlo? Because am I right in
thinking that nothing can escape a black hole and nothing can enter a white one?
Is that broadly it? Yeah, yeah, you're exactly right. So a black hole is a thing
in which everything can enter, but nothing can come out. And a white hole is a
thing from which things can come out, but nothing can enter. And the idea which
I'm following is that all the things that falls into the black hole stays
inside. Inside is like a long, long tube. But then the black hole slowly becomes
smaller, smaller, smaller, smaller. And then it jumps into a white hole. It
becomes a white hole. Inside the black hole, there's all this stuff that now can
comes out from the white hole. We should say, in fact, that a black hole, of
course, from which you're saying a white hole comes, is basically formed when a
massive old star collapses under its own weight. Isn't it? And Rosie, is that
something you've witnessed in showbiz? Oh, I mean, you know, sometimes, Anna,
sometimes it's because they get cancelled by the BBC for not being able to tell
the jokes they want. It's a whole different range of reason. It's the comedy
black holes. The comedy black hole. Olivia, some of these physics theories, I
don't know about you, but I find them hard to grasp. Is there anything in
cooking that people find hard to get their head around? It's a lot about
patience, which isn't something that I had when I started. But if you can break
things down, I imagine physics is very similar. I just haven't turned my mind to
it yet. No, salt is the answer. People don't understand how much salt they need
to make their food taste as good as it can. So that is the honest answer. But
the slightly more pretentious answer is just exercise some patience and you'll
find that everything's actually very achievable. So very like science. Indeed.
Carlo, you've mentioned white holes are liable to belch out stuff at any given
moment, which does sound like a bit of a liability for our museum. What kind of
a room do you think can accommodate that? How are we going to get around that
issue? We don't want to destroy all the other exhibits. No, I think you just
have to get a good insurance. OK. I suppose all we've got so far is Rosie's non-
existent book. So there's not much that they can destroy. It's not non-existent,
Anna. That's just your opinion. Carlo, thank you so much for introducing us to
and donating one of your white holes. It's such a fascinating concept. This
white gaping maw just continuously spouting out random things in a consistent
stream, never stopping. Like having dinner with you, John, isn't it? Thanks.
Thanks, Anna. That's very kind of you. Now, Olivia, what would you like to give
to the museum? Well, I'm a little bit concerned that I'm going to dazzle the
other panellists with my intellect. But I would like to donate a jar of
marmalade. Finally, we can just pop that on a plinth. Yeah, exactly. No problem.
No existential issue displaying it. And why are you donating marmalade? I am
fascinated by marmalade. I think it is the most absurd, unlikely substance.
Forget white holes. I love that people who love it are absolutely bonkers about
it. I think it is a source of total obsession. And what do you think is absurd
about it? I mean, is it the fact that it tastes quite horrible compared to all
other spreads? That just some people's a privilege? Anna, it's an acquired
taste. And we all know what that means. No, I have finally acquired the taste,
although it took me a little bit longer than some. The thing that is completely
absurd about it is that it is made from a fruit which is incredibly sour and
bitter. It is almost entirely pip and pith. There's very little actual flesh in
there. You can't eat it uncooked. I mean, you could eat it uncooked, but it
would be disgusting. It is not native to this country. And it's very, very
difficult to grow here. And yet the British have taken it on as their own, you
know, when Her Majesty died, we had pictures of Paddington Bear giving her jars
of marmalade as tributes to her. That's how much we see it as a national symbol.
I think that sales of marmalade went up after she filmed that scene. They did.
They shot up 20% in 12 weeks, which is really interesting because in 2014, they
thought that marmalade was going to go extinct. And actually, the sales
increased when the second Paddington film came out. But he on his own without
the Queen only increased sales by 3%. The royals should push more stuff,
shouldn't they? They should do more influencing. More hashtag gifted. You judge
marmalade awards, don't you? I have judged the World's Original Marmalade Award.
Yeah, that is sort of how I got into marmalade. I mean, my husband and his
family, who are marmalade obsessives, got me into the preserve. The World's
Original Marmalade Awards took me down a much deeper rabbit hole. I think the
youngest ever winner of Best in Show at the Homemade Marmalade Awards was nine
years old. Flora. Flora, there you go, who presumably you hate because you're
such a butter fan. But yes, I have her jar in my cupboard downstairs. Flora from
the Isle of Man made an orange blossom marmalade. So Carlo, what do you make of
this choice of donation? Are you starting to wish you donated something more
straightforward for us? No, no. It's like diversity. Olivia said marmalade is an
acquired taste. I don't want to say anything that in your case I was wrong. So I
would put it, I haven't acquired its taste yet. I think Carlo, that is your
youth talking, because as we grow older, we lose the taste buds that detect
bitterness more easily. And that's why you start to like coffee and dark
chocolate, you know, cigarettes and Campari and marmalade, all those bitter
things that as a child, you don't really enjoy. I don't drink, I don't smoke, I
don't drink coffee, chocolate, I like milk chocolate. You have adolescent taste
buds. All this will come to you. Your marmalade years are yet to come, Carlo.
That's something to look forward to. A reason to stick around. Well, Olivia,
thank you for this. A preserve that will be preserved in the museum forever. So
there we have it. The museum's collection now includes the unwritten second half
of Kubla Khan, a white hole and a jar of marmalade. I'd like to thank Rosie,
Carlo and Olivia, and I leave you with this from Somerset Maugham, combining
physics, food and funny. It's no use crying over spilt milk because all of the
forces of the universe were bent on spilling it. That's all from the museum this
time. Goodbye. The Museum of Curiosity was curated by John Lloyd and me, Anna
Tershinsky. The donors were Rosie Holt, Professor Carlo Rivelli and Olivia
Potts. The exhibits were catalogued by Mike Turner, Mandy Fenton, Jade Gebbie,
Cameron Loxdale and Lydia Meisen. The producers were Sam Holmes and Li Ying Li,
and it was a BBC Studios production for Radio 4. Anna and John will be back next
week with a cartoonist, an impressionist and a taxidermist in tow. Tomorrow
evening, Mark Watson tries to get to grips with life's big issues. He even asks
what the bleakest joke ever told by a four-year-old is. Mark Watson talks a bit
about life, is tomorrow's 6.30 comedy. Back to this evening and we'll hear from
Ukrainian performers living and working in exile on this evening's Front Row,
and the conductor, Anthony Papano, tells us about his two new versions of
Buccini's opera Turandot. Radio 4's Lent Talks for 2023. Lent Talks. Begins this
Wednesday evening at 8.