TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 be presenting the Sooty Shearwater. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello at nine o'clock,
this is BH Broadcasting House, I'm Paddy O'Connell, good morning. Here are the
headlines. The Prime Minister's been criticised by refugee rights groups after
pledging migrants who travel to the UK illegally will be prevented from staying.
An historic agreement to protect the high seas and marine wildlife has been
struck at the UN in New York. And leaked WhatsApp messages suggest the former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock intended to frighten the public to encourage Covid
compliance. Coming up, small boats, big deal. There's a fist being thrown here
ahead of me. If you get a four star hotel, three meals a day and £175 a week,
what would you do? At the moment a lot of the messaging is full of hate and it
makes people afraid. We'll have live debate on the programme with the
Conservative MP who backs the PM's new measures and the man who struck a deal
with the French, David Blunkett. After a dry February in most parts, should
gardeners renounce tap water on their bulbs? I'm stood three quarters of the way
down the bank of the Washpits reservoir and it's about 40% full. One of the
driest Februaries that we've seen in 30 years. Those levels haven't been
replenished as they would be during these winter months. And move over Matt
Hancock, we launch our own WhatsApp number to get your voice notes and
everyone's excited. To be honest I don't really know what WhatsApp is. After
celebrated jazz man Wayne Shorter dies, we'll enjoy some sax on Sunday. If
you're in this melancholic ethereal mood you can whisper through the saxophone.
It can be this wailing, alluring, mysterious, kind of sensual instrument. Our
headliners will be Jane Moore, Seb Payne and Catherine Nicholson. First the BBC
News with Alan Smith. Good morning Alan. Good morning Paddy. Rishi Sunak has
said he's committed to ensuring that people who come to the UK illegally are
removed as the government prepares to unveil new legislation this week to try to
address the issue. The Home Secretary Suella Braverman has suggested that the
British people are sick of inadequate action on migrant crossings. But charities
say the proposals are vindictive and extremely concerning. Simon Jones reports.
The Home Secretary, like her predecessors in the role, is talking tough. Enough
is enough. The British people want this solved, she told The Sun on Sunday. New
legislation is expected to place a duty on her to remove to Rwanda or a safe
third country anyone who arrives on a small boat as soon as reasonably
practicable. The message was reiterated by the Prime Minister, who told the Mail
on Sunday that people coming to the UK illegally would not be allowed to stay.
But the pledge is not straightforward. No migrants have been sent to Rwanda and
plans to do so are currently on hold, facing legal challenges and there is no
returns agreement in place with the EU. Members of the United Nations have,
after 15 years of discussions, reached an agreement aimed at safeguarding the
world's oceans. The High Seas Treaty will create protected areas covering 30 per
cent of international waters by the end of the decade. It aims to tackle
problems caused by climate change, overfishing and shipping traffic, with more
money spent on marine conservation. The deal was struck after one final 38-hour
session of talks at UN headquarters in New York. The conference president, Rena
Lee of Singapore, thanked everyone involved. Your hard work, your dedication,
your commitment to wanting to make this a success is the reason why we are here
today. You know in Singapore we like to go on learning journeys and I can safely
say that this has been the learning journey of a lifetime. The former Health
Secretary Matt Hancock is facing claims he wanted to use scare tactics to force
people to comply with coronavirus lockdowns in the latest leak of WhatsApp
messages from the Sunday Telegraph. In one conversation he describes how the
announcement of a new Covid variant would frighten the pants off everyone. Mr
Hancock has described the leaks as a partial biased account to suit an anti-
lockdown agenda. More details from our political correspondent Helen Catt. The
exchange published by the Sunday Telegraph took place on the 13th of December
2020, by which date the World Health Organisation said that more than 1,000
cases of the so-called Kent variant of the virus had been detected. Mr Hancock
and an aide are seen discussing when to announce its existence. The aide seems
to suggest rolling the pitch for a potential lockdown in London with the new
variant. Mr Hancock replies, we frighten the pants off everyone with the new
strain. A former adviser to the Health Secretary, responding to the publication
of his own messages, told the BBC that promoting caution had been basic common
sense. China has announced a reduced economic growth target of about 5% at the
start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing. The gathering is being
used by President Xi Jinping to further consolidate his power. From Beijing, our
China correspondent Stephen Macdonald reports. At the Great Hall of the People
in Beijing, Premier Li Keqiang told nearly 3,000 delegates that China overcame
great difficulties last year and that it succeeded in maintaining an overall
stable economic performance. However, the government here has been criticised
for prolonging strict measures as part of its zero-Covid approach that hit large
sections of business and smashed the livelihoods of ordinary people. Over the
next nine days, this gathering will place a range of Xi Jinping loyalists into
senior government roles, sparking fears of an echo chamber where China's leader
won't receive the fearless and frank advice he needs to hear. Two workers for
the International Red Cross have been kidnapped in Mali. The organisation said
the abductions took place on a road between the northern cities of Gao and
Kedau, an area which has long been a hotspot for violence by Islamist militias.
Regulated rail fares in England and Wales will rise at their steepest rate for
more than a decade today. The 5.9% increase will add hundreds of pounds to the
cost of many annual season tickets, even though the government says it's
intervened to keep the rise below inflation. Pubs, clubs and bars in England and
Wales will be allowed to stay open longer over the coronation weekend. Licensing
hours are being relaxed between 5th and 7th May. Tyler Allen reports. The Home
Secretary, Suella Braverman, will lay an order in Parliament tomorrow to give
venues permission to keep serving customers until one o'clock in the morning
over the coronation weekend. She described the King's coronation as a momentous
occasion deserving of special celebration. Ms Braverman said she wanted people
to be able to enjoy an extra pint or two with family and friends as they wished
His Majesty a long and happy reign. The British Beer and Pub Association has
welcomed the decision, saying it'd offer the industry a timely boost in the
middle of an acutely challenging period. That was Tyler Allen. Is it me? It is
you. Have I got any more? You're on. Oh, I'm on. Hello, good morning. We're live
on BBC Radio 4. It's half hour. SAC's on Sunday, a new feature, and we've got
our own WhatsApp number. It's not just Matt Hancock. Another plan to stop the
small boats in the Channel is being floated in the Sundays. The Prime Minister's
made tackling the rise in the numbers of people making the crossing a key
pledge. We've live debate about it in a couple of minutes. First we wanted you
to hear this. Rival demonstrations in Dover this weekend. We should not let this
happen. What we see is men and children. The women, where are they? If the women
came over, they're obviously scared as well, but it's just the men. So I don't
know why that's happening. If you get a four-star hotel, three meals a day and
£175 a week to spend, what would you do? France, you get nothing. The government
are useless. People are scared to go out walking their dogs at night. The
children might go out on their own. It's awful. Whose streets? Our streets is
the call. And the group is about 100 large, I would say. Last October, a man
threw petrol bombs at a processing centre for people arriving on small boats. He
threw petrol bombs with fireworks attached and was later found dead nearby at
his own hand. The whole situation has been escalating, both in terms of numbers
and in terms of feelings. There's a heavy police presence here today. Earlier, I
saw one peaceful demonstration of people speaking up for migrants and their
rights. We've got these protesters coming out, far-right protesters against the
refugees coming over on boats. They've been emboldened by people like Soheila
Braverman talking about an invasion of refugees. We can't allow these views to
go unchallenged. Can I ask you what your banner says and who made it? It says,
refugees welcome, because at the moment, I think a lot of the messaging is full
of hate and it makes people afraid. There had been an earlier anti-fascist
demonstration. And now you've got one group, which is 100 feet behind me,
calling for an end to small boats. And there's a fist being thrown here ahead of
me. The stragglers of one group are meeting the forward party of another. It's a
small group and you can hear that the voices are being raised. How many more
people are going to come behind us? The police have now put two lines between
the rival groups, bringing the two sides further apart. And of course, it's a
reminder that the two sides are further apart as we go into a week when another
policy will be presented by Rishi Sunak and Soheila Braverman, aimed at stopping
the small boats. But the predictions are, for now, the numbers arriving on them
will continue to rise. And based on what I'm seeing in front of me, the voices
opposed to each other will continue to rise too. That's the situation in Dover
this weekend. Amazing job done by the police. From what I saw, Labour's David
Blunkett struck a deal with the French when Home Secretary over the Songhat
camp. Now Lord Blunkett, welcome back to the programme, Lord Blunkett. Thank you
very much indeed. Nice to be with you. There are more initiatives on small boats
than prime ministers. Will anything work if it's not done hand in glove with the
French? No it won't. And the government know it won't. Just look at the mail on
Sunday. You get the reason why this is being done. They know they can't do it
before the election, even if it would work, and it won't. And so they're doing
it in order to put the Labour Party on the spot and to try and provide a message
after 13 years that they're going to get a grip of a problem of their own
making. Tom Hunt is Conservative MP for Ipswich and member of the backbench
Common Sense Group. Good morning, Mr Hunt. Good morning. Good morning. Give us
the bullet points of the prime minister's plans in the Sundays that you like. I
think the broad principle, you know, that if you arrive here illegally from
another safe country, you know, under no circumstances should you be able to
stay. I think that is the core principle that the prime minister is looking to
achieve. It's a principle he outlined just at the end of last year, shortly
after he became prime minister. It's a principle that I agree with. I really do
hope that this new bill realises that principle. Currently asylum seekers have
the right to remain in the country to have their case heard and the new plan
from the prime minister, if you come in a small boat, you can't ever claim
asylum. Lord Blunkett, does that pass the Blunkett test? Well, actually, it
doesn't pass the Nationality and Borders Act test, which was passed less than a
year ago. Don't believe me. Believe the last quite tough, well, very tough Home
Secretary, Priti Patel, who's quite rightly said we don't need any new
legislation from her point of view or Tom's point of view, because that actually
says if you arrive without a passport and papers, you don't arrive through an
agreed route, then you are inadmissible and you're counted as illegal. And we've
we argued this out. I don't know whether Tom picked it up in the House of
Commons, because it seems to me when things arrive in the House of Lords,
they've not often been thought through. If if Ritchie Sunak and Suella Brabham
and don't know what their own legislation says, we are in a real pickle, aren't
we? So let's get it clear. If if you're if you arrive in a small boat at the
moment and you end up in this hundred and sixty six thousand queue to be
processed, you are actually not being counted as a legal migrant. You're not
being processed. You're being threatened to be sent to Rwanda. Now, the problem
is we've given Rwanda one hundred and twenty million pounds to take four hundred
people a year. One hundred and sixty six thousand on the waiting list. Twelve
thousand have just been given an amnesty because they are counted from countries
that put them at risk. Now, the minute you do that, you admit that there are
countries across the world where people simply cannot leave legally like Iran or
Syria or Afghanistan. And I put it to Tom, is Pakistan a safe country? Because
if it is, nobody from Afghanistan will be able to come and claim asylum in this
country because that's the only route they can use. Yes, it's a very full meal,
Law Blanket. And of course, you know this subject inside out. But we have a
Sunday hour. So Mr. Hunt, let's take this in sections. One of the key first
things Law Blanket said there is you don't really need new rules. You need
you've got rules. So do you can you do can you deal with that point? So firstly,
I mean, I've been incredibly frustrated by the situation. I mean, I remember
when the Nationality and Borders Act was a borders nationality and borders bill,
you know, was making its way, you know, it's being introduced, etc. And I
remember responding to correspondence from my constituents who are concerned
about the situation saying that I know this is very frustrating, but we've got
this bill on the way that we hope will deal with it all. And that was very much
my hope. Clearly, we've passed the bill, it's become an act and we're no further
forward. OK, but just so just on that, that effort to Mr. to Law Blanket's
point, that effort was tried and it hasn't worked. So we need another one. So
what I'd say, and I think we've seen certainly through the Northern Ireland
protocol negotiations led by a prime minister, is that we have a prime minister
with a very fine mind and one who's who I believe is incredibly competent. He's
obviously with the Home Secretary, looked at the situation legally, and he
thinks more needs to be done. So I trust his judgment that that is the case. And
that broad principle, which is ensuring that if you come here illegally from
France, which is a safe country, under no circumstances should you stay here.
The debate about safe and legal routes is a is a different debate. I want us as
a country to be compassionate towards refugees who are fleeing persecution. You
know, twice in the last year, I've been to the Rohingya refugee camp. So you
know, I'm very pro us being compassionate. But ultimately, frankly, if you if
you have people coming from France, most of them seem to be blokes who are able
to stay here. It's working directly against the interests of some of the most
desperate people in the world. Of course, there's a limit to how many people we
can reasonably welcome. But look, I mean, with the differences already
established now, Lord Blanket, what would work? What do you think? What if you
if we put you back in post? Well now we are moving towards getting rid of the
Northern Ireland protocol and agreement with the EU. We could and soon that
could next Friday, sit down with the president of France and say instead of
paying 120 million to Rwanda, where we know we're not really going to be sending
people, we'll provide the resource to help you set up a licensing system so that
no one could sell, advertise, buy or own a boat in France without a license. And
we do that for a period of time until we've got a grip of this issue. And
secondly, we would have a very clear system in relation to those countries which
are safe and where we could return people very quickly and we turn them around
as soon as we could. The problem is, Paddy and Tom, I'd like you to address
this. We know that if people arrive on our coast and they believe they're simply
going to be put in camps, because that's what we'd have to do, we'd have to set
up mass camps across the country and they're going to be returned to Rwanda or
to the country that they've attempted to flee from. What are they going to do?
They'll disappear into the ether. What are they going to do? I'm still staggered
by the boat licensing for the French, but go on Mr Hunt, answer Lord Brunkett's
question. Can I deal with the situation with regards to France? Clearly, it does
seem that the Prime Minister has a more productive relationship with the
President of France and previous Prime Ministers. Clearly, that's a good thing.
I think it's part of the reason why we've had a good outcome on Northern
Ireland. So if it is the case that the Prime Minister is able to come to an
agreement with France, we're able to accept returns, for example, that would
clearly be a good thing. My angst is that we probably need to further kitchen
sink at this, which is a number of different things. And actually, I don't
really agree with the principle that we can only really control our borders if
the French decide to play ball. Okay, so what about this new initiative, Lord
Brunkett saying, license your boat on the northern coast of Calais. What do you
think about that, Tom Hunt? Do you want to go hand in hand in the end of this
interview and agree with Lord Brunkett? License French, all small boats must be
licensed in France. Look, it's the first I've heard of kitchen sink. Me too, but
go on, it's live. First I've heard of this idea. I've got a lot of respect for
Lord Brunkett and his thought process. So I assume it's not a completely balmy
idea, but I would like more time to look into that. But look, my initial sense
is that that in itself would not make a significant contribution to tackling
this issue. So you've already mentioned that you think Rishi Susunak has a sharp
mind. There's an implication there about the people who did the job before him.
But should the tactic have been different? Should we have been nicer to the
French instead of moaning at them? So I mean, I've just said, I think if we can
get a good relationship with the French, of course, that's a good thing. If we
can work with them productively on this, of course, it's a good thing. But in
essence, I don't want our ability to control our own borders to be dependent
upon the two leaders of my country and France having a good relationship on the
day. I mean, ultimately, we've got to be able to control our own borders. And
that should be possible with or without the French wanting to play ball. Okay,
thank you very much. Tom Hunt, Conservative MP for Ipswich and Labour's David
Blunkett, now Lord Blunkett, who struck a deal with the French with a whole new
plan there mentioned. And you can let us know what you think. There'll be talk
about this all week. There'll be a plan from the Prime Minister. There'll be
conversations in the Commons. So we're going to move on. 20 past nine. You can't
move for WhatsApp messages from Matt Hancock. So we're launching a WhatsApp
number today to send us a voice note and everyone's getting in on it. Hello,
it's Alan Bennett here for Broadcasting House. This is one of those WhatsApp
audio messages you were asking for. To be honest, I don't really know what
WhatsApp is. Anyway, I'm not much of a fan of texting and WhatsApp messages
anyway. It coarsens and reduces our language to a series of catchphrases, emojis
and letters. I M H O LOL. It's the undoing of the lot of us. I do not encourage
it. Goodbye. We are encouraging it. We want you to send us a message, a voice
note on the subject of wild isles. You can do it from anywhere you like,
including outside. You hit new chat, new contact, and you enter this number
03700 100 444. And the number might show up as Radio 4 WhatsApp. Send us a voice
note 03700 100 444. And thanks to John Corshaw who may have been heard there.
This week's slow radio comes from Lisa Brody. She's been harvesting coffee on
her farm in Merida in Venezuela. And here she is spreading the beans on the
patio to dry out in the sun. Got to bearded. Alan, can you smell the Robusta?
Yeah, it must smell lovely. It does sound like coffee beans for reasons I can't
explain. Yeah, did you hear me there? I did hear you. Oh right, sorry, I thought
they hadn't switched me on. That's your problem generally, David. I hear you
coming along in the morning at half past five and I wonder the same thing. Now
thank you very much for all the contributions. We may even have more live. We
celebrate the saxophone now after the death of one celebrated jazz man. American
Wayne Shorter played with Miles Davis and won 12 Grammy Awards. There was much
more to his life but at the centre of it all was the saxophone. Just what is it
about the joy of sax, the instrument some call the devil's horn? Celebrated
saxophonist Jess Gillam explains and plays exclusively for BH. I first picked up
the saxophone when I was seven years old and it was the sound of the saxophone.
From the moment I picked it up, that directness of sound that I just fell in
love with. What you put through the instrument is what you get out. So if you're
angry and you're growling, it comes out of the saxophone. If you're in this
melancholic, ethereal mood, you can whisper through the saxophone and that's the
sound that's produced. It's very emotive, very malleable and versatile. One of
the great pioneers of classical saxophone in Britain is John Harle and I was
lucky enough to study with him. He has one of those sounds like a beam of light
and he wrote this piece for me based on folk tunes from Cumbria, where I come
from. And the piece is called Rant. If I'd have grown up in another time, in
another place, it would have been the instrument of the devil. And I think
that's partially to do with its sound as well. The fact that it really can, it
can be this wailing, alluring, mysterious, kind of sensual instrument when it's
in particular settings and played in a particular way. And that's because you
can move around particular notes. You can slide between notes. There's a tune by
Duke Ellington called In a Sentimental Mood that really can make use of that.
The saxophone was patented in 1846 and the way it was first used was in military
bands. Adolf Sachs wanted to create a loud instrument, so an instrument that
could be projected and heard outdoors. Some people loved it. Berlioz loved it,
but because it was invented later in the kind of usual canon of classical
instruments, it's seen sometimes as an outsider. But then it was adopted and
really kind of, I think, grew up in dance music. Rudi Vidoff brought it to life
in America. And it became synonymous with jazz and with dance music. And so then
can in some ways be seen as a kind of political instrument. It stands for a lot.
And you look at its place in culture and what it can represent is really
interesting. They come in all shapes and sizes. So this next little extract I'll
play you is on the soprano saxophone, which is straight. It suits itself well to
classical music. So this is a piece of Baroque music actually by Telemann, and
it's an extract from the last movement of one of his sonatas. The saxophone can
capture the whole array of human emotion. And if I was thinking of saxophone
solos to listen to, there's a solo by Pee Wee Ellis on a live version of Tupelo
Honey with Van Morrison. And there you feel just lifted up by the music and hiss
out. Pee Wee Ellis, absolutely fabulous. Ellis Gillum, of course, can be heard
on this classical life on Radio 3 and on BBC Sounds constantly. Here on Radio 4,
funny man Robert Webb is Lauren's cast away at 11.15 and straight man James
Nocte is on at 1pm. No sax before marriage on the world this weekend today,
Paddy. Well, it should be. It should be more. Well, it must be the Scottish
election because, you know, politics is wild in the Westminster jungle this
weekend, as we know. But the politics of the whole country isn't all determined
in these parts. And that Scottish election for an SNP leader and first minister
has become something much more than, you know, a kind of game of buggin's turn.
Kate Forbes, the finance minister, has been open about her socially conservative
views. No sex before marriage. When did we last hear that? And her opposition to
same sex marriage. And in the contest with our fellow minister, Hamza Yousaf, of
the three candidates, it's almost certainly between them. It's opened up a huge
question, not just how should they pursue or can they pursue the independence
push without the dominating figure of Nicola Sturgeon? But what kind of Scotland
do they believe in? Quite a fundamental argument. Therefore, worth exploring.
Therefore, join us at 1pm. And we're also going to be taking a ride on a science
fiction machine into the depths of the Ministry of Defence. It's very peculiar.
I believe it. Thank you very much. I mean, you can say anything on the radio. I
remember Graham Gardner saying to Barry Cryer during one edition, and I'm sorry
I haven't agreed, I have to stop you there, Barry. Your dressing gown's fallen
open. So I believe you can say anything you like, Jim, and we'll believe you.
That's at 1pm. In the near future, our news will be reviewed by Jane Moore,
Catherine Nicholson and Seb Payne. We'll talk about gardeners. Should they use
tap water? Should you use tap water if you're a gardener? That's all ahead. It's
9.28. This is BH on BBC Radio 4. I'm Paddy O'Connell here with Headlines Alan.
Home Secretary Suella Braverman has said ministers will have a duty to detain
and swiftly remove anyone who comes to the UK on a small boat under new laws
expected to be announced next week. Those doing so would be prevented from
claiming asylum. The British Red Cross called the proposals extremely
concerning. The United Nations has agreed the first ever treaty to protect the
world's oceans that lie outside national boundaries. Environmental groups say
the agreement, which has taken more than a decade to negotiate, will help
reverse marine biodiversity losses. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock is
facing renewed scrutiny after new leaked text messages appeared to show him
discussing when to announce a new Covid variant to frighten the pants off
everyone. In another exchange published by the Sunday Telegraph, the head of the
civil service, Simon Case, seemed to suggest the fear-guilt factor was vital to
government messaging. And extended licensing hours for pubs and clubs in England
and Wales will be introduced during King Charles's coronation weekend. Venues
will be able to serve customers for an extra two hours between 5th and 7th May.
Never mind dry January, there's not been enough rain in February. In a moment we
hear an appeal to gardeners to cut down their use of tap water on the spring
bulbs. First to Andrew Blenkeron, a Suffolk farmer. The present point in time
I'm stood three quarters of the way down the bank of the Washpits reservoir on
the Euston estate. It's an 80 million gallon reservoir and it's about 40% full.
Our usual expectation by the end of February, beginning of March, that both of
our two reservoirs would be full. That would give us 180 million gallons of
water to carry us through the next summer. Because we haven't got the capacity
in the reservoirs that we would usually expect, we've reduced our irrigated
cropping area from 1,150 acres that we had planned down to 850 acres. So that
300 acre reduction probably represents about 4,500 tonnes of lost production of
principally potatoes, onions, carrots and parsnips. We dare not take the risk of
planting a crop that can't irrigate. My biggest concern is probably that UK
producers can't meet the volumes that are required by the retailers and they'll
import products potentially with lower standards than our own. A view from the
farm from Andrew Blenker and Professor Liz Bentley is Chief Executive of the
Royal Meteorological Society. I asked her about this February's rainfall. The
lack of rainfall for February, one of the driest February's, particularly across
England that we've seen in 30 years, since 1993. So only 15.3 millimetres fell
on average during February. Parts of the south and east of England were
particularly dry. So Essex, for example, only saw 3.5 millimetres, so about 8%
of what they would normally get. Generally it's drier in the east and wetter in
the west. But in Wales, in Northern Ireland, even in Scotland, the west of
Scotland, there has been significantly less rainfall across the UK. Yeah,
England probably stands out as the driest, but you're right, across Wales they
only saw 22% of what they would normally get, Northern Ireland 34%, and Scotland
just under 70%. So we could say hosepipe ban and it's just a matter of time.
Yeah, well, so we'd look to the winter months to actually replenish water levels
in the rivers, reservoirs and the water table. And obviously with a dry
February, that doesn't help. It means I think we've just got to be that bit more
vigilant as we go into spring and particularly summer because those levels
haven't been replenished as they would be during these winter months. You're a
professor and I don't know if you're also a gardener, but would you say to the
people who love gardening, don't water in the spring? Yeah, so if you're a
gardener like me, you'll have water butts in the garden and my water butt is
still full from the rain we had at the end of last year. So I can certainly use
that as I get into spring. And even if you're washing up, just fill the washing
up in a bowl and throw that washing up water on the grass or on your beddings or
on the pots rather than taking it from the tap. And I think we just have to
change our behaviour a little bit. We could use grey water, we call it, so
slightly dirty water that we've used and put that on the garden instead.
Professor Liz Bentley, don't use your tap water on your bulbs. What do you make
of that? Do let us know. We'll keep that going on Sundays. There's a new David
Attenborough series coming this week called Wild Isles. Here's just 15 seconds
of it. Welcome to a place that is astonishing. It rivals anything I've seen
elsewhere. It's not far. It's home. Fabulous. So we asked listeners just half an
hour ago to send a voice note to our new WhatsApp number. It's not just Matt
Hancock who's got WhatsApp. The sound of a Sunday morning from the Wild Isles or
not. Here's a crop just sent in the last 30 minutes. Hello, my name is John from
Derby. I once went to Shetland on the 31st of January to see a Viking
celebration. When walking along the seashore, a brown sea otter came out and
looked at me as if to say, what are you doing here? On the subject of wild
isles, the Bargan Islands in my local Sainsbury's can get very, very wild on
occasions. Thank you for your wonderful broadcasts. Bye. My name's Jane. I'm
ringing you from Provence in France, walking through beautifully forested woods
with my big black dog. The sky is bright, bright blue and the sun is very, very
yellow. It's bitterly cold and everybody that I would like to chat to is still
asleep. I thought I'd ring you instead since you've just encouraged me to do so.
Well there we are. It's a new feature. Who knows where that'll lead. Thank you
very much for those snapshots. It's 9.34. Let's turn to the headlines with Jane
Moore, the Sun columnist and loose woman. That's the name of the show on the
ITV. Thank you for clarifying that, Paddy. Do speak very softly because we know
you're a little bit hoarse. I will. Catherine Nicholson is European Affairs
Editor France Vincatch. That's how they say that, isn't it? Yes, or just France
24 to France. And Seb Payne swapped the Financial Times for UK Onward, a centre-
right think tank of which he's director. Hello, Seb Payne. Morning, Paddy.
Welcome back. Jane Moore, Sunday Express Splash, Harry's most revealing
interview yet. Has Prince Harry done an interview? Yes, as South Park might say,
it's the latest stop on his worldwide privacy tour. He has done an interview
with physician Dr Gabor Marte, who is a sort of a childhood trauma loss
therapist. And yes, it's all across pretty much all of the tabloids. The Sun
here, I come from a broken home. Sunday Mirror, me sharing my trauma is an act
of service, says Harry. But that service, unfortunately, would be quite a good
thing, I suppose, if you did it for free. But it would have cost you £19 to live
stream. And with that, you get a copy of his autobiography. So of course, it's
really just another plug on his book tour. There is a lot of sneering. Camilla
Long on the Sunday Times says, why is he doing this? Hasn't old Frosty Pecker
unpacked his trauma enough? I mean, this has gone through the looking glass,
Catherine. You come back to you, Jane. You've started this. Catherine, where are
you on Harry? More Harry or less Harry? I mean, as a fellow ginger, I am
inclined to feel solidarity with him. But I do feel like he is somewhat
overexposed at this point. I don't know if there is actually such a thing as
more Harry. And if there is, I certainly don't want to see it. I mean, the media
are very excited because obviously, every utterance gets reported greatly as we
see today. But if you look at the sort of the message boards from the general
public now, the primary view, I'm afraid, seems to be one of indifference. Yeah,
I mean, we were talking about this just before. I think really, your position on
Harry says a lot more about yourself than actually about these people. We don't
know Harry. We don't know the royal family, really. But, you know, if my parents
feel obsessed about him oversharing about family details, it's because they
don't want me to overshare about family details. And my generation and younger
are quite used to oversharing, a bit less bothered by it, I think. Well, it
might be a little bit too early on a Sunday morning to be quoting Sir Gavin
Williamson. But he did famously say of Russia that it should shut up and go
away. And I think that epitaph could be prescribed to Prince Harry, since I'm
not sure how much more there is to say and how much more we want to hear about
it. There we are. We're underway. You can read Harry's most revealing interview
yet in every newspaper. Jane Moore's got us underway. Catherine Nicholson, who,
as I've explained, is a journalist working for the French. I am, indeed. There's
nothing wrong with that. I said that in a rather accusatory way. She's working
for the French. The Mail on Sunday, page six. Entente Cordiale as PM heads to
Paris. Yes, and a beautiful picture of Emmanuel Macron and Rishi Sunak in this
lovely sort of three-way embrace almost. They're shaking hands. That's very
French. Yeah, they almost look like they're going in for a kiss. They're back
slapping at the same time. It's this, you know, really telling us there what the
paper, I think, is hoping for. And I think definitely what the two governments
are hoping for. The Prime Minister meeting President Macron this week. And the
paper says he'll see firsthand how British money is being spent on tackling the
small boats problem. But this is just, of course, like the latest in this ever
degrading relationship between Paris and London over the last few years. And as
we can see, Rishi Sunak going to Paris, hoping to rescue that, to get it back
into calmer waters, we could say. What do the French think about the migrant
crisis? Do they get as excited about it as we do? I mean, the honest answer is
they don't think about it in a sort of public discourse. I bet they do in
Calais. In Calais, they certainly do. Yes. They're doing Diap. But what I mean
is in this sort of national level where it's, you know, in the British papers
every single day, almost. But it is interesting, I think, if you look at the
kind of aesthetics of Rishi Sunak and Emmanuel Macron, there are not two people
who could be more aligned. They've sort of the way they dress, the way they
approach their politics. So it's no surprise that this summit is happening
between these two particular leaders. And of course, if you think of Liz Truss,
she famously was asked, is Emmanuel Macron a friend or foe? And she said, I'll
have to wait and see, whereas we see from the papers today that they are clearly
embraced as friends. And Rishi is not likely to say, what is it, donne... What
is it again? Donne le break or something. After the whole orcas rail, yeah,
Boris Johnson said, Emmanuel Macron, donne moi un break. And I have to say,
French, very serious journalists coming up to me saying, what on earth does this
mean? And I was put in a position of having to try and explain British humour to
them, which was kind of untranslatable. What about Seb's point that there is
something similar between Rishi Sunak, loafers, suits, detail, spreadsheets,
Emmanuel Macron, you know, meritocrat. Finance man. Finance man. Do you get
that, Jane? Are you seeing a new entente? Do you want a new entente? The only
similarity I care about is that they sort it out. I think people getting into
boats and dying is not an acceptable situation. They are both quite technocratic
in the way they look at politics. If you look at the breakthrough Rishi Sunak
made with the Windsor framework, that was because he was a detailed spreadsheet
man who was very emollient compared to the more kind of bombastic approach of
Boris Johnson. And I think if you could look at how successful he was with that,
if you can take that to small boats, which is what we're going to hear about
this week, then I think it will be a victory for those who believe in kind of
doing politics by detail and not just big slogans or codding, cod French that no
one can actually understand. OK, let me just mark your dance card if you think
everyone thinks it's a breakthrough. You can read Bill Cash in today's Sunday
saying that the Windsor agreement has got many holes in it, holes in the Windsor
agreement. But we won't go there now because we want a new subject from you,
Seb. Anywhere you want to go, any issue, any newspaper, any website, any
telepathy if you like. Well I think from now we will go back to Sue Grey, which
is going to be a constant topic in Westminster this week, that the papers are
full of this. And in the Mail on Sunday today, we've got Greygate, which is
saying Boris's partygate tormentor is in a row about No. 10's view on trans
policy and full of angry, fuming quotes from supporters of Boris Johnson. I
covered Whitehall for about four years at the Financial Times and wrote a book
recently which had a whole chapter on Sue Grey. And I find this whole thing
really extraordinary. And I think the reason that Miss Grey left the Civil
Service, because essentially she'd come to the end of the road. That I've been
told from civil servants that there was a new government ministry made in the
last reshuffle, the Department for Business and International Trade. And Sue
Grey wanted to be the head of that ministry and she was blocked by Simon Case,
the head of the Civil Service. And at that point she thought, I'm fed up, I'm
going to go off and do something else and that's to go and be the Labour Party's
Chief of Staff. But there's going to be some big questions for Miss Grey this
week. Number one, she's going to have to request formal approval for this job
and Rishi Sunak could block it for up to two years. The normal basis if you
leave government is about three months but he could push the boundaries on that.
The second thing is there's going to be questions asked in Parliament about when
the conversations began between Sir Keir's office and Sue Grey. So this story is
going to rumble on. But the thing is, if you're someone in the Conservative
Party who thinks there's a big civil service plot against you, this certainly
adds credence to it. I'm just really interested in the language being used
around this. I mean, the subheader there, Boris' Partygate tormentor, Sue Grey.
I mean, Sue Grey was appointed to undertake this work of doing the Partygate
investigation. And for months and months and months, Boris Johnson and many
other members of the Cabinet were saying, let's wait for Sue Grey, let's wait
for Sue Grey. She's very respected. Let's wait for Sue Grey. So this turning it
all around now and saying she's a tormentor, she's the inside man, it's just
very interesting language to me. I would say, though, that if you read the Sue
Grey report, it's not exactly the most brutal, thorough thing, perhaps. I think
some people, in fact, saw it as being a bit of an establishment cover-up. It
didn't go into all the details of what happened. What I find astonishing in all
of this is that there were obviously plenty of people that Sir Keir might have
given this job to, why they didn't anticipate that this would be a little bit of
an own goal. It is being overblown, I'm sure. But all of this is not helpful, is
it? Why did he not just choose somebody that wouldn't have this controversy
attached to them? Here's Jacob Rees-Mogg. I'm sorry to interrupt, I'm just
reading just to make the point. Jacob Rees-Mogg is out in Jane's Paper, The Sun.
Sue Grey's picked up a hammer and smashed the idea of an independent civil
service to Smithereens. I think that's perhaps overstating it a little bit. I
think the reason they went for Sue Grey is that Keir Starmer has a lot of
postulating thinkers in his office, people who can think about the problems for
the Labour Party, but not many doers. And Sue Grey has made a career out of
being a doer. But I do think it doesn't look good at all for the civil service.
You are listening to the live review of Seb Payne, who was the Whitehall man for
the FT, now at a centre-right think tank. Catherine Nicholson is a journalist
for European Affairs. Editor, there she is, at France-Covant Couch. Jane Moore
is a columnist with The Sun. And Seb Payne is telling us to watch out for this
question about Sue Grey. What did she say to Sir Keir, and when did she say it?
So that's a prediction for this week. And let's change the subject. Jane Moore,
back to you. We've had Hancock's four-letter rant at Gove in the Mail on Sunday.
Please don't say any four letters. Obviously not. No, I know that's obvious.
Mail on Sunday, yes. They've done a – this has obviously emerged from all of the
messages – but again, it's – Gove, when he was Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, said something publicly about how promising to reduce NHS waiting
times. And behind the scenes, Hancock has launched a bit of an expletive via
somebody else, and he's basically said, this will be interpreted as a play for
my job. And out of all of these WhatsApp messages that we're all pouring over
voraciously in The Telegraph, I do sort of rather feel that a lot of it is very
self-interested and political. Lots of talk about, you know, will this muddy the
waters? And as you said in your headlines this morning, this will frighten the
pants off the public. It doesn't feel very sort of statesman-like. And yeah, I
mean, and I was rather intrigued yesterday. There was a group called the Crisis
Management Group WhatsApp group that was set up to deal with Matt Hancock's
affair. And they switched it to disappearing messages mode. I have never heard
of this. Exactly. I think we're all learning so much about how they're
communicating. And it's just such a massive change, isn't it, in such a short
space of time. I mean, WhatsApp didn't exist, what, 10, 15 years ago. And if you
go back just sort of 30 years, I mean, everything was in minuted meetings and
written down on pieces of paper. And now we're able to read all of their text
messages to each other in real time. But WhatsApp is always marketed as being
encrypted and very safe. Unless you hand it over to Isabella Oakshott. Exactly.
I mean, exactly. But I think it's fascinating for a base of government
transparency to see this level of detail of policymaking, which we would never
have. Because you're right, you have official minutes. Because these discussions
would have gone on, but just in person, with time gone by. And you would see
official formal minutes. Now you're seeing kind of really the meat within the
sausage being produced. And also these messages have been given to the inquiry
judge, I believe. But she or he would have sort of assimilated it and given a
version. I wanted to ask you about this. Just to you listening, here's some of
the messages. We frightened the pants off everyone with the new strain. The
adviser responds, yep, that's what will get proper behaviour change. The
minister then asks, when do we deploy the new variant? So I think we can all
understand in isolation this looks one way. Seb, to Jane's point, and to you,
Catherine, as well, if all of this cash has gone not just to Isabella Oakshott,
but to the inquiry, is that a proper defence for Matt Hancock? You know, I've
given all this stuff, or someone's given all this stuff. Does that wash with you
as a Whitehall insider, just monkey? I think the question is the context to all
this. Because we are seeing a certain element of these messages. We are not
seeing all the messages. And also, this is Matt Hancock's messages. The inquiry
is going to get everyone's messages. What I will be fascinated is when we get to
the inquiry, what comes out of that matches up with the reports from here.
Because I'm sure some of this has been taken out of context. I'm sure some of
this has been picked to make Mr Hancock not look great. But on the other hand,
it's entirely his own fault. Well, that's already the accusation from Matt
Hancock. He says, some messages have been missed out in between. It's been
misinterpreted. But unfortunately, I do just think the massive, massive volume
of messages that they're going to have to go through for this inquiry. I mean,
this is just Matt Hancock's here, as you said. How long is it going to take this
inquiry to go through all of these? The Telegraph's got about 20 people on it
right now. I mean, there could be hundreds of civilians. It will be years. I
guarantee it will be years. They would definitely have picked up. It would be
years. I think Sweden's inquiry is done and dusted already. I think France is
pretty much... There's much more efficient people over there. Why does ours take
so long? Well, now this is Isabel Oakeshott's point, isn't it? I've given this
stuff because otherwise it's going to have to wait. But let me ask you to round
up... Also because it's a very good story. Well, that was going to say, just in
terms of finally, do you think it's now all of us should understand, don't send
a WhatsApp if you don't want it to be read by everyone in your family and life
in the world? Delete. Do not write anything down that you would not like to have
read back to you in court, said my father, who was a solicitor. I think that's a
little bit overstating it. You can't not ever write anything down. I think the
real lesson of this is don't give all your WhatsApp messages to someone who
totally disagrees with your worldview and has a track record of breaking
confidentiality. It's like a meme. I'll try and remember that advice, Seb. Don't
give your WhatsApp messages to someone who disagrees with your worldview. I can
only imagine what the messages are like behind the scenes now because, of
course, a lot of other people have been thrown under the bus by his actions. OK,
there we go. The Sunday Times, a nation of shoplifters. It's not the only paper
to talk about this today, but it's Seb Payne's pick. Will you summarise it for
listeners just waking up? Then just give it to us straight first. So essentially
this report starts off in Devon and has an example of a chap walking to a shop
taking £90 of goods from CCTV and no one does anything about it. Then the police
turn up four days later and again no one gets prosecuted. The paper is using
this to talk about the fact that we've seen a number of incidents of shoplifting
from £1.6 million in 2013 to £7.9 million last year and the amount of thefts has
jumped from £265 million to almost £1 billion in the last decade. And
essentially the paper is saying that we're in this situation where people don't
seem to have any scruples about shoplifting, the police don't seem interested
and also security guards are not willing to get involved in it. They're not
willing to go and stop people because they're worried about the repercussions.
And I think this combined with anti-social behaviour which has risen massively
over the past couple of years is going to be one of the key big issues come the
next general election campaign next year. If you look at a lot of these
neighbourhood apps now as well, primary is about people's stolen cars and these
cars can be worth tens of thousands of pounds and they say they have no interest
from the police whatsoever. Let's go out in the same newspaper, the Sunday
Times, with you Catherine, you're new to the programme. Eurovision super fans
cross fingers and pray for success and that's just in buying a ticket.
Absolutely and I'm sure this will resonate with many of your listeners including
yourself Paddy. Probably one listener to be fair. Big Eurovision fan. I
personally have just gone through the pain and trauma of trying to buy Olympics
tickets in the last couple of weeks through all this labyrinth and Eurovision
fans are going to be going through something a bit similar when the Eurovision
tickets go on sale on Tuesday. The Sunday Times in their article speak to
someone called Alistair Rendell. He's a Eurovision super fan who used to run the
UK's official Eurovision fan club and he's saying he's going to be using
multiple laptops all at the same time, lots of patience. He says there's no
secret formula and this is just such an obsession for so many people. It's a
huge carnival of Euro madness and it's all kicking off with the ticket sales
this week and I'm there for it. Jane, where do you stand on Eurovision? I'll
watch it on the telly. That's about it. What about this, the coronation is
exactly a week away from Eurovision and I've heard it said by TV insiders who
occasionally come here to use our gin, that sort of thing, that this is a sort
of TV reboot for brand UK. They've got the coronation, you've got Eurovision.
Jane, do you buy that? You're a big TV woman. Are we rebooting the UK in some
way? I mean if we package it in the right way I suppose and that is sort of the
point of the monarchy for most people is that it's a tourist attraction. Well it
looks like they're going to be making a bigger effort of it. Sam Ryder who came
second last year saying it's Ukraine's party, we're just inviting them to throw
it at our house. It is going to be a massive party. There's going to be
Eurovision Village and Fan Zone in Liverpool for 25,000 people. There's going to
be a simultaneous rave in Liverpool and Kiev and something that I don't
understand, perhaps too old now, an underwater disco. So certainly putting on a
big show, trying to make a big show of the UK being this Euro-friendly country.
Seb, in 20 seconds can you tell us how much time I need for music to make me
happy, linked to Eurovision? Nine minutes in fact, which we don't have today.
But if you have 13 minutes it can actually make you sad. This is a study
reported in the Sunday Telegraph that said 65% of listeners after nine minutes
felt they were quite uplifting. And you were mentioning Wayne Shorter earlier on
your programme Paddy and I think when I listen to this it makes me think of one
piece of music that he played on in particular that makes me very relaxed and
happy, which is In a Silent Way by Miles Davis from his 1969 album. And for me
that piece of music is about 15 minutes but I'm certainly happy by nine. Thank
you for not being silent this morning. Seb, well done with your voice Jane. It's
come back just in time for the end. Sort of. Catherine Nicholson, thank you all.
Enormously hard work done with ease. Thank you so much. We launched a new
WhatsApp number this morning asking for Wild Isle voice notes and here's more
we've been sent in the last 30 minutes. Hi, this is Lynne. Just back from the
wild and windy tip of the island of Fuerteventura. Had a week's holiday there
for the space it provides prior to starting chemo on Friday, which is quite a
claustrophobic experience. Growing up by a loch in Highland Scotland, we as
children used to row to a little island in the middle, which in the summer and
early or late spring perhaps it was, was filled with the scent of wild garlic.
Not very encouraging, but we had fun. I love the scent of wild garlic. Good luck
to Lynne beginning that important medical procedure. Britons should embrace
vintage clothing and wear it with conviction, so says the man who styled some of
our iconic pop stars and music videos. Roger Burton worries that teenagers use
the internet to find their tribe when they should be using their grandparents
old clobber. Dress with conviction, he says. I should warn you that what follows
contains rampant gratuitous nostalgia. What are we watching here? You're
watching the specials Ghost Town and this is one of the very first music videos
that I got involved with. That was Terry Hall. What's he wearing? He's wearing a
sort of purpley blue double breasted suit that was made in Chicago in 1951 and I
bought this in Nottingham, I believe back in the 70s, but it's a classic, what I
would call a zoot suit. And is it here? It is here, yes. You're so excited you
can't speak, Roger. No, I can't. Where is it? Do you want to have a look at it?
Yes. Do I want to have a look at it? Yeah, this is it. This is it. He wore this
in Ghost Town, he also wore it on top of the Pops. So I'm looking at a purple
suit, double breasted, huge flyaway wing collars. You told me as a nipper you
loved to wear a suit like that. Absolutely. It's just the kind of suit that I
would wear. In what way did how people look define the tribes of Britain in the
60s and 70s? I think very much so. And in fact, until the whole punk thing
exploded, the subcultures were very, very divided into Teddy Boys, Mods,
Rockers. You had to belong to one of those movements and you really had to love
the clothes. And then now, do you see the same people defining themselves by
clothes or defining themselves digitally? Yeah, now it's a whole different
thing. Obviously, since the internet explosion, one can be whatever one wants to
be. But I really don't see that much innovation. I mean, yeah, of course,
there's little pockets of kids, you know, dressing up. But what I see on the
streets, I find quite disheartening, actually. I mean, I have a problem with
tracksuit bottoms and tracky tops and stuff. I quite like that casual look. It's
all about wearing it with conviction. And we have to say to the listener that
I've never seen a middle-aged man, Roger, wear a cardigan with more conviction
than you, a maroon cardigan today. And this belies your glamorous past because
you went shopping with David Bowie. I certainly did, yeah. I used to take him
around to who I thought were kind of impressive designers of the time. And he'd
end up buying whole collections and stuff. Right, now we're just looking for
more suits via music videos. Now, you listening to BH will know this, of course.
You are looking at Tom Petty, I Won't Back Down. You will notice in, as his
backing grew, he's got Ringo Starr on drums and he's got George Harrison playing
guitar. This is a suit that George wore. And this is another, it's another
American one, actually. That man was seldom out of clothes drawn from all over
the world. I mean, furs, feathers, hip, snake-hipped jeans. You know, I became
his stylist and he really liked what I was presenting to him. He was fed up with
wearing new clothes, I think, a lot of the time. So here we are talking a lot
about suits. What are some of the fabulous female fashion creations that you've
got in here? Somebody who was particularly fond of little black dress at one
point was Annie Lennox. And she was a big fan of ours and used to wear quite a
lot of our stuff. Chrissy Hynde, Debbie Harriff in Blondie, I did a music video
with her. And then I was doing the Travelling Wilburys with Roy Orbison and Tom
and George and Bob Dylan. Basically we wanted to give them a story, a history,
like they were all related in some way. Ooh, what's this one? Yeah, that's the
one. Handle with care. Okay, so we've got George in a single linen jacket. It's
actually a frock coat. It's a Victorian frock coat in linen, in cream linen. I
think it's so important. I can't say that enough. What you wear says something
about you. You are our witness to that moment. You've got George Harrison, Bob
Dylan, Roy Orbison. You've heard unpublished and also never before or never
again played music by those people. Absolutely, totally, yeah. It's wonderful.
Magical. Can you remember it? Can you hum it? No. No one would buy it if you
could, haven't you? With thanks to Roger there, whose book is Rebel Threads, and
of course to our team. This programme was made, of course, by Louisa Service and
Kitty Hatchley. The studio expert was Nicky Brough, the editor was Tom Baker.
Thank you very much for listening. Have a lovely day. ♫ Oratorio Tworks Super
Hits