TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You can tweet us at Moneybox. Moneybox Live is just after three. BBC News at
midday. Shamima Begum has lost a legal challenge to the decision to take away
her British citizenship. She was 15 when she travelled to Syria from East London
to join the Islamic State group in 2015 and was stripped of her citizenship
after she was found in a Syrian refugee camp four years later. The decision
means Ms Begum, who's now 23, remains barred from returning to the UK. Our Home
Affairs Correspondent Daniel Sanford was at the hearing. Mr Justice Jay has said
that all nine grounds of Ms Begum's appeal have been dismissed. Mr Justice Jay
said that the strongest grounds were ones around the suggestion that actually
rather than voluntarily travelling to Syria as a 15-year-old, she had
effectively been trafficked, she'd been persuaded, groomed and persuaded to go
there. The judges clearly felt that that was a strong argument and they said
there was a credible suspicion that Ms Begum had been trafficked. However,
despite that and having some clear sympathy for that argument, the judges have
concluded that it's not really relevant to the legal aspects of this case.
British Steel has confirmed it plans to close its coking ovens in Scunthorpe
with a loss of up to 260 jobs. The company's Chinese owners blamed an
unprecedented rise in running costs and the need to make its operations greener.
The United Union said workers at Scunthorpe were the victim of a greedy employer
who had reneged on promises of investment. The Labour MP Darren Jones, who
chairs the Business Select Committee, believes the government's been
irresponsible in letting the situation come to this. Ministers should have been
having discussions with these companies years ago. The Scunthorpe site as well
as the Tata Steel site in South Wales are two examples of how you can make brand
new steel. I think there's a real risk of us losing that capability and if we do
lose that capability it means that we'll be reliant on imported steel from other
countries which will be great for those countries and the people that make it in
those countries but not great for the British economy. The National Education
Union says it's seen no indication that the government intends to meet its pay
demands so it will not follow nurses and suspended strikes. The Education
Secretary has written to teaching unions inviting them to formal talks on pay
and conditions but only if the walkouts are cancelled. The NEU's Joint General
Secretary Kevin Courtney says increased funding for a pay rise is needed. If it
isn't fully funded you just end up with cuts in schools and we can't have that
so we need that commitment that there's funding and there's a willingness to
look at this year's pay then there's the question of how much they're prepared
to move but we would go into talks you know if there's that sense that we can
move on these things. China's top diplomat Wang Yi has met President Putin in
Moscow after reaffirming their close relationship. China has not condemned
Russia's invasion of Ukraine but has stopped short of giving its full backing.
North Korea's state newspaper has said that accepting foreign food aid is like
eating poison sweets. Experts outside the country have raised concerns about
levels of starvation but the government in Pyongyang has rejected a UN offer of
help. From Seoul, Jean Mackenzie reports. For years North Korea has suffered
from food shortages due in part to its extreme isolation brought on by its
development of nuclear weapons. Then at the start of the pandemic it sealed its
border with China cutting off virtually all of its trade and forcing aid workers
to leave the country. The Rodong Shinmun today warned that countries could use
aid as a trap to interfere with internal politics. It's a mistake to try and
boost the economy it said by accepting this poisoned candy. And rail operators
have apologised for a problem which left information boards blank for a time
this morning and wrongly told people online that trains were cancelled. LNER,
Northern and Greater Anglia were among those which reported issues. No rail
services were disrupted by the glitch but some ticket purchases were affected.
BBC News. Now on BBC Radio 4, time for you and yours with Winifred Robinson.
Hello, welcome to Radio 4's Consumer Programme. Today we're talking about
shortages of salads and free-range eggs, of care workers and how asylum seekers
are being recruited. It did help me to build up my confidence to get back into
the community. It did give me a bit more independence but I don't have to expect
things from other people or from the Salvation Army all the time. There's a
shortage of accessible transport for people with disabilities. We'll hear how
you can contribute to some research about that. If you'd like to get in touch
with us while you're listening here's how. Email us please youandyours at
bbc.co.uk or you can tweet us hashtag you and yours or text 84844. There is a
shortage as I said of some fresh fruit and vegetables. It's led ASDA and
Morrisons to put limits on the amount that customers can buy. ASDA has said it's
capping sales of tomatoes, peppers and lettuces to three packs per customer.
Morrisons has said it will limit cucumbers to two per customer from Tuesday.
Adam Leyland is editor-in-chief of the Grocer magazine and Tim O'Malley is the
group managing director of Nationwide Produce. It's one of the UK's largest
fresh produce firms. Good afternoon to you both and welcome. Tim O'Malley, why
is this happening? Why is there this shortage? Good afternoon. Well it's mainly
about weather. We did have the problem with inflation but there's no doubt that
mother nature has taken over from that. So it all started in the summer with the
heat wave and the drought both here and on the continent and then we had an
incredibly warm autumn and then we were plunged into a deep freeze. So where
we're buying most of our vegetables from at the moment which is at this time of
year is Spain and Morocco. We've basically not had an autumn. We've basically
gone from a red hot summer to a summer to a deep freeze and when you get that
extreme range of temperature just overnight almost when we got plunged into that
deep freeze just before Christmas. The problem you have with greenhouse crops
grown in Spain and Morocco is they're not heated. So when you have that extremes
of temperature then it really has a major effect on the availability and the
quality of the crop. And then just to exacerbate things Morocco has had further
issues. Morocco is mainly tomatoes. We get a lot of our tomatoes at this time of
year from Morocco. Morocco in recent weeks on top of everything else has had
floods. It's also had high winds and the high winds have led to boats not being
able to depart from the ports. It's the perfect storm of incredibly bad weather.
So will these shortages get worse before things improve? They're starting to get
better from Spain from Almeria area which is where most of our produce is coming
from. So I'd expect availability to get better over the next few weeks for your
peppers, your cucumbers, aubergines, courgettes etc. Although it's not going to
get back to anything like normal. Morocco we are seeing some major issues there
because they've had this double whammy. They've had these storms and floods. So
I think we're expecting to see tomatoes be short on availability for some time.
Adam Leyland from the Grocer magazine. We've just heard Tim O'Malley's take on
what's caused these shortages. Do you agree? I definitely the number one factor
is the weather no question. But there are other factors and the soaring price of
energy in the UK has meant that Glasshouse protected crop growers in this
country and in fact in Holland another key source of products like salads and
tomatoes has also been impacted because growers aren't growing tomatoes here in
the same volumes. They're waiting for the weather to warm up so they're not
growing as early. So you've got this sort of double whammy where the actual
amount of produce coming from this country from the big Glasshouses here and in
Holland and so forth isn't coming on stream. And there are other issues. Tim
referenced the droughts last year. The impact on planting on products like not
just salads but products like cauliflowers and other brassicas is a real concern
because it shows us it's deeper than just those unseasonal historically
unseasonal items. Adam, Asdra Morrison's have already said that they will ration
sales of some salads. Are the other supermarkets all OK? Well, they're concerned
but no one's going as far as rationing at this stage. I think they're biding
their time. But it may happen. We saw that with eggs a few months ago where one
or two of the supermarkets started rationing produce or eggs specifically and
then slowly that changed and everyone followed suit. So we'll have to see. I
mean, basically, if shoppers start panic buying, then that might be the case.
But the important point to make here, Winifred, is that no one's going to starve
because of these problems in Spain. There is alternative produce, fresh but also
tinned and canned and frozen. So, you know, it's a question of what we have to
cook with tonight and the sources of ingredients is going to be a little bit
more limited. But we're not going to starve. Adam, you mentioned that, you know,
the cost of heating has gone up, that the weather, so there's less being grown
under glass in the UK. Yeah. Given that farmers were warning about that ages
ago, could the supermarkets have planned for this any better than they have?
Well, it's funny you talk about the supermarkets planning. I think there's two
people that need it potentially to, well, the government, sort of, I think,
scandalously has not supported the protected crop industry. They have supported
a lot of high energy users, but for some reason, the glasshouse growers aren't
getting supported, whereas botanical gardens have got support. They're using the
same amounts of heat. But they're tiny, aren't they? That's not a realistic
comparison, you know, Kew Gardens with all of the salad growing industry under
glass in the UK. Absolutely. But the whole point that the government was
supposed to be supporting big users of energy because they were unfairly hit.
And if the government's serious about supporting British grown produce, then it
needs to put its money where its mouth is. As to the sort of supermarkets and
their ability to see this coming, there's no question that fresh produce prices
have not gone up as much as other areas of food inflation. That's a concern to
farmers, understandably, and there's some justification for their concern that
this is an area that's highly, highly sensitive price wise and supermarkets
haven't been prepared to pay. Tim O'Malley, what do you say then, if you had had
subsidised energy, would it have made much difference given what you have
described? I mean, the scale of these droughts and freezing and so on and so on
all over the world? Yeah, for certain crops, particularly your greenhouse crops,
crops like onions and potatoes that you put into store. With regard to Adam's
point about the here and now, that wouldn't have made much effect now because
your greenhouse crops from Holland and the UK tend to come in February, March,
April. So we just start seeing them. It's certainly going to have an effect
going forward. But now the main issue is all about the weather. But I just
wondered, Adam, would you say that one of the issues is our pricing system is
flawed in the UK. So the way that the UK retailers tend to work is long term
pricing. They do it either seasonally or yearly. So for example, for greenhouse
crops, they'll do a winter programme and a summer programme or maybe an all year
round programme. And they've done that for years and that's worked pretty well
and I'm not knocking it because it gives comfort for the grower. It gives them
peace of mind. It allows them to invest. But with these extreme weather patterns
that we're continuing to get, the problem is that that is becoming flawed. On
the continent, it tends to be more of a monthly pricing situation. So at the
moment, I can tell you as a fact that the retailers abroad are getting more
product than we are in the UK because they're buying more on a spot price or
more on a wholesale market monthly price. And therefore, they're getting more
produce than the UK. And I know there's a lot online, there's a lot on social
media about is this all to do with Brexit? I can tell you it's not to do with
Brexit. It's about different buying models. Would you, Adam, agree that we need
to do something about that? Great. Thank you. Yeah, I would agree. I think that
there are certain areas, commodity items that are negotiated on an annual basis,
and it's not working given the exceptional circumstances in those areas. There
are some suppliers who've been able to renegotiate because of the nature of
their contracts or because of the nature of their power as well. A number of
price increases, whereas the relatively limited power of farming industry,
because it's not consolidated through a single ownership, means that there's
less bargaining power and they can't just stop the trucks in the way that we've
seen with some of the major suppliers. So, I would agree that we saw this with
eggs last year again, where actually the model that the supermarkets have to pay
egg producers wasn't able to keep up with what was happening. And there's a sort
of denial, I think, going on among certain supermarkets about what to do. Adam
Layland, Tim O'Malley, thank you both. Now, it looked like buying a car online
was going to be the future. The online used car retailer Kazoo expanded rapidly
in the pandemic when bricks and mortar car dealers were forced to close. But
Kazoo's fast growth is now stuttering. The company has slashed its sales
forecasts for the year and it's looking to close some of its vehicle preparation
and customer service centres. Kazoo is also closing its subscription deals. It
offered cars for a single all-inclusive monthly payment and that payment covered
your insurance, your road tax, the car maintenance and breakdown cover. That
offer closed to new customers last summer, but existing subscribers were told
that they could see out the remainder of their contracts. Now, though, some of
these existing customers have had their contracts ended early. They're being
asked to return their cars within three months. Anthony Baxter is a filmmaker
who lives near Dundee. He has a Kazoo subscription car and James Bagot is the
editor-in-chief of Car Dealer magazine. Good afternoon to you both. James Bagot,
as I said, we were told that car sales were all moving online. It was certainly
the perception. What's been the reality? Well, the reality is that actually,
especially when it comes to buying the second biggest purchase after your house,
people actually want to go out and touch, feel, see and try these cars out. And
a lot of people were pushed down the route of online sales, as you rightly
pointed out, as a result of the pandemic. You remember, retail had to close and
that included car dealers. So off the back of that, a lot of online sales did
happen and it sustained the car industry. But since then, since dealers have
been able to open their doors again, people have wanted to go back into
dealerships. They importantly want to meet the people that are going to sell
them these cars and they want to try them out. So it's not really been the
reality. Online car sales are happening. It is changing and moving towards that,
but not quite as quickly as some people like Kazoo thought it would. Anthony
Baxter, you signed up for one of these subscription deals with Kazoo. What have
they told you now? Well, as you say, Winifred, I took a subscription. It was
£279 a month for a Kia Cee'd, including road tax, comprehensive insurance,
servicing and breakdown cover. So a very good deal and allowed me to do a
thousand miles per month. But Kazoo have sent out letters. That was for a three
year period. But the letter says that it's abruptly ending this agreement. It's
titled Termination for Regulated Haar Agreement. And it says I have to return
the vehicle by the 1st of May. So this is I have to take it to a Kazoo service
centre. Problem is they're closing them all here in Scotland. So the nearest one
to me is in Northampton, which is a 900 mile round trip from my home. Or I have
to pay a £149 fee to have the car picked up. But they've told you that. They've
told you that you'll have to pay £149 for them to pick it up. That's right.
That's what the letter to me. I've got it here in front of me. Because they told
us that there's only be a collection fee if a customer lives less than 50 miles
from one of their centres and wants to have the vehicle collected. That
shouldn't really apply to you. That's a change. Yeah. OK. Anyway, sorry, you
must feel pretty miffed about it. Well, yeah. I mean, you know, the idea of a
subscription seems at face value a pretty good idea. I mean, subscriptions for
Netflix, Amazon and Kazoo came in buying up tens of these subscription car
services across Europe, spending a huge amount of money on these. And they've
been offloading them. They wanted to get rid of them. And so they need these
cars back in order to sell them as used car stock. But also the original
contract stated that if you exceed your mileage allowance at the end of the
term, you must pay Kazoo an excess mileage charge of 40 pence per mile. But
Kazoo is ending the subscription early. So if you'd agreed to do 36,000 miles
over the three years as I have and have done at this point 24,000 miles,
planning to do much less over the next 10 months or so, you'd have to pay an
excess mileage charge back to Kazoo of £4,000. So it all seems a pretty raw
deal. You think you'll have to pay them that? Well, I won't in my case because
I'm under, but I know for a fact having looked at some of the talk online that
that is the case for many subscribers. I understand. This is what Kazoo said to
us. They said rather than offer the minimum one month's notice as they're
required by law to do, they've gone above and beyond that because they thought
that was the right thing to do. And they've given their customers at least three
months notice. And in addition, they have waived the early termination fee. I
guess that's understandable since they're the ones who terminated it. And they
say they're working with remaining customers to wind their contracts down and
doing all they can to make the returns process as easy as possible for
subscription customers. Yeah, but I had taken out this for three years and that
was the agreement that they signed up to. James Baggot, these car subscription
deals were really heavily promoted and advertised. I mean, Kazoo's reported to
have spent £100 million a year on marketing. How popular are the deals? I mean,
how many disappointed people will there be? And is it just that there isn't
enough profit to make them viable? The problem Kazoo have got is they're
struggling in the market. They have lost a lot of money in the first half of
2022. The business lost £243 million. Its full year results for this year are
due very soon, but they're expected to be very similar. They listed on the New
York Stock Exchange and their share prices dropped 98% since they listed. So,
they are struggling and a subscription business is very expensive to do. They've
probably realized that, as Anthony's rightly pointed out, these cars are worth a
lot in the used car market. We've had a very strange period in the last two
years where actually used cars have grown in value. They're up something like
30% over the last two years. So, actually ending those subscription deals now
means Kazoo can actually sell those used cars while the prices are high. They
can bank that cash and put it back into its core business of selling used cars.
So, yes, there are some other subscription businesses out there. They are
popular and people like Anthony who want to fix their budgets, they're perfect
for those sorts of people. But for Kazoo as a business, they need that money in
the bank and they're going to be spending that on their core business of selling
used cars. Anthony, have you looked around to see if there's a similar deal you
can get anywhere else? I haven't at this point, no. I was thinking of maybe
going down the electric car loan scheme route here in Scotland, but I've yet to
really investigate it. But the beauty, as James said, of this deal is that you
know exactly how much your outgoings are per month and something that includes
road tax, comprehensive insurance, servicing and all the rest of it. It's a very
attractive deal at face value. Do you think it was almost too good to be true? I
think it probably was. I'm sorry, sorry you've lost it. Anthony Baxter, James
Beggott, thank you very much, both of you. Thank you. Now, we regularly report
on staff shortages. There are shortages of staff in care homes and in companies
that provide care at home for people who need it. And this shortage of care
staff means that many older and disabled people are waiting ages to get the help
they need. This workforce crisis is so bad that a year ago, care workers were
added to the government's official shortage occupation list. But one thing that
many people don't know is that some people claiming asylum are also allowed to
apply for jobs on that list. Our reporter Carolyn Atkinson has been speaking to
two men who have gone into care service. We'll hear from them in a minute. But
first, Carolyn, how does this work then, the official occupation shortage list?
Well, this list has a range of roles on it. So everything from engineers to IT
experts, vets, even ballerinas, and as you say, for the past year, care workers.
Now, people can come from overseas to fill these roles. And according to the
organisation called Skills for Care, which monitors the care sector, there were
as many as 15,000 people who did move to the UK last year to work in care. But
asylum seekers, Carolyn, these are people already here. So how would it work for
them? Yep, they're already here. By definition, they'll have lodged their asylum
claim, but they're not allowed to work at first. But once they've been waiting
for a year or more, so long as the delay is not their fault, they can apply for
jobs on this shortage occupation list. Now, the Home Office figures show there's
a current backlog of 143,000 people who have claimed asylum, but don't yet have
a decision. I've been speaking to the Chief Executive of the Home Office, and
I've been speaking to two of them who are being supported by the Salvation Army,
which has a government contract to run safe houses for survivors of modern
slavery. And the Home Office accepts that both these men are victims of modern
slavery, and they are now both claiming asylum. Now, Danilo, that's not his real
name, he trained in social care before being enslaved. He's been waiting over a
year. But first we'll hear from Sano, also not his real name. He's been waiting
for three years. He was a slave in a warehouse while he was studying in the UK,
but he was then enslaved just as his visa ran out. My trafficker, he used to
come in as a customer, and he said he will do everything for me. But he just
forget his promise. And so you ended up working 60, 70, 100 hours a week. I was
being assaulted every day, physical assault, mentally assaulted, and to work
without any day off. So 365 days continuously. I'm not allowed to go anywhere
because he has taken all my documents. He's not giving me food. He will give me
20 pounds to buy food from his shop, and you have to keep receipt in your
pocket. So that means I'm working for nothing, you know? So I was just waiting
for dying. I was about 14. It went for about five, six years of really bad
situation. Really, really bad, actually. I was being enslaved by them. And this
was your uncle on a farm, wasn't it? He was just making you work almost 24 hours
a day. Yeah, just work. Yeah. I thought they were just doing good to me, but
they did not do anything good to me. They just robbed me of my childhood because
you think they are your own people. So it was a bit hard when you realised
people has been not just using you, they abused your childhood. I've lost my
childhood. They have done things that I've never thought would have done to
someone else. And then you found yourself in another situation with your former
wife, and you were enslaved again, weren't you? You know, when you met someone
and you think like, oh, this is the right person, you give all your trust to
that person because something happened to you in the past, and you've tried to
trust that person who you love. And she used me. And took your money. Yeah,
really everything. When she left me, I got nothing else. I was literally
homeless. I slept for nearly two weeks in my car. And I was afraid to tell
people that I'm homeless. That's Danilo. Now, Sanu, the man we heard first, he
was actually rescued by a customer who realised what was going on. So he decided
to give the warehouse staff Christmas jumpers, but he cunningly hid a mobile
phone inside Sanu's parcel so he could dial for help. And that's what he did.
Now, Sanu and Danilo both say that getting jobs as kids and getting jobs as care
workers has changed their lives. I've been waiting for my asylum claim for over
a year. Then I applied for the shortage list work, which took three to four
months to be sorted. And I was really happy because it did give me a bit more
independence to look after myself. I don't have to expect things from other
people or from the Salvation Army all the time. It did help me to build up my
confidence to get back into the community, to be myself. That's how I feel.
That's the person I want to be. I look after mostly elderly people who are
unable to get their daily routines done by themselves. So mainly it's personal
care, medication, breakfast, getting dressed, have a good chat. I look after my
clients two to three times a day. So I've got good reviews from my clients.
They've been ringing the office and said, oh, when is this gentleman coming
back? And they said, why? Because we really like him. We want him to come back.
What do you say, though, to people who say by allowing people who are claiming
asylum to work, that will just encourage people to come to the UK because
they'll get a job? I think getting a job in the care sector is a passion for
job, actually. It's a passion for doing that job. It's like people think, oh,
it's a care job. I just go to people's houses. I do my job and I go home. For
me, it's a different way of thinking, of looking after people. You need to like
that job. Now I'm doing home care. They're a very good company. I need to work
for my mental well-being, to keep myself fit, fine, to recovering from my past.
Safehouse can't keep me for a longer period. I am enjoying this care sector. Got
very good feedback, very good relation with my clients. I enjoying it because I
love to help the people. I do my work with my dignity. My honesty is giving me a
good satisfaction in my inside that I'm doing something good. I know I will get
some money, but sometimes money is not everything. I feel proud that I'm doing
something for the country, for the community, for the society, and for myself as
well. So these things make me more proud. So it's a great honour. Carolyn, does
anyone have a handle on the scale of this? How many asylum seekers are working
in shortage occupation jobs and as care workers in particular? In a word, no, no
one knows. The Home Office told me it doesn't know and it isn't counting. The
Salvation Army, which is supporting Sano and Danilo, also don't have any
figures. But just in the London area, they say three asylum seekers have found
care jobs. They also say that quite a number more have permission to work, but
perhaps not surprisingly, they often struggle to produce the right documents.
But Vic Rayner, the CEO of the National Care Forum, which represents not-for-
profit and charity care providers, say their members are now starting to see
this as a very good way of recruiting new staff. We're certainly aware across
the membership that people are doing that. So we've got members down in the
southwest who are looking to work specifically with Afghan asylum seekers.
Generally, they're doing it in partnership with refugee-led organisations. Then
I think that's a really important community connection that enables employers to
both understand the needs of people who have been waiting for asylum for a year
or more, but also for those refugee organisations to understand better what the
care sector has on offer. Now, you've actually created a jobs board, haven't
you? So that it makes it easier for people who are looking for work if they're
an asylum seeker and if they're a care company looking for a member of staff can
find each other. How's that working? We brought together a coalition of
organisations, housing organisations, employment specialists, legal specialists,
to think about how we could coalesce resources together. And absolutely one of
those was the creation of a jobs board where an asylum seekers or refugees could
look at particular parts of the country they might want to work in, see what
jobs are available, also see what other support was available. So what other
community resources. But is it the right thing for the care sector? Because some
people, once their asylum claim does come through, will either be accepted and
may well then decide not to stay in the care sector, which won't be good for
your clients, or they are rejected and they will be asked to leave the country
anyway. I mean, I think the care sector is an enormous employer. It's 1.6
million people work within care. It's part of our job to make the experience
positive so that if they do have their asylum claim accepted, they absolutely
want to remain working within the care sector. So I mean, I don't see that as a
barrier. I think more of the issue is that we need to ensure that organisations
understand what the legal position is, and that people don't feel that they're
rejected because they've got the word asylum on their application, that they're
absolutely recognised for the talent that they would bring. The care sector has
so much to offer in terms of employment opportunities. And I'm really clear that
those who come here to seek asylum will have a vast range of talent and
expertise, and care should be welcoming that with open arms. And what do the
government say about it, Caroline? Well, the Home Office told us we're
supporting and growing the workforce at home through significant progress in
training and recruiting staff, as well as recruiting internationally, which
means there are record numbers of nurses and doctors working in the NHS in
England. Asylum seekers, they say, are permitted to work in jobs on the shortage
occupation list if their claim has been outstanding for 12 months or more
through no fault of their own. Caroline Atkinson, thank you. You're listening to
You and Yours, Radio 4's consumer programme. It is 28 minutes to one now. You'll
struggle to find free-range eggs in the supermarket right now. The UK's worst
outbreak of avian flu means the birds have to be kept indoors for so long that
their eggs are now labelled barn eggs instead of free-range. Millions of
commercially bred birds, including geese, ducks, chickens and turkeys, have died
or have been destroyed. Charlotte Smith from Radio 4's Farming Today reported on
it back in December when she went to one of the affected farms. So we're on one
of our organic free-range farms where we caught the disease. The gates are
locked as we can see, and this is as far as we're allowed to go. It's
frustrating because we want to be... Mark Gordon owns traditional Norfolk
poultry and has 60 farmers growing hundreds of thousands of chickens and turkeys
for him all across East Anglia. We visited one of his farms now out of bounds.
What was it like waiting for the cull? Well it's awful because, you know, your
birds are clearly very ill, they're quiet, and you can see them suffering, and
of course, you know, there's birds dying and it's just like a horror scene.
Excuse me. You know, the most heartbreaking thing is there's nothing you can do,
there's nothing you can do to help. I'm just gonna have to recombine my
composure. This is beautiful. I'm ankle deep in the broads. I've got a pair of
swans in front of me dipping and ducking and diving. Alongside me is Ben Kirby
from the RSPCA. This is quiet compared to how it would be normally. This slipway
has been, as usually, a wash with white and yeah, there just aren't the numbers
that we've seen before. So there are six. I was quite excited because there were
six. I mean, you could quite, in a normal year, you quite happily put a zero on
the end of that. So where are they all? Dead, I assume. Ben is responding to
calls from the public reporting sick wild birds on the Norfolk broads. They've
been finding birds stricken with the virus for which there is no cure and
euthanizing them. When you talk to farmers, they're all hanging on for a
vaccine. What are you hanging on for? I really don't know how on earth you think
about vaccinating birds that can fly off and swim away from you. I just don't
think it's going to be possible. My gut feeling is this is now here to stay and
it's something that we're going to have to learn to live with, like Covid, to an
extent. For some, talk of culls and vaccines is sort of missing the point. Peter
Stephenson from campaign group Compassion in World Farming has been trying to
change what he sees as a broken food and farming system for decades. And he
argues that the spread of bird flu across the world proves his point. We need to
move to a poultry sector with smaller flocks, lower stocking densities, and so
more space for the birds, because the transmission and amplification of the
virus is much less likely in such conditions. This is really hitting free-range
birds. And the answer has been to bring them in to make them in effect barn
birds. Some people think that actually is the future. There's something odd.
During Covid, we all were told, look, avoid mingling and keep social distance,
because we've all recognized that infectious disease spreads most readily when
there's lots of contact between people. But with bird flu, we're taking the
exact opposite approach. We're saying, bring the birds inside, cram them into
vastly overcrowded sheds. I'm not saying keep them outside, but we need a
strategy for getting out of this whole vicious cycle. And that strategy cannot
take place in the current intensive poultry sector. That's Peter Stephenson from
the campaign group Compassion in World Farming, ending that report by Charlotte
Smith. Well, Kate Norman is a poultry expert with the RSPCA. Kate, good
afternoon to you. What is the picture in UK supermarkets then? Are there any
free-range eggs being sold anywhere now? So at the moment, it's very unlikely
that you'll find any free-range eggs in the UK retail market. This is because
there were different housing orders implemented at different times throughout
the UK. And the first housing order ended on the 1st of February. And in order
to ensure smooth sort of labelling throughout the egg market, the British Lion
Code decided to mark all eggs as barn from the 1st of February. So what's the
thinking behind keeping all of the birds indoors? So the birds are kept indoors
to protect them from coming into contact with the virus. At the moment, the
virus is circulating in such high numbers through the wild bird population. And
if any commercial birds come into contact with infected faeces, that can then
bring it into the commercial flock and it spreads incredibly quickly through the
flock. We've been talking about laying hens. What about free-range birds that
are reared for meat? Presumably the same rules must apply to them. They won't be
able to go out of barns either, will they? Yeah, so they're all kept inside as
well to protect them from coming into contact with the virus. So basically the
whole poultry industry is indoors at the moment. So how is that meat labelled?
That will still be labelled as free-range as for each flock that's placed, they
have a 12-week derogation period. And so for the sort of faster meat production
systems, those birds won't be housed longer than 12 weeks before they're
actually taken to slaughter. What does being indoors all the time mean for the
welfare of these birds? Really, the main welfare impact is if the birds have had
free-range access, and then that's suddenly stopped. So the birds get into a
real habit of going outside, foraging in the grass, experiencing natural
daylight. And suddenly when that's stopped, they experience big frustration and
stress because they're very habitual and they get into that habit. So it's very
stressful for the birds. And what are farmers doing to try to make sure that
once these free-range hens are stuck indoors, they're well cared for? So farmers
are doing lots of management methods. So they're providing lots more enrichment
in the shed. So that's things like pecking blocks or interesting objects for the
hens to explore and peck at. And also one of the key things is providing them
with good quality litter so they can do their natural behaviours like dust
bathing and foraging within that litter. It's basically about keeping them
occupied. You heard what Peter Stevenson from the campaign group Compassion and
World Farming thinks. He thinks that this outbreak, this really serious outbreak
of avian flu is going to be a turning point, has to be a turning point for the
whole poultry industry, that it's wrong to house and birds, to grow birds in
these kind of quantities and this density. What do you think? There are very
intensive systems. So some of the cage production systems will have 200,000
birds in a system. And if the virus gets in there, all those birds will have to
be culled. Whereas the smaller, smaller flock sizes of 16,000 birds, that's less
hens that would be impacted by the virus. But it's still a huge flock, isn't it?
When you go to these farms and you look in the barns, I mean, they are crowded
even on the free range farms, aren't they? Yeah, I mean, to get the value from
the eggs, there are a lot of hens that are housed in these systems. And reduced
stocking density does provide the birds with more space and opportunities. Do
you think it's inevitable? Sorry, I'm sorry to interrupt, but do you think it's
inevitable that it will happen, as Peter Stevenson said? Or do you think that's
nothing to do with it, that it's really just to do with the wild birds? I think
the wild birds are really the main transmission into these commercial sites. And
that's because we have absolutely no control over where the wild birds go and
how that virus spreads from them to the commercial birds. So all we can do there
is really practice excellent biosecurity and that's been shown to reduce the
risk of transmission. Kate Norman from the RSPCA, thank you. Royal Mail has
finally managed to restore parcel services for customers sending parcels abroad
from their local post office. The company has been trying to get back to
business as normal ever since its computer systems were attacked by hackers
demanding a multi-million pound ransom, and that was nearly six weeks ago now.
Royal Mail had managed to restore parcel services to business customers sending
abroad, but listeners have been emailing us saying they can't send parcels
abroad from their local post office. Sarah Early got in touch about that. I
spoke to her this morning. She lives in Swanage in Dorset. I've been trying to
send this parcel to my friend's daughter since January because I forgot it out
of their Christmas parcel. So every week I go to the post office and try and
send it. She works somewhere in the Norwegian civil service, Sarah, right on the
Arctic Circle in Tromsø. I've been trying to send her just some ordinary
chocolate, some lint chocolate. So tell me about the problems that you have been
having since Royal Mail was attacked in this way. I haven't been able to send
anything except a card. I haven't been able to put anything inside the envelope
at all because as soon as it's an actual thing, you've got a customs declaration
and they were unable to do the declaration. Can I ask you, would it have been
possible for you to have sent this lint to Norway in the way you hoped if you
had done it online, bought your postage online? Because isn't that what Royal
Mail suggested? There was a whole lot of online stuff and I get brain fog and
I'm not from the online generation. I'm 73. So I didn't really want to volunteer
for that. And it just looked a bit baffling. So now that it has been fixed, have
you sent the chocolate to your friend? I sent it yesterday. And how easy was
that? Well, it was easier for me because my form was smaller with less detail,
but the person at the post office had to fill in a much longer form than
normally she would have had to. And she's very experienced and she was
practically tearing her hair out. That's Sarah Early. Well, Curtis Minder is the
chief executive of a company called GroupSense. Now it helps other companies
protect themselves against cyber attacks and it will negotiate with hackers
making ransom demands. And Curtis is joining us now from America. Curtis, why
will it have taken Royal Mail so long to restore all of its postal services
after this ransom attack? Well, it's likely that the impact of the attack was
pretty severe. As you can imagine, the systems that Royal Mail operates in order
to deliver these packages internationally is fairly complex. In many of these
attacks, the threat actors have spent months inside the victim's network, in
this case, Royal Mail, trying to find a way to make the biggest impact possible
and to take off as many critical systems as possible. And so it's highly likely
that their systems were taken down pretty severely by the attackers and it takes
a long time to bring those back up. Well, Royal Mail refused to pay a £67
million ransom demand from the hackers linked, it was said, to Russia, the
hacking team. Now, these hackers had threatened to release customers' personal
data and they gave a deadline for that early in February. Didn't happen though.
And Royal Mail said its own investigation didn't find any evidence that they had
infiltrated financial or sensitive customer information. So what does that tell
us about their systems, that they're good? Well, in the industry, we use a term
called attack surface to describe the available attack vectors from a threat
actor. In the case of Royal Mail, as you can imagine, their attack surface is
very, very large. And so, as a large organisation, you have a limited amount of
resources to defend yourself. It is likely that they prioritise systems that
have customer information, credit card information, and any kind of personal
identifiable information over other systems. So, it may have been more difficult
for the threat actors to impact those systems than, for example, the mail
routing systems that were affected. The parcel service still isn't the way it
used to be. Royal Mail has acknowledged that. There's no extra paperwork
involved for the people who run the post offices and all that form-filling that
our listener Sarah described. Are you surprised that a big company like Royal
Mail has been a target? Isn't it usually just much smaller firms? Yeah, I would
use the word target carefully because in most of these cases, the threat actors
are very opportunistic in nature. And as I mentioned previously, companies like
Royal Mail have a very large attack surface, meaning they've got a lot of
exposure to the outside world because of the complexity and the size of their
systems. So, it is likely that this was opportunistic in nature and not
necessarily a targeted attack. But even if it was a targeted attack, again, that
attack surface is so large that it is nearly impossible for any large
organization to defend all of it. So, what do you mean it's attack surface?
Those are the systems that every computer system inside Royal Mail that they
need to operate on a daily basis. They have, for example, the system that was
attacked, but they've also got systems for operational controls for payroll,
etc. Those systems are quite large. And as compared to, for example, a small
business, which may have two or three systems, they've got hundreds. So, they're
all a way in? They're all potentially a way in? They're all potentially a way in
and it really only takes one of those systems compromised to get to the rest of
the systems. And so, it's very hard to defend. Will international law
enforcement go after these people now who've done this thing? They are taking
account of this all over the world, Interpol and in the US, FBI is taking
account of these cases. Attribution, of course, is very, very hard, meaning we
don't exactly know the individuals involved in many of these cases. However,
there has been cases where we've been able to identify and arrest some of these
folks, for example, in Ukraine, etc. Most of these attackers, though, greater
than 80%, I would say, are not actually the attackers themselves. They are
coming out of Russia. And obviously, extradition is not available from Russia
and it's very difficult for us to apprehend them. Curtis Minder, Chief Executive
of Group Sense, thank you. Now, here are some questions for you. Are disabled
people and people with access needs able to travel easily? Are some types of
transport worse than others? If you have a problem, can you let the right people
know and get things fixed? At Parliament, we want to know the answers. You have
a right to get the transport you need, and we have a duty to make sure the laws
for disabled access are followed. Well, that's a clip from a video on social
media promoting the work of the House of Commons Transport Select Committee. MPs
from all parties who make up that committee are investigating how easy or
otherwise it is for disabled people to use public transport. And from what
they've heard so far, the conclusion is that disabled people are being excluded
very often. Ian Stewart is a Conservative MP. He chairs the committee. Ian
Stewart, why did you decide to look into this now? Well, it's a question that
the committee has looked at on a number of occasions over the years. And there's
quite a body of evidence available that people with reduced mobility are having
difficulties. What we're looking at in this inquiry is answering the question,
are there sufficient laws and regulations in place? And the problem is one of
enforcement of these. Or are there gaps in the legislation that need to be
filled? The answer is probably going to be an element of both of those. But we
thought it was important to look at this in the round and make a judgment about
where interventions need to come. Doug Paulley has first-hand experience of
this. He uses a wheelchair. He's a disability rights campaigner. Doug, tell me
what it is like for you then. The first hurdle you need to overcome if you
personally want to go somewhere and use public transport. Good morning. The big
problem that I have is in attempting to plan and book accessible transport,
trying to find out what services are accessible, whether you need to book in
advance. Trying to work all that out takes much more energy and work than it
does for a lot of non-disabled people. And so it can often be tempting to kind
of almost give up from the start rather than even attempt to go, if you see what
I mean. Yes. Tell me, just give us a few examples of the experiences you have
had when you try to plan and you do plan and still things go wrong. Okay. So
recently I was going, I was attempting to go for a weekend away and I was trying
to find local accessible taxis. Firstly, the train companies are required to
provide details of local taxi companies, including accessible companies and the
one involved didn't. And then local councils are obliged to have a list of
accessible taxis, predominantly for the purposes of ensuring that the people
driving those taxis don't discriminate against wheelchair users. But the council
hadn't complied with its obligation to produce such a list. And then eventually
the council got back to me and told me that there weren't any accessible taxis
at all in the town in which I was supposed to be travelling. And it was, yeah,
it's that sort of struggle. I mean, in the end I had to get in an inaccessible
taxi using a folding wheelchair, go in a different wheelchair, which then
restricted what I could do whilst I was away. But it's not just taxis, it
happens on coaches, buses, trains, planes, every form of public transport. I
experienced similar difficulties. Ian Stewart, you've already concluded that
disabled people are often excluded from public transport. So what is it that you
now want to know from people, people who are in Doug's position? Well, first of
all, we want to try and get an overall understanding of where the specific
problems lie. And part of our call for evidence, there is a short survey online
that people can fill in and that will help guide us as to looking at, you know,
is it more on the rail side or is it taxis or is this across the piece? It's
trying to get a better picture of where the problems lie. And as I say, Doug
mentioned there that local authorities and rail companies have a duty, but
that's not happening. That's not being enforced. Who are the bodies that need to
be enforcing these better? Is it the local authorities? Is it government
agencies? Is it the transport operators? Where are the problems? If things go
wrong, how well are the complaints handled? We're trying to get a good picture
of understanding the specific difficulties, and then we can look at what the
solutions might be. Ian Stewart, the difficulties have been discussed, haven't
they, for a long time. The law to provide redress has been in place for a long
time. Do you have any ideas yet how there could be some kind of simple to use
means of redress for individuals? Well, that's very much part of what we want to
look at. I mean, there's quite a complex picture of laws and regulations in
place. If you look, for example, at the Equality Act 2010, Part 12 of that does
cover an overall right that transport must be accessible to all regardless of
any disability. But it's how that then distills down into specific modes of
transport. Doug mentioned the very frustrating difficulty that some passengers
will have in actually planning a journey. Now, there are solutions to that that
don't require legislation. I was speaking, for example, to someone from Southern
Trains earlier this week, and they're about to pilot a new system that they'll
have a sort of mobile assistance unit available at stations so that people don't
have to book in advance. And there'll be people there to assist with ramps
getting on trains or whatever it is. So, we want to look at good practice as
well and how that might be spread more widely, but also get back to are they
going to be, you know, are there gaps in the law as well that we need to look to
fill? Yes, you said, let me just bring Doug in again because we're running out
of time. Doug, you are well known, you have taken transport companies to court
and still, and you have won, and still you find yourself in this situation. So,
if you were in charge now, what would you do to provide this simple to use means
of redress? I think it's crucial that the people who experience discrimination
should not be expected to take individual legal action against major
organisations. It's not a valid way of trying to ensure that the rights are met
and that the law is enforced. And also, there's a problem that a lot of the
regulators don't know or enforce their own laws in this respect. Some of my
legal action has proven that. And so, I don't know what the ideal answer is, but
I know what it shouldn't be. And that's expecting us to do this. Ian Stewart,
just before we leave it, what's the best way then for anyone who wants to
contribute to your committee's investigations to get involved with this? Well,
the easiest way is to look at the Transport Committee's website, which will come
up with a simple internet search. We are making the survey forms available in a
whole range of different formats. So, there's information there on the website
about how that can be accessed together with phone numbers if further help or
information is required. So, the deadline for evidence is the 20th of March. So,
there's still plenty of time for people to contribute. I mean, we want to get a
really comprehensive picture of what passenger experience is. Ian Stewart, MP
Chair of the Transport Select Committee and Doug Paulley, Disability Rights
Campaigner. Thanks to both of you. Lots of messages coming in about shortages of
salads. Geoff Todd says, there's no problem here in France, same weather
problems. Why is the UK having shortages? Perhaps it is Brexit after all. Karis
Davis says, hi from Northern Germany, no shortages here of any fruit or veg. And
Louise Hennage says, a lot of emails along these lines. Why aren't we eating
seasonal vegetables that are grown in this country, instead of trying to eat
summer vegetables all winter? That's it for today. Tomorrow's You and Yours is a
gap finder. I'll be interviewing Dr Tunde Okewale. He is the founder of Urban
Lawyers, a charity to help young people from poor and ethnic minority
backgrounds into the legal profession. That's just after the midday news. And
then at around half past 12, it will be sliced bread with Greg Foot. And this
time he's looking at hair conditioners and heat protection sprays, and looking
at whether they really deliver on their promises, whether they are really worth
spending your money on. So I'll be here tomorrow after the news at 12. You and
Yours was produced by John Douglas. The studio managers were Nat Stokes and Amy
Brennan. Sarah Montagu will have the world at one next. First, let's join Chris
Fox at the BBC Weather Centre for the latest this Wednesday lunchtime. Hi Chris.
Hi Ron. And the weather today feels a little bit cooler than it did at the start
of the week. Although temperatures are lower, they're actually a bit closer to
average for this time of the year. Now weather-wise today, I think we've got a
lot of clouds to come through this afternoon. And for eastern areas of Scotland,
central and eastern areas of England, that cloud will be bringing some patches
of rain. Most of it's going to be quite light, but the rain withers kind of on
and off really through the rest of the afternoon. Meanwhile, across more western
areas for western Scotland, Northern Ireland, Wales and western areas of
England, OK, there's still a lot of cloud for these areas, but there are some
limited breaks in the clouds, some bright or sunny spells. However, we are also
seeing some showers and some of those showers quite heavy. Got some of those
heavier showers moving into Wales, for example, at the moment. Now temperature-
wise across the UK, Scotland and Northern Ireland, around seven or eight degrees
this afternoon. England and Wales around eight to ten degrees Celsius with a
northwesterly breeze developing for most. Now overnight tonight we go and for
England and Wales, we start off cloudy still with some patches of rain around
and through the night that patchy rain will tend to become confined to parts of
East Anglia, the South Midlands, Southern Wales and Southern Counties of
England. Further north for Northern Ireland, for Scotland and Northern England,
it's a night where skies will continue to clear and with light winds, it's going
to be a cold night for these areas with a widespread frost. Temperatures between
zero and minus three degrees Celsius for the south of England, southern parts of
Wales, South Midlands and East Anglia. With that thicker cloud around,
temperatures will stay above freezing and lows will typically be around four to
six degrees. Now tomorrow we do have a ridge of high pressure building in for a
time and that's going to bring much brighter weather to Northern Ireland, to
England and Wales with any early morning cloud and patchy rain across the south
clearing away quickly. Sunshine follows, temperatures around seven to nine
degrees Celsius. A cold and frosty start in Scotland with morning sunshine but
through the afternoon cloud will thicken, it will turn wet across northern areas
and quite windy as well with gusts up to 55 miles an hour later in the day. Ron.
Chris, thanks very much. Chris Fox. Hello, I'm Brian Cox. We're back for season
26 of the Infinite Monkey Cage. Where do we begin, Robin? We're going to be
talking about the nature of the light that comes from stars and how to commit
the perfect murder. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are
distributed via third-party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are
currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds.