TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Radio talk show in the US. The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service,
the world's radio station. At four hours, GMT on the BBC World Service, Joe
Biden rallies support for Ukraine. The principles and the stakes are eternal.
The choice between chaos and stability, between building and destroying, between
hope and fear. While Vladimir Putin blames his enemies for the war.
Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict lies fully with the West and
of course with the regime in Kiev. I'm Peter Goffin and coming up on the
newsroom, Madagascar is hit by a powerful cyclone. We look at the environmental
impact of international football and a little Hollywood glamour. Welcome to the
honorary Golden Bear award ceremony for lifetime achievement. Please welcome our
guest of honour, Steven Spielberg. The acclaimed director is honoured at the
Berlin Film Festival. All that after this bulletin. This is Danielle Jawowiecka
with the BBC News. Hello. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech painting Ukraine's struggle
as a generational struggle for freedom. Addressing a cheering crowd in the
Polish capital Warsaw, he said that Washington and its allies would never waver
in their support for Kiev. Mr Biden said what he called President Putin's lust
for power and land would fail. Appetites of the autocrat cannot be appeased.
They must be opposed. Autocrats only understand one word, no, no, no. No, you
will not take my country. No, you will not take my freedom. No, you will not
take my future. In Moscow, President Putin in an earlier speech accused the West
of starting the war in Ukraine and he sought to justify Russia's invasion. A
year ago, in order to defend our historical lands, to liquidate the threat that
came from the neo-Nazi regime, we decided to conduct a special military
operation. And step by step, we carefully, consistently, will settle the task we
are facing. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks with Beijing's
strategic ally. He said relations between the two countries remained rock solid.
Here's Stephen Macdonald. China has been accusing the US of prolonging the war.
Now you've got the US saying it's China is the one that could be making the war
go longer if it starts supplying arms and ammunition for the Russian war effort.
Beijing says it's neutral. But researchers in North America say this country is
already supplying these dual-use technologies, so equipment that could be used
to fix fighter jets or jamming gear. Now later this week, China's leader Xi
Jinping will be making a speech and apparently calling for a negotiated
settlement in Ukraine. A court in New York says victims of the 9-11 attacks in
2001 by al-Qaeda militants are not entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen
in the United States. Lawyers for the victims say they'll appeal. Here's Peter
Bowes. At the time of the attacks, the ruling Taliban allowed al-Qaeda to
operate from Afghanistan. They were removed from power by a US-led military
coalition late in 2001, but retook control of the country two years ago. Judge
George Daniels, sitting in Manhattan, said if he allowed the funds, which are
frozen in the US, to be used, it would mean recognising that the Taliban are now
the country's legitimate government. That, he said, was something that the Biden
administration did not do and a conclusion that US courts lacked the power to
reach. You're listening to the World News. A New York court has found Mexico's
former security chief guilty of taking bribes in return for allowing safe
passage for drugs. Prosecutors said Genaro Garcia Luna was secretly taking
millions from the country's biggest crime group, the Sinaloa drug cartel.
Nicholas Rocha reports. The case against Genaro Garcia Luna was built on the
testimony of nine cooperating witnesses, mostly convicted cartel members. One of
them testified to having personally delivered bribes to Mr. Garcia Luna and that
his cartel paid the former Mexican security chief millions of dollars during
their association. No wonder the jury came to a swift decision. As a US
prosecutor said in her closing argument, the Sinaloa cartel simply could not
have built a global cocaine empire without Mr. Garcia Luna's complicity. The
Biden administration has issued a new order to ban asylum seekers from entering
the United States. The Biden administration has issued draft proposals that
would make it harder for migrants to claim asylum once current COVID-related
border controls are lifted in May. The plan would oblige adult asylum seekers to
use an app to book an appointment with US officials or first claim asylum in
another country before getting to the United States. The proposals are similar
to those issued by the former president Donald Trump, the city of Seattle has
become the first in the United States to ban discrimination on the basis of
caste. The decision was taken at a rowdy session of the city council after
representations from members of Seattle's South Asian community. Supporters of
the ban say it's needed because current civil rights law doesn't cover caste.
However, pro-caste Hindu Americans say the new ordinance could smear the South
Asian diaspora. The European Food and Safety Agency has made recommendations to
improve the lives of hundreds of millions of laying hens and broiler chickens.
Scientists want to stop the use of cages to house the birds. BBC World News.
You're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Peter
Goffin. Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine is not going to plan. Almost one
year on, it's a war of attrition, a trench war in some places. Ukraine has put
up a defense and even counterattacks with the support of the Western world. And
the money and missiles and tanks keep pouring in. But on Tuesday, in his annual
address to the Russian people, Mr. Putin justified his war by blaming his
enemies. Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict for its escalation
and for the growing number of victims lies fully with the West. And of course,
with the regime in Kiev. I wish to repeat, they started the war. We are using
force to stop it. A few hours later, we heard a very different take on the
conflict. Joe Biden, visiting the Polish capital Warsaw, urged all democratic
nations of the world to strive for peace and security. The decisions we make
over the next five years or so are going to determine and shape our lives for
decades to come. And while decisions are ours to make now, the principles and
the stakes are eternal. The choice between chaos and stability, between building
and destroying, between hope and fear, between democracy that lifts up the human
spirit and the brutal hand of the dictator who crushes it. Our North America
editor, Sarah Smith, traveled to Poland for this speech and had this assessment.
Joe Biden is inordinately proud of the way in which he was able to coordinate a
united and unified Western and NATO response to Russia's aggression. And he
repeats quite frequently and did again in this speech that Putin thought that he
would find the West weak and divided and uninterested and therefore be able to
take advantage of Ukraine. And of course, he found entirely the opposite. That
is a real point of pride for Joe Biden and it's something he wants to try to
maintain over what he is hinting is going to be a seriously long haul. If you
talk to security officials in the US and people in the White House, they tell
you that there's a practical stalemate on the ground at the moment and there's
no incentive for either side to enter any kind of talks or negotiations. So
there's no point in even suggesting it at the moment. Both sides, of course,
will try and launch a spring offensive, but American intelligence doesn't seem
to suggest that that is going to make any huge or material difference. If you
think about some of the bigger commitments in weaponry that the US have made to
Ukraine, the most recent one was promising them M1 Abrams tanks, which Ukraine
had been asking for for months and the US eventually agreed to. They're not
going to arrive this year, it doesn't look like. If they're going to be there
for a spring offensive, it will be a spring offensive in 2024. And the fact that
the US is procuring and commissioning tanks to send to Ukraine on that kind of
timescale tells you that they're looking at this lasting for a considerable
length of time. Sarah Smith in Warsaw. Let's turn now to the African country of
Madagascar, where a Category 5 storm has made landfall. Cyclone Freddy is one of
the most powerful storms to hit the region in years. And residents on this
island in the Indian Ocean are bracing for its full impact. We used to be afraid
of wind gusts, but now it's more the rising water that scares us. Also, our
house is at the bottom of a bridge. We're afraid of flooding. We've inspected
each of the homes, and we've found that there are no houses in the area. We've
got a lot of people in the houses. We're afraid of flooding. We've inspected
each of the homes to try and deal with the danger. According to what we're
hearing, it's a very powerful cyclone, which has to be taken seriously. The
newsroom's Nigel Adderley has been following the story. Well, Cyclone Freddy
made landfall on the island at around 1630 GMT on Tuesday. And the eastern coast
has taken the brunt of it so far. Winds of over 200 km per hour. It's been
confirmed a man has drowned in the nearby port of Mananoro. As we've heard, the
people in the region are extremely worried about the potential damage this could
cause. Madagascar is, of course, one of the world's most impoverished nations.
And the UN's World Food Programme has said more than 2.3 million people could be
impacted by this. And the storm landed north of Mananjari, a town of 25,000
people, which is still devastated after Cyclone Barisaray last year, which
killed 130 people across the country. And 33 also perished last month when the
first tropical storm of the year, Storm Chesano, caused more havoc with
extensive flooding covering an area of 90,000 people. You mentioned those other
storms. How common is this type of event in the region? More common than they
believe it should be because the cyclone season runs between November and April.
They average around 1.5 per year, which is the highest average in Africa. But
around six tropical storms have hit the nation within the last year. And this
was one of the worst seasons on record. The humanitarian charity Save the
Children has highlighted climate change as a reason for this and has also called
on higher-income nations to increase aid to help those unable to protect
themselves and their properties. So Cyclone Freddie has made landfall in
Madagascar. What's its trajectory? Where is it headed from here? Well, it's
forecast the cyclone will cross the island and then head towards Mozambique and
Zimbabwe by Friday. And disaster management in those nations are already
planning to move people away from those areas which appear to be in its path at
the moment. Nigel Adderley on Cyclone Freddie, which has made landfall in
Madagascar. You're listening to the BBC World Service, our top headlines. In an
emphatic speech in Poland, President Biden has said democracies were stronger
and autocracies weaker one year on from Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine.
And China's top diplomat Wang Yi, who is in Moscow for talks with the Russian
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, says relations between the two countries are
hard as a rock. In Turkey and Syria, rescuers are searching through the wreckage
and rubble caused by an earthquake on Monday. And the region is still grappling
with the effects of the quakes that struck two weeks ago. Our correspondent Anna
Foster is at a makeshift shelter in the southern Turkish city of Adana. As the
ground started to shake once again, millions of people gathered up everything
that was precious to them and ran. Hundreds came to this sports centre, bedding
down on blankets spread across a volleyball court. For many, like Felice, it
brought back painful memories of the first quake two weeks ago. I'm afraid for
our future. I'm afraid for our children. I don't want them to be orphans.
Mentally, I'm upside down. Almost half a million people have now left the
earthquake zone in southern Turkey. There's growing pressure on authorities to
care for those who aren't able to flee. Adana's mayor, Zeydan Karalar, visited
survivors here and promised to help. People filled this place up and thousands
are on the streets again. It's our job to erect them tents, provide them
blankets and food. Many of the buildings which collapsed in the latest quake
were already empty, damaged beyond repair by the first one, which killed more
than 40,000 people. Most of the new injuries were caused by panic. Some people
jumped from windows to try and get to safety. Anna Foster. Well, in spite of all
that chaos after the earthquakes, there are still moments of hope. A baby in
Syria who was born and orphaned on the day of the first quake has now been
adopted. Thousands of people all over the world had volunteered to give her a
new home. But she's gone to live with her aunt and uncle. Speaking to the BBC,
Khalil al-Sawadi described the miraculous moment he pulled his niece from the
rubble. We began to dig through the rubble for her parents. I knew that her
mother was about to give birth. As I was digging, I heard a voice. It was the
baby. She was screaming. I had no idea her mother had given birth. And I started
shouting, She's alive! She's alive! I pulled the baby out with my bare hands and
cut the umbilical cord. Then I took her to hospital. The doctors told me she was
OK, but I noticed she wasn't doing well. She'd spent seven hours under the
rubble by that time, so I was almost certain her parents were dead. All I wanted
was for the baby to keep the family name alive. At first, I thought the baby was
a boy. So when the doctors asked me for a name, I said, let's name him Abdullah,
after his father. I then went out to continue searching through the rubble for
the parents. But I was later told the baby was a girl. I suggested naming her
Aya, after her aunt, who'd also died in the earthquake. But the nurse said I
should name her after her mother. So I've named her Afwa. Two days after Afwa
was born, my wife also gave birth to a little girl, who we've named Aya. Khalil
al-Sawadi, voiced by one of our team here on the newsroom. Genaro Garcia Luna
was meant to be fighting Mexico's war on drugs. But the former security chief
now faces ten years to life in prison after being found guilty of taking bribes
by a court in New York. Our correspondent Netta Tawfiq told Andrew Peach about
the background to the case. This case really rested on the testimony of cartel
members who have been convicted of their own drug crimes. And those members gave
evidence about the bribes that Garcia Luna received, saying how it was all
delivered in cash, once left in a safe house in a false wall, one time at a car
wash in Guadalajara, another time at a French restaurant in Mexico City across
from the U.S. Embassy. And they detailed just how essential Garcia Luna's
involvement was to the cartel, passing along sensitive information about law
enforcement investigations. At one point, one cartel member detailed how they
were given federal police force escorts as bodyguards and police uniforms and
badges to be able to load shipments of cocaine. And prosecutors really say that
the Sinaloa cartel became this global cocaine empire and the biggest crime group
in Mexico, specifically because of Garcia Luna's help. How was he caught? Well,
he was living in the United States, and in fact there had been rumors about his
complicity with the cartels. Prosecutors in the United States, I should say,
initially decided not to go after him, thinking they didn't have enough
evidence. But after the El Chapo trial in New York, he is the former kingpin of
the Sinaloa cartel, after one of the witnesses, Jesus Zambada, said that he had
given millions in cash bribes to Mr. Garcia Luna, well then he was arrested in
2019 in Texas. And are there more officials like Genaro Garcia Luna who may come
to court yet? Well, look, I think if you speak to many people in Mexico, as I
have in preparation for this trial, many will say that there is always this fear
that the Sinaloa cartel and cartels like them can't operate without corrupt
officials helping them. I will say that the United States, while they thought
this might be the start of not just going after cartel members, but also corrupt
politicians, well, Salvatore Sanfuegos, he was the former Mexican defense
secretary who faced very similar charges to this in late 2020. Well, after they
arrested him, Mexico got very upset about that. They didn't take too kindly to
an official, another official being arrested in the United States, and
ultimately the United States did drop that case. But I think this also does send
a signal to other officials that if they want to step foot in the United States
and work with the United States, there is a bit of caution that needs to be
taken. Neta Taufik in New York. Now over to Richard Newman for the latest sports
news. Thank you. The Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp says it's hard not to feel
like their Champions League last-16 tie with Real Madrid is already over after
losing the first leg 5-2 at Anfield. The game started well for the hosts, who
led 2-0 in the 14th minute before the holders recovered emphatically. It's the
first time Liverpool have conceded at least five goals at home in the
competition. Their former midfielder Adam Lallana says the way they fell apart
was out of character. It's so not like Liverpool of the past to go 2-0 up at
Anfield. It wouldn't even be a question that they'd see that game out. So to
concede five really does just kind of epitomise where they're at this season and
the transition that I think they're in maybe as a football club. In the night's
other tie, Napoli took a 2-0 lead over Eintracht Frankfurt, who played over half
an hour with ten men in Germany following Randall Kolomoane's red card. Haiti
have qualified for the Women's World Cup for the first time after beating Chile
2-1 in a qualifying play-off. The Caribbean country go into a group which
contains the European champions England. Wales' Rebunion players have set a
deadline of Wednesday to settle a contract dispute with their governing body, or
they could go on strike. It's put Saturday's Six Nations match with England in
Cardiff at risk. Europe's Solheim golf captain Suhans Pettersson has defended
Tiger Woods over a joke which has been criticised as being sexist. The 15-time
major winner apologised after handing fellow player Justin Thomas a tampon after
hitting a shot further than him at a tournament in California. Pettersson is
sure Woods didn't mean to offend. I know kind of Tiger's humour and that's a
very probably boyish joke between the two of them and I don't really take it too
personal. I'm pretty easy on stuff like that. I'm sure it was meant as a joke,
not as harassment to female or to women in general. And Women's T20 World Cup
host South Africa have set up a semi-final with England after beating Bangladesh
by 10 wickets. Richard Newman. Well, as Richard reported there, the play-off
matches to decide the three remaining qualifiers for the Women's Football World
Cup finals are reaching their conclusion. Environmentalists have said that by
adding games like these, football's global governing body FIFA is actually
increasing the sport's carbon footprint. And they've warned against FIFA's plans
to include more teams in international tournaments. Our sports news
correspondent Alex Kapstik has been investigating the pros and cons. Fans from
Argentina celebrating their team's spectacular World Cup triumph in Qatar. The
tournament was watched by a global audience of billions, making it by far the
most popular single sports event on the planet, with profits to match. The
financial statements are looking extremely, extremely good. So this shows how
strong FIFA is today. And the FIFA president Gianni Infantino wants to build on
that success. It means international football is set to become even bigger, but
not necessarily better. Is it ignorance or is it just that they don't care?
David Wheeler plays for Wiccan Wanderers in the third tier of English football.
He also has the title of sustainability champion at the Players' Union. And he's
aghast at FIFA's expansion plans, like the next men's World Cup, which has been
bumped up to 48 teams, with matches spread across the USA, Canada and Mexico.
They tried to claim carbon neutrality for the Qatar World Cup, which was
probably one of the most carbon intensive events after the two world wars.
They're now having a World Cup over a continent, which is insane. It seems like
it's a money-making exercise at the expense of all else. FIFA is also upgrading
the men's Club World Cup. Real Madrid won the latest competition held recently
in Morocco, a relatively low-profile event contested by just seven teams. But
the revamp, scheduled for 2025, will involve 32 clubs. FIFA's hunger for more
has also extended to the women's game. A record 32 nations will compete at this
year's World Cup, with a brand new event added to the list. This was the
traditional welcome for the ten teams who've been competing in New Zealand over
the past week for the final three World Cup qualifying slots, a tournament which
raises more questions over FIFA's commitment to lower the number of women's
teams. And the commitment to lower its carbon emissions. My name is Diane
Caldwell and I represent the Irish national team, Republic of Ireland. Diane is
also part of a group of international players called We Play Green, who speak
out on environmental issues. I'm sure FIFA will say they've done it to help the
women's game grow there. Of course we all want the women's game to grow, but it
can still be done in a sustainable way and not by flying ten teams from
different continents to New Zealand to compete in 13 extra games, you know. In
response, FIFA issued a statement saying the new playoff tournament was a
collective decision by leaders of all the international confederations. It also
insists substantial efforts have been made to tackle the environmental impact
when increasing the number of fixtures. The global game is already big business,
but do big profits have to come at a big cost to the planet? Or can football
find a new tactic to tackle climate change? Alex Capstick there on the carbon
footprint of international football. Now, our newsreader Danielle has some of
the other stories we're following this hour. South Africa has come under fire
for joining Russia and China in joint naval drills, showing the strengthening of
ties between the countries. Opposition politicians and several other nations,
including the US and Ukraine, have voiced concern about the drills off the coast
of Durban. Australia's security chief says they've busted a hive of spies which
has been operating in the country for years. Mike Burgess didn't identify any
countries behind the network, but said the undercover operatives appear to be
highly trained. He claimed the group targeted judges, journalists and veterans.
And Malawi's president says a Scottish fund for poor countries hit by climate
change should be a prototype for the whole world. Lazarus Chakwera said the
money had already made a significant difference in six villages. After much
wrangling, world leaders followed Scotland's lead in funding loss and damage
projects at last year's UN Climate Summit. Thank you, Danielle. And finally,
he's one of the most decorated Hollywood directors of all time. Now Steven
Spielberg can add another prize to his trophy case, a Lifetime Achievement Award
from the Berlin Film Festival. He was in the German capital for a screening of
his new Oscar-nominated film, The Fablemans. The newsroom's Anna Aslam has this
report. Good evening and welcome to the Honorary Golden Bear Award Ceremony for
Lifetime Achievement. Please welcome our guest of honor, Steven Spielberg.
Steven Spielberg was greeted by a five-minute standing ovation when he entered
the auditorium. He looked teary-eyed during the ceremony as highlights of his
career were listed. And it was a long list, with Spielberg the name behind some
of Hollywood's biggest productions, such as Jaws, E.T., Jurassic Park,
Schindler's List and Saving Private Ryan. He was handed the Golden Bear by the
singer Bono. Spielberg said it was a tremendous high point in his life and noted
the significance of receiving the award in Germany. This honor has particular
meaning for me because I'm a Jewish director. And I like to believe that this is
a small moment in a much larger ongoing effort of healing the broken places of
history, what Jews call Tikkun Olam, the repairing and restoring of the world.
Steven Spielberg said he couldn't pick the favorite movie he's ever made,
describing them as his children, but he said the anxieties, uncertainties and
fears that tormented him when he directed his film at the age of 25 had remained
vivid over the years. On the red carpet, the 76-year-old gave this advice to
those hoping to emulate him. Study movies, study old movies, study contemporary
movies, but also write. It's very, very important that directors can also write
or at least associate themselves with writers because it's all about the story.
How you communicate the story, everybody has a different story. How you
communicate the story, everybody has a different style and you have to also hone
your style. But to figure out what you want to say, that's the most important
thing. You have something to say, there'll be people through film who will
listen. Berlin's Golden Beer is the latest accolade Steven Spielberg has picked
up across his decades-long career. He's also won three Oscars, nine Golden
Globes, three BAFTAs and 11 Emmys. Anna Aslam on the latest honor for Steven
Spielberg. A reminder of our main news now, in an emphatic speech in Poland,
President Joe Biden has said democracies are stronger and autocracies weaker one
year on from Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine. And that's all for this
edition of the Newsroom on the BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin. This is
the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull
Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and
frivolity to disadvantaged children. Children in refugee camps, in orphanages
and care homes. These kids probably have gone through some of the worst traumas
and they don't have access to counsellors or therapists. Ash and the seagulls
aren't therapists, they're clowns. So they do what they do best to help.
Escapism and fun. Give them something to wake up excited about, give them
something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise what is the point? When the
Greek government allowed children in refugee camps to go to school, the kids
who'd been working with the seagulls did far better than the other kids. If they
can believe themselves to be limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into
the next challenge of their life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying
Seagulls, Child's Play, Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. This is the BBC World
Service. My name's Hannah Ajela and I'm investigating online romance scams
around the world. I'm on a quest to find a woman whose stolen photos are the
bait in catfishing schemes, used to trick victims into relationships. In episode
four, the trail for Janessa Brazil goes cold, until she turns up on a shock jock
radio talk show in the US. Join me for Love Janessa after the news. BBC News
with Danielle Jawowiecka. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion of
Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech, painting Ukraine's struggle
as a generational conflict for freedom. Addressing a cheering crowd in Warsaw,
Mr Biden said President Putin's lust for power and land was a sign of his own.
Putin's lust for power and land would fail. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in
Moscow for talks. Mr Wang told the Russian Security Council Secretary Nikolai
Patrushev that relations between the two countries remained as hard as a rock.
He said the two sides discussed their opposition to all forms of bullying. A
judge in New York says victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by al-Qaeda militants
are not entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the United States. The
judge said it would mean recognising the Taliban government as legitimate.
Mexico's former security chief, Genaro Garcia Luna, has been found guilty of
taking bribes to allow safe passage for drugs by a US court. He took millions of
dollars from the Sinaloa drug cartel, Mexico's biggest crime group. The Attorney
General in Peru says the US State Department has agreed to extradite the former
Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo on corruption charges. Prosecutors say he
received millions of dollars from the Brazilian construction giant Odebrecht.
The city of Seattle has become the first in the United States to ban
discrimination on the basis of caste. Supporters of the ban say current civil
rights law doesn't cover caste. However, pro-caste Hindu Americans say the ban
could smear the South Asian diaspora. And Iran has imposed sanctions on 36 EU
and British individuals and organisations. The EU imposed similar measures on
Tehran a day earlier. BBC News Hello, I'm Hannah Ajela. And before we start,
please note this series contains adult themes. Behind every romance scam,
there's the bait. In Love, Janessa, from the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts,
I investigate the murky and surprising world of online romance cons, also known
as catfishing, and embark on a search for the woman whose stolen images are
being used to lure in countless victims around the globe. Janessa Brazil Phone
rings Phone rings So yeah, my name is Hannah and I'm a journalist. And I guess I
wanted to ask an obvious question in regards to what I'm working on. Do you know
Janessa Brazil? The answer from the woman on the other end of the line is no.
Right, OK. I mean, the reason why we ask is that I'm actually working on a
podcast about catfishing. That's me calling a neighbour of Janessa Brazil's in a
city in Florida. My producer found Janessa's address on an old voter
registration roll. I've made a lot of calls like this, cold calls that went
nowhere. There's loads and loads of images around her everywhere. So you've
never met a Janessa before? We traced old addresses, phone numbers. We did not
receive the complete number. You wish to call, area code first. I messaged a guy
on Facebook multiple times who seemed to be Janessa's ex-husband. I called a
store in Rio de Janeiro where I was told her father might have worked. Hi, do
you speak English? No? I wanted someone to tell me why Janessa seemed to go dark
around 2016. Before that, she had left a vibrant digital footprint. In 2011, she
was photographed flanked by several tank top wearing adult entertainment stars
at the launch of a new tequila brand. In 2013, she promoted swimwear for a label
specialising in Brazilian cheeky bikinis. But fresh Janessa posts seemed to drop
off a few years later. Her feeds, her video stream channels, all had become
dusty, untended places. Her social media felt like an abandoned amusement park.
But then, my producer sent me a link. Janessa, say hi to Nicole. Hi, Nicole. Hi,
Janessa. And suddenly, she seemed very much alive. From the BBC World Service
and CBC Podcasts, this is Love Janessa. The story of my wild quest to find the
woman whose face and body is the bait used in catfishing schemes around the
world. Episode 4. Helen of Troy. Hello. Is this Nicole? Yes, it is. This is a
clip from an episode of a radio show from 2019. Hi, this is Bubba. We're live.
Oh, wow. You emailed me and told me to call you. The host is of the shock jock
variety. He calls himself Bubba the Love Sponge. Bubba used to host a show
produced by Howard Stern, the popular American radio and TV personality. Bubba's
style feels very Stern-esque. Loud, cheerfully abrasive, filled with sex talk.
He films all of his broadcasts. At one point in today's episode, the camera
zooms in on a baby goat that's walking around, getting laughs for rubbing on
people's legs. So it's not your average recording studio. Bubba is a big guy
with a big microphone, wearing a fraternity T-shirt and headphones. And some
days he has a sidekick. You know, Janessa is part of my show. She's a co-host.
Janessa, say hi to Nicole. Hi, Nicole. Hi, Janessa. Now, Nicole, that's the real
Janessa. And I think, you know, I mean, like... I know she is. It does look like
Janessa Brazil. She sits in front of a microphone wearing a white jean jacket,
elegantly made up. Her brows are thin and arched high. A questioning look. Where
do you live, Nicole? I'm in Montreal. You're in Montreal, OK. And you know we're
a radio show that's based out of Tampa, Florida. Of course, I know you, Bubba.
Nicole got in touch because after 25 years, her marriage is on the rocks. Her
husband has become obsessed with a woman he met online. I don't know how he
found this person, but it was all of Janessa's photos. And this person was
posing. Her name was Natasha Belov, a nurse. And he fell for it, of course,
because of all the, you know, the beautiful, sexy photos of Janessa. So he
stumbled upon some chick that's portraying herself as Janessa, using Janessa's
photos. Well, it's probably a dude, too. I think it's a guy. Now, is he asking
for money? For the past year, Nicole's husband has been sending this woman
money. How much? I think he sent her close to $5,000. Oh my gosh! And it's
probably a lot more than that. Yeah, that's probably what you know. Yeah,
because she was claiming to be sick and, you know, and helping her grandmother
in Africa. So I sat down, I said, listen, I go, I'm going to do everything I can
to track down, because I knew your name was Janessa, to track her down, and
prove to you that the person you're speaking with is not even probably, like you
said, a woman. No, it's probably a man. Yeah, it's usually a man. Some guy from
Ghana or something like that. Part of their co-hosting shtick is that Janessa
and Bubba are platonic roommates. They post their roomie shenanigans online. You
can see videos of Janessa working out. Sometimes she mows the lawn in front of
their house in a bikini. Bubba makes raunchy but affectionate jokes. They laugh
a lot. They genuinely seem like friends. And on this episode, Bubba jokes that
Janessa should get in league with the scammers and spread the wealth. I'm going
to start doing this for real. I'm going to make Janessa make phone calls from
six until seven at the house every day to pay for half the rent and be like,
hey, listen, honey, you know, you got to work the phones. Imagine if I got all
the money that these people send out to be safe for Janessa. I'd be a
millionaire. This moment kind of blew my mind. It meant that Janessa was aware
that her image was being used by scammers all around the world. But the flesh
and blood Janessa? According to her, she's not getting rich at all. And there
doesn't seem to be anything she can do to stop it. So at this point, you
probably have the same question I do. Why doesn't anyone do anything about this?
It's a common thread in many of these stories. Very few people who have been
scammed try to get their money back. The ones who do are rarely successful.
You're listening to Love Janessa from the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts. I
have these two feral cats that live in my backyard that I feed Garfield and
Potato. And they wait for me in the morning by the backyard. This is John Armit.
I can hear him talking to my producer while I'm getting my tech set up. Hi,
John. So sorry. Technology. How are you? I'm wonderful. And you're in Lagos.
I've always wanted to go there. John's based in Ottawa. A feral cat lover and
world traveller, he has a soft, nice guy energy. But his job is intense. John is
an investigator for the Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre. We are the central
repository for data, for intelligence and resource materials that relate to
fraud. We at the Anti-Fraud Centre, we do not conduct investigations, but rather
we provide valuable assistance to our law enforcement partners. And we work
really closely with Europol and Intrapol as well. So by sharing our information
worldwide, we can actually make some traction on this. Around the world, the
fraud business is booming. COVID helped. A lot of people were stuck at home in
front of their computers looking for a little companionship. According to UK
Finance, a financial services trade association, bank transfer fraud linked to
romance scams was up 20% in 2020 from the year before in the UK. And in the
United States, reports of romance scams hit a record high in 2021, according to
the Federal Trade Commission. Victims lost almost twice the amount of money than
the year before. $547 million. And the other aspect of it is romance fraud are
the lowest reported frauds versus the highest amount of losses per victim, which
is staggering. I've seen on average $150,000 in losses per victim, which is just
devastating. And a lot of people seem to think like these fraudsters are just
maybe these overweight people in their grandparents' basement committing these
scams, when really it's a massive organized crime group that are making tons of
money. Did any of your work look at how Ghana has become quite a central hub for
romance scams? Some of the investigations have in fact led to Ghana. And I don't
want to make it seem like Africa is the main hub around the world. We have our
fair share of fraudsters in Canada and there's a lot of organized crime groups
within Canada that are not only targeting Canadians, but also victims around the
world as well. I asked John to walk me through a typical story, a real world
example of what happens when victims turn to the legal system for help. There is
one particular case in Canada here where the victim was hit up by these scammers
on a large social media platform. They started a dialogue. She was a widow, she
was looking for companionship and this fraudster filled that void. So in this
particular case, the person she thought was her new romantic interest was
purporting to be a US soldier who is in Afghanistan when the Afghanistan
conflict was... Scammers love to use images of military personnel as bait. Makes
sense. An officer has a built-in excuse to not reveal too much detail about
their whereabouts or background. And who doesn't love a man in uniform? And, you
know, over the course of their time together, which was only a few months, she
provided $150,000 in various methods, whether it be gift cards, wire transfers,
sending cash in the mail. So the victim finally had had enough and had friends
convince her to go to the police. So our investigation began and we ended up
identifying that there was a money mule in Canada that was the intermediary
between sending the money to Nigeria. A money mule is someone who transfers
illegal money from one person to another, helping to launder it. These webs are
huge, intricate. Many different criminals are involved in a single scam, each
taking slices of the same pie. Sometimes the mule is working in tandem with the
scammer, but sometimes they're also being scammed. The mule may not even know
they're a mule. They think they're just receiving a nice cash present from a new
love interest they met online. The woman worked closely with police on a sting.
The money mule, the man who allegedly had been the intermediary between the
woman and her beloved fake military boyfriend, agreed to come by her house. And
we ended up arresting the individual as he was trying to get an extra $60,000
for the victim. When he showed up, officers quickly intercepted. John says he
didn't resist arrest. So as a result, we were able to seize some devices and
technology from the individual and we wrote search warrants and we were able to
access that data. And the data was really surprising even for me to see of how
many frauds this suspect was involved with. This person was involved with
identity thefts, actually stealing people's wallets at malls, involved in the
SIM card swap. So he had individuals that were compromised working for financial
institutions, telecommunication companies. So the far reach of this one
individual was quite incredible. But even with all that evidence, the matter is
still before the courts. It's been three years since charges were laid. The
other challenge is the court process. We know a lot of our prosecutors don't
have a lot of experience in cyber fraud and fraud investigations. And as we know
with the court systems around the world, that it can take two to three years
before these matters get before a jury or a trial. Every once in a while, a case
does get legal traction. The US Federal Bureau of Investigation says it has
busted a Ghana-based criminal enterprise with the arrest of six of its
ringleaders in the US on charges of laundering more than $50 million. This clip
is from a Ghanaian TV station called Joy News. Those six men are part of a group
the FBI labelled the Enterprise, criminals whose elaborate schemes zigzagged
across the US and Africa in the 2010s. They snagged victims using dating sites
and text messaging, laundering money through dozens of American bank accounts.
After years of investigation, a woman named Deborah Mensah was extradited to the
US from Ghana in 2020 and convicted as one of the Enterprise's co-conspirators.
She was ordered to pay over $1.5 million in restitution. We've not been able to
confirm whether the money has been collected or distributed to the victims yet.
We do know that Mensah was sentenced to nearly six years in a New York prison
where she sits today. An outcome like this is extremely rare. That Canadian
woman who thought she was in love with a military man? The thousands of dollars
she allegedly lost were likely laundered far from Canada as soon as the money
left her account. Even if her case goes before a judge one day, she'll likely
never see a penny. Like we tell people, the criminal court system is not set up
to try and get your money back. If there's assets that we can seize, that's one
thing, but if they've gotten rid of all the money and these accused have no
money, you can't get blood from the stone sort of thing. So, our big, hyper-
connected new world works very nicely for scammers. If a scammer is in Quebec or
Nigeria and a scammer is in Sardinia or Texas and the mules are doing their
muling in between, that's a lot of different justice systems, unsynced,
physically far apart. I wondered if crackdowns were more successful on a local
level. I've been doing this job in terms of cyber-security and cyber-crime
investigation for the past ten years now. When I was in Ghana, I sat down with
Philemon. Heads up that we were speaking in a car during a rainstorm, so it's a
little noisy. Philemon's part of a private digital forensics agency that works
with local law enforcement. His job is different than it was a decade ago. At
the time, you realised that cyber-crime wasn't really something that people even
care about within the country, because it was quite new. And it could seem like
criminals had a social cachet in Ghanaian society that shielded them from
prosecution. When somebody is a cyber-criminal and they're enjoying their
proceeds from this crime, they tend to donate to society. They are kind of
respected, so the laws weren't really punitive, they weren't really enforced. So
people just do things without being punished. I wondered if part of the reason
Sakawa Boys had this slightly elevated status in some people's eyes had to do
with Ghana's history. I'd heard there are scammers who justify their illegal
actions because of colonialism. When I was in Accra, I met up with another
Sakawa boy named Romanus. There's an argument that romance scams are a form of
reparations for slavery. People see it as a way of taking back what was stolen
from them. 100% true, yeah. Because back in the day, we were not there, but we
had the white scam for our gold. More of our properties took it to their side
and then built something for themselves. So, yeah, I can see it's kind of a
payback. A kind of payback. Whatever the scammers' perceived justification is
for these crimes, the end result is usually the same. No repercussions for the
criminals involved. But why is it that most cases don't lead to a prosecution? I
asked Philemon why most cybercrime investigations fail to lead to a prosecution.
The only challenges that we have currently is the complainants. When there is a
case, getting the complainant to come to court is difficult. Why don't they want
to come forward? The person making the complaint has to also make sure that you
are willing to support the investigations. You are willing to also testify. But
if you are not, it's difficult. And most of the time, the victims are outside
the country. So getting the plaintiff's case, coming here, you know, they don't
see it as worth it, so they don't come. So international justice usually plays
out pretty badly for victims and pretty nicely for scammers. But there's a third
party in the romance scam chain. The bait. So I wanted to know if Janessa Brazil
had ever sued anyone for using her name and image. Simon, the journalist from
episode one, believed he'd uncovered Janessa's true identity and that her real
name was Vanessa. When Simon thought he'd tracked down Vanessa, he tried to warn
her about how her pictures were being used. And she basically said, thank you
for alerting me to this, I'm well aware of it. And it's made my life a misery.
I've been subject to court proceedings in Florida. I even had one man who
claimed that he'd given me $2 million that I'd embezzled from him. And I was
taken to court. My assets have been frozen. I'm not allowed to... Of course, we
don't know if Simon had actually been corresponding with the real Janessa
Brazil, but we were curious about the idea of court proceedings involving her.
We couldn't find any traces of her name in the courts. But then we found that
video from 2019 of Janessa co-hosting Bubba's show. Can you imagine if I got all
the money that these people send out to these fake Janessas? I'd be a
millionaire. There's probably millions of dollars... Bubba's show is recorded in
Tampa, and in Florida, my producers know a guy who specialises in finding
people. Bob Norman. Bob's a journalist based in South Florida. He works closely
with a private investigator to find people in a place where a lot of people go
to not be found. There is a culture of con in Florida. There's no question about
it. There's a lot of grifting going on in Florida. Maybe he's been down there
too long. But Bob's take on Janessa was immediately sceptical. My first thought
was that she's got to be involved. That was my first thought. Either that or
she's the most unlucky person to be wrapped up in this all the time. It's
natural to have suspicion. Is that fair? Probably not. Is it worth pursuing?
Absolutely. I have to admit that I felt sort of protective of Janessa when he
said that. Making this podcast, it feels like I've spent a lot of time with her,
even though we've never met. I realised I'd come to think of her as someone
who'd been exploited, the Roberto version of Janessa. Was I too getting caught
up in a fantasy of rescuing her? As Bob talked, I also wondered if I was a bit
naive about who was pulling the levers on the Janessa Brazil scheme. After all,
she was in a perfect position to make a lot of money off her image. And would
that even be such a terrible thing? It was her image, after all. As she said on
Bubba's show, millions of dollars have been sent to the fake Janessas around the
world. Who could blame her if she tried to get some of that money herself? Do
you see Janessa Brazil as the victim? Would you say that she could very much so
be the innocent person whose images have resurfaced the internet thousands of
times? I mean, your image is not yours once it's out there. But, I mean, if
it... Why would they use her face? What is she, a modern-day Helen of Troy or
something? Or she's a siren. From Ulysses. She draws them in. Is that what it
is? Is she just got a face that somehow is more effective than other faces? I
don't know. Perplexing. It's a word that comes to mind. It's perplexing. The
best way to get to the bottom of this would be to speak to her myself. But
first, I'd need to find her. If, let's say, she does fall under the category of
someone who doesn't want to be found, how easy would it be for someone to
disappear in the US? It's not easy at all. It's almost impossible. I guess we're
kind of in that mindset-slash-limbo of trying to think of another angle or
another approach that we may not have thought of. Does anything come to mind for
you? Well, I mean, there's obvious, I think, ideas that come to mind. One is,
and I think you all are following that, trying to find other people that are
close to her and trying to find another way into her graces or confidence in
some way. We know one person who's close to her. Janessa is part of my show.
She's a co-host. Janessa, say hi to Nicole. Hi, Nicole. Bubba, the radio host
from Tampa, Florida. His full, now legal, name is Bubba the Love Sponge Clem, by
the way. Then you have to put the little registered trademark, the R, the circle
R, because it's a federally registered trademark name. And then the last name is
Clem. So I set my hunt for Janessa aside to see if I can get Bubba to talk to
me. I tried Twitter. I tried Twitch. I tried his agent. I also tried reaching
him at a racetrack he owns in Ocala, Florida. Please check
Bubbaracewithheart.com for times and pricing. Thanks so much, and we hope to see
you here at the racetrack. Hi, my name is Hannah Ajela. I am a BBC journalist
hoping to speak to Todd, aka Bubba. And then one day, Bubba's name pops up in my
inbox. Yes, I'm available for your podcast. Tell me what I need to do. Next time
on Love, Janessa. I met Janessa in New York at Howard Stern's studios. And I
just thought that, oh, my God, she's so stunning. I hope I can add some insight
for you guys. Love, Janessa is produced by Antica Productions and Telltale
Industries for the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts. I'm Hannah Ajela. Thanks
for listening. I'm Marie Keyworth, uncovering the hidden world of high-end mass
catering. The Food Chain, Thursday at 11.30 and 23.30 GMT. At
BBCWorldService.com, the Arts Hour. Here's Nikki Bady. With actor Michelle Yeoh
on her Oscar-nominated performance in Everything Everywhere All at Once, the
Indian director Shekhar Kapoor on his cross-cultural rom-com and Mexican
filmmaker Alejandro González Señorito and rapper BIG FUNDS to proceed with
Fantasticвал.