TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and refugee camps. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. It's five o'clock GMT. I'm Jackie Leonard. This is the
Newsroom from the BBC World Service. The ship has reached the shore. After
marathon talks, United Nations member states have agreed on the basis of an
unprecedented international treaty to protect the high seas. We'll hear from
Beijing where China has announced a reduced growth target at its annual
parliamentary session in which President Xi Jinping is expected to tighten his
hold on power. In Ukraine, conflicting reports on whether Ukrainian forces in
Bahmut are preparing a strategic withdrawal or holding ground in the face of
intense pressure from the Russian army and Wagner mercenaries. And the United
Nations and Iran have announced an agreement to allow UN officials to carry out
further inspections of Tehran's nuclear program. The only thing that matters is
that we are able to inspect, that we are able to account for every gram of
enriched material that is there. All on the Newsroom. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with
the BBC News. After more than a decade of negotiations, the countries of the
United Nations have agreed the first ever treaty to protect the world's oceans
that lie outside national boundaries. Delegates cheered and applauded as the
agreement was finally signed in New York. Environmental groups say it'll help
ensure sustainable development. Nicola Clark is an oceanographer from the Pew
Research Center and has been following the talks. So it will have to go through
legal scrubbing and be formally adopted, but then after that it will go to a
ratification phase where states will have to formally ratify and once we have
reached that number then it will enter into force and we can actually start to
implement it which is really exciting to think about. The high seas make up
about 60% of the world's oceans but only about 1% is currently protected. China
has announced a reduced economic growth target of about 5% this year at the
start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing, but the military spending
is to rise by more than 7%. Here's Viv Marsh. The coronavirus pandemic and the
now abandoned zero Covid strategy are casting a long shadow over China's
economy. Growth last year was just 3%, hence the caution with this year's
target. But defence spending is to rise by more than 7% this year, marginally up
on last year. Delivering the government's work report, the Premier Li Keqiang
said the armed forces should prioritise training under combat conditions. Mr. Li
and other officials and ministers are due to be replaced during the session by
politicians close to President Xi Jinping. Israel's seen the largest protests so
far against the government's planned judicial reforms. Up to 200,000 people took
to the streets with the most significant demonstration taking place in Tel Aviv.
Anna Aslam has the details. For the ninth week in a row, people took to the
streets with flags, banners and drums calling for democracy. The demonstrations
were largely peaceful, but footage showed some protesters in Tel Aviv breaking
down police barriers and igniting fires as they blocked major roads. The police
used water cannon to clear the crowds. There were also some clashes in
Jerusalem. Several opposition politicians spoke at the protests, voicing their
concerns about the government's proposed reforms. The changes would allow
ministers to choose Supreme Court judges and would limit the court's powers. The
Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation
on corruption allegations involving President Guillermo Lasso. The vote's non-
binding, but it could eventually lead to impeachment proceedings. The president,
a former banker, has experienced turbulent relations with Congress since he was
elected two years ago. Mr. Lasso's been accused of involvement in a corruption
scheme involving state-owned companies. World News from the BBC. At least five
people have been injured in Peru after the security forces opened fire against
indigenous protesters in the southern city of Juli. The city's police station
has been set on fire. Demonstrators across Peru have been demanding the
resignation of President Dino Buluarte, who replaced the left-wing leader Pedro
Castillo after he was impeached three months ago. Journalists have taken to the
streets in Guatemala to protest against censorship and government intimidation
after a judge ruled that eight reporters covering a high-profile trial should be
investigated for obstruction of justice, Leonardo Russia reports. The ruling was
announced on Tuesday as the editor of the prestigious El Periódico newspaper,
José Rubén Zamora, appeared in court for a hearing. Mr. Zamora, who has
published several reports on government corruption, was arrested seven months
ago and charged with money laundering. During the hearing, the judge opened a
new criminal proceeding against him and accepted the prosecutor's request to
investigate eight other journalists. The ruling caused outrage in Guatemala and
abroad. The British Prime Minister says he'll ensure that no one who arrives in
the UK illegally will be allowed to stay. Writing in a British newspaper, Rishi
Sunak described his determination to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small
boats. The government's expected to announce legislation in the coming week.
Critics say it could violate human rights. The Tunisian director Youssef Chabi
has won the top prize at the Pan-African Film and Television Festival, known as
FESPACO. His film, Ashkal, is a thriller set in an abandoned part of Tunis after
the fall of President Ben Ali in 2011. The awards for the second and third place
films went to two female directors, Burkinabe Apolina Traore for Syrah and
Angela Wamai from Kenya for Shimoni. BBC News. Hello, I'm Jackie Leonard and
you're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. An historic
agreement to protect the world's oceans has been approved by delegates after
long years of negotiations. It will be formally adopted after it's been
thoroughly vetted by lawyers. Nicola Clark is an oceans expert from the Pew
Research Centre and has been following the talks at the UN headquarters in New
York. It was an incredible moment to be in the United Nations. You know, we have
been working on trying to secure this treaty. We've been talking about this idea
for over 20 years and it took a lot of work. There's a lot of enthusiasm and
just general joy in the room that we finally were able to get it across the
finish line. Only about 1% of the high seas are currently protected. This high
seas treaty aims to extend that to 30% by 2030. Climate change, pollution and
overfishing have been having a detrimental effect on the oceans and the treaty's
goal is to reverse marine biodiversity losses. This agreement came after
marathon talks as our climate and science reporter Esme Stallard explained. It
was very hard work, not to mention this negotiation. We've been through 10 years
of negotiations to even get to this point. The most recent talks have been going
on for many, many hours since Friday morning so there is real excitement but
also just massive relief amongst the delegations. What was the big stumbling
block? Why did it take so long? The main stumbling block to this point has been
over the sharing of resources the oceans offer us. So richer nations have the
money, they have the technological capacity to go in and find those benefits the
oceans can offer us such as new drugs, but poorer nations wants to make sure
they also saw the benefits from that. They see the oceans as a common shared
resource. Obviously they have finally reached this agreement but we're talking
about an area, a huge area, which has hitherto pretty much been the Wild West of
free-for-all. So how will they monitor what goes on in these international
waters? Exactly, it's often said that we know more about space than we do about
the deep oceans. So the next step is actually getting the agreement ratified. So
what that means is that countries put it into their own law and then they'll
have to be a number of committees set up to actually implement this. But as you
said it's a massive area so they'll have to be a lot of funding put in place to
make sure that those regulations can be monitored in the deep sea. And that's
obviously discussions for different talks entirely? That's more talks to come,
probably a few more years but little baby steps. That was Esme Stallard. To
China now. China's annual parliamentary session opened with party members
clapping along as President Xi Jinping took his place front and centre. There
will be nine days of meetings during which President Xi Jinping will be
confirmed as president for a third term in office. He's also expected to tighten
his grip on power even further by replacing several officials and ministers with
loyalists. So what's the significance of this parliamentary session? A question
for our correspondent Stephen Macdonald in Beijing. Well it's kind of doing two
things. One is putting forward a plan to try to convince people that the
country's still in good hands coming out of the coronavirus crisis. That the
economy especially will move forward. There's a new GDP target of around 5%
that's seen as pretty modest really and that would be compared to say 3% that
was achieved last year. So growth not through the roof but much better than last
year. And Li Keqiang, the Premier, when he made this speech was going to great
pains to say we overcame great difficulties and challenges. We succeeded in
maintaining an overall stable performance last year and there's better things to
come. So the problem is of course is that many people wouldn't think it was that
overall good and stable last year. The prolonged use of these heavy-handed
restrictions to crack down on the coronavirus really smashed business and hit
the livelihoods of ordinary people. Took the shine off the government and
especially Xi Jinping, his reputation has been hit quite a bit by it. So they'll
be looking to turn this all around. But there is a big problem though in that as
part of this turnaround at this Congress, Xi Jinping's putting in all these
people into these senior roles who are very loyal to him and some analysts are
worried that this could be creating a bit of an echo chamber where he won't have
ministers, you know, the governor of the Reserve Bank or these types of people
giving him fearless and frank advice and then instead they'll just be too
worried to tell it like it is, if I could put it that way, to Xi Jinping. And at
this event you mentioned COVID. What are the other main priorities for
discussions over the next nine days of meetings? When you say discussions, I
mean people just sit there and receive information basically. It's a sort of
rubber stamp event really. Now that said, there are all sorts of topics that
come up, you know, defence spending, the new defence spending figure for
example, 7.2% for those who are interested. It's not like people are going to be
sort of discussing whether or not that's too much or not enough. They'll all
just be sort of nodding their heads and saying okay, all with Taiwan. Climate
change amelioration, you know, people's health insurance payments. All sorts of
things are referred to in various sessions at the Congress. Like I say, it's not
like there's a lot of debate going to happen or anything like that. That was
Stephen Macdonald in Beijing. In Ukraine there has been intense fighting around
the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. An estimated three to five thousand
civilians are still there out of an original population of around 75,000. They
are without gas, electricity or water supplies. The Russian army and Wagner
mercenaries are putting increasing pressure on Ukraine's soldiers to withdraw
from the shattered city. The latest analysis by British military intelligence
says Kiev's forces have been fortifying their positions and bringing in elite
units. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale is watching the situation from
the capital Kiev and explained how Ukraine's forces might attempt to withdraw
from Bakhmut with minimal casualties. All armies train on how to withdraw in a
strategic way. It's an action that requires its own defence, which is one of the
reasons why some people have been speculating that the recent reports of
reinforcements going in on the Ukrainian side are there actually to prepare for
some form of defence. That is only a speculation but that is one of the reasons
that some analysts have given for the possibility of why other Ukrainian forces
have been brought in. How important is Bakhmut? If the city does fall to Russia
what does that actually mean? That's the question mark that hangs over this. Why
is this battle being so hard-fought when, you know, Western analysts, Western
officials, Ukrainian, you know, commanders say that Bakhmut has no strategic or
little strategic value in itself. It's not a garrison town, it's not a transport
hub, it doesn't have a particular geography that allows, you know, armies to go
in and out. I think from the Russian side the Kremlin is simply desperate for
some kind of victory. It hasn't had one for a long time, it simply needs to have
some good news to sell back home. I think it is also hoping that if Bakhmut
falls then potentially that could be some sort of springboard to future
territorial gains elsewhere in the Donbas. Again that is challenged by military
experts. And then on the Ukrainian side it seems to be pretty straightforward.
They are using this battle to tie up Russian forces that could be elsewhere.
They're also using it to inflict as many losses on Russian forces as possible,
frankly to kill as many Russian soldiers as possible, to degrade its military
capability. And that's a very, very hard calculation to make because a lot of
Ukrainian soldiers are dying in the process. But the calculation that Ukrainian
commanders are making is that substantially more Russians are dying and that is
a price worth paying. But that is why the battle is so hard-fought. But it's
certainly at huge cost to both sides. James Landale in Ukraine. Iran has agreed
to allow UN officials to carry out further inspections of its nuclear program.
The UN nuclear watchdog chief Rafael Grossi says there's been a marked
improvement in his discussions with the Iranian government. He's been in Tehran
for talks following the discovery of uranium particles enriched to near weapons-
grade level. On Mr. Grossi's return to Vienna, where the International Atomic
Energy Agency is based, he said the agreement included tangible monitoring
measures and surveillance cameras would be reconnected. The only thing that
matters is that we are able to inspect, that we are able to account for every
gram of enriched material that is there. And this is the spirit of the of the
exchanges and we have been working satisfactorily in that regard. From Vienna,
here's our correspondent Bethany Bell. Iran and the IAEA have issued a joint
statement which says that Iran is prepared to give more information and more
access to UN nuclear inspectors who've been looking into past nuclear work by
Iran. And this announcement was made after a two-day visit by the head of the
IAEA, Rafael Grossi, and he said this included reinstalling monitoring equipment
in some sites, including cameras. Now the IAEA has also, in a separate
development, been concerned about the discovery of traces of highly enriched
uranium at one of Iran's underground nuclear site at Fordow. And the concern
about this is because weapons-grade enriched uranium is 90% and what was
discovered at Fordow was 84%. And we know now, Mr. Grossi says, that there will
be 50% more inspections at Fordow to try to get to the bottom of this. Iran says
that its nuclear program is peaceful, although it did acknowledge that there
could have been what it called unintended fluctuations at Fordow. Mr. Grossi
said he hoped that this was a new phase in relations between Iran and the IAEA.
He said he had got concrete steps that had been agreed here, but other countries
may be more skeptical saying that Iran has made such promises in the past and
not delivered. Will it deliver now is the big question. That was Bethany Bell in
Vienna, this is the BBC in London and Neil Nunez has some of the other stories
we're watching today. Two international Red Cross workers have been kidnapped
between the cities of Gao and Kidal in Mali, an area which has long been a
hotspot for violence by Islamist militias. Mali has been gripped by a security
crisis since 2012 and kidnappings are common, with motives including demands for
ransom and acts of reprisal against security operations by the government. A
Norfolk Southern train has derailed near Springfield in the US state of Ohio,
but the train was not carrying any hazardous materials and there are no reports
of injury. Another Norfolk Southern train derailed in East Palestine in Ohio on
February the 3rd, spilling toxic chemicals into the environment and forcing
thousands to evacuate their homes. And a series of severe snow storms and
ferocious winds have battered the south and midwest of the United States,
leaving a trail of damage and causing at least 12 deaths. Nearly half a million
people are still without power. With just a week to go until the Oscars,
Hollywood stars have been letting their hair down at the Independent Spirit
Awards in Santa Monica, California. These are the top honors in America for
independent movies that cost less than 30 million dollars to make, Wendy
Urquhart reports. It's an event on the awards calendar that everyone looks
forward to. The actors are jovial, the mood is light and nobody has to be on
their best behavior. The red carpet was awash with stars including Jamie Lee
Curtis, Michelle Yeoh, Cate Blanchett and Paul Mescal. Everything, Everywhere,
All at Once took top honors on the night, scooping seven of the top prizes at
the Independent Spirit Awards, including Best Feature Film, Best Director, Best
Supporting Performance and Best Lead Performance for Michelle Yeoh. The movie is
about a Chinese-American laundromat owner who's struggling to finish her taxes
when she swept into an alternate universe and the film is already at the center
of the Oscar buzz in Los Angeles. Elsewhere, Joyland was named Best
International Film and All the Beauty and the Bloodshed won Best Documentary.
Now Los Angeles is gearing up for the biggest bash of the year, but who will
take home the coveted Oscars will be kept firmly under wraps until March 12th.
That was Wendy Urquhart. Quick reminder of the main news, United Nations member
states have agreed on the basis of an unprecedented international treaty to
protect the high seas. This is the BBC World Service. And in fact that's where
we're parting company with the World Service and welcoming you to a new day here
on BBC Radio 4. Good morning from me Alan Smith and our studio manager Rob
Fanner. Ben Rich will be here with the early morning shipping bulletin in a
minute, then I'll be back with the news, a look at the Sunday papers and the
sport in news briefing. That's our buzz five. After bells on Sunday we'll have a
profile of Dame Angela Maclean, the Professor of Mathematical Biology who's just
been appointed the UK government's Chief Scientific Advisor. Profile is at a
quarter to six. But first let's take a look ahead to next Saturday when we'll
have a musical love story. On BBC Radio 4. And I've seen you. You're always
wheeling yourself around here. And I've seen you. Porgy reborn in the back
streets of South London. Don't make me beat down every door. You're my girl.
Featuring new music produced by the critically acclaimed artist Swindle. Roll
your dice, see where it lands. Performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra. Don't
tell me you're not like any other man Porgy. What else do you want? Nothing.
Bess loves Porgy. Kiss me again. Yes madam. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds beginning
next Saturday afternoon at 3. So now let's cross to the BBC Weather Centre with
Ben Rich. Alan thank you very much. Good morning. It is time for the shipping
forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard
Agency at 05.05 today Sunday the 5th of March 2023. There are warnings of gales
in Fair Isle, Faroes and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at midnight.
Low 50 miles east of Iceland 1022. Expected Fair Isle 1004 by midnight tonight.
High Rockall 1030 dissipating. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours Viking
north at zero south at zero east 40s. Northerly or northwesterly four to six
becoming cyclonic three to five later. Then northeasterly four to six later in
Viking. Squally snow showers good occasionally very poor. West 40s Cromarty
cyclonic three to five becoming variable two. Then cyclonic five to seven later
perhaps gale eights later in Cromarty. Showers turning to snow later moderate or
good occasionally very poor later. Forth Tyne Dogger northwest veering north
three to five then becoming variable two. Becoming west or southwest four to six
later showers becoming wintry good occasionally poor. Fisher German Bight
northwest four to six occasionally three later squally sleet or snow showers
good occasionally very poor. Humber Thames Dover northwesterly three or four
occasionally five in northeast Humber showers good. White Portland Plymouth
north or northeast backing northwest two to four showers good. Biscay east or
northeast two to four showers good. South Fitzroy cyclonic four to six rain good
occasionally poor. North Fitzroy Sol easterly three to five occasionally six in
northwest Fitzroy becoming variable two later in east showers good. Lundy
Farsnet north or northeast two to four backing northwest three to five showers
good. Irish Sea northwest three to five showers good. Shannon east becoming
variable two to four showers good. Rockall Malin northwest three to five veering
north four to six later showers good. Hebrides Bailey northwest three to five
veering north five to seven perhaps gale eights later in Hebrides showers
becoming squally turning to snow later good occasionally very poor later. Fair
Isle Faroes southern southeast Iceland cyclonic three to five becoming
northeasterly six to gale eight sleet then squally snow showers moderate or good
occasionally very poor. Northern southeast Iceland northwesterly veering
northeasterly six to gale eight squally snow showers moderate or good
occasionally very poor light icing. And now the weather reports from coastal
stations for 0400. Tyree Automatic northwest by west three 24 miles 1023
falling. Stornoway northwest two rain one and a half miles 1021 falling. Lerwick
north by east three more than 38 miles 1020 falling. Lucas west southwest three
19 miles 1021 falling. Bridlington northwest three 1022 falling. Sandetti Light
Vessel Automatic northwest by north four five miles 1022. Jersey east southeast
one 16 miles 1023 falling. Channel Light Vessel Automatic north three 1023. City
Automatic east by north two nine miles 1025 falling. Valencia east northeast two
24 miles 1026 falling. Ronaldsway north northwest one 1024 falling. Mallinhead
west by north three 22 miles 1024 falling. And now the weather forecast for the
inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24
hours issued by the Met Office at 0500 on Sunday the 5th of March. The general
situation a ridge of high pressure currently lying over southern and western
parts of the United Kingdom will gradually decline during Sunday. This will
leave most places in a northwesterly airflow with showers affecting many areas.
Colder air will follow southwards during Monday with showers in the north
becoming heavy and turning to snow. From Cape Wrath to Rattray Head including
Orkney Cyclonic four to six becoming variable three or less becoming west four
to six later then veering north five to seven later. Showers becoming squally
and turning to snow later moderate or good occasionally very poor later. Rattray
Heads to Berwick-upon-Tweed west veering northeast three to five becoming
variable two becoming southwest three to five later then veering northwest four
to six later. Showers becoming wintry later good occasionally poor later.
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby west or northwest veering north or northeast two to
four backing west or southwest three to five later showers good. Whitby to
Gibraltar Point west or northwest becoming variable later two to four showers
good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland westerly or northwesterly two to four
showers good. North Forland to Selsey Bill westerly or northwesterly two to four
showers good. Selsey Bill to Lime Regis north backing northwest two or three
occasionally four later fair then showers good. Lime Regis to Land's End
including the Isles of Scilly north or northeast two or three becoming variable
three or less then west or northwest two to four later fair then showers good.
Land's End to St. David's Head including the Bristol Channel variable three or
less becoming west or northwest three or four occasionally five later fair then
showers good. St. David's Head to Great Orm Head including St. George's Channel
northwest three or four occasionally two at first increasing five at times later
showers good. Great Orm Heads to the Mull of Galloway west or northwest three or
four becoming variable two at times then increasing five later near the Mull of
Galloway showers good. Isle of Man northwest three or four occasionally two at
first increasing five at times later showers good occasionally moderate.
Lockfoyle to Carlingford Lock west or northwest three or four occasionally two
at first increasing five at times later showers good. Mull of Galloway to Mull
of Kintyre including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel northerly or
northwesterly backing westerly for a time two to four occasionally five later
showers good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardnamurchan Point variable two or less at
first except near the outer islands otherwise northwest three or four veering
north four to six later showers good. Ardnamurchan Point to Cape Wrath
northwesterly three or four becoming variable two for a time in north veering
northerly five to seven later showers becoming squally and turning to snow later
moderate or good occasionally very poor later. Shetland Isles north four or five
becoming variable three becoming cyclonic five to seven later then becoming
north or northeast later snow showers becoming squally later moderate or good
occasionally very poor. And that completes this morning's Shipping Bulletin.
I'll be back with a general weather forecast in a few minutes. Thank you Ben.
This is BBC Radio 4. It's half past five on Sunday the 5th of March. Good
morning. This is News Briefing with Alan Smith. A landmark agreement to protect
the world's oceans has been reached in New York. Rishi Sunak has pledged to make
sure that people who arrive in the UK illegally are deported and in sport a
nail-biting win helps Arsenal keep their five-point lead in football's Premier
League. The United Nations has reached the first ever international agreement to
protect the world's oceans that lie outside national boundaries. Delegates from
UN countries cheered as the conference president Renner Lee announced the accord
had been finally signed in New York after 36 hours of continuous talks. The ship
has reached the shore. The deal comes after more than a decade of negotiations.
Environmental groups say it will help reverse marine biodiversity losses and
ensure sustainable development. Dr. Laura Meller from Greenpeace explained what
was at stake. The oceans are in crisis and it's overfishing, climate crisis,
pollution, changing the life and the very chemistry of our oceans. Scientists
say protecting at least 30% of the oceans by 2030 is what marine life needs to
be able to heal. Rishi Sunak has said he's committed to ensuring that no one who
arrives in the UK illegally will be allowed to stay. Writing in the Mail on
Sunday, the Prime Minister describes his determination to end small boat
crossings in the English Channel. The government is expected to table new
legislation in the coming week to try to tackle the issue, despite protests from
human rights charities. The Home Secretary Suella Braverman has addressed the
issue in the Sun on Sunday as our political correspondent Helen Catt explains.
Suella Braverman has said that it has to be that if you come here illegally you
will be detained and swiftly removed and what we're expecting to see in this
legislation when it goes to Parliament is that it will place a duty on her to
remove anyone who arrives from a small on a small boat either to Rwanda or to a
safe third country as soon as reasonably practicable. There are also expected to
be other measures like making the asylum claims of anyone who does come to the
UK using small boat crossings inadmissible and that they will be prevented from
claiming asylum while they are in the UK. Matt Hancock is facing claims he
wanted to use scare tactics to force people to comply with Covid lockdowns when
he was Health Secretary. In the latest leak of messages from the Sunday
Telegraph he talks to an aide about announcing a new variant of the virus in
December 2020 that would frighten the pants off everyone. Mr Hancock has
described the leaks as partial biased accounts to suit an anti lockdown agenda
and believes there's no public interest case for releasing the messages as
they'd already been passed to the independent Covid inquiry. Railfares in
England and Wales go up today by 5.9 percent, their steepest rise in more than
10 years. The increase will add hundreds of pounds to the cost of many annual
season tickets even though the government says it's intervened to keep the rise
below inflation. Donald Trump says he's planning on staying in the US
presidential race next year even if he's charged in connection with one of
several criminal investigations into his activities. Speaking at a conference of
conservative activists in Washington he said he was the only candidate he could
that could save America from as he said the zealots and fools of the mainstream
Republican Party. He told delegates he wanted to avenge his defeat in the 2020
election. In 2016 I declared I am your voice today I add I am your warrior I am
your justice and for those who have been wronged and betrayed I am your
retribution I am your retribution Pubs clubs and bars will be allowed to stay
open into the early hours over the coronation weekend. Venues across England and
Wales can serve customers for an extra two hours between Friday the 5th and
Sunday the 7th of May. That's the news we'll take a look at the Sunday papers in
a couple of minutes but first Ben's back with today's weather. Yes indeed thank
you good morning it is going to be quite a chilly feeling day today a lot of
cloud around there will be one or two showers most of the showers falling as
rain at this stage but as things turn even colder into the start of the new week
many of those showers will start to turn to snow but as far as today goes across
England and Wales most places are starting with extensive cloud cover. Through
the day that cloud will produce the odd shower here and there some heavy ones
potentially across Western England and Wales as we head through the afternoon.
For Northern Ireland and for Scotland here a lot of cloud around as well there
is a slightly better chance of that cloud breaking a little so a better chance
of seeing some spouts of sunshine but there will also be some showers mostly
falling as rain but perhaps over high ground in Scotland we will start to see
some sleet and some snow mixing in to the showers and for Shetland later in the
day we'll see some outbreaks of rain but also some snow starting to fall down to
sea level by the end of the day. Temperatures in Shetland just two or three
degrees at best elsewhere five to eight degrees so chillier than it was
yesterday then as we go through tonight we will see those outbreaks of rain and
snow in Shetland pushing southwards across Scotland getting into parts of
Northern Ireland and Northern England by the end of the night the snow mostly
over high ground but behind that in the north of Scotland snow showers coming
right down to sea level and some ice as well staying a little bit less chilly
for England and Wales briefly but as you go through Monday into Tuesday that
cold air sweeps southwards some of us seeing some snow showers particularly in
the north and east of the UK. Thank you Ben. We'll take a look at the overnight
sport news in a couple of minutes but first to first look at the Sunday papers
and the Mail on Sunday puts Rishi Sunak's pledge on illegal channel migrants on
its front page. Inside it says the new measures will challenge what it calls the
shocking misuse of asylum by people coming here through countries which are
safe. The paper reports that the new pledge has followed months of Whitehall
discussions about whether Britain could leave the European Convention on Human
Rights which provides the legal authority for most deportation challenges. Mr.
Sunak the paper says has concluded the key part of the convention could be
circumvented instead. The Sunday Express leads on the same story it says that
senior aides in the Home Office have been working in secret to drop legislation
which can slam a brake on what it calls the abuse of human rights laws to
frustrate attempts to deport illegal migrants. The Sunday Times though says the
first deportation flights to Rwanda may not happen for some time. It says the
government legal service suggests the scheme will be tied up in the courts for
more than a year. He's gone full Trump is the observers main headline. The paper
says support for Boris Johnson among senior Tories is draining away over his
response to an interim report which suggested there was significant evidence he
did mislead MPs over Partigate. It reports that several conservative grandees
reacted with disbelief as Mr. Johnson questioned the work of a cross-party
Commons committee investigating the issue. Allies of the former Prime Minister
accused the committee of staging a political show trial. According to the Sunday
Times thousands of Ukrainian children have been abducted and taken to Russia or
Crimea during the last year. It says a Yale University study estimated more than
6,000 children between 4 months and 17 years old were being held in various
camps across Russia. Ukrainian officials insist the figure is much higher.
Several front pages cover Prince Harry's virtual fireside chat to promote his
memoir. Harry's new blast at Charles is the Sunday Mirror's headline. The paper
reports that the Prince said he and the Royals just didn't speak the same
language. The Sun on Sunday quotes Harry as saying he was brought up in a broken
home. It says the Prince described his childhood as incredibly painful. And the
Observer covers the return of the veteran presenter Sir David Attenborough in
front of the cameras in a new BBC wildlife series next week at the age of 96.
The paper says that it understands that the show on British natural history Wild
Isles will be the last time viewers will see him filmed on location although his
spokesperson insisted he was definitely not stepping down. That's our look at
the papers. Sport now and in the Premier League Arsenal have kept their grip on
the top spot with a hard-fought game against Bournemouth. With that and the
other headlines here's Andy Barwell. The Arsenal manager Mikel Arteta said he
loved the initiative, the courage, their personality and the way his Premier
League pace setters made things happen. And it was Rhys Nelson who scored in the
seventh minute of added time as Arsenal fought back to beat relegation-
threatened Bournemouth 3-2 in a thrilling game at the Emirates Stadium. When the
ball came out the edge of the box I was thinking before it happened I was
thinking just please just give me one chance you know and the ball dropped in
the right area and I just put my foot through it you know and happy about it in
the back of the net. So Arsenal are top Manchester City they remain five points
back after beating Newcastle United 2-0 and with the week now between games Pep
Guardiola says he's looking forward to having two days off. Fourth place side
Tottenham Hotspur beaten 1-0 away at Wolves. Wesley Fofana scored his first
Premier League goal as Chelsea beat Leeds United also 1-0 and that was the same
score as Aston Villa defeated Crystal Panics. There's pressure mounting on David
Moyes at West Ham United who suffered their biggest defeat of the season in
losing 4-0 at Brighton. There's pressure too on Brendan Rodgers with Leicester
City now slipping into trouble they were beaten 1-0 at Southampton who moved off
the foot of the table. Today's Premier League action sees Nottingham Forest
attempt at Everton followed by clash between old rivals Liverpool and Manchester
United. They meet at Anfield we can hear now from the two managers in the moment
United's Eric ten Haag but first Liverpool's Jurgen Klopp. These results out
there they have really good performances top football and if it's not going that
well they still get results so that's why you are there. I'm looking forward I
know the ambience the atmosphere will be great will be hostile against us and we
like it. With Rangers beating Kilmarnock 3-1 in the Scottish Premiership the
leaders Celtic have seen their lead at the top cut back to six points going into
today's game with St Mirren. Dundee United boss Jim Goodwin said he was
disappointed to be struck by coins during his side's 3-1 loss at home to his
former club Aberdeen. It's Arsenal against Chelsea in the FA Women's League Cup
final at a sold-out Selhurst Park. The reigning Formula One world champion Max
Verstappen is on pole position for today's season opening Bahrain Grand Prix and
Laura Muir admitted she wasn't at her best going into this year's event but she
still claimed a record fifth European indoor athletics gold medal. Muir came
home first in the 1500 meters at this year's championships in Istanbul. Andy
Barwell now a look ahead to some of the items in the diary for later in the day
and President Biden is visiting Selma in Alabama on the 58th anniversary of the
city's bloody Sunday when 600 civil rights marchers were attacked by state
troopers and sheriff's deputies. Broadcast on television the incident helped
lead to voting reform which the marchers had been calling for and supporters of
the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin are expected to gather in Moscow and Gorky in
Georgia, his birthplace, to commemorate the 70th anniversary of his death. Polls
in Russia two years ago showed 45% of people expressing respect for the
dictator. And finally a glance back at some of the stories that were making the
news on this date in earlier years. Three years ago today the UK recorded its
first death from COVID-19. An elderly patient with an underlying condition died
in a hospital in Berkshire. In 2018 police declared a major incident in
Salisbury after doctors treating the former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his
daughter discovered they may have been poisoned with a dangerous substance.
Later the British government accused Russia of attempting to murder them with
the nerve agent Novichok. In 2008 Gordon Brown's government saw for conservative
attempt to force a referendum on the new European treaty drawn up to replace the
abandoned Constitution. David Cameron, the then opposition leader, said Mr.
Brown lacked the courage to put the new proposals to the public but Mr. Brown
insisted that being part of the EU was important for Britain. When will we not
wake up to the fact that three and a half million jobs are dependent on our
membership of the European Union, that 700,000 companies are trading with
Europe, that 60% of our trade is with Europe and all that is put at risk by
conservative intransigence on Europe. In 1946, less than a year after the end of
the Second World War, Winston Churchill coined the phrase the Iron Curtain
during a speech in the US and ten years earlier the Spitfire made its first test
flight from Eastley Aerodrome near Southampton. The fighter plane helped the RAF
win the Battle of Britain and that brings to a close today's news briefing. It's
time now for Bells on Sunday which this week comes from St. Peter's Church in
Henley in Suffolk. The church is a grade one listed building, the main body of
which dates from the 13th century. The tower houses a ring of eight bells by
various founders, the oldest of which were cast by the Bury St. Edmund's foundry
sometime in the late 15th century. The tenor bell weighs 800 weight and is tuned
to the note of A flat. We now hear the bells ringing Bristol Surprise Major by
members of the Suffolk Guild of Bell Ringers who celebrate their 100th
anniversary this year! Those were the bells of St Peter's Church in Henley in
Suffolk. This is BBC Radio 4. Now here's Mark Coles with Profile. Covid back in
the spotlight this week. Specifically, the advice scientists gave ministers
during the pandemic and whether it was acted upon. Fresh questions have been
raised about the judgement of the former Health Secretary, Matt Hancock, during
the Covid pandemic. It comes just as the government has announced the
appointment of its new chief scientific advisor, Sir Patrick Balance, replaced
by Angela Maclean, his former deputy. Next slide please. We have to turn to how
many people have died from Covid. And our first way of counting that is daily
Covid-19 deaths in hospital. Maclean making history, the first woman to hold the
position. She certainly doesn't suffer falls. Very curious, very exacting. What
you see is what you get. Relatively little known until now, so we thought we'd
do some digging. A word of warning from Angela Maclean's daughter, Rosie. She's
quite a private person. The Wikipedia page is not brimming with details. Tell me
about it. She was born in 1961, the third of four children to doctor parents.
Her father, Andre, was a professor of toxicology at UCL and still going strong
in his 90s. He's a natural scientist to his fingertips. Angela Maclean's
husband, David Van Os. And Angela's mother, Lizzie, also still going strong, was
a doctor and a psychiatrist. Her grandmother had been an actress in pre-Second
World War Berlin. Angela herself, born in Jamaica where her dad was researching
malnutrition among Jamaican children. She used to tell us stories about how she
would get to school in a basket on the side of a donkey. Beats backseat of the
school bus any day. Her parents moved back to South London while Angela was
still young, and by eight she'd become good friends with Alison Hindle, now,
rather conveniently for us, commissioning editor for drama here at Radio 4. The
pair of them bonding over trying to balance long bamboo canes on the tips of
their fingers. The sort of thing we used to do in the pre-TikTok era. I remember
how competitive Angela was, but also she wanted to know what movements would
disturb the cane more than other movements. And I like to think that that was an
early indication of her future inquiring mind. Sounds a bit harder than poo
sticks. Whenever I went round to their house, people were always talking about
educational subjects. It was not a sit around on the sofa watching telly kind of
environment. In fact, I think there may not have been a television. Not no Top
Cat or Scooby Doo. At 18 she was off to Oxford University to study maths. To
her, maths was a language and a philosophy and a way of thinking, not just sort
of adding up sums and doing fractions. It's her world view. And an all-consuming
one, recalls close friend Catherine Innes Carr, who was studying chemistry back
then. We liked to think of ourselves working late into the night, pushing back
the frontiers of science. So, willing to cross the traditional arts-science
divide to find love. Eh, David? She read maths at Somerville. I read English at
Trinity. So we are the living embodiment of C.P. Snow's two cultures. Had to
Google that one. The university drama group where the two cultures, the two
students came together. He was a very keen theatre designer as a student and she
had got her eye on him and decided that she would volunteer to help with various
bits of theatre design in order to be in his company. And it paid off. Alison
shared a flat with Angela at the time. Began to notice some unusual habits. When
she was particularly pleased about something, I remember she would do a little
jig, sort of jumping up and down on the spot. And if things didn't go to plan…
She would sometimes vent her tension by throwing things at the wall. Come again?
And then she would get up and throw a cup at the wall. By the time we left that
flat there were dents in the plaster. Hope their landlord isn't listening. After
graduating with a degree in maths and plate smashing she went to do a PhD at
Imperial College London where she met fellow student Graham Medley. We started
our PhDs on the same day in the same office. Graham, now Professor Medley, a
leading expert on infectious disease modelling, remembers her thesis on measles
being pioneering work. She came up with the idea of something that's now called
the honeymoon period. So this is the point of where you start vaccinating
against a disease like measles and the disease essentially disappears for a long
period of time but then comes back later because of the build up of susceptibles
within the modelling. You're losing me slightly, Graham. WHO and other groups
had said, oh look, the vaccine's not working anymore but in fact it's just a
consequence of the way in which diseases transmit. I see. And that idea of the
honeymoon period is now firmly embedded in the literature and taught to
undergraduates all the way through so it was a very successful PhD. Angela and
David wed in 1986, their honeymoon in Alaska, and followed that with a hike
across Corsica. And before long Angela was settling down to do research
fellowships at Oxford University and the prestigious Pasteur Institute in Paris.
Now we're being told the Ministry of Agriculture vets strongly suspect that a
case of foot and mouth disease has been found in southern Derbyshire. After the
2001 outbreak of foot and mouth disease, Maclean sat on a government committee
looking into how to prevent future infectious diseases in livestock. She co-
authored a book on SARS, a respiratory disease caused by another coronavirus,
and chaired a group of experts trying to come up with policies to reduce the
risk of future pandemics. When she first started in that area I remember kind of
feeling, oh well that's intellectually interesting but when would it ever have
any practical application? How wrong was I? Indeed, we'll get to Covid-19 in a
bit. She also did groundbreaking research into HIV-AIDS, persevering to crack
one of the biggest puzzles about the illness. Trying to explain the long
incubation, relatively long incubation period of that virus where people
typically develop AIDS sort of many years after infection. Professor Graham
Medley again. One of Angela's major talents is being able to understand what she
doesn't know and what other people don't know and then work on it, work out to
actually resolve that question. In 2008 she became a senior research fellow in
theoretical life sciences at All Souls College Oxford. The following year she
was elected to the Royal Society, the oldest independent scientific academy
still in existence, made up of some of the world's most eminent minds. Daughter
Rosie again. I remember that being a really big moment and also kind of that,
you know, I had a pretty awesome mum. Up until that point regarded not as a top
scientist but just mum, albeit a slightly odd one who would encourage her
children to extract the DNA of peas at the kitchen table before tea. That was
pretty fun. I bet. I remember lots of sciencey craft projects. Inner element
when it came to organising Rosie's younger brother's Harry Potter themed
birthday party. McLean assuming the role of potions master at Hogwarts School of
Witchcraft and Wizardry. My mum set up the kind of the potions lab and it had
this experiment. You would sort of stir some chemicals together and this liquid
would go from see-through liquid to dark blue and then you stirred it again and
it went back to see-through and it was just stuff like that, you know, she was
always finding fun stuff for us to do and enjoying it just as much herself.
She's also a bit of a twitcher, goes bird watching, walking most weekends with
her friend Catherine Innes Carr. The pair of them early risers up with the dawn
chorus. Often it'll start with one or other of us messaging at about five and
saying, shall we go? And shall we go at six or shall we go at seven? We go in
all weathers and she's very, very observant, so much better at spotting a
kingfisher than I am. Oh look, there's one. They call you Lady Luck. She's still
keen on theatre, musicals too. It wasn't just a ploy to get her man. In fact
we're going to see Guys and Dolls on Friday, so if I burst into tune please
forgive me. So what about work? What do Angela Maclean's colleagues make of her?
She has very strong views. She has a backbone. Cecile Fabre is a senior politics
research fellow at All Souls College and has known Maclean since 2014. And when
she disagrees with you, she's able to communicate that very clearly. She has a
very low tolerance threshold. In 2019 she joined the army, well sort of, became
the MOD's chief scientific advisor. Thought of Rosie again. She loves kind of
folk songs, carol singing and singing out loud, campfire songs. She really loves
that song Something Stupid. Has been known to do something stupid on occasions.
She once accidentally burnt her eyebrows off setting up a bonfire. She does it
in petrol. And then we all stood far back and she explained fire safety and
threw a match on, which didn't catch. And I think she threw another one on and
leant over the bonfire, struck a match and it obviously then flumped up and she
burnt off her fringe and she burnt off her eyebrows. Luckily she was fine. And
if the photo on her Wikipedia page is anything to go by, the eyebrows have grown
back. She started her role at the MOD in September 2019 and the job meant she
became a member of SAGE just weeks before Covid-19 happened. One of my
colleagues said to me at the time, the country is very lucky to have Angela in
that position at that time. She and Professor Medley co-chairing SAGE's crucial
SpyMO sub-committee, giving ministers expert advice on modelling and
epidemiology. Angela's job was really to manage the results of what the
committee was saying inside government, so taking it to policy makers to make
sure that the modelling and the science that was being done was being understood
and being considered carefully by policy makers. Care to expand on that, Graham?
Tell us what sort of response she got? No, not with the inquiry going on. Angela
Maclean's role, that relationship between scientists and government ministers,
likely to be central to the upcoming official inquiry into how the pandemic was
managed. All sounds rather dramatic, doesn't it, Alison? She was extremely
discreet about it at the time, but there was a tension for her between the
scientific observations that she and her team had made and what the government
might have preferred to be being said. So what about Maclean's husband, David?
What did he think? It was the biggest opportunity to put science at the heart of
government decision-making that she's ever had, and I think she found it quite
exciting as well as very stressful. Presumably frustrating as well, because not
everybody gets the science, do they? No. And I mean, you know, so things like
exponential doubling, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and soon you get to a very big number.
That's really important to understand if you've got a disease that's doubling
every five days. And I think all the scientists felt the same way, that you've
got to deal with the situation as it is. The Sir Patrick Valences deputy,
Maclean would sometimes find herself stood next to the Prime Minister, taking
part in the government's daily 5pm Covid briefing. And what you see is that
deaths in the UK is still continuing to climb and is higher than we would wish,
I think is all I can say. Her daughter Rosie adjusting to seeing her mum on the
telly. I was just incredibly proud. One of my friends said to me, if anyone is
going to be doing that job, I'm really glad it's your mum, because she's a no-
nonsense woman. There were some in government, as well as the public at large,
who felt that the scientists went too far, used mathematical modelling to put
forward worst-case scenarios that didn't always turn out to be accurate. Not
fair, says husband David. You had a highly infectious disease and her
contribution was the result of 20 years of thinking about it, but also 20 years
of giving advice to government on science policy. Right place at right time, I
hope. And so to the top job. How does friend Alison Hindle reckon Maclean will
fare as government chief scientific advisor? I think she will be a very clear-
minded advisor to the government and I hope for the government's sake they
listen to her. Professor is temperamentally direct, so if speaking truth unto
power is important and good for inner democracy, then I think she'll deliver on
that. The only thing Angela Maclean might need to work on is getting used to the
limelight that inevitably comes with the job. Yeah, well, we are having a small
party on Sunday lunchtime to celebrate her success. Nice. If she's hiding in a
cupboard under the stairs, I'll know that the profile is just a step too far.
It's over, Angela. You can come out now. The profile was presented by Mark
Coles. The producer was Sally Abrahams. We'll have the news next and then Samira
Ahmed will be reflecting on what it means to be part of a crowd in this
morning's Something Understood. First though, a look ahead to Wednesday morning.
There are over one and a half million postcodes in the UK. The Patch on BBC
Radio 4. We randomly pick one out. So which one do I press? Clear the random
postcodes? And uncover a story there you probably wouldn't have heard about.
They can't get the staff to put them here, let alone a new prison with 700 more
staff. He said we know exactly what's up there. We're looking for something that
shouldn't be up there. The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. When the police lock
these people up, who looks after them? Well, it's prison officers and it's all
done unseen. On Wednesday morning.