TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock, time for Saturday PM with Reginae
Wadyanathan. Hello there. A meeting of the world's largest economies in India
exposes deep rifts over the war in Ukraine. We will stand with Ukraine in its
fight for as long as it takes. The D20 has to condemn the aggression of Russia
against Ukraine. Hundreds march through the streets of Omar to condemn the
shooting of a senior police officer. I've seen enough in my lifetime and I
really don't want my children to see it in the future. We are united together
and people like that just need to go away. The attacks stirred up memories of
the troubles. We'll speak to a trauma specialist. And how do you turn a cooking
show into a West End musical? I don't want people to think it's spoofing soggy
bottoms and things like that. That would be a pantomime. We've done something
much more heartfelt and real. We'll ask the co-writer of the Great British Bake
Off musical with the BBC News, Alan Smith. The UK and the European Union appear
to be on the brink of finalising a new deal on post-Brexit trading rules for
Northern Ireland. A Downing Street source has described talks as positive, while
the Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadka said they were inching towards a
conclusion, but there was still a gap to be closed. The current agreement means
goods arriving in Northern Ireland from Great Britain are subject to checks. The
arrangement is opposed by the Democratic Unionist Party, which is blocking
power-sharing at Stormont until changes are made. Our political correspondent
Ione Wells reports. The essence of a new deal between the UK and the EU over
trading arrangements for Northern Ireland is basically there. Discussions
between both sides are now focusing on its unveiling and presentation. The
government is briefing politicians and business stakeholders about it. King
Charles was also due to meet the President of the European Commission Ursula von
der Leyen in the UK today. Downing Street and the Palace claim this was
cancelled due to operational reasons unrelated to the political talks, but her
planned visit to the UK indicates a deal was about to be publicly presented
while she was here. Marches and rallies have taken place in County Tyrone in
support of a police officer critically wounded by government on Wednesday. Five
people have been arrested in connection with the attack on Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell in Oma. Police say their investigation is focused on the
dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Julian Fowler reports from Oma. John
Caldwell was coaching an under-15 football team when he was shot and critically
injured. Around a thousand people gathered at his club, Bearer Swifts, to march
in a show of solidarity for him and his family. They were led by young people
from the club, some of whom witnessed the attack and were joined by members of
sporting organisations from across the community, including the local Gaelic
Football Club. So when there's an attack, like a Wednesday night... A rally was
also held in the centre of Oma, a town that is all too familiar with the
violence of the Troubles. 25 years after 29 people and unborn twins died in a
dissident Republican car bomb. Voting has officially closed in general elections
in Nigeria, but long queues remain at many polling stations as millions of
people wait to cast their ballots. Officials have apologised for delays
affecting the country's most competitive election since the end of military
rule. They blamed logistical and security problems with criminal gangs trying to
disrupt voting at several polling stations. G20 finance ministers meeting in
India have failed to agree a closing statement because of differences about the
war in Ukraine. India said Russia and China had objected to parts of the
document condemning Russian aggression. India had been determined to use its
presidency of the group to champion the needs of developing nations. But
divisions about Ukraine dominated, with the United States and Britain determined
to reaffirm their support for Kyiv and push for sanctions. South Africa's
finance minister, Enoch Gorongwana, said that would be difficult. We're
wrangling over the wording, how do we word the Ukraine-Russian situation? But
the chairs find a comfortable position of addressing that, acknowledging that
the majority of the countries, where do they stand and what are the difference
other countries are? A new earthquake measuring 5.3 has been reported in central
Turkey. Officials say the tremors could be felt in the capital, Ankara. There
are no reports of casualties. Just weeks ago, nearly 50,000 people were killed
in huge earthquakes that struck southern Turkey and northern Syria. Two bodies
have been found in the search for crew members of a tugboat that capsized in the
Firth of Clyde yesterday. A major search and rescue operation, including divers,
was launched after the boat sank. It's understood only two people were on board.
And a letter written by Neil Tennant from the Pet Shop Boys thanking Radio 1's
Janice Long for playing the band's debut single in 1984, has been discovered in
a record shop in Altringham. The note was tucked into the sleeve of a 12-inch
copy of West End Girls that the shop's owner bought in a job lot of vinyl at an
auction. Thanks, Alan. For the last few days, finance ministers from the G20
Group of Major Economies have been gathering in the South Indian city of
Bangalore. The choreography of these meetings isn't usually that newsworthy.
They meet, dine and mingle. Then a joint statement's released. But today we
didn't get one. The hosts, India, said Russia and China had objected to parts of
the document condemning Russian aggression. After the meeting closed, India's
Prime Minister Narendra Modi, whose government has not openly criticised Russia
for the invasion, called for more dialogue. Since the events in Ukraine, India
has laid emphasis on resolving this dispute through dialogue and diplomacy.
India is ready to contribute to any peace process. But Spain's finance ministers
have been But Spain's finance minister, Narendra Modi, whose government has not
openly criticised Russia for the invasion, called for more dialogue. Since the
events in Ukraine, India has laid emphasis on resolving this dispute through
dialogue and diplomacy. India is ready to contribute to any peace process. But
Spain's finance minister, Nadia Calvino, was more blunt about the tension
between member countries. Discussions are getting more difficult as the war goes
on. I asked our correspondent in Bangalore, Leila Nathu, to explain the
divisions. According to India, it was Russia and China who raised objections to
any mention of the war in Ukraine being included in any concluding statement. So
Russia and China objected to the fact that finance ministers and central bank
governors, who were the ones convening here in Bangalore this weekend, should be
drawn into any kind of political situation. Now, the context of this is a G20
meeting under the presidency of India who didn't want to talk about Ukraine, who
wanted to talk about all the things that it wanted to champion, the needs of
developing nations, things like debt relief, sustainable growth, food security.
And then you had the G7 nations, those wealthier economies within the G20, who
actually wanted to steer the conversation towards Ukraine. And what's the mood
there now in Bangalore because of a G20 finance summit that's sort of been left
hanging? Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of pride in India that it is taking
on this presidency of the G20, you know, that it has the opportunity to shape
the agenda. But of course, there is a wider international political context. And
I think it was very stark here to see the differences, what the US and UK
particularly wanted to talk about, and being very clear that they wanted to see
strong condemnation of Russia as an outcome. You mentioned the US and the UK.
What more have we heard from their representatives? Well, I spoke to the
Chancellor Jeremy Hunt yesterday as the meeting was underway. And he was very
clear again that his message was about Ukraine. You know, he talked about the
fact that by not addressing global security issues, there couldn't be progress
on any other challenges facing the global economy. So he said that everything
was kind of connected to this and this was at the root of it. And he talked
about making the argument here. Two other countries that that should be the
position and trying to sort of win over countries who were less strident in
their condemnation. So, you know, the US and UK, I think, came here with very
clear aims. Of course, conversations in private would have taken place about
broader economic issues and things that India wanted to talk about as well. But
certainly in public, the message they were portraying was trying to rally
support for Ukraine. And in fact, they had their own G7 meeting on the sidelines
of this summit in which they promised more sanctions and talked about more
financial support for Ukraine. So I think sort of two things going on in
parallel here and certainly a bit of a divide between the G7 countries and the
G20 as a whole and actually just exposing how difficult it is in this context.
Well, earlier I spoke to Thomas Matusuk, a senior adviser at Flint and the
former German ambassador to India. I began by asking him if it was strange for a
communique not to be agreed upon at a G20 meeting. I think it is rather unusual.
India sees itself as a global player, as one of the most important countries in
the world, who refuses to be drawn into any camp. This is one reason. The other
reason is that India traditionally always had a soft spot for the Soviet Union
and for Russia. Because whenever India was in trouble, it was the Soviet Union
at their side and the US and the West were always on the other side, like in the
three wars against Pakistan. Furthermore, I think India shares the view in many
parts of the global South that the West is overdoing the importance of this, as
they see a European conflict and don't pay enough attention to the big issues of
the South, like hunger, for instance. And finally, don't forget, this closeness
to Russia pays off for India quite handsomely because they get a lot of very,
very cheap energy from Russia now that the sanctions of the West are in place.
It's not surprising, though, that Russia and China didn't sign a statement
condemning the war in Ukraine. Well, that's true because Russia, of course, is a
part of Russia, Russia is the aggression and China is very close to Russia
without taking the final step. I think at the moment, China is in a very
comfortable position. They see that the US is heavily engaged in Europe, taking
its eye to a certain degree of Taiwan. So this is good news. But there is one
game changer that goes for India and for China. Should Russia resort to a
nuclear strike, then I think India and China would come out very much against
it. Now, looking at this statement from India, which is the G20 chair, so it's a
summary of the meetings. Of course, it's not the communique that many expected.
It says in that the G20 is not the forum to resolve security issues. How
relevant is a body like the G20? Of course, it's more focused on tackling
economic crises, but it is a body of countries that come together and try and
solve some of the world's problems. Well, I mean, you just said it. The sheer
fact that these leaders of these important 20 countries sit together and talk
about these things is of certain value in its own. And I think what members of
the G20 should not do, trying to overload the circus. I think it's already a
huge achievement that they talk about all sorts of things that I'm quite sure
behind closed doors. Of course, they talk about security issues. It would be
ridiculous, but you don't see it in a communique. Has this war rendered bodies
like the G20, though, ineffective now, if you can't come up with any sort of
agreement like that? No, I don't think ineffective. I think it shows, especially
in crisis like these, that you need these fora, you need these channels, you
need these informal channels in order to talk about these things. So I think it
would be a situation which would be much, much worse if the G20 didn't exist.
The Texas have been granted more time to question four of the five men arrested
in connection with the shooting of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in
Omar on Wednesday. The police officer was attacked as he finished a coaching
session for an under-15s team at a local football club. Hundreds attended a
rally today to condemn the shooting. From the bottom of my heart, you're very
welcome here and we really, really, really appreciate the support that you've
been giving us. Thank you very much for coming. It is a feeling for the
children. It's just, it's not good enough. I've seen enough in my lifetime and I
really don't want my children to see it in the future. We're part of the
community, so just needed the way together and show our support together. No
part of the community wants to see this. We are united together and people like
that just need to go away. Police believe those responsible were from the new
IRA, one of a number of dissident Republican groups. It's no surprise people
across Northern Ireland have reacted so strongly. It's 25 years since an IRA
bombing in Omar took the lives of 29 people, the single biggest attack of the
near 30-year conflict in Northern Ireland, the suffering from which is still
felt today. Well, Sandra Peak is the CEO of Wave Trauma Centre, which provides
support for people impacted by the troubles in Northern Ireland. Thank you for
joining us this afternoon, Sandra. Thank you. How do you help people through
this sort of sudden shock, particularly in a place which has gone through deep
trauma before? Well, for many years, we're over 30 years in existence and we
provide a range of therapeutic and support services to people who have been
bereaved and injured, people who have witnessed incidents, people who have the
psychological trauma of witnessing or indeed been directly affected themselves.
And I think that if you look really in the history of trauma, that trauma work
goes through periods of attention and periods of forgiveness. And certainly, I
think in Northern Ireland, we have grown a lot in relation to having a better
understanding about how trauma affects the community and why services need to be
in place. I mean, essentially over the history of the troubles, sadly, many
people cope through silence and we had families silent, we had communities
silent. And our statutory services, our health services were also silent too.
And that has brought a tsunami of people to wave now many years later. But I
think that at a wider level, our awareness, our knowledge in relation to how
trauma impacts upon individuals, young people, older people, you know, it's very
important today. And I think it's of benefit and abuse when, sadly, when
incidents such as this arise. You talk there about silence, people not speaking
for years. How does your organisation open up a conversation and how's that
conversation been going this week? Well, I mean, people are coming to us all the
time, Regina. We normally would have had around 600, 650 new people into wave
each year looking for services from the ages of four to maybe into their
mid-90s. What we have found the last number of years, certainly for the last two
years, is those referrals have doubled because it was a very detrimental impact
of Covid, because Covid rendered people back into their homes, back in without
all the support structures they had in place, maybe the structure of work, the
structure of friends, all the things that they did. And what happened was people
then had more time to really think and to reflect and to dwell on the past and
referrals to wave have doubled over the last two years. The events this week
have brought back into sharp focus, threat and fear. We can see that members of
the security forces, ex-members of the security forces who may have had attempts
in their lives or indeed their families have been directly affected, that
they've really struggled because this brings into sharp focus how violence can
be visited on us without warning. Just really, you know, and it takes people
back to the vulnerability. And here is a man who was coaching football with
children. You know, it's unspeakable to think of anybody going in to harm him,
never mind to do it in front of children and the wider exposure in relation to
that. But that's the sad reality of life that's been here when you talk to
families, your people whose loved ones were killed visiting hospitals to see
their newborn child or indeed maybe in relation to being at church or indeed in
hospital or, you know, standing at a wedding. There was no sacred place here in
Northern Ireland through the troubles when quite some people were protected from
the threat that something could happen. So, you know, that brings it into very
sharp focus this week in relation and people are reliving what has happened and
what we've seen, Regina, certainly I saw really through Wednesday and later
Wednesday into Thursday was that some family, some clients then retreated back
and became very fearful again and really, I'm worried about coming forward. And
just briefly, Sandra, what do you think needs to be done, perhaps by politicians
or other people to help people tackle this kind of violence and get through it?
Well, I think we saw political unity this week and that is really important and
people standing together. I think when we listen to your interviews for a moment
today, you can hear people saying, we do not want to go back here. We do not
want to revisit it and I think there's a very clear indication. Obviously, these
are a small group of people, a small minority of people, but they can go beyond
to disrupt things and to bring fear back into our community. And, you know, and
I also think that we need to think carefully about how the legacy of the past is
addressed because how the government addresses the legacy of the past affects us
for the future. Okay. So I think as a society and as a community, we need to
work together to tackle this. Sandra Peak from the Wave Trauma Centre. Thank you
very much for joining us. It's 5.19. A new earthquake measuring 5.3 was reported
today in central Turkey with tremors felt in the capital Ankara. Turkish and
Syrian authorities have now confirmed that more than 50,000 people were killed
in the huge earthquake which hit their countries at the start of this month.
Millions have lost their homes and remained displaced. Our correspondent, Laura
Bicker and her team have been with aid workers on the ground and in the air as
they try to get help to those who need it. Aid that took time to arrive is now
in full flow. Tents, food, medicine are all passed along a line of soldiers and
volunteers then crammed on board flight after flight. More than 100 aircraft
leave here every day. Our helicopter is stacked full before we take off over the
mountains to get an idea of the scale of this disaster. This is by far the
biggest logistical operation Turkish forces have ever faced. The fault line that
they're having to cover is over 100 kilometres long. Ten cities are in a state
of emergency and then there are remote communities scattered across the
mountain. And the biggest thing people need right now are these tents and it
takes up a bit of room in a helicopter. On the southern coast in the hillside
village of Kabsuyu they've waited for more than two weeks for tents. Hamza
Sevartoda's shelters have finally arrived after yet another big tremor on
Monday. Our water is disconnected. We have no electricity. Our situation is
dire. We can't communicate. Our phones have no signal inside the village. We
don't know what's next. Will they build houses? Will they demolish our homes?
Will they take us elsewhere? We don't know what we will do. Gonal shows us
around her house. It's still standing. Just. But the cracked concrete means the
roof over her bedroom is at an angle. It's not safe. We live in fear. We can't
sleep well at night. When the quake happens we suddenly wake up. What can we do?
We can't go outside either. It's cold. There's nothing that can be done. Her
daughter was killed when the first earthquake struck the city of Antakya on
February 6. They've buried her here in the village. The tents are temporary.
Gonal told us she needs a new home. There have been major challenges to overcome
to help people let Gonal. Airports are damaged and landing in remote areas has
been difficult. Some of these guys have been flying over a thousand hours since
this earthquake. They say they've been going non-stop. One of the things they've
been telling us is the view they had as they first flew into the earthquake-
affected areas. The casualties that they had to evacuate. Some of them have
incredibly harrowing stories and they're still keeping going. Aid is now getting
to most who need it. But this operation is a short-term fix. The long-term plan
to help the tens of thousands of people left homeless in this crisis is still
unclear. Or a bit of reporting there. Now here at PM we like to follow up on the
big stories for the latest developments. So here's an update on Thor. Thor the
Walrus. He's the one who was spotted on the south and east coast of England in
December. After leaving UK shores there was a sighting of him in Iceland
yesterday. Julia Cable is the Director of Operations at the British Divers
Marine Life Rescue. She tracked Thor during his visit to the UK. He was first
noticed around Dieppe in France at the beginning of December. On the 11th of
December he turned up down in the south of England. He turned up around
Portsmouth. He hung around on this little beach area there till early afternoon.
Then on the 31st of December he turned up in Scarborough. He hung around in
Scarborough on the 31st for probably I think it was around 24 hours. Then just
as he did before he disappeared off again. Then on the 3rd of January he turned
up in Blythe on the northumberland border. Again he hung around for another 24
hours or so and then just disappeared again. How do you actually know that this
particular Walrus that's been spotted in Iceland is actually our very own Thor?
Much the same sort of technique that we use to identify grey seals. The markings
on animals like that are individual. A bit like our own sort of fingerprints.
They will have their own specific markings. The photographs that were taken of
him when he was in the UK have been matched up with photographs that were taken
of him in Iceland. Through those photographs we've been able to pull out certain
sort of identifying marks on his skin. Right. I'm just looking at a picture of
Thor on the BBC website. He's a good looking Walrus. What do you think happens
to him now? Where's he likely to head to? Hopefully he will just keep heading up
and he'll find himself where he should be. Colder climates. He's about a 7 year
old male. He should be starting to spend more time with other Waruses. He's
still fairly immature but at some point he will need to go and find his own
kind. Now there used to be Walruses in Iceland but they're extinct there now. So
this is an especially big deal. Well it's a kind of big deal for them to be down
in our waters. We've had three now turning up in the last few years. We just
need to accept now that we are going to be seeing more of this sort of species
turning up in odd places. They shouldn't be down here. We don't really know
where Thor or any of the others had started off but thankfully they don't stay
here for too long. Wally a couple of years ago was a little bit different but
Thor thankfully has just sort of visited and left. So hopefully he will not come
back to us any time soon. 5.25. Greasy muffins, soggy bottoms and the big white
tent. We're not talking about the next series of the Great British Bake Off but
the Great British Bake Off Musical which opens tonight at London's West End.
It's been five years in the making but why turn Bake Off into a stage show? I
asked Jake Brunga, one of the writers. The thing about the Bake Off tent is that
it's the perfect vessel. It's a fantastic precinct location for people of many
different backgrounds and ages and sexualities and classes to come together and
show not just the skill they have for baking but about how their friendship
develops between them which is just, that's an ultimately musical theatre story.
How do you make it, you know, a show of two halves with 16 songs? Well I always
knew that there would have to be the sort of iconic characters that we all know
and love from the series. There's always normally a sort of elder granny type
who bakes for her grandchildren and there's always a pretty young girl who
studies at Cambridge University. But I knew that in this show I could dig into
some quite serious subjects as well. My sister was widowed when she was 29 and
she joined a baking group as sort of, you know, something to do I guess. And
then she joined an organisation called Widowed and Young where she met a widowed
man who she fell in love with. And I've managed to sneak that storyline into the
show with a character called Ben who has a daughter that he brings with him and
he meets a carer who's been caring for her mum. And so it's really about how
grief and bereavement sort of draws these people together. We have a Syrian
teenager character. I went and met a fantastic group of Syrian teenagers at
school in North London to influence that story. So it really is a big tent. Yes,
very much. And you actually have a tent that is almost like the Bake Off tent on
the stage with the bunting and everything. Of course, and it lights up. It does
very clever things. But if my dad was on your show, I know he would kill it.
People say he's a baking pro. So he'd definitely win it. But he needs a
makeover. Bake Off please take over. Stop him from wearing his denim and plaid.
So tell us about some of these songs. There's 16 of them which is quite a lot.
This is the perfect chance where everyone gets the chance to tell their story. I
think I'm making it sound like it's full of ballads. It's full of fun as well.
There's a character called Izzy in a song called Obviously where she talks about
her sort of secret inner desire to win. Always the straightest student item come
in second place. If there's a marathon, believe me, I'm gonna win that race.
There's lots of lovely like fun duets. There's big company numbers, but it's not
a show that is just about, I don't want people to think it's spoofing soggy
bottoms and things like that the whole way through. That would be a pantomime.
We're not doing that. We've done something much more heartfelt and real and just
life affirming. You did mention though the innuendos that are part of Bake Off.
It's a part that we all love as well. How have you managed to weave those things
into the musical when you've also got some really serious societal issues there?
Well, that's the thing. I mean, even the most serious musicals. Look at Les Mis
and Miss Saigon. There are those characters and moments of real humor too. And
of course, this is what drew me to the project was that I can have all of the
fun that, you know, that you'd expect from Bake Off while sneaking those stories
in. So it's really got everything. That whole phrase, you know, your laugh, your
cry. Can you turn any reality show into a musical? Can we see Love Island, Big
Brother? What about Mastermind? We were wondering in the office. Well, do you
know what? Bake Off was originally commissioned under the documentary Arm of the
BBC, not under reality. And they don't think of it as being a reality show.
People don't phone in. They don't vote people off. It's very much that they
consider it that a baking competition could happen anywhere. I don't think I
will be turning my life career into reality TV show. So no PM the musical. Oh,
who would you like to play you? This is my first one. Oh, wow. And that is quite
a finale for my first PM. Well, that's all for the programme today. Our
producers were Ayula Adenji and Andrew McNair. Our editor was Daniel Kramer.
Studio direction by Sarah Kimberley. Paddy will be back here tomorrow with
broadcasting house at 9am tomorrow. I'm Regina Vivian Arden. Thanks very much
for joining us. This is BBC Radio 4. Now it's time for Political Thinking with
Nick Robinson. Hello and welcome to Political Thinking. My guest this week shows
how one person armed only with passion, determination and a mobile phone can
force politicians, regulators and companies to listen. Cuégio Tueñaboa tweeted
pictures of the terrible state of the flat in which he and his sisters lived and
in which his father died. He was riddled with damp and mould and infested with
cockroaches and mice. He enlisted neighbours on his South London estate to his
fight for decent living conditions and thanks to a growing media profile, now
helps people in social housing all over the country. Cuégio is just 24 years old
and only graduated from university this week. Cuégio, welcome to Political
Thinking. Thank you for having me on. And congratulations on graduating. Thank
you. Can you take in how much your life has changed in the past couple of years?
No, when I do get the opportunities to sit back and actually think about it, it
does blow my mind that all of this happened in such a short space of time. I
mean, 18 months or thereabouts and I always wanted it to progress in that way
because of the cause. Did I think it would happen so soon? Absolutely not. So it
has been a complete 180 of where I was only a few years ago. Well, we're going
to talk about the issue. We're going to talk about how you became the campaigner
you are. But before we do, just give us a sense. What is your life like? What is
a typical day, a typical week like for Cuégio? Busy. No two days are the same.
It really isn't like today already. I've had two meetings before our meeting and
it's like that most days, some days are quieter than others. So that's meeting
with tenants in social housing. Yeah, tenants in social housing. I've met with
one already today and a chief executive for a housing provider. But then as well
as that, I also do talks and speak to groups on behalf of my campaign and my
campaign and work. And come here to Westminster to meet ministers, to meet other
politicians. Yeah, it's crazy. So let's go back to how it all began. You're in a
flat in Mitcham in South London. Do you remember a moment at which you looked
around that flat and realised just what the terrible conditions you were living
in were? Yeah, I did. I did. And I think it was just before things changed. And
when I had a missing ceiling in my front room, because that happened for period
over winter. No ceiling at all. Yeah. So it's a townhouse, three floors and in
the middle floors of the front room. And that ceiling began to cave in because
of a leak and it had to be taken down. So it was just beams above it and you
could see daylight out of the brickwork and it wasn't dealt with over the winter
period, many months. And I remember just being stood there and looking at it and
thinking, I can't like how can anyone be paying rent to live in this? Never mind
me and my family. But it was the case. And I mean, having mice, having
cockroaches or not, it was a daily nightmare. No one wants to live with vermin
in their home. And I guess you can only imagine the impact that has on your
mental health. But it's when your father, Quaikou, fell ill, and had to be
nursed in those conditions that I get the sense you first began to think that
you had to fight this. Yeah, when my dad was diagnosed with esophageal cancer
stage one, I think I was very naive and thinking no one around us had ever
become ill or diagnosed with cancer or passed away near me. So I've never
experienced that or grief or anything like that. And I was naive in the sense
that I thought, well, it's lucky we found it at stage one. I didn't realize how
aggressive the cancer was and it did progress very rapidly to stage four in the
space of a year. And he went from walking around, doing being independent, doing
his normal day to day routine to not even being able to swallow his own saliva,
never mind eat or walk. So he was completely bed bound and watching him in those
conditions and watching district nurses come in three times a day to feed him in
those sorts of conditions and just discussed and horror on their face and them
asking us questions about the conditions that he's in. Even up until today,
makes me feel guilty for the fact that he was in that condition. But now I'm
able to look at it from a bigger picture and see that it wasn't our fault. It
was the fact that we were being kept here. Our provider knew that these were the
circumstances and he was having to live in there and our fight was trying to get
him better at the time. That was our priority. Unfortunately, that didn't
happen. Now, eventually you post photos on social media. You get picked up by
the media itself and you get some attention. But before that, and you had
contact with Clarion, they're the big housing group that your landlord still to
this day and they're the biggest, aren't they, in the country? I think 350,000
people more than that live in homes that are run by Clarion. So you had contact
before it went public? Yeah, I did. I complained. I rang up. I spent more time
and I can say this now because I worked in a school opposite my house and I
spent more time in my office on the phone trying to get through to Clarion than
I did actually doing my job on some days. And I can say it now because I'm not
there. And my head teacher now and my ex-manager knows that. Not only that, by
the way, but your head teacher said to a school leaver's assembly, Quajay will
change the world. She was pretty proud of you. Yes. Yeah, no, she was. She was.
And she used to actually be my old reteacher. So we have a very, very good
relationship. So when you decide to tweet the photographs, which is shocking
when you see them. Did you have any idea that this would explode on social media
or is it just getting out of your system? I had nothing left. I had no other
option. No one knew the conditions that we were having to live in. Why? Because
we felt a huge sense of shame. But I was so angry that day because I had phoned
my provider and spoken to someone to ask where are they? They were supposed to
come out and carry out work. And they were so rude to me on the phone and
dismissive and then hung the phone up on me that I said, this is where things
change. I'm no longer going to contact you. I said, next, it will be a
journalist. And my thought was the way I do that is by exposing the situation
we're having to live in. I have to be vulnerable in that sense. And yes, we
might be ashamed. We might get absolute backlash for it. But we have nothing
else to lose. There's no other option for us because they're simply not
listening. So I went around and took photographs of inside our homes and videos
and just did that whilst I was at work. I mean, in the space of a few hours, it
just went. It blew up. And then you went to your neighbours. And tried to enlist
them in all of this as well. When you knock on the door of people you don't
know, not your immediate neighbours, but the people on the estate. Did they look
at you as if, you know, what are you doing here? No, it was quite the opposite.
So the reason I did that, the reason I went around to the estate and I wasn't
necessarily going to in the beginning, but my provider put out a statement and
it was something along the lines of we're sorry, Quajo feels as though him and
his family haven't received the service that they deserve. After, no, no, my dad
passed away and all of that. And that angered me. And I said to myself, if
that's the game we're going to play, so be it. So I made the decision I was
going to go around my whole estate after work that evening. Why did those words
end you so much? Because I thought my dad had died in those conditions. You had
people coming in my home saying it's not even fit for animals to live in. I had
the provider said that it was contractors that were sent out by the provider to
carry out work. So it was my kitchen. It was to deal with the mice. And they he
apologized and he was sincere about it. And he was just like, I'm so sorry,
you're in these conditions. He didn't know about my dad, but my provider,
Clarion did. And that's what frustrated me the most because I was like, we're
not going to do this. My dad has died. And still you're saying we're sorry,
Quajo feels as though he hasn't received that service. Just thought they were
saying what they needed to say. Exactly. It was all the publicity. And I was
like, I know it's much worse than this. I'm not going to pull the ladder up
behind me. And I said, I know I'm tired after work, but I'm going to go around
every single home on my estate. And what I did, because at that time no one knew
I wasn't a campaigner and no one knew of me like that, is I printed letters in
school and my school was good. And they said, print as many as you need to. And
I printed 500 and whatnot and knocked on people's doors and posted them, spoke
to tenants that I could. And it was after school. So I put the letters in. And
by the time I had done a full circle of the estate, my phone was already blowing
up with tenants sending me videos, pictures, complaints, saying, please
highlight it. It's really bad. And people are living in on that estate. Far
worse conditions than me and my family were living in. And that gets you onto TV
news and that gets the attention of the housing minister. Yes. Of Michael Gove.
Yes, it did. Now, his staff, his officials got in touch with you. There was
various MPs, Mayor of London, I was trying to reach out to and various others at
the time. I can't remember all of them, but I wasn't really getting anywhere
with it. And things began to grow and all of a sudden, sexual estates team
reached out. And at first I thought something, some sort of scam or is this. You
just believe. Yeah, I was suspicious. Oh, what? You thought it might not be his
staff at all. No, I didn't. It was a joke. Yeah. Yeah. I thought it some sort of
joke. But then I read through the email and there was a bit of a back and forth.
And then they said, he's seen your tweets and he's seen the things you've been
highlighting, not just about my estate and my home, but going around at this
point and highlighting others and that he wanted to speak to me and meet with
me. Would I be up for it? And I thought, absolutely. I mean, the cause is the
most important thing. And ultimately, the change is going to come from the
government. That's the only place it can. And I expected that there was going to
this is perception that I have. And I think a lot of people do have politicians
and you think they're there to toe a line. And I thought that was going to be a
head to head. And I'm going to have to justify why it is this needs to change.
So I was surprised. Did you pray for it, though? Did you pray for that? I did.
Yeah, I did. You put on a suit for the occasion? No, I didn't. I didn't put on a
suit. I went exactly like how I normally would. I went in my tracksuit. I don't
know how often people go into the home office wearing a tracksuit. But I said at
the end of the day, the reason I'm coming here is not based on what it is that
I'm wearing, but what it is I'm here to say. What struck people, because many of
your followers, I'm going to suggest, are probably not natural conservative
supporters and not necessarily natural fans of Michael Goads either. But when he
lost his job, he's coming back again now, but he lost his job at one point. You
tweeted in defense of him. I sort of say what you like about him, but kind of.
Yeah. Yeah. And the reason I've done that was to express my worry. That was my
the primary reason I tweeted that tweet and my concern. And I got huge backlash
for it. I mean, the biggest amount I think I've had so far and people were
beginning to question my ability and my my ability to campaign and do the work
that I'm doing. And that I found really disheartening. And it was a bit
depressing to read all of that, because the point people were people were
overseeing the point I was trying to make. Which was what? What did you want to
get over? The reason. So the reason I tweeted that was because I was worried
that Boris Johnson got rid of Michael Goad for his own personal reasons and
personal gain. The reason I was worried now was because this jeopardizes any
progress that was made in terms of the progression of social housing, the
regulation. And what is it that you've seen or what has he done that has made,
if you still think this, made you think, is it going to do business with?
Listened first and foremost, didn't come out on the defensive like I would have
expected. I would have and I was ready to go head to head. That wasn't the case.
And actually, I went in there with a set of a list of points that I thought
would help in terms of fixing this housing crisis. And I put them on the table
and he listened to them, took them into consideration. And at a point, I saw
that some of those was going to be included into regulation that's set to come
out hopefully later this year. There's something they call AWAB's law, isn't
there? Yes. That terrible case in Rochdale, the little two year old AWAB who
died because of the reaction of his lungs to the damp and the mold. Yeah. And
that was so that that law came out because of campaigning work of his family.
But in terms of regulation and the regulators and various other things, I did
suggest and he did take on board, which is what people didn't see. And the
reason I tweeted that was because if things aren't going right, if a politician
isn't doing what they're supposed to be doing, I'm very happy to call them out
on that. And I've been very vocal and I've done it online before. But I think
it's also important to be as transparent as possible, especially for the benefit
of tenants out there living in disrepair and say when I believe things are
starting to look like they're going right and when I am worried and concerned.
So you meet Michael Gove and you've come with things to say to him. And if you
said you did think he listened, is there an example of something you proposed he
did that you're pleased with? Yeah. So one of the points I wanted to raise and I
did my research and I knew he had been a part of education and I worked in a
school. So I wanted to look for an analogy that worked. So in terms of
regulation, which I wasn't happy with at that point, I said, I'd like to see the
regulators operate off style, off style, offstead style inspections. And that's
to go in from the top to the bottom and regulate properly, properly as opposed
to just speaking to the landlords and getting their opinion, not speaking to any
tenants, because that's what happened in my case when I reported my landlord to
the regulator on my estate. And I wasn't happy at all. And he took that on board
and he completely understood the analogy that I was trying to give. And he said,
absolutely, because what I said was offstead wouldn't ring up a head teacher of
a school, say, how are you doing? The head teacher turns around and said, we're
great, we're amazing. Here's an outstanding. That's not the case. They go and
look for themselves top to bottom. That's what regulation is. That's what
regulation in housing should be. And he seems to have taken that on board. You
think that will now happen? Yes, yes. It's been mentioned as part of the
regulation. But again, we have to know how it's going to be enforced and how
strict it's going to be when it's enforced. But I was glad to see that. You
talked of how you felt when you got that backlash. Did you at any stage think
enough? You know, I've got into the shark infested waters of politics. People
like me when I was just saying things were bad. Yeah. But as soon as I tried to
do anything about it, people don't like it very much. Yeah. Do you think enough?
I can go and be a student. Yeah. Another few beers, go dancing, have a life.
Yeah, I mean, I did. There were questions of that and I did start to doubt it. I
started to feel like, what's the point? Especially when I was getting backlash
from a lot of people that supported me and supported the work that I've done. I
said how great it was, but now all of a sudden a few people turn around and say,
well, they'll start a question of my campaign and saying I'm naive, I don't know
what I'm doing, don't know what I'm talking about. When that's completely not
the case and they've completely misread what it is that I'm trying to say. And I
wasn't feeling great at that point too. I mean, people only see a small
percentage of the work that happens online or what I choose to show people. They
don't necessarily see what's going on and the hard side of things behind the
scenes. So, because you're seeing images, you're reading stories, you're hearing
stories that are pretty hard to take. Right, exactly that. When you're hearing
people are dying, whether that be of cancer like my dad, they've got terminal
illnesses, they've been injured in their homes and you're hearing that day in,
day out, it's difficult. Especially less than three years after my own dad
passed away of similar conditions. It is very, very hard. So, to then have that
on top of just backlash, and I'm very thick-skinned, but to have that, I just
thought to myself, I thought to myself, can I continue? Should I just stop now?
Am I pushing myself too far? But then I realised I've come so far and a lot of
progress has been made that may have not necessarily been made in the past and
will I be doing myself, not just myself, but other families out there going
through what me and my family have been through, a disservice by stopping now.
How do you protect yourself? Because it must be all too easy just to look at
that phone late at night. There's another photograph, there's another story, and
they believe you can make a difference now. So, it's not only that you're seeing
the horror, but it's, Quajo, come, do something for me, help me, make this
better. It's a lot of pressure and it's difficult, and I haven't found the
answer to that. I don't think. No-one puts more pressure on me than me. And even
when I went to Ghana, I was taking calls from tenants over here whilst I was in
the mall that's supposed to be on the holiday, and I find it hard to switch off.
I feel guilty if I can't get back to people. But the reality is I get hundreds,
if not thousands of messages now from tenants, and I can't get back to
absolutely one. Why? Because I'm a human being and I still have to try and clean
my house and do the normal things that normal people have to do whilst trying to
juggle that with my campaign and work. But the change I can make is trying to
get change for as many people as possible at government level. You said a
provider recently. Are you happy to sit down with companies, even companies you
think are behaving appallingly, to try to get them to improve the way they do
things? Absolutely. I said that about all the housing providers. I've said in
the past, I'd even sit down with Claire Millo, who's the chief executive at my
housing provider. She got called before MPs to give evidence, and she said she
was ashamed by what had been exposed. But then she went on and said she
absolutely runs a repair service that responds to its residents. How did that
make you feel? Angry, because I see the reality. You asked Claire Millo when
last was she on one of her estates, or how many estates has she been on in the
year prior to 2023, and then you asked me how many I've been on. They're going
to be two completely different things. The reality that I'm seeing, the
grassroots work, it translates completely differently to what it is that Claire
Millo and the PR side of that organisation is putting out there. Tenants are
coming out and telling me on a daily, weekly basis that are Clarion tenants,
that they need help because they're not being listened to even now. It sounds
like you're a man pondering, what, a career in politics? I don't know, it's been
talk about that. When I was younger, I never thought I would get into politics,
but since doing this work, I've been telling myself that sometimes if you want
change, you have to be the change, you have to go in there and try your best in
order to do that. So being a councillor, a member of parliament, mayor? Who
knows? The idea of mayor would be nice, not just because of the title, but
because of the work that can be done, and not just housing, but other areas that
I don't think has been prioritised or dealt with in the right way up until this
point. And I think I come from a different perspective than some other
politicians or different backgrounds. And I don't think there's enough
representation. We talk about representation and diversity, and it's very much a
tick box exercise in Westminster. We talk about race, we talk about background
and those sorts of things. What we don't take into consideration is class, and I
don't think there's any class diversity in Westminster at all. I think there's
more class diversity in a loaf of bread than there is in Westminster. If you go
for politics, do you know which party you've been? I've tried to keep my
politics out of the work that I do now, but I have to say, politically, I'm
disappointed by all parties and I've made that very, very clear. I think, on one
hand, taking out housing, I've been, and I think a lot of people up and down the
country, I've been disappointed with the Conservatives for not just the last
year, but many years. Just because you work with Michael Gove doesn't mean
you're a Tory. Yes, yes. But then, on the other end, you've got Labour, who have
gone and have publicly been disappointed with, and I've put that on social
media, where I don't think they're doing enough to represent the people that
Labour, once upon a time, represented, and people from my background and working
class background, believed in. What would you say to some people listening to
this, who'd say, look, he'll learn you can't work the system, you have to
overthrow the system? Sometimes you need radical change, I think,
and.....it.....to an extent, I do believe that, but ultimately, I think, if I
want change now, I have to work the system because that change comes from those
in power. And I've made it very clear, I've made it very, very clear, it doesn't
matter who's in power, if it's Conservatives or Labour or who's willing in
Westminster to tackle this issue of poor housing, I'm willing to work with them,
whoever's willing to take it on. At the moment, it's Michael Gove, but like I
mentioned earlier, if it was Labour and they were in power, I'd be saying and
doing the exact same things I'm doing now, cos ultimately, that comes above my
political opinion. All these people are writing to you, is there a case you look
back on and think, I feel good about that one, Matt, that was something I'm
proud of? There's many, there's many. The one I can think of in particular was
when... It was last year when I went up to Birmingham and I went to visit a
tenant who happened to work in the NHS and her mum was elderly and every single
wall and door in that home was covered in black mould and damp. And her mum had
recently had a stroke of blind on a hospital bed in the front room and she told
me and she broke down and cried and said, I'm worried my mum's going to die in
these conditions and I can't help her. And I raised it on social media and
within a matter of days, she was moved out. And in a few months, they were found
permanent accommodation, which they were so happy with, they had a garden and
everything. And she was just so grateful and I said, don't even thank me. This
shouldn't be happening, you shouldn't have gone through this for the last 10
years. And it made me feel good. No money value can be put on that. That's the
satisfaction I get and why I continue to do what I do. That's the sole reason.
It must have brought it all back for you, then. Yeah, it did. Cos I always go
back to my dad and I wasn't able to help him. So being able to go through those
situations and helping other families and seeing them come out on the other
side, it brings me some sort of relief. Yeah. Has it occurred to you you might
have much more power if you carry on being a housing campaigner than if you
become just another politician? Yes, yeah, it has. I mean, housing will always
be something I'm campaigning on. I would like to... It changed to come about and
me not have to do it as much, but I would always be there to put pressure on
providers, on politicians, landlords. But who knows, I haven't decided as of yet
exactly what I'm going to do. But for now, I'm a... I'm a Quajo housing
campaigner and intend to be so for the... until it's sorted. Was your head
teacher right? Is Quajo going to change the world? I'd hope so, even if it's a
bit. I mean, I always said in the beginning, if I could help one person and one
family, even if it was just my next door neighbour, then it's a job well done.
And I've managed to do that so far. And now that I've sort of built this
platform, I want to help as many people as possible because I've climbed up that
ladder and I want to help as many people up it as possible. Quajo Twinnaboe,
thank you very much for joining me on Political Thinking. Thank you. If you do
my sort of job, you get stopped in the street, you get talked to in the back of
cabs by people who say, there's no point being interested in politics, is there?
Nothing changes. They're all the same. You've just seen an example of how wrong
that is. Political Thinking with Nick Robinson was produced by Jack Fenwick.
This is BBC Radio 4, and it's now time for the shipping forecast issued by the
Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 1725 on Saturday,
25 February. The general synopsis at midday, High South Fairhose, 1028, expected
Cromartie, 1034, by midday tomorrow. Low, East Fitzroy, 1005, losing its
identity. The area forecast for the next 24 hours, Viking, North at Sira, South
at Sira, Northalie or Northwesterly, 4-6, Wintery showers at first, good
occasionally moderate at first. Forties, North or North East, 4-6, Wintery
showers, good occasionally moderate. Cromartie, 4th, North or North East, 3-5,
becoming variable 2-4 later in Cromartie. Showers, good. Tyne, Dogger, North or
North East, 4-5, occasionally 6 at first, showers, good. East Fisher, North
Eastily, 5-6, backing Northily or Northwesterly, 3-4, fair, good. West Fisher,
German Bight, Humber, Northily or North Eastily, 4-6, decreasing 3 at times
later, showers at first, good. Thames, Dover, White, Portland, Plymouth, North
Biscay, North Eastily, 5-7, perhaps Gale 8 later in Dover, White and Portland,
showers, good. South Biscay, Cyclonic, 3-5, becoming North Eastily, 4-6,
occasionally 7 later, showers, mainly good. South Fitzroy, Cyclonic, mainly
Eastily or North Eastily, 3-5, occasionally 6 in North and East, showers,
perhaps thundery at first, good, occasionally moderate at first. North Fitzroy,
Sol, Eastily or North Eastily, varying South Eastily in West, 5-7, showers,
good. Lundy, Fastnet, Irish Sea, East or North East, 4-6, occasionally 3 in
Irish Sea, mainly fair, good. Shannon, Rockall, East, varying South East, 4-6,
increasing 7 at times later, showers, good. Malin, East, varying South East,
3-5, fair, good. Hebrides, variable 2-4, becoming South or South West, 3-4,
fair, good. Bailey, South or South East, 4-6, fair, good. East Fair Isle,
Northily or North Westily, 3-5, fair, good. West Fair Isle, variable 2-4, fair,
good. Fair Rose, variable 2-4 at first in South East, otherwise South Westily, 4
or 5, mainly fair, good. South East Iceland, South Westily, 5-7, showers, good,
occasionally moderate. And that's the shipping forecast. Now for the more
general forecast, we're joined by Chris Fawkes, afternoon Chris. Good afternoon
Tom. Well today we've had north-easterly winds pushing cloud across the country,
and certainly for north-eastern areas of the UK, it has really been quite a
cloudy day with showers coming and going from the North Sea. Now looking at the
weather picture overnight tonight, those north-easterly winds will continue to
bring a scattering of light showers across eastern areas of Scotland and down
the eastern side of England from more or less Northumberland down to around
about Norfolk. Away from that though, the day's cloud will start to melt away
across most of southern England, across the West Midlands, Wales, western
England, Northern Ireland and western areas of Scotland. So for these areas
we'll have lengthy, clear spells developing through the night. Now where skies
stay clearest, we are quite likely to see a frost developing with temperatures
around about zero to minus two quite widely, but for western Scotland, that's
where we'll see some of the lowest temperatures overnight, minus five degrees
possible in a few spots. Eastern Scotland and those cloudy eastern parts of
England though, probably just about avoiding a frost with temperatures a few
degrees above freezing, giving the onshore winds and still those areas of cloud
that will continue to feed in. Now looking at the weather picture into Sunday,
it's another day where high pressure will be in charge. The weather is
predominantly dry, but again, there'll be a few showers around coming into
eastern Scotland and across parts of northern England, perhaps reaching Wales
through the day. I think the cloudiest weather will be eastern Scotland across
northern England and into Wales as well. But aside from that, I think generally
speaking, there should be a bit more in the way of sunshine to go around. The
wind's a little bit lighter and temperatures are eight degrees, so feeling a bit
more pleasant. Tom. Chris, many thanks. The six o'clock news is next here on
Radio 4. First though, let's find out who Lauren Laverne will be speaking to
tomorrow morning. My castaway is the artist Sonia Boyce, who put childhood fears
to creative use as an adult. I was always convinced that the wallpaper was
moving, that I could see things in the wallpaper. And I do think that wallpaper
will repeat pattern has a kind of otherworldly quality about it now. But as a
child, I was just always a bit scared of the wallpaper. Sonia Boyce, my
castaway, do join us to hear her desert island discs tomorrow morning at 11.15.
Cycle killer, cast your seat. Fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa, fa,
fa, fa. ["C Antonio Boyce, my castaway", do join us to hear her desert island
discs Thank you.