TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM, longwave digital radio and BBC sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. BBC News at
10 o'clock. This is Mark Forrest. Good evening. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving
it everything to secure a new deal with the EU over Brexit trading arrangements
for Northern Ireland. We'll report on the latest negotiations and the crucial
role the Democratic Unionist party will play in any agreement. Rallies have been
held in County Tyrone in support of the police officer who was shot and
critically wounded by gunmen. Votes have been counted in Nigeria where three
candidates are vying to be the next president. And England have triumphed in
their Six Nations clash with Wales in Cardiff. The Prime Minister has said he's
giving it everything to get a new agreement with the European Union on post-
Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. In an interview with the Sunday
Times, Rishi Sunak said there was unfinished business on Brexit and he wanted to
get the job done. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadka, said the talks were
inching towards a conclusion and there was a possibility of a deal in the next
few days, but it was by no means guaranteed. The current agreement means
Northern Ireland still follows some EU laws and goods arriving from Great
Britain are subject to checks. Our political correspondent, Ione Wells, reports.
The essence of a new deal between the UK and the EU over trading arrangements
for Northern Ireland is basically there. Discussions between both sides are now
focusing on how it is unveiled and presented. The government is briefing
politicians and business stakeholders about it. King Charles was also due to
meet the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in the UK
today. Downing Street and the Palace claim this was cancelled due to operational
reasons unrelated to the political talks. But her planned visit to the UK
indicates a deal was about to be publicly presented while she was here.
Ireland's Prime Minister, Leo Varadka, told reporters the talks were inching
towards a conclusion. We're not quite there yet, but there is ongoing engagement
involving the UK government, involving the European Commission, and of course
the Irish government is plugged into that. I think it's fair to say we are
inching towards a conclusion and there is the possibility of agreement in the
next few days, but by no means guaranteed. Rishi Sunak has been trying to shore
up support for a deal among some critical Tory MPs and the Democratic Unionist
Party. Critics are concerned that politicians in Northern Ireland may still not
get full control over future EU laws that could apply there. The government
knows this may be a case of giving everyone some things they need if you can't
give anyone everything they want, but political battles with his own MPs and the
DUP could still lie ahead for Rishi Sunak. As we've heard, the reaction of the
Democratic Unionist Party to any deal between the government and the European
Union will be key. Our Northern Ireland political editor, Enda McClafferty, has
this assessment of the choices facing the party. The moment of truth is fast
approaching for the DUP, but don't expect a quick response once the deal is
published. The party will want to study the legal text to see if it meets their
seven demands. Though open to interpretation in parts, these demands deal with
removing trade barriers across the Irish Sea and restoring Northern Ireland's
sovereign place in the UK. Fixing what they see as a democratic deficit will
also be key. Expect to see a beefed up role for the Assembly when it comes to
deciding what EU legislation will apply in Northern Ireland. But will it simply
amount to more of a say in the decision making process, stopping short of a
veto, which the EU insists it will not allow? That will be key and may require
some constructive ambiguity to allow both sides to sell the deal. Crucially, the
new legal text which will overlay the previous legislation will allow the DUP to
claim the protocol has been replaced. Though the EU will argue the protocol
remains intact with its original legal text unchanged. The party will also
consult those businesses struggling under the burden of the protocol. If it
works for businesses on the front line, then it adds more pressure on the DUP to
say yes. Rallies have taken place in County Tyrone in support of a police
officer who is critically ill in hospital after being shot earlier this week.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was attacked on Wednesday night at a
sports centre in Omer when he was off duty. Police have been given more time to
question four of the five men arrested in connection with the shooting. Julian
Fowler has spent the day in Omer. John Caldwell was coaching an under-15
football team when he was shot and critically injured. Around a thousand people
gathered at his club, there are swifts, to march in a show of solidarity for him
and his family. They were led by young people from the club, some of whom
witnessed the attack and were joined by members of sporting organisations from
across the community, including the local Gaelic Football Club. A rally was also
held in the centre of Omer, a town that is all too familiar with the violence of
the Troubles, 25 years after 29 people and unborn twins died in a dissident
Republican car bomb. This was a demonstration of unity by ordinary people
against the new IRA, who police believe carried out the shooting. A
demonstration that those who oppose the Good Friday Peace Agreement have little
public support and that the overwhelming majority do not want to see a return to
the violence of the past. The former Labour MP Luciana Berger has accepted an
invitation from Sequeir Starmer to rejoin the party, after she left four years
ago due to concerns about anti-Semitism. At the time she accused the Labour
leadership of attempting to brush complaints under the carpet. Ms Berger stood
for the Lib Dems in the 2019 election but did not win a seat. Sequeir Starmer
said he was delighted she'd return to the party. Votes were being counted in
Nigeria, where three front-runners are thought to be in a tight race to become
the country's next president. Almost 90 million people were eligible to vote,
but some polling stations opened late, many saw large queues and there were
isolated incidents of violence. Our West Africa correspondent, Mayini Jones,
sent this report from Lagos. In a polling station here, voters are frustrated.
No electoral officials have shown up and they can't cast their ballots. It's not
clear whether this was due to poor management or a deliberate attempt to
suppress the vote. The level of engagement in this election has been unusually
high, particularly from young people. They're desperate to choose a government
that will address the country's ailing economy and rising insecurity. 25-year-
old Amara says no officials from the Independent National Electoral Commission,
or INEC, showed up at her polling station. Nigeria is Africa's most populous
country and is projected to have the third largest population in the world by
2050. Whoever runs the country for the next four years will determine whether
its young people will thrive within its borders. Already, thousands of educated
Nigerians have left the country. The number of Nigerians granted working visas
in the UK has tripled since 2019. It's a brain drain the country can't afford.
Finance ministers from the major G20 countries who've been holding talks in
India have failed to agree a closing statement because of differences over the
war in Ukraine. The hosts, India, said Russia and China had objected to parts of
the document condemning Russian aggression. Our political correspondent Leila
Nathu has sent this report from Bangalore. India has been determined to use its
presidency of the G20 to champion the needs of developing nations. In his
opening address to finance ministers and central bank governors who'd gathered
here in Bangalore, Prime Minister Modi urged delegates to focus on the most
vulnerable citizens of the world. India wanted to discuss debt burdens, food
security and sustainable growth. But the conversation became dominated by
divisions over the war in Ukraine. India has remained neutral on the conflict,
but the UK and US came to the meeting to reaffirm their support for Ukraine, to
strongly condemn Russia and to push for economic sanctions. But Russian and
Chinese delegations objected to any reference to the war being included in a
final statement. India said the two countries believed it wasn't for finance
ministers and central bank governors to get into political issues. So no jointly
agreed document was published. Instead, India issued its own summary of the
event, saying most members strongly condemned the war and demanded Russia's
withdrawal from Ukraine. Turkish officials say they're now investigating more
than 600 people in connection with buildings that collapsed during major
earthquakes earlier this month. Tens of thousands of people died in Turkey and
neighbouring Syria. Orlando Teel reports. Turkey's Justice Minister, Beqia
Bostar, outlined the scale of the investigations during a visit to an earthquake
coordination centre in the southeast of the country. He said that of 612
suspects under judicial investigation, 184 were already in jail, including
construction contractors and building owners. More than 50,000 people are known
to have died in the quakes in southern Turkey and northern Syria, and experts
believe poor construction standards played a significant role. Opposition
parties have accused President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government of failing to
enforce building regulations. The deputy chair of the Environment Agency has
called for a massive transformation to the way food is produced and distributed
in the UK. A number of supermarkets are limiting the sale of some fruit and
vegetables, blaming bad weather in Spain and North Africa. But British producers
say other factors are affecting production here, including high energy costs,
Brexit and last year's drought. Our business correspondent, Esselt Karr reports.
Empty shelves in some supermarkets this week have highlighted the
vulnerabilities of the UK's food supply chain and prompted some in the industry
to call for change. Extreme weather affecting imports from Spain and Morocco is
a major factor in the shortages, but some UK growers have also described putting
off planting crops due to high energy costs and low prices offered by
supermarkets. Judith Batchelor, who's the deputy chair of the Environment
Agency, said it was time for risks like climate change to be built into how our
supply chains work. There is an unprecedented number of different factors
impacting the price of our food, and that's not just here at home in the UK, but
we're part of a massive global food system that is extremely complicated and
interlinked. And I think we are seeing or facing into what needs to be a massive
transformation of the way that we produce, distribute and retail food. The
National Farmers Union has called for more support for the industry with things
like energy costs. Helen Browning, the chief executive of the Soil Association,
who's also a farmer, described the issues facing growers as deep and severe.
We've obviously got the labour shortages coming out of Brexit. We've had Covid.
We've got the climate change impacts, which are going to get only worse, and we
really need to be thinking about planning for water management, getting our
soils in good heart and the energy issues. But we've also had Ukraine and the
feed price increases. We've had avian flu in the poultry sector, TB, and the
cattle sector's ongoing challenge. The British Retail Consortium says
supermarkets have long established relationships with farmers and understand the
need for prices to be sustainable. The government has highlighted the resilience
of the UK supply chain and says current shortages should be resolved in the next
few weeks. But many of those growing fresh produce in the UK believe the
challenges could continue long beyond that. Police searching for the sister-in-
law of the actor Mackenzie Crook, who went missing in West Sussex, say they
found a body. Laurel Aldridge, who's the elder sister of the actor's wife,
vanished on the 14th of February from her home in the village of Warburton.
Police searching for the crew of a tugboat that overturned off Greenook in
Inverclyde yesterday have recovered two bodies. They're understood to have been
the only people on board when it capsized. The search operation had involved
divers, coast guard units and the RNLI. Sport. In rugby union Six Nations,
England have fought their way to a ten-point win over Wales in Cardiff, while
Ireland survived a scare from Italy. With the details as well as a round-up of
the rest of the day's action, here's Mike McCarthy. England kept their interest
in the Six Nations title alive with a 20 points to 10 win in Wales, tries from
Anthony Watson, Kyle Sinclair and Ollie Lawrence secured the win. The build-up
was dominated by the potential for strike action in the Wales camp because of a
contract dispute. England head coach, Steve Borthwick, says despite the
distraction, Wales ran them close. I think you've got to give those Welsh
players such enormous credit, incredible respect to go through what they've gone
through and produce a performance like that. That deserves enormous respect.
Ireland remain on course for a grand slam after winning 34-20 in Italy.
England's cricketers are looking to continue their dominance over New Zealand in
the second test, day three underway in Wellington. Stefan Schemmelt is watching.
New Zealand are 201 for eight. Home captain Tim Sauthi finally out for 73. After
causing a little bit of chaos, he hit 50 from 30 balls faced on Sunday morning,
including four sixes, was dropped at long leg by Jack Leach, but next ball, Chip
Stewart brought to Zach Crawley at mid-wicket. Tom Blundell is still there on
36, but New Zealand still need another 35 runs to avoid the follow-on, and even
then, there would be a question of if England would enforce it. New Zealand, 201
for eight, in reply to England's 435 for eight declared. In the Premier League,
leaders Arsenal and Manchester City both won to keep the gap between the title
rivals at two points. Arsenal won one at Leicester, Manchester City were 4-1
winners at Bournemouth. Meanwhile at the bottom, Leeds United's new manager,
Javi Gracia, celebrated his first game in charge by securing their first Premier
League win since November. A 1-0 victory over Southampton lifts them out of the
relegation zone, dropping into the bottom three at Everton after a 2-0 defeat at
home to Aston Villa. Elsewhere West Ham Thresh, Nottingham Forest, 4-0,
Liverpool's trip to Crystal Palace, Finnish Golis, and Ross County were the big
winners at the bottom of the Scottish Premier ship, they beat Dundee United,
4-0. Mike McCarthy. A walrus that drew crowds when spotted on the south and east
coasts of England appears to have arrived in Iceland. The mammal, named Thor,
appeared in Hampshire in December before spending New Year in Scarborough and
heading 70 miles further north to Blythe in Northumberland. Now he's been
spotted in Iceland. Julia Cable from British divers Marine Life Rescue said
they'd used markings to know it was Thor. The markings on animals like that are
individual, a bit like our own sort of fingerprints, and the photographs that
were taken of him when he was in the UK have been matched up with photographs
that were taken of him in Iceland. And through those photographs we've been able
to pull out certain sort of identifying marks on his skin. The headlines again.
Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it everything to secure a new deal with the EU
over Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. The Irish Prime Minister,
Leo Varadka, said the talks were inching towards a conclusion but a deal was by
no means guaranteed. Rallies have been held in County Tyrone in support of the
police officer who was shot and critically wounded by gunmen. Votes are being
counted in Nigeria where three candidates are vying to be the next president.
England have triumphed in their Six Nations Rugby Union clash with Wales in
Cardiff. BBC News. Read by Mark Forrest. Next tonight on Radio 4 a debate about
Britain and how it should make amends for its colonial past, that's the moral
maze, and then at 11 o'clock it's quiz time and a chance to test your musical
knowledge as Paul Gambaccini hosts another edition of Counterpoint. That's all I
had. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago I was filming East London Mosque when the story
broke. The three schoolgirls from the area had gone missing. They were heading
to Syria to join the Islamic State Group. Breaking news this morning, three
British schoolgirls are reportedly missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of
the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her
steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to find people who knew her and
to investigate the truth of her story. What do you think people think of you? As
a danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum
story, Series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. Time now for the
moral maze. First broadcast earlier in the week, here's Michael Burke. Good
evening. It's perhaps slightly strange that the high watermark of classical
antiquity should be found in Bloomsbury. For that we have Lord Elgin to thank,
and in fact not a good it did him. He ruined himself. Some say rescuing, some
say stealing, the marbles that bear his name, and died all but penniless in
France where he'd fled to escape his creditors. They might not be in the British
Museum much longer. By all accounts they could be returned to Greece in a
complicated kind of permanent loam. The fate of the Elgin marbles is just one
aspect of the current movement to try to write what are regarded by some as
historical injustices. The return of artefacts has its own issues of cultural
ownership, how and where glorious works can be displayed to best advantage. The
wider call for reparation for past wrongs, slavery for instance, is even more
difficult. The Church of England has set up a £100 million fund to somehow
compensate for its shameful involvement with the slave trade. This raises all
sorts of questions. How far are we responsible for the actions of our forebears?
Who would qualify for a pay out and why? Where do you stop? As one commentator
put it, if we have to make reparation for the presumed sins of our empire,
perhaps we should sue the Italian government for what the Romans did to us.
Paying for the past, our moral maze tonight. The panel Ash Sarka from the
Navarro Media Group, the feminist author and commentator Ella Whelan, the
historian Tim Stanley and Matthew Taylor, Chief Executive of the NHS
Confederation. Ash, where should the marbles be? I think they should be in
Athens because it will give me a chance to go there and eat some beautiful deep
fried cheese again. But on the demand for reparations, I don't think it makes
sense to say that ill-gotten wealth can be handed down through the generations,
but the demand for restitution can't. And I also think that the argument is
misleadingly presented as being about the sufferings of the past. It's not. It's
about how the suffering of the past never really went away and how it manifests
in the injustices of the present. Ella, Ella Whelan. The marbles, I think that
there's, you know, I'm going to say that there's a sort of a nice fudge to it at
the moment, which is that there's you can see them in situ and you can also go
to that wonderful institution, the British Museum and see them. I think you can
get different things from both. But on reparations, more broadly, I think we're
in danger of letting governments off the hook for their ongoing failings in the
present by looking to the past for the cause and cure of all our ills. Matthew,
Matthew Taylor. Yeah, I'd send them back to Athens and I'd have very good
replicas for us to look at in the British Museum. I support the principles of
restitution and compensation, but I do think they're principles that need to be
balanced by relevance, practicality and some notion of the public interest. Tim
Stanley. On the marbles, I'm tempted to quote Ronald Reagan, who, when asked if
America should return, the Panama Canal said, we bought it, we paid for it, it's
ours. But I recognize that it can be moral and decent to gift, to lend, to be
charitable and to try to carry out restitution for past sins. But I wonder to
what extent British museums and British politicians also have a moral obligation
towards British visitors and British taxpayers. Panel, thanks very much indeed.
Our first witness is Dan Hicks, who's professor of contemporary archaeology at
Oxford University, author of The Brutish Museum, on the line now from the Pitt
Rivers Museum at Oxford, where he's a curator, I think. Professor Hicks, that's
right, is it? Not a misprint, The Brutish Museum, how so? It is, absolutely,
yes, hi. So, yes, I mean, the book looks at the role of British museums in
relation to violence under empire. And it really makes a point which we've
already heard, which is that in some instances, there are situations where
empire isn't over. So we have to look at objects and look at those instances
where a return is asked for in terms of what's happening now and not in terms of
seeking to right wrongs from the past, but to look at actually how we make our
museums, the, the, the, you know, everything that we want them to be in the
present. Okay, Ella William. What should the requirements be for a return? What
kind of boxes does an individual or a nation have to take to warrant a
legitimate repatriation? So I think it's important that you say an individual or
a nation because in a lot of cases, we're not speaking here about the national
museums, we're talking about the fact that objects are, you know, around the
country, around the UK and in museums in which actually restitution has been a
normal part of how we work in museums for a very long time. So in the very
different historical instances of Holocaust loot, or the return of indigenous
human remains, the return of items, you know, it is a part of our normal work in
the museum. Okay, but should, should, sorry, should we, should anything be
given, should any claim be taken seriously? Could anyone say actually that's
looted or that was stolen or that was ill gotten and so give it back? And so
what we've learned over the years is, is essentially a case by case approach.
We're talking about millions of objects in our museums, most of which are not
accessible to the public, these are items hidden away in storerooms, open items
that, you know, haven't been looked at for over 100 years. And so it's a case by
case approach, but we have to be open to returning, you know, in some cases. And
what's, what is the sort of, what's the upshot of that return because you know,
is it just about returning it to the right place, is it returning it to the
right person because obviously, you know, the Parthenon was built by slaves, do
we stop at giving it back to Greece or do we find the rightful ownership? I
mean, where's the, where's the moral end point of this process of do gooding by
return? Yeah, I don't know if I call it that exactly. This isn't about being
good. This is about understanding our museums as operating in the contemporary
world and really wanting our museums to be fit for our times. Yeah. And how
does, you know, what would you say to the argument that, you know, a museum is
something that makes accessible the story of human civilizations, you know, a
kid who's growing up in, you know, not with lots of money to travel to different
countries can go to the museum, the British Museum take, for example, and
experience that holistic, universal human story. Don't we lose that if we give
everything back? Aren't you just emptying all the coffers of your own workplace?
So I think first off from, you know, Ipswich to Manchester to Birmingham,
Bristol and Edinburgh, we have items that actually nobody can see. So a large
amount of this is about items that are not in the British Museum. And build more
museums. And so this is very much a normal part of our museum practice. And I
think we actually really have to worry about those who wish to turn this into,
you know, an issue which is about a culture war or an issue which is about a
culture war. And it's only a model rather than. Right. Hang on a second. I'm in
Professor Hicks. You say others wish to turn it into a culture war issue, but
your issue with the museum goes well beyond one or two objects being out of
place. I mean, you have said that the Anthropological Museum, which Pitt Rivers
is an example of, is, and I quote, a weapon and a device for the ideology of
white supremacy to legitimate extend and naturalise new extremes within
corporate capitalism. You have a much bigger political take on the museum than
just it has some objects that are in the wrong place. Well, absolutely, because
these are legacy institutions. Imagine any other aspect of our art or culture.
Imagine, you know, medicine, any other aspect of our universities where we
weren't allowed to improve how we act according to our knowledge in the present.
So I think, you know, actually understanding that the museum is an idea for a
period of time in its history in the later 19th century, early part of the last
century was put to ends which have no place in the present. We see that most
obviously with the fake racial science, the display of human remains. I don't
think anyone is arguing that we ought to, you know, not with the human remains
or as you get stained with displays there. But the visitors to the museum might
not share your political outlook. And many people who come to a museum expect
simply to see beauty and knowledge from around the world put on display for them
to look at, them to enjoy and process and understand as they see fit. Whereas if
you take an object away from them, to what extent are you letting them down? Do
you have a moral obligation to them to see the object? This is about
anthropology museums and about world culture and that idea of world culture and
what that means in the present. We've never needed something like a world
culture museum more in the present to see the world and the different ways of
your making, your thinking, experiencing the world outside of a Eurocentric
lens. But that doesn't mean we need to display items that were taken with
violence, where there is a demand for return and to say under no circumstances
will we ever return. So this is where we have to get another question. If that
object were taken, even if, OK, let's say we're taken with violence many, many
years ago, in the process of it being taken to somewhere else, does the meaning
of the object not change? Is the fact that it has been kept stored, curated and
displayed over time, does that give any claim to ownership to the nation that
now has it? So in those cases, I think we have to underline where we're looking
at African objects that were taken with violence, how much was actively
destroyed and the taking of that object and the cultural dispossession that was
part of colonial war is something with which we have in anthropology museums to
work in the present. So we are working with these resources in the present.
Either we want museums where we put humans first and we think about the present
and the living present, or we have some weird idea that the museum is a thing
that will never change, that can never be a part of our world in the present.
And I think that's entirely wrong. I can't imagine any other sector where we
would make that argument. Professor Hicks, thanks very much indeed. Our next
witness is Dr. Tiffany Jenkins, who's author of How Treasures of the Past Ended
Up in Museums and Why They Should Stay There. She's on the line now. Well, in a
sentence, why? Well, I think objects can tell us a lot about the lives of past
people, their windows really onto the world. And I think demands that they are
returned for past wrongs turns them into objects of apology rather than
enlightenment. I think museums and objects can do many things, but they can't
solve the problems of history. Understood. Matthew Taylor. Dr. Jenkins, just a
thought experiment. I imagine we discovered that most of the medieval European
exhibits in a popular Argentinian museum were donated by a Nazi fugitive from
his hoard of items stolen under German occupation from European museums. Should
we seek to return those objects? I think if you've got living relatives, people
still alive today. This is 90 years ago. No one's alive anymore. They were
nicked by the Nazis from, I don't know, a Polish museum and they're in an
Argentinian museum. Should they be returned to Poland? Quite possibly. I'm not
against return per se. I just don't think it's not. So it's not the principle of
restitution. So whatever. I think if you let me, I think you do need to do on a
case by case basis and you need to ask where is best for the object. So where is
it best in terms of truth? Where does it tell us a certain story about those
past people? Access who gets to see it and preservation. And my problem is that
with this debate, it's become so moralised and politicised, we've actually
forgotten about the object. Well, it's kind of interesting because that's almost
exactly what our previous guest said, that he said we should look at it on a
case by case basis, that we shouldn't see it as a kind of moral question. So I
think I'm understanding that your position is you're not opposed to the
principle of restitution, but you think it needs to be balanced by kind of
pragmatism, by some kind of public interest test. Would that be right? I might
say, but I think you're probably wrong about Dan Hicks, I think his is a moral
quest. It's your views I'm interested in. But if we are to be pragmatic, public
interest, why? Let's take the Rosetta Stone, that's a good example. I mean, we
could use laser printing to make an absolutely perfect copy of it. And we could
tell the story, as in fact, we're doing now at an exhibition about how we
deciphered it. So what would we actually lose by returning the original to
Egypt? Well, I think the question was best answered by asking, would you be
happy to send a replica to Egypt? Or would you be happy to send a replica of all
the marbles to Greece? No, you wouldn't. There are many things you can do with
replicas. And I'm quite excited about the possibility. But I think ultimately,
it doesn't answer the question of ownership. And we may be object fetishes here.
I mean, we love museums, we love objects. So maybe we are. But I think people do
want to see and hold or touch, not that they're allowed to, the real thing. But
I guess this is the point then, that if we accept the principle of restitution,
but we say, yes, but it should be reasonable. We shouldn't have to make enormous
sacrifices. People shouldn't not be able to see things. But if you can make good
replicas, given that only 3%, as I understand it, of the museum collections in
the world are currently on show, and there's an enormous amount that could be
brought out of the cellars, given these things back, it's not going to ruin our
museums. It's not going to stop people being able to understand the history of
things. Some of our most popular exhibits are indeed replicas. So why don't we
just get on with it? It might be a good idea to talk about specifics. So in the
case of the Parthenon in the British Museum, I think they work very well there
in relationship to other cultures. So the Assyrians and the Egyptians. You can
better understand the specificity of ancient Athens that way. Equally in Athens,
Sorry, just to be clear on this, how would it actually be different if they were
perfect replicas? What would that take away? I don't think anybody wants to see
perfect replicas. I think you could do something more creative with replicas. So
the Parthenon, for example, was coloured. It was covered in bling. It looks
completely different the way we see it today. Maybe you could do that with
replicas. But I think people still want the staff. Hello, Tiffany. Just help me
understand a bit better. Is your position that great works of art somehow
transcend the context of their origin and that they kind of belong to the world?
I think they do both. So the Parthenon, for example, is both specific to ancient
Athens. And you can see that very well illustrated in the Acropolis Museum. But
at some point, they do become dislodged and acquire different meanings beyond
their moment. That's what they're interested in about them. But I'm thinking
about what artefacts of great historical importance do. And they kind of provide
us an opportunity to look for ourselves and look for meaning in the place that
we find ourselves because look, let's say that I see power in a military coup
here in the UK. And I decide that the Sotunhu mask should be enjoyed by the
people of Bangladesh. They should get a chance to see it as well. So I sign it
over permanently to the best museum in Dhaka. Would that be okay to dislodge it
in that way? I wouldn't be against it. I mean, I love the Sotunhu mask and lots
of people be very cross and they see they have a particular relationship to it
because it is from Britain. I understand that equally. I understand people in
Greece who feel a particular national relationship to the Parthenon. But I do
think, you know, why should we just have Greek art in Greece? What about sending
it to China or Peru or Dhaka for that matter? On a permanent basis to send over
the Sotunhu mask, you wouldn't think that we were being robbed of some part of
our history, some way to understand ourselves and our history that we gain
something as the English, as the British from being able to see it whenever we
want. I love being able to see it whenever I want, whenever I'm in London. But I
think it could do something different in Dhaka and it could do something of
public benefit there. I think Churchill's letters aren't here and Henry VIII's
letters to Anne Boleyn aren't here. And I think, I mean, this is obviously more
literary culture. I think the Codex Bible is in Florence, the first Latin Bible
from the north of England. Objects do, in a way, they're like ambassadors. And I
think that's what the Parthenon can be like. It's an ambassador for ancient
Athens in Groomsbury. And I hear that point and I understand the principle of
loaning objects out and maximising the number of people that can see it. But by
keeping, say, the Benin bronzes here, are we not robbing people in Benin and
Nigeria to understand something of themselves through these objects? Well, I am
sort of a return of some of the Benin bronzes to Nigeria. I think there are lots
in European and American museums, but I do, I am cautious about the current
repatriations because at the moment there isn't a safe place for them. And it's
very likely that the museums that are rapidly shoving them out of their
collections, you sort of have to ask why they're doing that. Those objects are
likely to end up on the private market and an idea when people are unlikely to
see them. Dr Jenkins, Tiffany Jenkins, thank you very much indeed. Our next
witness is Chinnie McDonald, who is director of the Theos Think Tank and author
of God is Not a White Man. We've been talking about artefacts here, but moving
on to the broader question of reparation. What, in a nutshell, because we'll be
unpacking it in a moment, what's the moral case for this generation of British
people paying this generation of African, say, or Indians because of what
happened centuries ago? Well, I think we tend to over complicate this issue. I
think at its heart, it's pretty simple. We all have an instinctive understanding
of fairness and of justice. I've got two little boys. My five-year-old
understands that if he takes something from someone else that doesn't belong to
him, that the right thing to do is to give it back. At its heart, it is an
instinctive understanding. So we tend to over complicate it and try to find ways
in which we won't do it or we shouldn't do it. But really, it's pretty simple.
Tim Stanley. To pick up on that very interesting example, the point is there,
individual responsibility. He's got to give it back because he took it. When
we're talking, however, about great-great-grandparents taking from other great-
great-grandparents, do we have an immediate responsibility for that? I think
it's interesting to say that because we also often talk about remembrance. So
every year we remember those who died in the war. We say we will remember them.
We have a connection to the past, to those who have come before us. Now, yes, if
my son takes something from someone else, it's his individual responsibility.
But it's not just about the past. It's also about the current, the present and
the future. We, it's interesting that lots of people have an interest in their
own ancestry. People who watch, who do you think you are? True. And when they
find out about their ancestors, they feel a connection to that. So I think we do
feel connected to the past. But you see, you're introducing ancestry here, but
we're talking here about states and the responsibility of states. Now, if, for
example, someone migrated here from Poland just 10 years ago, why should they,
with no ancestry linked to the British Isles, after through tax or whatever, pay
reparations for how the British, British subjects may have treated someone two
or three hundred years ago? Well, that's an interesting example, because
similarly, why should I, as someone who was born in Nigeria, who has family who
were taken from Nigeria during the transatlantic slave trade, I paid my taxes,
went towards paying off slave owners when the UK government took out the biggest
loan in its history in 1835 to pay off, they said, compensate slave owners for
the projected loss of earnings. And we were paying that from 1833 until 2015.
Right. Right. OK. I mean, others would argue that was done in order to make
anti-slavery possible, that it had to be paid off in order to avoid a conflict
or avoid legal action, etc., etc. But accepting that, where does this
potentially stop? So we're taking the example of slavery, obviously, because
it's so particularly morally stark, but one could argue that, you know, the
Romans once ruled Britain, the Vikings once raided Britain. Where do we stop in
terms of responsibility for what our societies did in the past? Can I demand
reparations from Norway? Again, I'd say it's not just about the past, it's about
the present. So the difference here is that we are talking about countries and
nations, particularly in the global south, in Africa, in Asia and Latin America,
who are still paying the consequences of centuries of colonization, subjugation,
oppression, violence, that has consequences for how they live today. So there
are repercussions to all that has happened over the past centuries. So it's not
just about the past, it's about the present and it's also about the future. What
kind of people do we want to be? Do we want to be those people who say, wasn't
me? No, thanks. It's got nothing to do with me. Or how might we be people who
say there's a wrong that has been done and how might we be play a part in
writing it? Ella. To fix those problems in the present, what would reparations
look like today? It could look like all sorts of things. It could be national
governments paying to national governments, but I think we can also be a little
bit more creative about it. So it can be institutions, it can be the Church of
England has, as was mentioned, put together a hundred million pound fund to in
some way repair some of the damage that was done its role in the transatlantic
slave trade. But they're also kind of interesting examples, Stormzy and his
bursary for black young people to go to Cambridge. I love an example of the
Virginia Theological Seminary in the US that tracked down the descendants of
those enslaved people who worked at the college centuries ago and they gave them
a thousand pound checks. But they didn't just give them money. Obviously, some
people said no, thanks too little too late, but some people accepted it wasn't
just about money, but it was then also about you can have this check, but you
can also use our library. You can eat for free. It's about restoring
relationship. There's all sorts of interesting and creative ways that we can we
can do this. There is already a process through which Western nations, through
their explanation, try to aid nations that are oppressed or struggling or
developing or however you want to call it. I mean, that is through the process
of aid. And how would that how would it be different? Well, it's correct that
the conversation in international development and philanthropy at the moment is
about talking about reparations rather than aid, because the idea of
philanthropy and of aid is this idea that I am we are benevolent, rich, wealthy
nations who will give charitably. And it's often morally dubious. I mean, it's a
very it's very politicized kind of way of looking at it. I mean, it often does
more for the Western nation than it actually does for the Nigerians or the
Congolese or whoever are receiving that cash or whatever. Well, I'd say good
development is kind of decolonizing and it works with the communities in those
countries to work out how they want to be to kind of develop. Jenny McDonald,
thank you very much indeed. I'll ask this is James or who's associate professor
of the of the philosophy of religion at Cambridge University and a member of
history reclaimed, which is a group of academics who campaign against what they
see is the abuse of history for political purposes. He's on the line from there
now. Is that Professor or what you what you what you think is happening here in
the call for reparations to former colonies or the descendants of slaves and
abuse of history for political purposes? I'm not sure I would go that far,
though I'd certainly disagree with Gina and saying that the issue of reparations
is is a simple one. I think it involves an exceptionally complex set of moral
problems. It's interesting that the example she used is of her son, a case of
individual culpability. But I think in the case of reparations, we're dealing
with a much more complex issue of collective moral guilt and harm and even less
straightforwardly how collective moral guilt and harm persists over time. I
don't think anyone would deny that there are situations from the recent past
where there's a strong case to be made for reparations. An obvious example is
the the 1952 reparations agreement between Israel and Germany, where Germany
financially compensated the Jewish victims of the Holocaust or reparations made
by our own government to survivors of the Malmau uprising in the 1950s. But I
think the case for reparations gets much weaker when one leaves the land of the
living, as it were, and and resurrects horrors from the distant past when one's
effectively asking people who could not have been guilty of a crime to make
atonement to people who couldn't have been victims of the crime. Understood.
Arshaka. Hello, James. I'm so glad you mentioned the land of the living because
that's really where I want to begin. Have you ever heard of a place called
Angola Prison? I think I might have seen some articles about it. Yes. I mean,
just to catch up our audience, Angola Prison is the nickname for Louisiana State
Penitentiary. It's the largest maximum security prison in the US. Seventy five
percent of the inmates there are black and it's called Angola because that's the
name of the slave plantation that the prison was built on top of. So to this
day, you can see disproportionately black men in a chain gang working for free
or very native free, laboring in the fields, guarded by white rifle men on
horseback. Does slavery in this context feel like a distant past or does it feel
like maybe it's invading the land of the living? Not at all. I think the case
that you you point to is a case that's straight from the land of the living.
There may be analogies that we can draw with slavery in the past, but they would
only be analogies. What needs to be shown for reparations to make sense is a
clear causal nexus between slavery from the past and the slave like conditions
that that you draw attention to. And the further we get into the past, the
harder it becomes, I think, to provide the kind of evidential basis for that
causal nexus that you need to command widespread public support for a big scheme
of reparations. But when you when you when you see something like that and you
see the descendants of enslaved people toiling in very similar conditions, do
you honestly look at that and go, well, correlation is not causation? I do. I
look at that and I think that that would be that that is a problem that relates
to policies of incarceration and inappropriate forms of incarceration in the
present. I think you can't change the past. You can affect the present. And I
would look at a situation like that and seek solutions not in the distant past,
but by seeking and not by seeking reparations, but by demanding that the US
government or the state government of Louisiana addresses the problem. Matthew
Turner. Do you think it's useful to have a sense of national responsibility, for
example, for our role in some of the most panacious aspects of imperialism? Yes,
I do. But the question is, how is that responsibility understood? How is it how
is it acknowledged? So should I feel that as a modern British citizen? Should I
feel a sense as a citizen of some kind of responsibility? Because I think you're
saying that I shouldn't because I didn't do it myself. I think there's a
difference between an awareness of one's individual moral failings and, of
course, an awareness of our kind of our role in the collective and our attitudes
to the past. But the basic principle, I think the basic starting point for any
analysis of moral culpability and blame and harm should be at the individual
level and not not at the collective level. But as a historian, presumably you're
happy that we would feel a sense of national pride. I don't know the Magna Carta
or the Battle of Britain. So it seems to me that a sense of responsibility for
what our forebears have done wrong is the kind of the flip side of that. But is
it also be the case that history might teach us that part of the reason that we
are a rich country, relatively speaking, is because we benefited from the
exploitation of the resources and the people of our colonies? Yes, look, I think
if you I think the more you look at this, the phenomenon of slavery through a
historical lens, the more you realize that what's unique about Britain's role in
the slave trade and Britain's colonial past is that we were the first empire,
the first civilization to not only put a stop to it with the 1807 Act, but to
police the seas and to, in fact, we... No, I understand all that. But the point
I'm trying to make is this. We benefited part of what enabled the industrial
revolution and our growth to one of the richest countries in the world was
because of the exploitation of resources and people under colonialism. And
therefore, when we look at those countries now seeking to develop those
countries that we exploited, isn't it reasonable that not only we feel a sense
of responsibility, but also that we might want to express that responsibility
concretely? Yes. And I think we already do that. We already hypothecate 0.7
percent of our gross national income for foreign aid. There's been a lot of
debate over that, but that's a significant contribution. And if you look back in
the 19th century and we've talked already about the 20 million or so that was
given in the early 1830s to slave owners, of course, that was a controversial
payment. But those who think that it was the wrong thing to do owe an
explanation for what the alternative might have been, how we could have brought
an end to slavery faster. But if institutions, whether it's the Church of
England or a university or a gallery or whatever, if they can trace their
origins, their wealth to the ill-gotten gains, as it were, of slavery or
colonialism, isn't it reasonable that they would say, well, actually, we'll use
some of that resource to support the museums, the institutions, the churches,
those countries that we exploited. That's the principle. What's wrong with that
principle? Well, I'm not sure that it's as easy as that. I think there is a real
difficulty of accurately quantifying both historic harms and inherited harms, if
you assume harms can be inherited. Look, I think the historical work that the
Church of England commissioned is a really impressive piece of research on this
front. But I think it makes the mistake, which I think you're making, too, of
measuring historic harm against the financial gain made by the perpetrator from
the harm. And it's very tempting to do that because then you could get a clear
basis of assessment for any reparation that would otherwise be very hard to
establish. But it's a mistake because it's not at all clear that quantifying the
gain is the same as quantifying the harm. There were plenty of companies
connected to the slave trade, most notoriously the South Sea Company, which
failed despite exploiting slaves. And using commercial gain to quantify historic
injustice, this leads to some very odd results. It would be odd to claim that
descendants of slaves connected to commercially unsuccessful companies don't
deserve reparations. But descendants of slaves owned by commercially successful
ones do deserve them. Professor Orr, thank you very much indeed for joining us
this evening. Well, panel, we've covered quite a distance. I did think the
question of returning artifacts would be essentially simpler than the wider
question of reparations. But I don't think it quite turned out this way. Tim,
did you think the first witness, Dan Hicks, was going a bit far with this idea
of the brutish museum that seemed to be, in his view, part of the master plan of
a master race to continue the empire project and white supremacy and all? I
didn't think he was open and explicit enough about what he really thinks. I
mean, he said, are we saying that museums should never change? Well, no one says
that. The question is, how do they change and what is the democratic basis for
that change? Can it be an elite group of curators who have a very specific
political view of the past? Should they be allowed to radically transform
museums? I don't think so. He said there's no other sector where anyone would
make the argument that things shouldn't change. But then again, to most people,
when they think of museums, they think of the word conservation. They think the
idea, in a sense, actually is to keep things the same. And there's something
slightly odd about inheriting a collection that's been built up all over these
years and visited and loved by people. And starting from the principle of
saying, OK, how can I give bits of this back? There's something odd about this
drive, this fanatical drive to hand bits of what Britain has over. And does one
not have a moral obligation to the people who collected it and the people who
love it here? Well, I think one of the things that Dan Hicks was getting at, and
I would have liked to see more discussion of, is the way in which the museum, as
we understand it, is deeply bound up with colonialism. It was a way of
whitewashing looting. And you lend it a kind of cultural authority and a
morality by saying, well, we've done this to protect it from you savages. I
remember actually being at a talk by Roger Scruton, who said, well, the British
in India, they preserved Sanskrit texts from being burned. Then you go, well,
being burned by who? The British. So I would have liked to see a bit more
discussion of that. But it's also, I think, there's a superiority which stays
here with us, where we go, well, we are the responsible custodians of these
objects. You couldn't possibly look at your country as a rife with corruption.
You couldn't possibly say that you'd protect them. One is that I don't think
that does give enough credit to the development of museum sectors, particularly
in Africa over the last couple of decades. And then the second thing is, well,
isn't the principle of returning stolen goods something of an absolute? Right.
If I've nicked your telly, you can't you don't have to guarantee that you won't
smash it in. Not if you did it 500 years ago. Ella, the argument is so
polarised, isn't it? I mean, it was like stolen and looted or rescued on the
other side. There isn't very much room for nuance, like, you know, the Parthenon
had been used as an ammo dump before Lord Elgin arrived. And the kingdom of
Benin was a pretty unpleasant place where the bronzes came from. Well, I mean,
the whole I mean, Tiffany Jenkins, a second witness made this, you know, and
actually links to something that Tim said. You know, one of the important points
is that objects or pieces of art or statues even have a they don't have a static
history. They have a complicated. I'm thinking of that statue in Glasgow, is it
with the cone on its head? You know, the things change, you know, in an
important sense, things change in time and in context. You couldn't have such a
perfect finalisation and distinction between Dan Hicks and Tiffany Jenkins. And
Professor Hicks talking about the fact that he, you know, do we put humans first
or he sort of he didn't want to say it or he said or objects first was what he
was the second part of that sentence. And of course, Tiffany is Professor
Tiffany Jenkins is coming along and saying, well, actually, you know, as an
expert in curating or an expert in objects, you have a moral responsibility to
the thing itself and to situate it in the right place and to tell its story
properly and to do it justice. And I think that there's, you know, her phrase,
objects of apology is such a wonderful way of putting it, because, you know, the
moral quest of someone like Hicks has got nothing really to do with how best to
serve the moral importance of the object. But it's actually all about sounded
like it's all about his white guilt, which is not very interesting for people
paying the entrance fee to museums. Matthew, on this wider question of
reparation, there was a lot of emphasis on it's about the present as much as the
past, which I'm sure you probably agree with. But it rests on the idea that
these other countries are worse off now because of what our ancestors did in the
past. Is that, do you think, beyond argument, uncontestable? Well, I think it's
beyond argument, but I certainly think that any suggestion that somehow there is
some kind of point at which we can say, well, we're not affected by the past in
terms of the benefits and privileges that we have or the countries that we
exploited are not affected by that past. And I don't think that David all wanted
to deny that. I mean, I think what's been interesting to me actually, I seem to
be listening to a different program from other people. I think what's been
interesting is there hasn't been these clear cut moral distinctions, actually. I
think that Dan Hicks and Tiffany Jenkins could co-curate an exhibition extremely
well because they'd both be kind of interested in how you respond to what people
want to see. And Dan Hicks would say, people don't really want to see things
which they associate with exploitation now. And Tiffany Jenkins would say,
people want to see things from around the world, but it should be based upon a
cosmopolitan view of stuff. And I don't think, as I say, I don't think that
James all disagreed with the notion of everything. How do we do it? What's the
right way to do it? And I think that's absolutely right. I don't think it's
straightforward, but I absolutely think that the principle applies. Yeah. Tim,
James all had two moral arguments against reparations. It struck me. One was it
was a question of collective guilt, which he didn't believe in or didn't think
was morally sound. And also the period of time. We weren't the perpetrators.
They weren't the victims, I suppose, in the short term. No. Moral
responsibilities tend to be immediate. They tend to relate to the individual.
What are they responsible for? What can they do something about? And it's
difficult when you come to geographic distance. It's even harder when you come
to centuries of difference between the individual and the events. And given that
we are then locating the individual within nation states, the notion, as I
suggested, that someone who, say, migrated 10 years ago, here 10 years ago, is
responsible for the British state two or three hundred years ago, did. I just
find that very, very hard to buy. And in fact, I see it as a process of... But
Tim, I don't see why, because I think, wouldn't you accept the principle that if
you come to Britain, what you do is you accept that you're British, and part of
accepting that you're British is you're now associated with the history of
Britain. Isn't that part of the citizenship deal? Well, let's flip it. It seems
to me that the other side of this argument is unhealthily obsessed with genetic
ancestry. I find that really quite strange. How people keep coming back to,
well, of course, the English do have a responsibility for this. Whereas this is
owned by this group of people in this part of the world. It's a terribly
unprogressive view of history, that culture is located in one location, and a
race of people have a responsibility for someone. If I may jump in as a child of
empire, when my grandmother was born, it was as a subject of the British empire.
Bangladesh didn't exist until 1971. I would not feel that it was inappropriate
for my tax money, tax money that I pay, to go towards some kind of reparations
or restitution. And the reason is, is that I have participated in educational
institutions, have been the beneficiary of wealth which has been passed down
generationally and kept within British institutions, much of which was extracted
from the global south over the period of colonialism. That's not about me saying
I'm responsible, but it's me saying I've benefited from those things. A generous
gesture, if I may say so, Ash. Indeed. And worthy of you. That's it for this
week. From our panel, Matthew Taylor, Ella Whelan, Ash Sarker and Tim Stanley,
and from me, until the same time next week. Goodbye. The More Amazes, chaired by
Michael Burke and produced by Jonathan Halliwell. And already, we're testing
your musical knowledge after the news. On Radio 4... Our Father... Who art in
heaven... Hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around
the world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this year's Lent Talks, six people
reflect on the words of this prayer. As we forgive those who trespass against
us. Sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. For
thine is the kingdom. Lent Talks, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins this
Wednesday evening.