TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's one o'clock GMT. Hello, I'm Rahul Tandon and this is Business Matters here
on the BBC World Service. Today we're live in the United States and India.
Coming up, an important moment for the global economy. The latest economic data
have come in stronger than expected, which suggests that the ultimate level of
interest rates is likely to be higher than previously anticipated. That of
course is the chairman of the US Federal Reserve, Jerome Powell, saying interest
rates will have to continue to rise for longer than expected. What will that
mean for the world's largest economy? We'll hear from one of its top economists.
And more trouble for TikTok. Could it soon be banned in the United States? And
speaking of trouble, Elon Musk tweets are once again affecting the value of his
company. Twitter right now, it's got a degree of toxicity to it. We'll hear from
a former Twitter vice president. That's Business Matters here on the BBC. First
though, the latest BBC News. I'm Stuart Macintosh with the BBC News. Hello.
Protests in the Georgian capital Tbilisi against a controversial foreign agent
law have continued late into the night. Hundreds of people gathered outside the
parliament building where police used water cannon and tear gas to try to
disperse them. Raihan Dimitri reports from Tbilisi. The protest broke out on
Tuesday evening after lawmakers from the governing Georgian Dream Party approved
the first reading of a foreign agents bill. It would require non-governmental
and independent media organisations who receive more than 20% of their funding
from abroad to declare themselves as foreign agents. The opposition says it's a
Russian-style law that would stigmatise and clamp down on Georgia's vibrant
civil society and free press. The UN Refugee Agency has called on lawmakers here
in Britain to reconsider draft laws that would detain and deport people arriving
by boat to claim asylum. A spokesperson for the UNHCR said the measures violated
both the letter and the spirit of the refugees convention. The British
government says the legislation is the only way to deter people making the
journey by sea. From Geneva, here's Imogen Fowkes. The UN Refugee Agency is
still studying the UK's new legislation but says it has profound concerns. At
first sight the proposals look, the agency said, like an asylum ban which would
violate the UN Convention on Refugees. The convention, which the UK was a key
founder of, says everyone seeking protection has a right to have their claim for
asylum heard, even if they have arrived illegally. Denying that right would
undermine the very purpose of the convention, the refugee agency said. The White
House says it supports a bipartisan bill in Congress that will give President
Biden new powers to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok and other foreign
technologies that could pose security threats. Our North America technology
correspondent James Clayton reports. TikTok has experienced this all before. In
2020 the company came close to being banned in the US by President Trump. But if
they thought that Joe Biden's presidency would be more amenable towards the
company, they thought wrong. TikTok has been able to do the seemingly impossible
in times of political polarisation in the US, unite both the Democrats and the
Republicans. The cross-party bill will give the US government powers to ban
TikTok and other technologies they believe pose national security risks. Five
women have sued the American state of Texas, saying they were denied abortions
even though their lives were in danger. The lawsuit follows a US Supreme Court
ruling last year that removed constitutional protection for abortion rights. The
women want the state to clarify that doctors can provide abortions in cases
where continuing the pregnancy is unsafe. World News from the BBC. President
Zelensky's adviser, Mikhailo Podolyak, has said Ukraine was absolutely not
involved in the sabotage attacks last year that severed Nord Stream gas
pipelines in the Baltic. Earlier, a report by the New York Times suggested a
pro-Ukrainian group was responsible for the attacks. The report cited anonymous
US intelligence officials who were said to have stressed that they'd seen no
evidence that the Ukrainian government itself was involved. Israeli forces have
killed at least six Palestinians in a raid on Jenin in the occupied West Bank.
The Israeli military says one of the dead is a militant suspected of killing two
Jewish settlers in Huara last week. Palestinian health workers said 16 others
were injured in the fighting. Cyclone Freddy is expected to make landfall again
in Mozambique later this week after it struck Madagascar for a second time on
Monday, bringing strong winds and torrential rain. Madagascar's government says
eight people were killed. Scientists here in Britain have found that bumblebees
learn to solve puzzles by watching their more experienced peers. The researchers
said their study showed that the insects were intelligent and that not only
instinct but also social learning play a large role in societies of bees, ants
and wasps. Charles Haverland reports. The experts devised a puzzle box that
could be opened using either a blue tab or a red tab to access a sugar reward
inside. They trained groups of so-called demonstrator bumblebees to open the box
using one of the two methods, watched by a set of observer bees. When the
observers tackled the task, 98% of the time they used the method they had
witnessed, even after discovering the alternative option. The bees therefore
learned this behaviour socially, not through discovery. The scientists' broader
conclusion is that innovations can spread like social media memes through insect
colonies and they can respond quickly to new environmental challenges. And
that's the BBC News. Hello and welcome to Business Matters here on the BBC World
Service. I'm Rahul Tandon. Hope you are all well. Coming up on the programme
today, will the US Senate tame TikTok? The Chinese Communist Party has proven
over the last few years that is willing to lie about just about everything.
We're going to hear from TikTok's head of public policy for the Americas. I
think it's unfortunate if we become a pawn in a larger geopolitical debate or
crisis. And we're going to tell you about the most successful film in the
history of Bollywood cinema, probably Indian cinema as well. I'll be joined
throughout the programme by two guys on opposite sides of the world from San
Francisco's Bay Area. We have Alison von Diggelen, host of Fresh Dialogues,
based of course in the heart of Silicon Valley. Lots of tech news coming up on
the programme, Alison. But it is Wednesday morning here. I know it's Tuesday
where you are at the moment, but Wednesday means it's International Women's Day.
And I just wanted to ask you a question. When you're around in the tech world,
are you seeing more women in senior positions yet? It's a perennial problem in
Silicon Valley. We have some substantial high profile females in tech, but not
enough of them. And the pipeline is and continues to be an issue. Not enough
females are doing the prerequisites to get into tech. And something really has
to change. A lot of efforts are being made, but not enough progress has been
made. We're also joined by Jyothi Malhotra, editor of the National Strategic
Affairs at the print website. Always a pleasure to have you on the programme.
We're seeing Indian CEOs really coming into the US and taking up those big
companies. Are we seeing more female CEOs being able to do that? I think more
and more of that is happening, Rahul, in India. I think, unfortunately, a lot of
these women CEOs are also daughters and wives of their more sort of successful
partners and fathers and things. But yes, there is, I think, especially in the
younger generation, many more women coming up and doing much better. Well, that
is good news on International Women's Day. But let's hope that that progress
continues to speed up. We're going to start the programme by talking about
something we like to talk about quite a lot, that of course, are interest rates.
What happens to them in the world's largest economy, the US, has a huge impact,
not just there, but also on the global economy. So when the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve, the US Bank, speaks, people around the world listen very
carefully. And Jerome Powell was speaking in the US Senate on Tuesday. In light
of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary
policy affects economic activity and inflation, the Committee slowed the pace of
interest rate increases over its past two meetings. Although inflation has been
moderating in recent months, the process of getting inflation back down to 2%
has a long way to go and is likely to be bumpy. As I mentioned, the latest
economic data have come in stronger than expected, which suggests that the
ultimate level of interest rates is likely to be higher than previously
anticipated. If the totality of the data were to indicate that 50% of the
world's interest rates are going to be higher than the previous year, and the
totality of the data were to indicate that faster tightening is warranted, we'd
be prepared to increase the pace of rate hikes. Someone else who was in the
Senate on Tuesday was Mark Zende, Chief Economist of Moody's Analytics. I think
expectations before today would be maybe two more rate hikes, a quarter point
for each hike. Now at least three, maybe four rate hikes. So instead of the
federal funds rate, which is settling just north of 5%, it'll be probably closer
to five and a half. But broadly speaking, he was, as people in the bond market
say, quite hawkish, sending a pretty strong signal that he thinks the Fed needs
to do a lot more work here, raise rates more, keep them up for longer, to rein
in growth and quell inflation. If these rate rises continue for longer than
expected, is it inevitable that the US economy moves into recession? No, I don't
think so. I mean, I think the US economy is incredibly resilient. You know,
given these kind of strong fundamentals, I think the economy can weather higher
interest rates. But it's gonna be tricky. I mean, I don't want to be Pollyannish
here. I mean, I think under any scenario, it's going to be, you know, a
difficult 12 to 18 months. But I don't know, I don't think it's inevitable. I
think we've got a fighting chance to navigate through without an outright
recession. Can we talk about your appearance in the Senate? A lot of talk about
the debt ceiling in the US, the amount of money it can borrow, its borrowing
limit, if that isn't raised, could we see the US moving into recession? And then
we're talking about a lot of job losses? Yes, if we breach the debt limit, if
the Treasury, if we get to a place where the Treasury runs out of cash, and
that's possible at the moment, because the Democrats and the Republicans can't
agree on this. Yeah, no, that's absolutely true. I mean, they've got to, they
got to sign on the dotted line, pass a piece of legislation, increasing it,
suspending it, or, you know, I would prefer just getting rid of it altogether.
But, but yeah, they got to do that. And we don't know precisely what the date
the date is for when they run out, the Treasury runs out of cash and can't pay
everyone on time. But my, my, my sense is, it's probably going to be about mid
August. So we need to see Republicans and Democrats come together and, you know,
agree to raise the debt limit. And you're right, if they don't, and we breach
and someone doesn't get paid, then yeah, that at that point, we're going in,
there's there's just no way. And by the way, we're going to be taking everyone
with us, it's going to be a real mess around the world. If that does happen, 7
million jobs could be lost. The darkest scenario is the Treasury can't pay
everyone on time. And that continues on for a while through, you know, into at
least four or five, six weeks. If that happens, if that's the scenario, then
yeah, the recession that's dead ahead is going to be incredibly serious. And US
could lose 7 million jobs unemployment, get back to 8. Just for context, the US
unemployment rate today is 3.4%. So it gives you a sense of magnitude. So yeah,
I mean, under the darkest scenarios, this is this is pretty dark. But, but
Rahul, let me just say, you know, the debt limit has been in place for 100 years
plus. And you know, we've had this, we've gone down this path many, many times
before, brinkmanship, back and forth, Sturm and Drang, and at the end of all of
it, you know, lawmakers do come together. So I still expect that with a high
probability. But, you know, I do think we need to consider the alternatives.
Mark Zandi, the chief economist of Moody Analytics, a man that many people say
the Biden administration listened to more than any other economist in the US at
this particular point in time, Alison, a lot to digest about the state of the US
economy, those interest rate rises, not unexpected, but an indication of the
sort of confusing state of the US economy. Many people thought that by now, with
those interest rate hikes, the economy would be cooling down a bit. It's not.
No, it's certainly not. And these increases in interest rates have an outsized
impact on the tech industry. It's more reliant on outside funding than other
industries. And listeners might be surprised to learn that there's a knock on
effect to employees, those that have kept their jobs in tech. Stock price
fluctuations impact compensation a lot because a lot of tech compensation is in
stock grants. For example, you know, let's talk, let's give your typical 30 year
old software engineer, she may have half of her compensation in stock grants. So
when that stock price reacts to interest rates going up, or just the worry that
interest rates will go up, she gets a major pay cut. So that is something to
consider. Yeah, I think it's interesting, isn't it, because the US is the
world's biggest economy, what happens there impacts every single part of the
world. And people will be looking at this in places like India, and worrying
about the dollar strengthening and making imports more expensive. Oh, yes,
absolutely. Rahul, it's very closely watched, as you know, what happened,
though, is that the speech has come exactly when the holy holidays beginning. So
I think, you know, it is International Women's Day, as you all know, across the
world, but it's also a big festival in India today. And so I think the speech is
going to get about 24 hours of sort of sleepy time before India wakes up on
Thursday and reacts to the speech. But you're absolutely right. And on the
economy, I think two or three things are happening. First of all, the Reserve
Bank, which is India's central bank has said that the economy is doing better
than expected coming off COVID. More than 6% in terms of growth. But I think
because the Fed has been a little uneven in December, if you remember back in
December, the expectations and inflation weren't as they are now. So it has been
to the impact on the Indian economy is also quite uneven. So the overall growth
rate and Raghuram Rajan, India's sort of well known former central banker has
warned that the average annual growth yield could be just like 3%. And he's
referred to this very famous sentence, it's called the Hindu rate of growth,
which to your international audiences may make no sense. But it basically means
that the Indian economy will sort of grow only between three and 4%, which is a
huge source of worry. So yes, there will be a lot of interest as we go off, but
that's only 24 hours from now. Yeah, three or 4%. I think a lot of countries in
the world, Alison would love to have three or 4% growth at the moment, but it
doesn't create enough jobs. And then your final point from you, Alison, on this,
just give us a sense of what it's like in Silicon Valley at the moment. We
talked so much, don't we, about these job losses in the tech industry. We're
going to come on to this a little bit later in a second, Elon Musk, as well. You
know, when you're moving around at the moment, is there a real sense of fear
amongst tech workers that they could get fired tomorrow as well? Yes, this
latest round of job cuts has really spooked a lot of people because it wasn't
just the last in get fired, it was at all levels. It doesn't matter how senior
you are. So I think that rattled quite a lot of the tech community here. Right,
we're going to move on and talk about the festival that Jyoti was talking about
just a few minutes ago. Jyoti, you want to explain what that song is, why it's
so popular at this time of year in India? Well, that's because, Rahul, like I
just said, you know, we are into, it's early morning here in India and in a few
hours from now, the whole country, especially across North India, is going to be
completely taken over by colour and, you know, sort of water, watercolour and
everybody's going to be playing the festival of Holi, which is that the whole
sort of, you know, there's a lot of sort of drink and dance and colour and
basically it's just one big holiday. You know what, you're making me, you're
reminding me of how much I miss India on a day like this, because everybody will
just sort of run around and, you know, you'll put colours on people and throw
things over people. It's a sort of a day where everything goes. But what about
the business side of this? Is it a day, you know, we obviously have Diwali, we
have Eid in India, which are big festivals for Hindus and Muslims respectively,
where we know a lot more spending takes place. Does it happen with Holi as well?
Are we seeing that more and more? It absolutely happens with Holi, not compared
to what happens with Diwali, which is later in the year, but Holi is also a big
festival. And a couple of other things are happening, Rahul. You know, ever
since a lot of Chinese products were banned in India, you know, going off the
border problem that we've had, that India has had with China in the last couple
of years, well, almost three years now. So a lot of Chinese products have been
banned, which means that the market has really boomed with Indian made goods. So
Indian manufacturers are doing much better. And by several estimates, about 50
or $60 million worth of sales will happen in this long extended Holi weekend. So
not just colour and, you know, water guns and you know, that sort of small
stuff, but even like big sales, the e commerce giants, Amazon, Flipkart, they're
all, you know, sales are sort of everywhere. So it's one big party, Rahul, as
you know. And yes, so there's a lot of sort of money management type of stuff
also sloshing around. So yeah, but I think at the bottom of the, the bottom line
is that people are not just having fun, but people are spending, big spending is
happening in the markets. But that happens, Alison, doesn't it? When you have
fun, you're in a good mood. So you don't mind shelling out a little bit more.
You know, we used to have this terrace in Kolkata, where we were and the whole
family would get together on Holi, you know, cousins, nieces, nephews, and we
basically just chuck colours all over us and basically chuck colours at anybody
who went past. But festivals, we have it, I suppose, with Halloween, Christmas,
with all sorts of other things are becoming an important part, Alison, of many
countries' economies. Absolutely. Mother's Day is coming up in May. Oh, don't
remind me. In the United States, not March. There's March here, isn't there?
It's May in the US. It is March in the UK and I think May almost everywhere else
in the world. But last year, despite the anticipation of recession and people
tightening their belts, I think it made a new record. They're saying $32 billion
were spent. Wow. And 90% of American adults celebrate Mother's Day with
jewellery, flowers, and gifts of experience are popular, you know, like treating
your mum to a concert or a day out somewhere. Well, you know, I'm missing
Mother's Day this year. It's coming up in a couple of weeks' time and my mum has
already asked me to compensate her with a bigger present than normal. And since
I don't get her anything most years, it's really not very hard to do. Right,
we're going to move away from Mother's Day because I'm beginning to feel quite
guilty about it at the moment. And we're going to talk about US-China relations
once again, because they are really been up there dominating the news headlines
over the last few days. Of course, that important gathering taking place in
China. There was a rare outbreak of bipartisanship in the US. Congress is a
group of Democratic and Republican senators introduced a new piece of
legislation designed to protect national security that could in effect allow the
US government to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok. There is growing concern in
the United States that the social media company could share users' sensitive
information with the authorities in Beijing. The authorities in Beijing say
that's not the case. The Republican Senator John Thune is one of the bill's co-
sponsors. The Chinese Communist Party has proven over the last few years that is
willing to lie about just about everything. It's safe to assume that if the CCP
is willing to lie about its spy balloon and cover up the origins of the worst
pandemic in 100 years, they'll lie about using TikTok to spy on American
citizens. It's high time we address this issue. I think this legislation goes
about it in the right way to get something on the President's desk and start to
attack this problem. Before that happened, that sort of unison of the Democrats
and the Republicans, Michael Beckerman spoke to the BBC. He's the TikTok's head
of public policy for the Americas. We understand the concerns. It's on us to
make sure that we go above and beyond. But the concerns on national security,
the concerns on data going to China or other countries is not unique to TikTok.
But we understand because of our growth and where we sit and the origins of the
company that we have a higher level of security. And that's why we're getting so
much scrutiny. And that's why we're going above and beyond these systems that
we're building around the world. It would be hard to deny that we're caught up
in those very broad geopolitics that really have nothing to do with us. I think
it's unfortunate if we become a pawn in a larger geopolitical debate or crisis.
Michael Beckerman, the TikTok's head of public policy for the Americas. You are
there in Silicon Valley, Alison, at the heart of the tech industry. Does this
feel different to 2020 when President Trump wanted TikTok banned or at least its
US arms sold to a US company? Well, I think it's yes and I think there are a lot
of influences at play. I think there may be some truth to the security risk
TikTok poses. If we remember Huawei, the cell phone company, it was found to be
building spy systems into its networks. So I think the bottom line is just
because we're a bit paranoid about the Chinese doesn't mean they're not out to
get us. But I think also part of it is it's a tit for tat against China for
banning Facebook, Google, Amazon, etc. And I think the politicians are just fed
up playing whack-a-mole. They don't want to just ban TikTok. This bill isn't
just about banning TikTok. TikTok's not even mentioned in the bill. What they
want are wider powers. But it's interesting to know that the Commerce Secretary
Gina Raimondi, if this bill passes, she'll have the power to deal with these
perceived threats. But she's already gone on record to say that a complete ban
of TikTok would be political suicide. So it gives you food for thought. I mean,
there could be some protectionism involved in this too, an attempt to stifle
foreign competition from China. But it's a complicated matter. And we don't have
all the facts. No, we don't at this particular point in time. Jodhpur, you're in
a country which of course has taken action against TikTok already, hasn't it?
That's right, Rahul. India banned TikTok and actually over in the last couple of
years, over 200 Chinese apps. But the TikTok ban was quite significant and sort
of made several waves because this happened in the wake of the Chinese, you
know, we have a border problem with China. And this happened nearly three years
ago. And the Indian government accuses China of sort of entering India's
territory. Now, those conversations are still on. But at the moment, when India
banned TikTok about two and a half years ago, there were over 200 million users
of TikTok in India. So a huge sort of consumption of TikTok was taking place in
India. But I think there has been a lot of support, public support as well, for
the government's decision to ban TikTok because of the border row that India is
continuing to have with China. Yeah, I remember. So because of the sort of
nationalism questions. But having said that, there is a lot of concern about
alleged surveillance and, you know, stuff like that. So I think the Indian
government's decision has had a lot of support. I remember when this happened,
actually, because my niece, who was a big TikTok user, called me up and said,
they're banning TikTok. I'm going to have to leave the country. She is still
there and she managed to survive somehow or the other. I was interested, Alison,
when you said political suicide to ban TikTok, because there's no doubt, isn't
there, the president, the former president, Donald Trump, who wants to be
president again, is going to raise this issue during his campaign. And I'm sure
we'll say he's going to ban TikTok. Yes, I think it's, you know, I think the
bottom line is all these politicians want to be seen to be doing something, you
know, punching China on the nose. Is that popular in the US? Would that give
similar support to what Jyothi talked about in India, where there's huge public
support for the decision to ban TikTok? I think in some, probably in the
majority, yes. But I think, you know, there will be people like your niece who
are just up in arms about this. But as you say, there are plenty of other
options for young people. But I think another aspect, you know, as a parent, I
think the claim that apps like this are rotting the minds of our youth
definitely has some credibility. But it's not just TikTok, other apps like
YouTube Shorts, Instagram, they're getting young people addicted to these time
wasting, mind numbing activities that shorten their attention span and distract
them from getting important things like school and college work done. But you
know what, I need to put you on the phone to my daughter. I think if you could
repeat that to her, I would be extremely, I would be very grateful. For a small
fee. Jyothi, just briefly, as we come up towards the news, of course, this is a
week where we've seen, you know, very strong statements from President Xi,
unheard of when it comes to the US. What have India made of what President Xi
has had to say? India hasn't said very much publicly. Everybody's watching the
Chinese, the meeting, that's the gathering that's taking place in China as we
speak. But publicly, there's been absolutely no comment. You do know that last
week in Delhi, there was a G20 foreign ministers meeting where the Chinese
foreign minister was in Delhi, Xin Gang. And I think he was sort of
diplomatically told off that the border conflict with India, which is, which
sort of is on top of everybody's mind, and that must be resolved, and not sort
of pushed on the back burner. So yes, we watch what happens in China carefully.
But then we hold, you know, hold our punches and, and don't let the rest of the
world know exactly what we're doing. There we go. I'm going to send Alison my
daughter's number while we have a break. We'll be back very soon. 930 and 20
GMT. We're talking about the most successful Bollywood film ever. The White
House says it supports a bill in Congress that will give President Biden powers
to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok as a security threat. The legislation has
bipartisan support in the Senate. Five women have sued the American state of
Texas, saying they were denied abortions even though their lives were in danger.
Texas has an abortion ban but allows terminations in an emergency. President
Zelensky's advisor, Mikhailo Podolyak, has said Ukraine was absolutely not
involved in the sabotage attacks last year that severed Nord Stream gas
pipelines in the Baltic. Earlier, a report by the New York Times suggested a
pro-Ukrainian group was responsible. Cyclone Freddie is expected to make
landfall again in Mozambique later this week after it struck Madagascar for a
second time on Monday, bringing strong winds and torrential rain. Madagascar's
government says eight people were killed and more than 1,000 homes were
destroyed. Scientists here in Britain have found that bumblebees learn to solve
puzzles by watching their more experienced peers. Experts from Queen Mary
University of London trained a set of bees to open a puzzle box containing a
sugar reward. These bees then passed on the knowledge to others in their
colonies. BBC News. You're listening to Business Matters here on the BBC World
Service. We have Jothi in Delhi getting ready to celebrate the Festival of Holi,
one of my personal favourites, I have to say. And of course we've got Alison
there in Silicon Valley in California. We're going to talk, Alison, about Elon
Musk. Give us a sense in Silicon Valley. How is he viewed? The tech man who's
become a billionaire. Is he still seen as a hero? Are people just getting a bit
fed up of him now? Well, he still has some loyal fans that doesn't matter what
he says on Twitter, they will just support him through and through. But it seems
to me that, you know, he's really taken a step in the very dark direction this
week. I feel like since he bought Twitter, he's removed what little small filter
he had before. We've now got this unfettered portal to his brain and it's not a
pretty sight. But I think to back up, I mean, what's really made Musk a fearless
and groundbreaking innovator is the same trait that makes him a heartless boss
and a dangerous provocateur. He's an audacious rule breaker and has no respect
for society's conventions or common decency. So I think there are a few people
that are defending him right now. I mean, I think like the cancel culture, you
know, we can still say Michael Jackson was an incredible musician. And I think
Elon Musk will always go down in history as an incredible innovator. But I
think, you know, he is he's really flirting with serious danger now. Well, let's
let's pick up on his flirting with serious danger because of his latest bad
press. And there has been a lot of it, as Alison said, that came when a Twitter
employee who was suddenly locked out of his work computer had to tweet Elon Musk
to find out whether he had been fired. Our technology reporter Shiona McCullen
picks up the story. Now what's happened is we're seeing a really human side to
one of these layoffs. So we've got this employee, Hallie Thorlifson. He was
locked out of his computer a week and a half ago. He decided to then take to
Twitter to ask Elon Musk directly, you know, have I been sacked? What's
happening here? And this has ended up with this very public exchange on the
platform between the two of them, which has since gone viral. Several follow up
questions from from Mr. Musk. Mr. Thorlifson, you know, outlines what things
he's done at Twitter, what his job involves. And Mr. Musk then saying two
laughing emojis and that's it. And then confirming, you know, he had lost his
job. There were some extraordinary tweets, Jyoti, in this particular exchange by
Elon Musk. He said that his former employee didn't do any work. Then it emerged
that his former employee actually had muscular dystrophy, obviously a condition
which makes it difficult to work at times. Elon Musk has now apologized, saying
he's spoken to his former employee on a video call. He said, I'd like to
apologize to Hallie for my misunderstanding of the situation was based on things
I was told that were untrue or in some cases true, but not meaningful. He is now
considering remaining at Twitter. We're going to hear from somebody who knows
Twitter very well in a second, Jyoti. But what have you made of this, the way
that, you know, the man running one of the world's best known companies is
behaving with one of his former employees, maybe coming back to work now so
publicly? It's a complete shock. I mean, it's completely ridiculous the manner
in which this whole thing has unfolded, even if he didn't know that his own
employee had a health condition. And that's not that's, of course, very much
part of the problem. But that is secondary to me. You cannot talk like this,
especially on an open social media platform. What kind of leadership does this
demonstrate? Terrible. And, you know, for somebody as rich as him, for somebody
as as like Alison said, is, you know, is an incredible innovator. But this is
it's really shocking. And Twitter is a is an open platform that that is so
useful for people like us, especially in journalism, is you get so much
information. But for us to use, you know, to you to participate in a sense and
platform like this, where the leader of that of that company behaves so badly. I
mean, I think if it was anybody else, if he was not the owner of the company, I
think he should have been sacked right now. Well, he's done that to a lot of his
own employees. Let's pick up on some of the points that Jyoti made there. I've
been speaking to Bruce Daisley, who's a former Twitter vice president. It's
remarkable, isn't it? It's difficult to think of a comparison of someone who
sets about trying to humiliate someone. It's just remarkable to witness some of
the things going on, because it just appears that Musk really has no off switch
and doesn't appear to have anyone giving him advice about things that might not
necessarily play well. A lot of people think that famous people like Elon Musk,
even though he owns the company, would have an army of people working under him
who probably deal with his Twitter account. That clearly doesn't seem to be the
case. He just seems to respond whenever he feels like it with whatever he wants
to say. I was fortunate to chat to some of my former Twitter colleagues, some of
whom have been fired by Musk. Some of them described to me situations where
he'll be sitting in a meeting room and he'll think of a tweet and he'll ask the
people in the room whether he should tweet it. And one of my colleagues who
ended up being fired by Musk said to me that generally, broadly a consensus in
the room that no one likes to say no to him. Anyone who's survived and has got
any tenure under the billionaire seems to have learned that it's best not to
disagree with him. So Musk has just lived in this bubble for so long now that
his instincts about what is right and wrong have started to fail him to some
extent, because he's not necessarily in touch with what real people think. The
difference I suppose here from his other businesses, whether we're talking about
SpaceX or Tesla, even though at times he was in the public domain, he wasn't in
the public domain as much as he is now, was he? That's right. And you know, and
Tesla, because it was initially a challenger, any publicity was good publicity.
He used to boast that he'd never spent a penny on marketing of Tesla. Do you
think he still believes that? It's really interesting, the response of the
markets to his Tesla product day last week. And I think the general response was
that the stock fell after he'd completed it. The interesting thing about this is
that Tesla has what Twitter doesn't have. It has a listed price. It has,
effectively, the stock market can act like an opinion poll. It can act like a
voting system on what they think of his decisions. Twitter doesn't have that.
Yeah, Twitter, of course, private at the moment. Final question to you. When you
act in the way that he has done with this former employee of his, that is going
to put some advertisers off from being involved in your company. These decisions
he's making will have financial implications, won't they? Yeah, most definitely.
There was reporting from his own accounts. He told a Twitter Spaces session a
month or two ago that revenue was down about 40%. To put that into real terms,
the annual revenue last year of Twitter was around $5 billion. So effectively,
he's saying that the revenue is on track to deliver about $3 billion. And this
is exactly the reason why, because advertisers broadly ask themselves the
question, do I want to be associated with the place that I advertise? And
Twitter right now, it's got a degree of toxicity to it. And so advertisers will
be thinking, I've got no shortage of options of where I could advertise. Maybe
I'll just pause for the moment and come back and spend in the next cycle. Bruce
Daisley there, who was a high ranking official at Twitter. Alison, he has
apologised, of course. But let me give you a couple of headlines that have come
in in the past few hours. It seems that the Federal Trade Commission in the US
has demanded that Twitter turn over internal communications related to its
owner, Elon Musk. The EU is telling Elon Musk here on Wednesday morning to hire
more staff to moderate Twitter. The simple fact is that since he's taken over
it, a lot of analysts say that the company is probably valued at about a quarter
of the price that he paid for it. I mean, all his actions are actually
destroying his own company's value, aren't they, every single day? It seems to
be, yes. And yet today, Elon Musk went on a live stream interview at the Morgan
Stanley Conference. I didn't see that, but I heard some reports of it that he is
pushing out new features on Twitter. And he's he's talking, he's he's claiming
that the number of advertisers is on the upswing. And, you know, as much as I
mean, I share Jyoti's abhorrence for what he did to this Icelandic entrepreneur,
former Twitter employee. But there's in the past, naysayers against Elon Musk
have been proven wrong time and time again. So there is as much as I disapprove
of his behaviour, there is a small part of me that says maybe he can turn
Twitter around. I think as every day goes by and he keeps shooting himself in
the foot by these toxic messages with people, I think the chances are slimmer
and slimmer. But I think there still is a chance that, you know, anyone can turn
Twitter around is Elon Musk. Well, there we go. Alison, you know, this
particular industry very well. Let's see what happens. I'm sure Elon Musk will
pop up in a few conversations now and then here on Business Matters. Let's go
back to Jyoti's part of the world now, South Asia, because for the last year or
so, across our coverage here on World Service Business Programmes, we've been
hearing some grim stories about life in Sri Lanka, the economic crisis there
that's affected just about everybody in the country, millions of people
struggling to get access to food, fuel and medicine. Here's a watchmaker in
Colombo that we spoke to last week here on our business programmes. And the
country is going from bad to worse. We are all suffering. We all. Now the
business has gone down. We are only depending on those foreigners to give us
help. We are worse than beggars now. Land of beggars. We have become a land of
beggars. It's a shame. As a Sri Lankan, I'm ashamed. The begging he was
referring to there was this bailout of 2.9 million dollars from the
International Monetary Fund that Sri Lanka would get there. But that was
dependent on restructuring some of its quite considerable debts, particularly
ones with China, India and Japan. Well, it looks possible that that will now
happen. Shantidev Rajan has been negotiating on behalf of the Sri Lankan
government, and he told me that with everything in place, he expects the IMF to
ratify this deal on the 20th of March. The funds will be approved. But the other
thing that the IMF wanted was this financing assurance from the official
creditors, because that means that they will proceed to negotiate in good faith.
What will this mean for Sri Lanka? We have spoken with you. We have spoken to
others in Sri Lanka. This is a country that is still in a perilous financial
position. Is this the beginning of moving away from that position? It'll mean a
lot in terms of alleviating the shortages and the current uncertainty around the
economic situation. Sri Lanka has been in a deep recession, I would say. Growth
last year was negative 9 percent, the second lowest growth next to Ukraine. The
money, as well as the confidence, will help alleviate some of that. That will
enable Sri Lanka to start exporting again, as well as stimulate the local
economy and businesses. It still has a long way to go to resume rapid economic
growth. Our listeners will look at this, and it's not just about the $2.9
billion that Sri Lanka can get from the IMF. This can open up further funding,
both from institutions like the World Bank, but also maybe the private sector as
well. That's right. It's like a seal of confidence, and that gives investors a
lot of confidence. And so I think we can see some foreign direct investment and
other kinds of external finance coming into the country. You've been involved in
the process here right from the start. How difficult has it been to sit down
with countries and try and get them to at least agree to look at restructuring
this debt? Well, I don't think it's that difficult to get them to sit down and
agree because they all saw the handwriting on the wall. But it's taken longer
than people thought the whole process, hasn't it? It's taken longer, I would
say, for two reasons. One is that the reforms were politically difficult because
the economy was in a recession with high inflation at the same time. The economy
was tumbling down and inflation was about 50 percent. We're talking about
increasing taxes and cutting subsidies. That's a painful reform in those
circumstances, but they did it. So I think six to nine months is not
unreasonable to get there for that. Shantanu has been involved in those
negotiations, been speaking to us regularly here on our business programs.
Another thing that he said to me, which I found fascinating, was that one of the
other big factors that has delayed the restructuring of debt, which means it's
taken longer for Sri Lanka to be able to get close to accessing this money, was
the political tensions between the US and China. And that actually, you know,
because they're at loggerheads with each other, that means that countries like
Sri Lanka get tied up in that as well. And we could see that affecting other
countries as well. Let's take Pakistan. Rahul, even if there is tension between
US and China around South Asia, and you mentioned Pakistan, so you have two
countries now, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, and I'm not going to say Nepal or
Bangladesh right now. So let's just focus on Sri Lanka. Even if there is tension
between the US and China, why should China delay the promise of lending or of
assuring Sri Lanka that it will lend money to Sri Lanka so that the IMF can get
its bailout package sooner than later? I mean, I think that's really horrifying
for the Chinese to hold this sort of blackmail over Sri Lanka's head, because it
has tensions with a third country. Of course, these tensions are apparent for
all of us here in South Asia. The Chinese are expanding their sphere of
influence very aggressively here in South Asia. India also has huge problems
with it. I referred earlier to this border conflict that we have with China, but
that's not the point. I think when this crisis happened in Sri Lanka, and it's
about a whole year old, as you know, the anniversary of the so-called Aragalya
or the, within quotes, the revolution, which is the word in Sinhala, is coming
around. Now, this crisis has been around and the IMF concedes that Sri Lanka has
been waiting for six months for China to say yes or no, or maybe. And India, and
I have to say for my country, at least this time around, right from the start
has been very, very supportive of what's been happening in Sri Lanka, whether in
terms of exporting or sending, you know, fuel, medicines, just sort of stuff.
India moved quickly. But a point to you on this, Jyoti, is, you know, we can
look there and talk about who should have been restructuring debt quicker or
not. But it is the Sri Lankans themselves who got themselves into this mess,
didn't they, under the Rajapaksas? Of course they did. And I think they concede
that. Listen, Gautam Bhai, Rajapaksa is not the cleanest of politicians across
the world. We have to learn to live, not, sorry, let me say that again. We have
to live with the crackpots in our own part of the world. The Sri Lankans will
punish him. They have already. He's been ousted. The people have... But the
damage to the economy is huge, isn't it? Even if they punish him. They've been
saying, yes, this was a country that, you know, was one of the economic success
stories of Asia. No, no, that's fine, Rahul. But the fact is that if China wants
otherwise to expand its influence in Sri Lanka, then it jolly well also assure
this country, as well as the IMF, international bodies, that it will help. Now,
for China not to do that is, I think, a complete abdication of its neighbourly
duties. And that's OK. Then countries like India will step in, supported by the
US. So then this great power rivalry will only be accentuated. Alison, one of
the problems that countries like Sri Lanka face, Pakistan faces, is this rising
strength of the US dollar. And we go back to where we started. Jeroen Powell
will be giving more evidence in Congress on Wednesday. But a strengthening of
those interest rates means the US dollar is going to get stronger. That is bad
news for many countries across the world. Yes, absolutely. It's going to
increase their borrowing costs and increase the cost of doing business. But I
think the point that I was focusing in on in this story is China's role, as
Jyoti said, as a global lender. It's grown dramatically over the past decade.
It's the biggest lender now. Yes. Sri Lanka is just one of the countries. And I
think the powers that be in America, the United States, will be looking at its
global influence, which is going to be rising in a similar fashion. But that is
just the nature, Alison, isn't it, of the changing world that we live in. We
have now, we discussed this on the programme, you know, yesterday night. But for
the first time, the US has a challenger, not just militarily like the Soviet
Union was, but economically in the form of China. And countries, many of them
across Africa, will go to China for money because it doesn't put in place some
of the conditions that the IMF and the World Bank put in place. Yes. And it's
also going to impose its rule of law, which, you know, if we look at some of the
the dastardly things that China has been up to, it's very concerning, you know,
for people that believe in, you know, freedom of speech and democracy. It's a
very concerning progression. I think a lot of people would agree with you on
that. But when you speak to some of these countries who've taken the money, they
will tell you that, look, OK, you know, we take on board those concerns, but
we've been in debt for generations to the IMF. And it's time that we tried
something else. Yes. And they have every right to do so. And it just begs the
question, you know, can the IMF, the United Nations, can the United States do
more to help countries in dire straits like Sri Lanka? If they can help
economically, they can help, you know, by rule of law as well, right? Spreading
democracy, true democracy, rather than, you know, China's way of doing business.
Jyoti, briefly, very, very difficult times across the border in terms of
politically and economically in Pakistan. India must be worried about both those
things. Rahul, quickly to your question earlier to Alison. Yes, China has every
right to demand that if it lends money to countries, then they should do what
China asks them to do. That's fine. But you don't hold a sword over somebody's,
you know, over somebody's head and say, listen, you better fall in line. You
better abide by all the not just economic conditions that we've posed, but also
otherwise, which means keep India out, keep the Americans out, keep whoever else
that we don't like out. So that's fine. And we've also seen that the Belt and
Road Initiative that the Chinese have laid out, you know, it's the largest sort
of highway, if you like, of goods, services, tech, everything across the world.
And they poured in enormous amounts of money. But watch two countries in the
South Asian space, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. There is such antipathy growing
towards China in both these countries. I know both these countries fairly well,
especially Pakistan. The conditions they put, you know, when you have Chinese
investment in Pakistan, they bring their own labor. A lot of it is prison labor.
That's not my problem. But they bring their own labor to work in Pakistan, which
basically means that Pakistanis do not work in these in these enterprises.
Second of all, they, you know, they basically carve out these little zones,
these economic zones, which separate them from the rest of the country. So
there's no integration. It's just such a purely black and white financial type
of relationship with the politics thrown in, which is that you become my client
state. And that's exactly what Pakistan has become. Well, let us see what
happens. We are, I'm sure, going to see more countries going to China. China's
own economic growth slowing down. It'll be interesting to see how that affects
its investment in other parts of the world. Let's turn to our final story. Now,
one that I've been looking forward to, the Bollywood film, Pathan, which I have
seen, has become India's biggest box office Hindi film ever. The action thriller
features Bollywood icon Shah Rukh Khan, along with other A-list actors like
Deepak Ghandapadukone and John Abraham. It broke the record of Baobali 2, which
was a Tamil film, and it has made over 125 million dollars worldwide. Nasser
Hanif looks at the success of the movie despite some early controversies. After
four years out, Shah Rukh Khan's spy thriller was set for a grand return to the
big screen. Then we got the controversy. Shah Rukh Khan's new film, Pathan, is
releasing next month, and the Madhya Pradesh Home Minister has already
threatened to block its release in the state because he has a problem with the
orange color of Deepika Padukone's swimsuit. He said that the song contained a
contaminated mindset, amongst other things. Protests followed in several Indian
states. Now, saffron is a color that's associated with the Hindu faith, and some
felt it was under attack. Speaking shortly after its release, Shah Rukh Khan,
the star actor, called for calm, especially on social media. The tide turned as
the film released in nearly 800 screens worldwide. A massive opening for a
Bollywood film. Here's Shah Rukh Khan again. Praise for the film led to a record
number of advanced screenings. Bollywood was in need of a super hit, and the
story of a suave Indian spy on a mission to stop a group of terrorists from
attacking India was bringing in the crowds. Film trade analyst Komal Natha
there. He says the movie was also very important for Khan too. And so, despite
the early setbacks, Bataan is now a record-breaking super hit around the globe.
Jyoti, have you seen it? Do you like it? Of course. What kind of question is
that? I loved it. I agree. I took my 92-year-old mother to see it. Did you? Did
she like it? Yes, of course. And people were sort of dancing in their seats and
whistling. I mean, listen, this is Shah Rukh Khan, and I'm a hard-boiled,
weather-beaten journalist, but you know, his voice is just something else. I
mean, I'm not surprised at all that this movie has done so well, but there are
two or three reasons as well, Rahul. One of them is, and nobody has voiced this,
we don't talk about these things publicly, but when his son was thrown into jail
for 23 days last year, allegedly because he was carrying weed, which was never
proven, the whole country was out there in support of Shah Rukh Khan. So I think
a lot of people are also responding to him as parents, as, you know, for his
son, Aryan. I mean, that's one part of it. But listen, over and above, there is
Shah Rukh. There's only one star in the world today, and that's him. Wow, I tell
you what, you know what, I've never heard you get so excited about any
particular specific topic on this programme. Now, Alison, I know you've probably
not seen this film. Can I strongly recommend that you go and see it? It's proper
Bollywood masala film. It's got action. It's got romance. There's no story.
There's no plot line. Nothing. No, but don't put her off. Are you going to go
and see it? Next time you come on, we're going to get you to report on it.
Forget the Oscars. Go and see Bhutan. Well, my movie recommendation is Tar with
Cate Blanchett. Now, there is a movie star. Highly recommend. She's amazing.
Yeah, she is. She is. But I think, to be honest with you, Jyothi, your 92 year
old mother, she's going to prefer Bhutan to Tar. What do you think? Oh, any day,
any day. And the story is so South Asian. You have a Pakistani ISI agent, which
is their spy. And she's this gorgeous Deepika Padukone. She is absolutely
stunning. But we're not going to let you give away the plot. That is it for this
edition of Business Facts. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Going
through the letters from soldiers at the front was a complete carelessness of
their own lives. You know, hello, Mama. Hello, Papa. I'm going to go.