TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Series 2 of I'm Not a Monster, listen on BBC Sounds. BBC News at 9 o'clock. The
Metropolitan Police has apologised for missing opportunities to arrest one of
their officers before he killed Sarah Evrard. Wayne Cousins, who is already
serving a life sentence, was jailed for a further 19 months for exposing himself
to women on three occasions. One of his victims read a statement to the court.
Her words have been voiced by a producer. I had no one contact me or ask me for
a statement. It was only after Sarah's murder that I became involved. If he had
been held accountable when we reported the crime, we could have saved Sarah.
Friends of two women and a man who were found dead in a car that crashed in
Cardiff have expressed frustration that it took nearly two days for police
officers to find the wreckage. Two others were trapped in the vehicle for up to
46 hours before they were rescued in the early hours of this morning. The South
Wales and the Gwent forces say the case has been referred to the police
watchdog. Ukraine's President Zelensky has been urged not to retreat from the
besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. There have been reports suggesting Ukrainian
troops have started to withdraw from the city, which has been virtually
flattened after six months of Russian attacks. Analysts say Bakhmut has little
strategic value, but has become a focal point for Russian commanders who have
struggled to deliver any positive news to Moscow. Opposition parties in Turkey
have agreed a joint candidate to compete against President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
in elections in May. 74-year-old Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu leads the secular Republican
People's Party. A former Mexican beauty queen and her partner who fled Spain
after stealing 45 bottles of fine wine have been captured in the Balkans. The
couple enjoyed a 14-course meal at a hotel, then raided the wine cellar and fled
before dawn. They were extradited to Spain and sentenced to four years each in
prison. BBC News. In half an hour, Kirsty Walk discusses the Iraq War and its
legacy 20 years on in Start the Week. But now on Radio 4, in a change to some
listings, here's another chance to hear an episode of Science Stories, where
Philip Boull tells the tale of Galileo and his relationship with the Church. In
August 2018, a young historian of science made the kind of discovery most
researchers in his field could only dream of. Salvatore Ricciardo was a
postdoctoral student at the University of Bergamo in Italy, and he was visiting
the Royal Society in London to study documents handwritten by Galileo. Galileo
famously insisted in the early 17th century that the Earth goes around the Sun
and not vice versa, an idea that got him into deep trouble with the Catholic
Church. So here is Ricciardo browsing through the Royal Society's online
catalogue, and he comes across a letter apparently written by Galileo in October
1613 to his favourite protégé, Benedetto Castelli, at the University of Pisa.
Now, there is a famous letter that Galileo sent to Castelli in December 1613
that began his troubles with the Church. All Galileo scholars know about that.
But there seemed to be nothing special about this earlier one. Still, Ricciardo
decided to take a look and he ordered up the document from the library vaults.
When it arrived, he couldn't believe what he was seeing. This is the story of
Galileo's lost letter, and the new light it sheds on the old story of how
Galileo challenged the Church. The letter gives us even more reason to suspect
that the story is not quite the one we often hear of an upright, principled man
committed to reason and truth, facing a blinkered and bullying institution,
clinging to superstition and scripture. No, Galileo was something of a slippery
customer who was apt to push his luck a little too far. The Secret of the Moon
In the early 17th century, Galileo became an intellectual celebrity. In 1610, he
published a book called The Celestial Messenger, in which he described his
observations of the heavens with a new instrument called a telescope, which
magnified what the eye could see. Galileo discovered that the moon is a world
like ours, with mountains and valleys, challenging the old view of the celestial
bodies as perfect spheres all orbiting the earth. And he reported seeing four
moons, or stars as he called them, circling around another of those celestial
bodies, the planet Jupiter. Finally, he reported that the hazy band crossing the
sky, called the Milky Way, was composed of swarms of stars beyond number. So the
cosmos was not arranged quite how most people had assumed, with the sun and
planets circling around the earth in stately procession. All this lent strength
to the idea that Galileo had begun to entertain that it was the sun, not the
earth, which sat at the centre of the universe. That's what the astronomer
Nicolaus Copernicus had already suggested nearly a hundred years earlier. Until
Galileo came along, the Church had found a way to live with Copernicus's idea of
a sun-centred cosmos. It was all very well as a purely mathematical description
that made astronomical calculations easier, the theologians said, but you
weren't supposed to think of it as a description of how things were really
arranged. Galileo, however, began to suggest that, yes, it really was. At first,
the Church seemed happy with Galileo's discoveries. When he went to Rome in
1611, he was given a warm reception. It was some of the professors, not the
clerics, who weren't so keen. They disliked seeing their old earth-centred view
of the universe challenged. Others were jealous of the attention Galileo was
getting. And he was never the most diplomatic of men, inclined to call those who
disagreed with him fools. Galileo helped his former pupil Castelli get a place
at the University of Pisa in November 1613. But the young man almost immediately
got into trouble for talking about the Copernican theory in front of some
indignant local nobles. Galileo decided to write a letter outlining his own
thoughts to help Castelli defend himself. This letter to Castelli, sent in
December, is one of the key texts in the debate about how science and religion
relate to one another. Galileo, a committed, if not exactly devout, Catholic,
argued that they needn't conflict because the Bible was never meant to be a book
of natural philosophy that explained how the world worked. He said, Two truths,
he said, science and scripture, can never contradict each other. But then it is
the task of interpreters of the Bible to find the meaning of the words that kept
them in agreement. This might seem today to be an eminently sensible position
for someone who believed in God and the Bible, but also in the power of reason,
observation and mathematics to make sense of the physical world. But it also
came dangerously close to telling theologians what their job was. They weren't
going to like that. Unfortunately for Galileo, correspondence like this was apt
to leak. In late 1614, an influential Dominican monk was given a copy of
Galileo's letter to Castelli and, deciding it was objectionable, sent it to
authorities in Rome, who examined it with some disapproval and sent it on to the
Inquisition in Florence. Galileo got wind of this and asked Castelli to return
his original letter. He then made a copy and sent it to his friend Piero Dini, a
cleric in Rome, saying he'd written it quickly and was in the process of
revising it. Galileo also suggested to Dini that the copy of the letter
forwarded to the Inquisition may have been altered by his enemies to make him
look worse. He accused them of wickedness, ignorance and fraud. The version he
sent Dini, he said, was what he'd really said all along. Was it, though? Plenty
of copies of the letter to Dini now survive, but what historians have wanted was
the original sent to Castelli to compare it against. This was thought to be lost
until Salvatore Ricciardo made his discovery at the Royal Society. He'd been
studying Galileo long enough to recognise the man's handwriting, and when
Ricciardo saw the letter itself, he realised it had been misfiled under the
wrong date, written not in October 1613, but in December, exactly when Galileo
had written to Castelli in Pisa. That's presumably why no one had spotted it
before. The newly discovered letter has many crossings out, some altering the
original text to soften its challenge to religious authority. The text
underneath the changes looks identical to the one that had been sent to Rome and
the Inquisition. It feels a bit like the denouement in a crime series, Exhibit A
and the Prosecution. It's hard to avoid the conclusion that this is indeed the
original of the letter Galileo sent to Castelli, and that Galileo had amended it
after it was returned to him in an act of damage limitation. In other words,
Galileo was lying when he claimed that his original letter had been doctored to
incriminate him. Here we find Galileo preparing a new, toned-down version of the
letter to pass off as the original. The letter is one of the first defences of
the freedom of science against ideological interference. Galileo's insistence
that science be allowed to reach conclusions about the world that aren't
constrained and proscribed by Holy Scripture is eloquent and important. But how
should we feel about it if it was also something of a work of deceit? To get a
better sense of how all this fitted with the ideas and traditions of Galileo's
time, I spoke to historian of science Paula Findlen of Stanford University in
California, an expert on the scientific world of Italy during the Renaissance.
Galileo is trying to argue for what people called in this period libertas
philosophandi, freedom to philosophise. That is an idea that predates Galileo
but becomes more and more important in his age. So how do you carve out the
space to think freely as a philosopher, to not always have it interpreted
through the lens of faith? You know, that's part of what he's asking for is
room, right, room to think, you know, room to think and not be immediately
judged by one standard when this might be about something else. All of that
sounds like a very noble and in fact important thing for science to progress, to
be able to have that freedom. And I guess that's one reason why Galileo is so
revered even today by many scientists. On the other hand, what we seem to find
him doing with this letter is kind of altering the truth, altering the record
and trying to pass it off as another truth. So he seems to be changing this
letter with the intention of saying, well, this is what I really wrote all
along, which seems to be sort of catching him in the act, I guess. And it makes
me wonder about the personality of Galileo. I mean, was he in some ways more of
a pragmatist who was looking after his own skin? Yeah, you know, if you think
about Bertolt Brecht's play, his writing and rewriting of Galileo, the
fundamental issue that Brecht struggles with is Galileo's humanity as a mirror
of the world and the human condition in general. And yeah, I mean, Galileo, he
is not a noble person. He is a flesh and blood human being who, you know, is
often intemperate and arrogant, is fixed on his ideas, can be very in-politic.
And so he's struggling with that also, right? I mean, the first version of this
letter, as we now see, is not particularly temperate, right? You know, one of
the things he crosses out over and over again is literal, the literal meaning,
you know, that. And so he is arguing a kind of strong position. And then he sees
the problems when he becomes aware that a version of that letter has gone to
Rome, has been sent by the Florentine Dominicans to Rome to the prefect of the
Congregation of the Index of Prohibited Books. So now he begins to realize where
this might head. And now he wants to control the message. So what he does, I
mean, in many ways, it echoes very well in our world of fake news, right? You
know, which version of it is really true? You know, so he seems to, you know,
now that we have this document, we can say more clearly, he seems to be the
person who is getting out a revised version of his 1613 letter to Castelli and
sending it to key people in Rome to say, hey, this is the correct version, as he
says. Send it to this Jesuit. See if it can get into the hands of Cardinal
Robert Bellarmine, right? The head of the Roman Inquisition. See if I can get
people to see that this version, the more moderate version, is the correct one,
because he does not want judgment passed based on the other version that is
probably the original, seems to be the original and is a lot less temperate,
much more volatile. And did it work? Did it have that effect that he desired?
Well, ultimately, even this editing was unable to stop them from putting
Copernicus on the index of prohibited books until On the Revolutions was
corrected. So in March of 1616, Copernicus ends up on the index of prohibited
books. And Galileo has been in Rome. He goes to Rome, you know, late in 1615.
And he is privately warned by Bellarmine not to hold, teach, or advocate in any
way whatsoever, you know, heliocentrism, right? This private, famous private
warning that's going to come back to haunt him in his own trial in 1633. And so
he himself is not condemned. In many ways, he's blacked boxed and pulled aside
for this kind of unusual private conversation with the Roman Inquisition. We
might say that perhaps it does slow down a process that then resumes when he
publishes his dialogue in 1632. But what he ultimately is unable to do, what he
wanted to do, of course, was to prevent them from putting Copernicus on the
index. So he so he perhaps personally gained some time but loses the immediate
battle, right, over this earlier work of astronomy that had been the foundation
of his own work. Right. And just to clarify, putting a book on the index makes
it sound like that that's quite a drastic thing. But did it necessarily mean one
was forbidden to read that book or simply that it was under consideration by the
church? Yeah, I know people do have a lot of misimpressions about what it means
that it's, you know, absolutely forbidden. No, you can get a license to read
prohibited books. Many people do. Many people write and request licenses. Many
people, of course, ignore the whole process and just have illegal copies and
hope nobody notices because it's in your house and somebody would have to decide
to come in and notice that you had books you shouldn't have. And then most
importantly, Copernicus is an example of a book that is put on the index until
corrected, which means they're going to expurgate it. They're going to clean up
the copy, take out the offending passages. So they're going to take out the idea
that heliocentrism, the idea that the sun is the physical center of the
universe, is true. They're going to make sure that it is only hypothetical. So
by the early 1620s, there is a corrected, appropriately Catholic version of
Copernicus available. You can correct your copy. And so in that respect, it's
not that it's a completely black and white story, but it's a process that both
sides are thinking through. What is and is not appropriately Catholic? And how
do we handle these books that we perhaps might not want to entirely throw out
the baby with the bathwater? There's a lot of good math and astronomy in
Copernicus. Let's save that and get rid of the controversial ideas. Galileo's
letter to Castelli left some religious leaders suspicious of him. But at first
he was simply given some friendly advice to stick to maths and astronomy and not
to go around telling theologians their job. If he could simply regard the
Copernican model of the universe as a useful tool for doing calculations, there
was no problem. But Galileo was obstinate. He was convinced that the Copernican
model was literally true, that the sun, not the earth, really did sit at the
centre of the universe. That would have been all very well if Galileo had solid
proof, but he didn't. Still, in 1632, he published his great work arguing that
the earth moved while the sun stood still at the centre of things. He put the
argument in the form of a dialogue between three imaginary people, one of whom,
called Simplicio, is a simpleton who defends the old earth-centred model. Some
people considered this character to be a thinly veiled caricature of the Pope.
From there it was downhill all the way, to the trial before the Inquisition in
1633, at which Galileo was forced to recount. He then spent the rest of his days
more or less under house arrest at his villa in Arcetri, near Florence. The
Galileo affair has often been held up as an example of how science and religion
are fundamentally at odds. In this view, science looks, as Galileo did, for
fundamental and provable truths about the world, while religion sticks to
unprovable assertions based on scripture. And when the two conflict, the church
got tough. But is that really how it was? To get a sense of how science and
religious belief coexist in the past and today, I spoke to Mary Jane Rubinstein,
a professor of religion at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut. The
notion that religion is somehow a backward, authoritarian, anti-rational
opponent to science really comes at the end of the 19th century. There are these
two books that everybody always talks about, John William Draper and Andrew
Dickinson White, each of them one American and one British guy. Each of them
argue that science and religion have been in conflict forever. But actually what
they're up to is they're secularizing some kind of classic Protestant arguments
about the backwardness and anti-intellectualism of Catholicism. So it's actually
a battle between Protestants and Catholics that then gets sort of grafted onto
and renewed as some sort of dispute between the secular and the religious. Was
there anything happening in the late 19th century that brought those issues to a
head? One thinks immediately, of course, of Darwin and how his theory of
evolution was received by the church. Was that one of the big issues of how
science and religion might come into conflict at that time? Certainly the
revelation and the attempt at coming to terms with Darwin's theory of natural
selection opened up a possible rift between what we would call science and
religion. But religion, as it were, sort of Christian theologians and Christian
thinkers and preachers and things, they were really of numerous minds about it.
It really wasn't until about the 1920s with the Scopes trials in America that a
real sort of division opened up. So there were decades of just sort of post-
Darwinian confusion where, you know, Christian theologians in particular just
weren't quite sure what they thought about it. It wasn't until this sort of
American fundamentalist reception in the 1920s that we really get this opening
up of a distinction. And that tension at least seems to persist today, the
tension between fundamentalist religious thinking and evolutionary theory.
That's still a kind of flashpoint, as it were, between science and certain parts
of religion. Are there other areas today that tend to sort of exacerbate this
apparent conflict between science and religion? And are there areas where
they've made their peace with one another? Sure. Well, I think the first thing
you want to ask is what kind of religion you're talking about. For example,
there's a massive difficulty between Native Hawaiian activists on the big island
of Hawaii and the National Science Foundation over the building of yet another
telescope on Mauna Kea. So that would be a conflict, we could say, between
science and religion. There are conflicts between the Lakota people over the
pipeline that runs through Standing Rock in South Dakota, and of course, the oil
industry. And so that could be seen as a conflict between science and religion.
There are fantastic consonances and resonances and interesting kind of zippings
back and forth between Tibetan Buddhism and neuroscience and Tibetan Buddhism
and quantum mechanics. So you could look at any of those different traditions
and have a very different conversation. If we're talking about the legacy of
Galileo and that whole genealogy, then we're really talking about Christianity.
And yes, of course, so evolution continues to be a flashpoint in the US, at
least, as does climate change, particularly, again, with very conservative
evangelical Christians. And then science and technologies relating to gender. So
things like abortion, contraception, reproductive technologies, homosexuality,
gender confirmation surgeries. These are flashpoints. These are areas of
disagreement. This having been said, in almost every other area, there's really
no problem between science and even the most conservative forms of evangelical
Christianity. So I'm thinking, for example, of medicine, cosmology, space
exploration, botany, engineering, right? Nobody's opposing cell phones. So for
the most part, science and religion are actually getting along just fine. Well,
you mentioned cosmology, Mary-Jane, but that potentially is one area where
there's at least a discussion to be had between science and religion, because
science is aiming to, of course, develop ideas about how the universe began. And
that is something that traditionally religion seems to have spoken to, the idea
that it was created by God. Where does that sort of discussion stand today? I
would say that the threat here is actually ironically one-sided, that physicists
and cosmologists tend to be very worried about starting the story of the
universe in such a way that a theologian might say, Aha! God must have done it.
Right? So they try to find alternative explanations. The multiverse, for
example, is one possible way of accounting for the emergence of the universe
without having to appeal to God. This is the idea that there are many possible
universes. Yes, even maybe an infinite number of universes, and all of them take
on all kinds of different configurations throughout infinite time. And then
every once in a while, one comes along that happens to work, and we must be in
one of those. So there's no need to say that God, say, fine-tuned the universe
in order that we might emerge. So you kind of get rid of the necessity for God.
The problem is that any theologian can just respond and say, All right, you've
got a multiverse. Delightful. God made the multiverse. So it's not really a
threat to religion. Religion here, theology at least, is more a threat to
science than science is to theology. It feels to me as though in a way that's
speaking to exactly what Galileo was talking about in his characterization of
the relationship between religion and science. That he was saying it's actually
not religion's job to pronounce on the natural world. There are things in the
Bible that seem to relate to it. But that's not what religion is about. And it
sounds as though in a sense that's the reconciliation you're talking about here,
that theologians may say, Well, we're not looking for a physical mechanism in
religion that describes how the universe came into being. Our questions are
different. Yeah. Well, let me make a friendly amendment to this. I think that
what Galileo was saying was not so much that religion has no business making
pronouncements about the components of the physical world, but that scripture
has really nothing to say about the components of the physical world. He says in
that letter to Castelli, he says, Look, if scripture wanted to talk to us about
the configuration and nature of the planets, they actually would have mentioned
the planets, but scripture doesn't talk about it. So it's a terrible place to
go. But thankfully, God doesn't just give us scripture. God also gives us the
book of nature. So we can study nature as a book, right, as a kind of scripture
in its own right. And through our study of nature, we can learn more about the
divine constitution of the universe. So that scientific project for Galileo, I
would argue, in Galileo's own world is also a religious project. It's just not
particularly scriptural. I think that Thomas Aquinas is really useful on this.
So and this has been the Roman Catholic position certainly for, you know,
centuries. The idea is that reason can get us very far and that it is the
obligation of people who possess the capacities of reason to follow them and to
see where they lead. But then there's some point at which reason sort of leaves
us off and revelation or faith has to kick in. And that distinction is pretty
clearly marked for Roman Catholics. It's the distinction really that Galileo is
trying to talk about between knowing about the properties of the physical world
on the one hand, which reason can do, and understanding what we need to do to
earn salvation on the other hand, which reason cannot do. And this is why we
have scripture. So the book of nature can teach us everything we need to know
about physical principles. The book of scripture can teach us everything we need
to know about how to get ourselves saved. But this helpfully opens a space for a
kind of compatibility and a sort of not just a compatibility between religion
and science, but a way for them to sort of give one another their own terrains
really. And do you think that there are terrains where potentially those two
ways of thinking may come into conflict? That, for example, if science seems to
be telling us something that conflicts with some of the fundamental propositions
of belief, what do you do then if you're a religious scientist? So you do
exactly what Galileo did and you head back to scripture and you ask, is there
any other way that we can interpret this? Right, so the ingenious thing that
Galileo does in that letter to Castelli is he says, look, scripture is not
trying to teach us about physical principles, but if scripture were trying to
teach us about physical principles, this is the way that we would read that
passage in Joshua 10, which says that God made the sun stand still. The
objection was if Joshua says that God made the sun stand still, then clearly the
sun had been moving. And if the sun is moving, this means that the Bible is
telling us that we live in a geocentric universe. Galileo ingeniously shows that
actually in order to say that God made the sun stop, you would have to affirm a
heliocentric model. I won't go into it here, but he just engages in creative
scriptural hermeneutics and this is what you would need to do. Galileo is widely
regarded as one of the greatest scientists that ever lived. He helped introduce
the idea that science is about making tests and observations, relying on
experience and careful measurement. About the Copernican cosmos, as well as
about a great deal else in physics, he was dead right. But to historians, he's a
more complex figure. Sometimes he let his assertions outstrip his evidence and
sometimes he was plain wrong. And if he'd been more tactful, less provocative
and pugnacious, he could probably have saved himself a lot of trouble. His
letter to Castelli, which languished in the archives for centuries, now shows
that he wasn't above tampering with the facts. And what this story tells us, of
course, is that Galileo is not that heroic figure constructed to illustrate a
story about a war between science and religion. He was all too delightfully
human, brilliant and bold, ambitious and cunning, just the sort of person to
rearrange the universe and our place within it. MUSIC Science Stories was
presented by Philip Ball and the producer was Deborah Cohen. It's 20 years since
the US and UK invaded Iraq to overthrow Saddam Hussein. In a moment, Kirsty Wark
discusses the lead up to the war, the impact on the lives of Iraqis and the
legacy. But first, with a look ahead to the world tonight, James Kamarasamy.
Thanks, Al. Ukraine says it's digging in and not rolling over in the battle for
Bahmut. We'll find out why a small city in eastern Ukraine has become the focus
of months of fighting and why the two sides want to hold it so badly. We hear
how the NHS is trialling the use of artificial intelligence to check for breast
cancer. As the government prepares to unveil its small boats policy tomorrow, we
look at the similarities between UK and US approaches to illegal immigration on
their southern borders. Plus, a report from the Seychelles on the country's huge
heroin problem. And we find out why the floppy disk will never die. James, thank
you. Now on Radio 4, here's Kirsty Wark to start the week. Hello. Twenty years
ago this month, George W. Bush and Tony Blair signed off on a plan to topple the
tyrant Saddam Hussein. A plan built on the myth of weapons of mass destruction
and the conviction of making the world a safer place. The blood and thunder and
mayhem that followed the short war all but destroyed Iraq, birthed Islamic State
and, many would argue, made the Middle East a more unstable, more dangerous
region. As Iraq unravelled, without a post-invasion plan, at least 150,000
Iraqis lost their lives in the long conflict, as well as thousands of US and
British soldiers. In a special edition of Start the Week, our three guests
witnessed the conflict and chaos at very close quarters and in very different
ways. They are the Iraqi journalist Ghaith Abduhahad, whose new book, A Stranger
in Your Own City, recounts his country's descent into violent civil war post-
invasion. Emma Skye, founding director of Yale's International Leadership
Centre, she joins us from New York. And the BBC security correspondent Gordon
Correra, who's presenting a new series, Shock and War, on Radio 4, looking at
the Iraq war and its legacy. Well, 20 years ago, what were you doing in the run-
up to the invasion and where were you, Ghaith? I was in Baghdad. I was in my
apartment following the advance of the armies on the World Service and trying to
chart their advance on an old map. And until one day, when a neighbour knocks at
the door and says, the Americans are here. I say, yes, I know. They're in Hella,
100 kilometres to the south. No, no, they're here in the streets. And that's
when I saw the Americans for the first time. At that stage, of course, you were
a young architect, but you're also a deserter from Saddam's army. I mean, tell
me about that. So I studied architecture and then rather than go serve in the
military, I decided to desert. And I didn't like the army. I still don't like
armies. And I lived a life of hiding. So I was faking my own ID cards. But I
have to say something. I survived five years as a deserter, not because I was
brilliant, but because the regime was very weak. The security services were
corrupt, falling apart. Had I been a deserter in the 80s, I would have been
caught in a week. So, Emma, you were a young 34-year-old woman. You'd been 10
years in the Palestinian territories. Where were you when the invasion started?
So when the invasion started, I was in Manchester working for the British
Council. I'd been in Palestine for 10 years with the British Council, and I was
now back at headquarters. So I was one of these very angry about the war, felt,
what can I do? This is terrible. Why are we going to war? And really, I felt I
needed to do something. I wanted to do something. Gordon, pinpoint where you
were. Well, I was a reporter for the Today programme at the time. And just
before the war, I'd been in northern Iraq, the Kurdish region. So outside of
Saddam's control, and I'd visited some of the front lines and been to Halabja,
where Saddam had used chemical weapons in the 1980s. It was part of that kind of
whirlwind of post 9-11 reporting where, you know, the intensity of events. I
mean, it's hard to recall just how fast moving things felt. But then by the time
the war actually started, I was in Washington. So let's see how we got to that
point. In your series, you go back and you talk to many of the key players, and
some of them haven't spoken before about the run up to the invasion. And you do
start with the American hawks. I mean, why were they so keen on regime change?
It's interesting. I talked to lots of people. Weapons of mass destruction often
only came up as a kind of secondary issue. In some case, it was a visceral
dislike of Saddam. There was a sense of unfinished business from the first Gulf
War, including by George W. Bush, the new president, whose father had taken on
Saddam but not toppled him. Then you had a more neocon worldview, which wanted
to transform the Middle East into some kind of democracy, but starting with Iraq
to make it safer for the world in their minds. And then in other cases, post
9-11, you just had these people who wanted to demonstrate American military
power against someone. And that country was Iraq. And one of the former SIA
operatives tells you, we would have invaded Iraq if Saddam Hussein had a rubber
band, a paperclip, and somebody would have said, oh, he's going to put your eye
out. Given that and given everything that happened, why was Tony Blair seemingly
so keen to align himself with Bush? So I think that goes to this post 9-11 era.
I think Tony Blair had positioned himself as the bridge between this angry,
bruised United States and the rest of the world. Over Afghanistan, he'd kind of
built a coalition to try and guide America. And he thought he could influence
the United States. He thought he could deliver an international coalition to
deal with this rather than having America acting alone. I do believe that was
the fundamental driver more than, if you like, the specific threat from Saddam
and weapons of mass destruction, even though that was part of his reasoning
behind why dealing with Iraq. But I think those drivers were the real ones. And
I think it's only now, 20 years on, that he and others are really able to kind
of talk about it in that way. So weapons of mass destruction, it's fascinating,
which was the public justification, were not really the fundamental driver. And
this idea that you were going to have a country which was certainly going to be
almost transformed by a Western democracy, rather working with the tools you
have. Absolutely. And for a long time, I subscribed to that narrative that the
whole mess that followed the invasion happened because the Americans did not
work with the tools they had. And of course, I mean, there were tools and they
could have worked with the Iraqi army officers. They could have worked with
someone else. But then later throughout the years, I came to realize that there
was no scenario in which this invasion could have worked, which is you can't
bomb a nation, put it under sanctions, bomb it again, and then come with the
same army and the same tools and the same American legacy and the Western legacy
in the Middle East and say, Ola, let's have a democracy now. Let's transform
your society. Well, Emma, the invasion topples it down very quickly. You arrive
on the scene. Tell me about your journey to end up in Kirkuk. And we'll talk a
little bit about you become the governor there. But had you ever been to Iraq
before? No, I'd never been to Iraq before. And basically, I didn't get any brief
before I arrived in Iraq. The foreign office said, you know, find your way to
RAF Brice Norton, get on a military plane to Basra. And when you arrive, you'll
be met by someone holding a sign with your name on it. So, you know, I thought
it sounded plausible. I assumed the government knew what it was doing. So I
followed those instructions, got on the military plane, arrived in Basra. And
nobody was expecting me. There was no sign with my name on it. I had no idea
what I was supposed to do. So I slept in the airport the first night with all
the British soldiers, then found a C-130, one of those big Hercules planes that
was going to Baghdad the next day, arrived at Baghdad airport and then found a
bus that was going downtown. And I knew the headquarters of the coalition was
Saddam's Palace. And when I was there, I was kind of, you know, hello, Emma from
England, come to volunteer. And there I found my name was on the list. And I
spent sort of a week in the palace getting briefed on the whole idea of what the
coalition provisional authority, what they thought they were doing. And then
they said, look, we've got enough people here, try the north. So I got on
another plane to Mosul. And when I got there, they said, oh, we've got someone
here, keep going. Then eventually, you know, I arrived in Kirkuk. And they said,
great, you are now the senior civilian in Kirkuk, reporting directly to
Ambassador Bremer. And good luck. You had 10 years of negotiation between
Palestine and Israelis. You were a negotiator. You did understand diplomacy and
foreign affairs. But what did you know about what was going on in Kirkuk? Well,
I knew absolutely nothing. And, you know, Iraq had been really cut off for the
rest of the world all through those years of sanctions. So nobody really knew
anything about Iraq. And, you know, I had gone to Iraq because I wanted to
apologize to Iraqis for the war and help them rebuild their society. I had no
sense that I'd be put in a role like a colonial administrator. So I set out,
first of all, to try and get to know people in the province who were the
leaders, what was the structure there that I could work with, and how I could
understand what everybody thought about the conditions, about the future, what
they wanted. And people had been living for years and years of trauma. In a
place like Kirkuk, Saddam Hussein had been this awful, evil leader. He had mass
murdered his people. And you had every person I met there had suffered in some
way. Everybody had some grievance. And there was this expectation that America
was going to come in, fix the country within six months, and make it look like
Dubai. And a lot of things seem shocking now, but the absence of planning seems
almost the most shocking element of it. And what it was, was that you had
different factions within the US who had different ideas of what should happen.
I mean, so you had some, and, you know, the kind of Rumsfeld view, John Bolton,
when I interviewed him for the series Express This, which was basically, you get
in, you overthrow Saddam, and you get out. I mean, John Bolton had them a copy
of the Federalist Papers, the US constitutional papers, say, good luck, walk
away, and let them deal with it. But there was one genuine view within
Washington. There are still people who hold to that. There are others who were,
we have to develop democracy. There are other people who thought, well, maybe
you put in some exiles quickly to put it over. There are others who thought,
well, these exiles are completely untrustworthy. You had a complete mess, which
was never resolved. And bad actors supported by the US. And, you know, this is
the second thing, which is, so if we say that the first disaster was an
occupation, the second disaster were the exiles. The exiles came from outside,
they had developed these kind of very claustrophobic ideas about injustice,
about persecution, about victimhood. So when they came to Iraq, they wanted to
address their victimhood. And in that kind of binary narrative, in which there
is one section of the society is a victim, the other must be the victimizer. And
that quickly moved from Saddam being the oppressor into the whole of the Sunnis
of Iraq being the oppressors. And suddenly you have a huge group of people who
many of them did not support Saddam. This idea that it was, as we said, that it
was Sunni on one side and Shia on the other, when sometimes you had Shia and
Sunni forces working together, you had some Kurds coming in. This was presumably
mind blowing for Americans on the ground because they couldn't get, they
couldn't understand what was going on. Because in Iraq, I don't want to say
there was no sectarian identity, but the sectarian identity was not the most
important thing. But it was reinforced by the way that Bremner set up the
coalition. Absolutely. Suddenly you have all the security forces kind of drawn
from the kind of the Shia exile community and people who were in Iraq. But then
also the Sunnis who were pushed in a corner have to come up with a kind of an
opposition, a rejection to this kind of programme or this occupation that's
targeting them. And that is the easiest recipe of a civil war that was
reinforced in Iraq. And, and, you know, when I started journalism, I didn't know
who was a Sunni and a Shia amongst my friends. But when I started journalism as
an assistant in 2003, I started recording names on my phone and adding Sunni
Shia. So I myself fell into that kind of binary way of thinking. Emma, from the
people you were talking about, were you very aware of this kind of binary
notion? So in Kirkuk, you had more groups than Sunni and Shia. You had Arabs who
were Sunni and Arabs who were Shia. You had Kurds, you had Turkmen, you had
Christians, you had all these different groups. So you have a very, very complex
environment. What I tried to do was create platforms for, you know, consultation
to be as inclusive as possible. But then what happened was diktats that came
from Baghdad that said you must implement debathification. You must dismiss the
security forces. And so the people that we had been working with on the Sunni
side then found themselves kicked out of their jobs. We had hospitals with no
doctors. We had schools without any teachers, which meant the people who were
working with us then moved into opposition and then moved into insurgency
against us. So constantly trying to manage all the different communities, all
saying that they had been victims, all highlighting the level of their
grievance. But were you operating, I mean, you were getting all this incoming,
saying you had to, you know, the debathification and so forth. And were you
pushing back? So of course we were reporting back the problems to Baghdad. You
have to understand that the Coalition for Perpetual Authority was a small
organization built from scratch, built from the hoof, didn't have systems,
didn't have people who'd work together. We were trying to administer a country
of, you know, 20 million people with, you know, a couple of hundred foreigners
who had come in to do this. It was mission impossible. But Greith, what was your
overriding emotion? Look, there was a sense of disbelief among all the Iraqis
I've talked to. Even in Saddam's hometown in Tikrit, I remember going there like
two, three weeks after the war. People were, you know, happy to get rid of
Saddam. In Ramadi, army officers, I mean, let's remember that it's the army
that's tried to topple Saddam three times in the 90s. So everyone was, if there
was one thing everyone agreed upon is that Saddam's gone fine, finally, you
know, war after war, destroying the whole nation for decades for his kind of
megalomania kind of beliefs. Now, what's next? What's next is it came the
disaster and people say, why are the Americans pointing their guns at us? Why
the Americans are driving tanks in the middle of the streets? Why the Americans
are not protecting buildings? So that, and you know, you have to remember that
for Iraqis, America is the greatest nation in the world. America would just
change everything. And then when they see the Americans failing, they don't
believe it is an American failure. They think it's a conspiracy. But two things,
first of all, had they not disbanded the army, would the outcome be different?
You're not sure. I'm not sure because the conditions were there for failure. But
if they had more troops on the ground, they could at least protect petrol
stations, protect electricity, power stations, prevent looting. Up until today,
I mean, 20 years later, we still don't have electricity in Iraq, partly
corruption, partly because of the looting, the destruction of the infrastructure
in 2003. I mean, you had a team of 100 people trying to run a country, but the
country was allowed to fall apart, destroyed in front of their eyes. And as this
was, sorry, carry on. Well, I was going to say on the, you know, the absence of
security, I mean, the only ministry they put in troops to protect was the oil
ministry at the start. I mean, which I mean, the symbol that that, you know,
what that represented to Iraqis told people a lot about what they felt the
invasion might be around. And part of it was the ideology which drove the
invasion, which said, you know, the Rumsfeld view and the Pentagon, which was
small force numbers, just use our power and then get out. And that drove that.
But then it was entirely predictable that other actors would start to move into
Iraq. I mean, it was it should have been predictable. It would become a theatre
for jihadists to move in. It should have been predictable that the Iranians next
door who'd heard these hawks in Washington say Baghdad first, then Tehran, would
seek to make it harder for America to do that by getting involved. So that was
predictable. And yet very little was done to stop it. So I would like to add one
thing about the jihadis. I mean, throughout the 90s, so Saddam kind of defeated
the political Shia Islam in the 80s, persecuted, executed and killed. In the
90s, he was after the kind of the Salafi, the radical Sunnis who started posing
a threat to the regime. And it has and it devoted its security forces to fight
the jihadis. So I'm not defending Saddam's security forces, I'm just saying the
threat to Saddam from political Islam was a Sunni political Islam, was a jihadi
political Islam. And then suddenly, 2003, borders are open. A guy comes from
Afghanistan, who was in Iran, probably called Zarqawi, has an absolute goal. His
plan was evil and brilliant. Create civil war to push all the Sunnis to join the
jihad. And I want to come on to a little later when Emma was back, but before
that, just on the question of the personality of the people you met, because
justifications that were made by perfectly sane and reasonable people, you would
think, people that maybe you'd have a coffee with then. And they turned into
jihadis. I mean, that for Iraq was very difficult. That was very difficult for
me to comprehend how, see, I kind of never left Baghdad. I lived all my life in
Baghdad. I went to Kirkuk a couple of times, a few summers. But in these 29
years, Baghdad, this flat, ugly city, had no borders within it, had no
divisions, had no separate identities. And within months, the city is divided. I
have to negotiate lines. I have to find, I became a stranger in my own city.
Which is, of course, the title of your book. Because I need someone in that
neighborhood where I used to eat falafel who would take me to that neighborhood,
who would vouch for me there. And again, I see normal people becoming killers,
basically becoming killers, planting Ayidic bombs, kind of kidnapping Sunnis,
kidnapping Shiites, and killings, and streets in Baghdad becomes war zones. Of
course, it all builds up, and it's not only one year or two years. It takes 20
years culminating in Mosul and ISIS. So it's all one line. And of course, Emma,
that could have been stopped earlier, I think your view is. In 2007, you went
back during the surge. Tell me about that. Well, the nature of violence in Iraq
really changed over the years. I mean, I'd only been in Kirkuk for about a week
when I had a house downtown Kirkuk that was attacked by, well, I can't say
insurgents, they were attacked by jihadis who blew up the house with me in it.
So that back in 2003, led people like me to move from being downtown to move
into military bases. And by the time you get to 2007, the US military had
withdrawn to big bases, so weren't living out within the community. So the
violence at the beginning of 2003, after the invasion, was very much directed at
the occupiers, and at those that we put in power. So we'd all set up provincial
councils, we'd set up parliaments, we set up all of these things. That violence,
the nature of the violence then changed. As Reith was saying, you had Zarqawi
who was instigating attacks on the Shia in order to get this backlash against
the Sunnis. So the violence had morphed from insurgency really into full blown
civil war. So by the time President Bush took the gamble to surge extra forces
into Iraq, by that stage, there was a better understanding, I think, among the
coalition leaders about what was driving violence. And the approach was to
really push US forces to live back out amongst the Iraqi population, to protect
them from the violence. The Iraqis then began to see the Americans almost as the
protectors, you know, from the violent extremists. There was already a Sunni
awakening turning against al Qaeda. And you started to see the decline in
violence. But then, Gordon, the Americans back Maliki and he hasn't even got
majority in the parliamentary elections. What you get is this, you get the
surge, which is successful in that period in stabilising, but then you get this
sense of weariness. You have President Obama, who is, his motivations and his
Vice President Joe Biden are to disengage. And you have a disputed election and
effectively they walk away at a time of kind of political turmoil, which then
leads to the re-emergence of ISIS, you know, or the creation of ISIS in Iraq and
Syria. Emma, fair to say you're critical of Obama over this? Oh, yes, because
Gordon was saying we've done so much to bring the violence down. The 2010
elections, everybody turns out to participate in it. And you have people who
formerly were in the armed struggle running as candidates. It was a really good
election. But Maliki doesn't believe Maliki was the prime minister and he didn't
believe the election results. In the American system, they were divided about
what to do. On one side, there were those, including myself, who argued that the
US should maintain the results of the election and allow the winning bloc to
have first go at forming the government in line with the Iraqi constitution, in
line with customary practice in parliamentary systems. And Joe Biden says, nope.
Maliki's our man. Iraq's not really ready for democracy. It needs a Shia
strongman. Let's keep Maliki in power. Maliki gets his second term. He has the
support of the Iranians. And his policies from then onwards are very, very
sectarian. Civil War ends by 2009, 2010. Maliki comes to power and totally agree
with Emma. He goes after the Sunnis rather than reconcile that rather than bring
them into the country. He believes in this whole idea. His whole idea is on
Manantia, which we never handed back. We have the power. It is for us, Shia
political Islam, and it will stay in our hands. We will not hand it back. So
what does he do? He creates the condition to alienate the Sunnis. He allows
massive corruption in the army and the state because corruption is his tools to,
you know, to build his patronage network. So army officers, you know, they run
their military units like fiefdoms. So you have a battalion, 3000 soldiers. In
reality, you have 500, 600 fighting force. The rest are salaries siphoned to
create these military fiefdoms. Now, that is coupled with the effects of the
Arab Spring in Syria, where the chaos across the border, where sectarianism,
which were first emerged in Iraq, is nurtured in the Syrian civil war, allowing
the jihadis to rebuild their networks across the border, come back to Iraq, and
leading to the creation of ISIS. And now, in the closing minutes, we should talk
about the legacy. I mean, if you go backwards and forwards, tell me when you
were last in Baghdad, what was happening? I was in Baghdad last week and I'm
writing kind of about this whole legacy of 20 years after the war. And of
course, you know, Baghdad is at peace at this moment, but the absence of war
does not translate into long peace. I met one of the characters who made his
name during the civil war. I mean, he's the murderer. His name is Abu Dara. And
Abu Dara, his name is associated with these worst massacres. I accompanied him
driving around the streets of Sadr City. He's positioning himself as like almost
like a charity worker, handing salaries and a frozen chicken to families and
widows and orphaned children. And as we drive, and he says, this is where we
fought the Americans. This is all what happened. We go into side street and he
takes me to this car park and shows me 20 armored vehicles. He says, I'm keeping
them for the day when I need them. And I'm thinking, I mean, look, the Americans
killed and got killed for months, years over that stretch of a highway to
control that highway, to defeat Abu Dara. 20 years later, Abu Dara has his
military car park next door and he's there. There is no accountability, no
accountability to the Western leaders who created the war, no accountability to
the Iraqi leaders who killed and maimed their nation. And Emma, from your point
of view, the legacy of the Iraq conflict? Well, the legacy has affected not only
Iraq, the Middle East, but I think the wider world. And it's always seen as an
example of how U.S., the great superpower, violated the rules based
international order by invading Iraq. Putin always refers to it. People in the
global south refer to it. It's mentioned a lot in relation to the Ukraine war. I
think it undermined America's leadership, its unipolar moment, I think came to
an end with the Iraq war. I think it undermined how democracy is perceived in
the Middle East and around the world. I think you can relate the fallout from
the war, the arrival of those refugees in Europe at the time of the British vote
on Brexit, that the fear of a million Middle East refugees coming to the UK was
one of the drivers to limit immigration, to regain control of the borders. And
you can look at President Trump, who was forever referring to Iraq as the worst
decision ever made. He would save America from terrorism. Let me just bring
Gordon in. Your view on the legacy? I think it's a seismic event which ripples
out everywhere. And it ripples out whether it's trust in public life, in
politics in the UK, whether it's our confidence in intervening around the world,
whether it's in the Middle East in terms of the relationship of power Iran has
to other countries, security and terrorism. I think the terrorism threat would
have been very different were it not for Iraq. But I think above all, it's a
legacy for the Iraqi people themselves. Thank you this morning to all my guests.
Emma Skye, founding director of Yale's International Leadership Centre and
author of The Unravelling and In a Time of Monsters. Ghaith Abdullah has A
Stranger in Your Own City, Travels in the Middle East, Long War has just come
out. And you can hear Gordon Carrera's 10 part series, Shock and War Iraq 20
Years On on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds from next Monday at 1.45. Many thanks to
today's studio engineer, Tim Heffer. Next week, Tom Sutcliffe will be back with
another Start the Week. But for now, from all of us here, thank you and goodbye.
Start the Week was presented by Kirsty Walker and produced by Katie Hickman. In
a moment, James Kamara-Sami hears how the NHS is trialling the use of artificial
intelligence to check for breast cancer in the world tonight. But first a look
at the weather forecast. Tonight, southern areas will be cloudy with outbreaks
of rain moving southwards, which may turn to sleet or snow as it clears.
Northern areas will be cold with clear spells and snow showers, these most
frequent in the north and east. Tomorrow, the south will see rain, sleet and
snow gradually clear away through the day. Northern Scotland and north-east
England will have further frequent snow showers. Elsewhere, it will be a cold
day with sunny spells and isolated snow showers. On Wednesday, the south of the
UK will have a risk of snow for a time. The far north will have snow showers,
but it will turn to be drier elsewhere. On Thursday, central and northern areas
have a risk of significant snow.