TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's to our obligation to keep it secret. The moral maze debates in a couple
minutes. BBC News at 8 o'clock. The BBC News at 8 o'clock. The BBC News at 8
o'clock. The BBC News at 8 o'clock. The BBC News at 8 o'clock. Radio 4's Lent
Talks continues this evening. Now time for the moral maze, live as usual. Here's
William Crawley. Thanks very much. Good evening. Should we always keep secrets?
The journalist Isabel Oakeshott clearly doesn't think so. In releasing a cache
of WhatsApp messages in the pages of the Daily Telegraph, messages passed to her
by the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock, she broke a legally binding non-
disclosure agreement. She says no journalist worth their salt would have done
otherwise. And she maintains that her obligations to Matt Hancock are outweighed
by the public's right to see those messages between government ministers and
officials. But there's a wider question here that touches all of our lives, our
friendships, our relationships more generally. When, if ever, can we
legitimately breach a confidence? In fact, might a breach of confidence
sometimes be the moral and courageous thing to do? That is our moral maze
tonight. What are the moral limits to our obligations to keep a secret? Our
panel, the historian Tim Stanley, the feminist writer and journalist Ella
Whelan, the priest and author Giles Fraser and Ash Sarkar, contributing editor
of Novara Media. Let me come to our first question with our panel. It seems that
there's a kind of spectrum. Some people at one end of that spectrum say it's
never OK to breach a confidence. Some people at the other end may say it's no
big deal if you breach a confidence. Where are you on this spectrum, Giles? I've
quite a high doctrine of trust and loyalty. So I think, and I don't mean to be
too high minded about it, but I actually do have a reasonably high doctrine of
promise keeping and keeping your promises. Ash? I think there's a difference
between professional standards and how we conduct ourselves interpersonally.
Interpersonally, I'm an incorrigible gossip. But if in my professional life I've
said I'll keep a secret, then I will. That's not the case, I think, for if
you're undertaking journalistic work. You are predator and the politician is
prey. That's how it's meant to go. Tim, I'm breaching your confidences when I
say that you also write for the Daily Telegraph. What do you think? That's true.
And I won't breach any confidences this evening because whatever you people say,
I won't be listening. What I would say is the Oakeshott Affair seems to me to be
an exception that proves a rule. Trust and confidence are virtues. I agree with
that, of course. But this story has met a clear public interest test. Plus,
journalists have a vocation, which means they have a moral obligation to tell
readers the facts as they know them. And Ella? Well, I mean, you know, from an
Irish family, growing up with a big group of girls. To your advantage, I have to
say. Indeed, you were nothing if you didn't have a secret. So it was our kind of
our way of communicating. And so, you know, I likewise very much enjoy gossip.
But I think politically, when you're fighting for something, and when you really
need to have your band of brothers and sisters stood by you, trust, loyalty,
solidarity are things that are invaluable. Thank you all very much. Let's come
to our first witness, who is Stephen Barnett, Professor of Communications at the
University of Westminster and an expert on journalistic ethics. Stephen, Isabel
Oakeshott says she revealed these messages because it was in the public interest
to do so. You disagree. Why? I see no public interest here. If it was genuinely
a public interest issue, it wouldn't have gone to a particular publisher that
has a very trenchant viewpoint, which is in accordance with Isabel Oakeshott's
own viewpoint, which is that lockdown was wrong. She has a very libertarian
view, which says that we shouldn't have locked down. There were various things
that the government did wrong. And therefore, clearly, that publisher is going
to have a vested interest in dealing with those messages and sending them out,
cherry picking them in a way that suits their agenda. Ella, your witness. Would
it have been OK if the publication that Isabel Oakeshott chose was pro lockdown
or was neither? Is your main kind of problem with the fact that it was the
Telegraph? My main problem is that it was a publisher with a clear agenda that
matched hers. Had it really been a public interest? I think there are two issues
here. One is, was there a public interest in breaching a clear journalistic
confidence? I don't believe it meets that bar, whatever the publication. But the
other issue is, if you're going to do that, if you're convinced by the public
interest justification, then give it to a news outlet that is genuinely
impartial and genuinely neutral and will not cherry pick to suit their agenda.
Why don't you think it meets that first bar of public interest, regardless of
the bias that you're implying within the Telegraph? Because what it's done, and
I think this discussion demonstrates this, is to set an agenda around the
inadequacy of the political response. Now, there is absolutely a need to inquire
about that. No question about that. And there are other issues as well, which is
what would the scientific community say? What would the medical community say?
We must remember that the NHS was on its knees and there are going to be big
questions to answer about how we dealt with that and what lessons we can learn.
So it's the harm that you're already concerned with what the public does with
this information, what the public does with this story? My concern is that it
sets an agenda that is, I think, inappropriate and prejudges the public inquiry
under Dame Heather Howe. And in setting that, you know, yes, if you go with what
you're saying, that there was an agenda here and that this is perhaps even a
stretch to say a kind of cynical move to, you know, push a certain kind of
political viewpoint. So why can't the public view those facts, view those
messages and use their own trust and their own agenda, their own kind of ideas
to assess it independently? That's a very good question. The answer is we're
only seeing a portion of the truth. We're getting a very partial and partisan
view. We're not getting all the messages. We're not getting 100,000 WhatsApp
messages. We're getting the Telegraph's cherry picked idea of what they think we
ought to be looking at. Do you think that, you know, does anybody ever do
anything without an agenda? Is it not good that some of these very important
parts of the inner workings of political life come to light? I like to think
that we're sitting in an institution now which actually would not have a
political agenda if you gave them to the BBC. Sorry, I think you're fine. An
even better idea, given its track record here, would be the Financial Times. I
can think of many news outlets that would genuinely look at those messages if
that was what she wanted to do and say, we will try to do this on a neutral,
non-partisan basis. Very briefly. Yeah. You know, are you in danger, though, of
saying that because, you know, every sort of person and particularly those
involved in politics has some kind of bias. But the broader question here about
whether or not the public should see what happened in Matt Hancock's political
dealings in his private life, is there no benefit to that at all? Do you think
you should have stayed secret? I think there will ultimately be a benefit, but I
want to see them in their proper context and not picked out of context by an
organisation that has an agenda. Thank you very much. Tim, your witness. Let's
put aside Isabel Oakeshott's motivations and discuss the morality of editing, of
being an editor of a newspaper. You teach journalism. There are presumably going
to be future editors in your class. Possibly editors of newspapers. Maybe they
have been. I'm sure they have been. Are you really going to say to that class of
future editors, if someone gives you a scoop like this, don't publish it? Well,
I'm going to say to them, look at what the agenda is and what is your
journalistic obligation here? Your first journalistic obligation is to find out
the truth. And if you're going to do that, then you have to look across the
piece. My problem here is that we're told we're being given access to the truth,
but it is a version of the truth. It is a little beam of light on a very large
canvas. So my advice would be wait until you can genuinely look at the canvas.
And then, of course, let's scrutinise. Let's say it's a piece of a puzzle. But
as an editor, even if you're only given a piece of that puzzle, don't you have a
moral obligation to your readers, given how important that piece of that puzzle
is, to share it with them? I think you have an obligation to put it in its
correct context, particularly on an issue which is as life changing as this kind
of public health crisis. We need to learn lessons about what happened. We do.
Medical lessons, scientific lessons, political lessons. And what is happening
now is that those lessons, I'm afraid, are being prejudged by the leak of very
selective messages. But we are learning lessons. We're learning about how people
panicked. We're learning about how they tried to panic us. We're learning about
how they didn't test everyone who went into care homes and why. These are
lessons that are life and death and directly affect the readers' lives. And we
have to hear them in the context of what were the fears about the NHS collapsing
at the time? What were the fears of hundreds of thousands of people dying?
Everyone knows that. I'm sorry. A newspaper publishes every day. It can't
release a novel every day which covers, like War and Peace, every character's
perspective. It has been given one source of information, a source that no one
else has, and it has an obligation to share it. Otherwise, people wouldn't know
it. Why not give us every single message? Why not put it on the Telegraph
website? Or put it on, even better, because the Telegraph, as you know, is
behind a paywall. We have to pay to be able to access them. That's another
issue, by the way. Put it on a completely free website dedicated to those
messages. If that's the issue, transparency is the issue, make them available.
The BBC is financed through a TV licence. The Telegraph is very proud of the
fact that it survives through providing a service that people are willing to pay
for. It's perfectly transparent because the point is… How do you know we're
getting all the messages that are being sent? I think you are misrepresenting
what the Telegraph is publishing. It is not simply publishing individual
messages. You know it is publishing large samples of conversations which the
readers can read and then reach a conclusion. We exude the Telegraph's agenda,
which is an anti-lockdown agenda. There are perfectly valid reasons. Because
they're messages from the Secretary of State of Health. If we had been given a
tranche of messages from a scientific body, then it might have given a different
perspective. But we are sharing something that people otherwise might have to
wait years to hear. Sorry, you're sharing a sample of those messages. You are
not sharing all of them. Okay, thank you very much Stephen Barnett. Thank you
very much. Our next witness is the author and commentator, Dr Joanna Williams,
who wrote in defence of Isabel Oakeshott this week in The Spectator. Good
evening Joanna, thanks for joining us. You believe that Isabel Oakeshott was
right to publish this material. But I note that you concede that she
nevertheless committed a moral misdemeanour. Misdemeanour is your word. How so?
Well, I do think that privacy is important. And I do think that government
ministers and advisors should be able to hold discussions in confidence. But I
actually think that the moral point here is much more a question of what's in
the public interest. And I think when you're in a situation where people lost
their lives, people lost their livelihoods, our freedom was taken away from us,
children's education suffered, the economy suffered. There's such a huge,
overwhelming national interest to get this information out there in the public
domain, that I think it completely overrides the point about privacy. I'm not
sure we got to the misdemeanour bit, but we'll see if we get there eventually.
Giles, your witness. Some journalists have gone to prison to protect their
sources. Why do you think they've gone that far? Well, I could well imagine the
source being potentially vulnerable and wanting to protect that person. I don't
think Matt Hancock falls into that category. This is a man who voluntarily
handed over these WhatsApp messages. Let's remember, he wanted his story to be
out there. He employed Isabel Oakeshott as a ghostwriter on his book. He then
went off to be on I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here. This is not a man who has
a huge regard for his own privacy. He's not a vulnerable person here. When you
see the NUJ Code of Conduct, which talks about the importance of protecting the
identity of sources, there is not an asterisk on the end of that which goes, if
they're a jolly good person or if they're not the Secretary of State or so
forth. I mean, presumably this is an idea of protecting the confidentiality of
your sources. Especially, I mean, you know, this is somebody who it looks like
they've promised to keep this secret through some sort of agreement. And they've
just willy nilly broken this agreement. This is more than a misdemeanor, isn't
it? I mean, would you say this to somebody who had parents die in a care home
alone, for example, somebody who saw their children suffer home alone without
contact with friends? I've just said it on national radio. So, yes. I think it's
so overwhelmingly in the public interest to have this information out there.
When you think that this is somebody who had power over the entire nation, was
making decisions seemingly on a whim to lock the country down, to take away all
our freedoms, all our liberties. And for us to now see the flippancy and the
jokes that were made. I don't defend any of that. Absolutely. I understand. But
I want to talk about journalism here and about the ethics of journalism. And
there seems to me a crucial point here that, you know, you don't promise to keep
things quiet, secret. If I say to you, can we have a conversation off the
record? And you agree and then you write it all up in the Telegraph the next day
or whatever publication it is. Ultimately, what you're doing is you're
destroying our trust in journalism. And that has a much wider, that's much wider
implications. Why would I tell you anything going forward? Very briefly, Joanna.
Oh, I just think talking about journalistic integrity here, it completely misses
the point. I mean, it's focusing on, as far as I'm concerned, such an incredibly
trivial issue when up against the moral rungs. You think it's trivial? You think
journalistic ethics is trivial? No, I think journalistic ethics are extremely
important. But when set in comparison to people's lives, people's livelihoods,
people's freedom, education, employment, the entire freedom of a nation, I
actually do think that journalistic integrity at that point is the least
significant, the most unimportant factor here. Joanna, we've got to stop on the
premise. We've got to talk about journalistic integrity. We've got your point.
We've heard it a number of times. Thank you very much, Joanna Williams. Ash. Oh,
Joanna, let me in, let me in. Just to broaden out a little bit, do you think
that journalists have an absolute duty to the truth? Yes. OK, cool. So truth,
clearly, isn't all there is to it. There's influence. There's politics at play
as well. You happen to agree with lots of the conclusions which have been teased
out by The Telegraph. So when there is this process or there is a kind of agenda
here, a political agenda, and the public aren't told about it explicitly, isn't
there something which is duplicitous, that is misleading about it? I really
disagree with that. I don't think there's anything duplicitous or remotely
misleading about this whatsoever. The Telegraph is there for people to read. I
mean, if the argument is why didn't Isabella Oakeshott hand these messages over
to the BBC, for example, well, that's her choice. You know, I think she's well
within her rights. I think she's done the country a huge favour. I'm saying
don't we deserve to know how and why that choice was made? I'm not saying she
doesn't have the right to make that choice, but we, the public, deserve to
understand the process of how we receive that information. I actually don't
think Isabella Oakeshott is really the story here. You know, I think the story
is what happened to the nation over the course of two or three years. But we are
talking about the practice of journalism here rather than what's in the
messages. But like I say, when it comes to journalism, I mean, many people
actually do not think that the BBC was politically neutral on the issue of
lockdown. I'm not questioning the BBC here. I'm talking about how and why did
Isabella Oakeshott make the decision to go with the Telegraph? Don't we deserve
to know why, what she was thinking, what her priorities are? I'm not saying that
they're necessarily malign, but that we deserve to know. Personally, no, I don't
think we have any right to know or who cares. I mean, it just doesn't seem to
me, it seems to me such a completely trivial thing. Maybe she has a friend
there, maybe she likes somebody at the Telegraph. Maybe she does think the
Telegraph would deal with them with more integrity than other publications. So
what? Who cares? This is not the important issue. If I have the right to have
insight into Matt Hancock's thinking, because that's what I get when I read
these messages, why don't I have the right to understand Isabella Oakeshott's
thinking, the Telegraph's thinking? Again, not to assign any malign intentions,
but just to know, just to know what the agenda is. Well, I think, as has already
been stated on the programme this evening, people are quite well aware that the
Telegraph has been sceptical of lockdown. I don't think there's any huge secret
about that. I don't think there's any hidden agenda here. I think the political
leanings of the Telegraph and the Telegraph's approach to lockdown have been
quite clearly made over the past two or three years. Joanna, thank you very
much, Dr Joanna Williams. And let's move beyond the specific ethical questions
around this WhatsApp's disclosure to the broader questions. And our next
witness, Adrian Hilton, a writer on politics and religion. Adrian, as I
understand it, you take a nearly absolutist approach to keeping a confidence,
except in those very, very rare occasions when it may be morally necessary. Can
you briefly tell us what kind of occasions meet that test? For some people, the
integrity, their integrity is almost sacred. I'm probably inclined towards
Giles, that to violate it feels as though you're impinging upon salvation
somewhere. And yet occasionally, a little like the priest in confession, there
may be a time, a time in a million where you do have to breach a confidence. And
I apply what I call a fruits test. Is it justified by doing more good than harm?
Adrian, that's helpful. That gets us going. Ella. I want to know what's more
important, you know, a sense of protecting the trust that you have between
someone or following your own conscience. So, OK, we can all think of extreme
examples like, you know, someone's about to commit mass murder. And so probably
you would tell on them if they told you that. But about something more mundane,
like you find out that someone is going to cheat on your sister. Do you then,
you know, in your conscience tells you that that's a wrong that you have to
prevent? What do you do? All of these things will depend from, they'll just vary
from person to person. People have different moral assessments of themselves and
how they fit into the moral space. As I say, for some, integrity is sacred. But
for others, they're almost immune to anything that violates their freedom to act
and freedom to express. And people take a different view as to whether somebody
is shallow or has integrity within a moral framework. So it will vary from
person to person. OK, but let's not be relativist about it. What do you think in
terms of, you know, human beings are flawed. We quite often do things that are
wrong or are immoral. And is it more important to correct those things, perhaps,
and prevent those things by breaching trust? Or do we sort of maintain that we
can all keep our secrets and actually bad things happen in society? We all have
a moral outlook. It is to avoid or mitigate harm to prevent suffering. I think
that's built into the human psyche post enlightenment. So where we will act is
to mitigate suffering. And if that means that I have to breach a confidence to
protect a relation, a sister or a mother or father or a pet, then I will do so.
Oh, a pet. OK, so you've gone further than I thought you would, Adrian. But so
then if you, you know, if we are saying that actually you can trust me with a
proviso that actually you can't trust me if you're going to do, if you're going
to kick my cat or you're going to cheat on my sister, then does trust really
mean anything? I mean, you know, what's the point of it? What's the point of
saying you can trust me? Well, because we mean it. We mean the word trust, but
because it's a part of our integrity and honour. So when we articulate it, we
mean it. But that doesn't mean we mean it in perpetuity. Things change. And I
think, as I say, I mean, there's no convenient Benthamite calculator into which
we can put all of these potential harms and weigh them against the possible
goods. There's a give and take. There are pros and cons and we weigh them all
differently. All right, let's put the calculator down for a second while we
bring in Ash. I'm going to go really low with this, Adrian. Do you ever find
yourself party to gossip? Of course. And so what do you do when someone tells
you someone else's secret? So not murder, but maybe a mutual friend did
something very embarrassing on a night out. Do you stop your ears and turn away?
No, I listen. And so why do you listen? Because we're human. I'm intrigued. I
will listen to gossip if I'm told gossip. And is that because we're bad? Is it
because we're weak or is it because gossip does something valuable? No, it's
because we're human. I mean, we're interested in other people's foibles, other
people's sins, vices and crimes. We're just curious. We're just curious. But
does that curiosity have a value? Is there value in us learning other people's
secrets? Yes, because we can compare them to ourselves and see how we're doing
by comparison. There's comparison and maybe it helps us understand reality a bit
better, that people aren't just what they tell us they are. I think it helps us
to understand ourselves a lot better. So if the breaching of confidences has
this social value, maybe it improves us, helps us become better people. How do
we maintain that really high threshold where unless it kills my sister or my
cat, I'm not going to breach a confidence? I mean, I wouldn't say the breaching
confidences has that social value. It clearly causes harm. I mean, in the case
of Isabel Oakeshott, it's not only Matt Hancock who has been harmed manifestly.
She's harmed herself. But hang on, you did say that hearing a secret can be
morally valuable. It can improve you. It can help you understand yourself. But
then breaching a confidence, there's no value to it. Can you make that make
sense to me? No, I'm not dealing with such absolutes. There are possible
occasions when these things can be true and when they are not true. But I'm
talking about the same occasion, right? So not murder, not dead cat, but someone
did something embarrassing on a night out. They swore someone else to secrecy
about it. They don't want anyone to know that they were sick on their trousers.
But you found out about it anyway. And if hearing those kinds of confidences can
improve you, then why should the person who told you be morally tarnished? I'm
not saying that that sort of example would improve you. That's simple gossip.
It's worthless gossip. But I mean, come on, you ran an anonymous blog which had
a fair bit of church gossip in it. I mean, you must have thought there was some
kind of value in it. That wasn't gossip. That was truth. That's what I'd say as
well. But it very often is gossip. No, the motive is what determines the
righteousness of the pursuit. If you're trying to enlighten people, to edify
them in order to improve their interactions, their relationships in society in
general, then that's quite a different pursuit to just empty gossip. Adrian
Hilton, thank you very much. And to our final witness, the Catholic writer Peter
Stanford, whose biography of Judas suggests that we should think twice before
condemning someone for a breach of trust. Peter, are you saying that Judas
wasn't a Judas after all? I'm saying this is complicated, really. There are good
betrayals and bad betrayals. So in a very narrow sense, Judas's betrayal leads
to Jesus's death, but also Judas's betrayal leads to – Jesus's death leads to
Jesus's resurrection and is part of God's plan. So Judas was part of God's plan.
So perhaps that was a good betrayal. These things are complicated. Tim? OK, so
most Christians would say that God knows what we're going to do, but he doesn't
make us do it. So it may well be part of the plan, but ultimately Judas makes,
out of his free will, a choice to betray Jesus. And for around 2,000 years,
everyone said that was a bad thing and he's been the model of a bad human being.
It's quite clearly the Bible comes down against treason and betrayal, right?
Yes, it definitely comes down against those. I think when you say for 2,000
years people have condemned Judas, it's certainly true of some people, but there
are an awful lot of people who haven't. And it's kind of understanding – I mean,
it's trying to understand our place in the decisions that we make. It's trying
to understand free will. It can take you all sorts of places. And I think one of
the things that's quite important to remember about Judas is that one of the
Gospel accounts tells us that when he gets his 30 pieces of silver, he throws
them back through the temple gate. And then he goes on later. There are two
different accounts of how he dies, but one says that he hangs himself. So in a
sense, it shows you the difficulty of these choices that we're talking about.
Peter, it shows his shame. It shows his shame at having betrayed his friend.
Well, it shows that as well. I mean, he isn't privy to – if he is carrying out
God's plan, God hasn't sort of taken him to one side at the beginning and said,
this is what's going on. But is there a danger here of rationalising bad things
and of a kind of a very modern obsession with trying to look for the good, even
in the very worst people, that you can say that someone who's done something
demonstrably wrong, there are good byproducts. But still what they did was wrong
and immoral. One of the things that we're taught as parents early on is to
distinguish between the bad things that our children do and calling the child
themselves bad. So I think, you know, we can vilify Judas and indeed he has been
judicially – Oh, indeed. But that's because of free will. Because the point is
that Judas is not – he's not born a bad person. He makes a bad choice. But it is
a choice and it is a bad one. The weight of Judeo-Christianity is against
reason. But the issue we're discussing is breaches of confidentiality, as making
those very, very difficult decisions. And I think one of – I think there are
occasions on which it can be justified, but I think what is important to realise
in that process is that it is incredibly difficult and these things are not done
easily. I mean, yes, there's breaches of confidence in terms of kind of gossip
and those things. And that, I think, is in – that's in one place. But I think
when one tries to think about the really big questions where people are deciding
to come forward and talk about something, matters of literally of life and
death, although, you know, and we can apply those or not apply them to the case
we're talking about at the beginning of the programme, these are not easy
things, not easy both for the person who is betrayed and often not easy for the
betrayer. I wonder if you can talk about the confessional because this seems to
be a very interesting space. I mean, you clearly recognise the social value, if
you just put it in non-theological terms, but the social value of there being a
space where people can go and talk about what it is that they've done, even if
it's really very dark indeed. Absolutely. And, you know, I'm not a great
confession goer now to be in confessional mode, but it has in the past been a
very valuable thing. One of the things about the confessional, which is – and I
think we don't only have to talk about the confessional – for everybody to have
someone to kind of unburden these things to, is an important thing. So
absolutely it has a social value. We can debate whether it has a spiritual
value. But I think as well, one of the problems with the confessional is the
seal of the confessional. So you do absolutely, supposedly, at least anyway, the
seal of the confessional, whatever you say in there won't be repeated. And it's
part of its appeal. But it's like everything else. It is quite complicated. So
one of the things that we've discovered in recent times is that priests who'd
abused children went into the confessional, confessed to other priests that
they'd abused children, and the priest who heard the confession decided because
of the seal of the confessional he could do nothing about that. So the priest
who then goes off abuses more children, ruins more lives. What the Royal
Commission in Australia, which has been looking at the whole question of
clerical abuse, has suggested is that the seal of the confessional could in some
situations not be absolute. And it seems to me that is probably quite a sensible
– I mean, it's a very difficult course to take. It'll be strongly resisted. But
in terms of weighing up the – we've been talking about why people make choices.
And I think, let's take the best view of Catholicism in that they see the value
of there being a trusted place you can go to. But we can't ignore the fact that
it actually worked rather well for the Catholic Church, that its sins and its
cover-ups in terms of clerical abuse were not discovered. Yeah, I mean, I've
been taking confession for a very long time and no one's ever told me anything
that remotely close to me wanting to go to the authorities. So it's quite a rare
thing. I don't say that I would never be the case. But I suppose I just don't
like that. I mean, I think I agree with you about the paedophilia thing. I
really do. But I just want to establish the sort of value of that sort of
trusted space. I mean, if you're down the pub and you're talking to your mate
about, you know, a problem you might be having with your marriage or something
like that, though they're such important conversations, that the idea that we
think it of a sort of – well, what one of our guests call a misdemeanor to
somehow tell everybody about that, that seems to be wrong. I mean, you share
that sense. Very briefly, please, Peter. Yeah, I do. And let's think of another
– very quickly, let's think of another context. The context – we talked about
religious context. Let's think about mentoring and coaching and psychotherapy
and those areas. There is a confidentiality that exists in those situations, but
it is done – they actually have contracts between the two people involved in it.
And they have very specific areas. I think with coaching, it is around if the
person tells you they've broken the law, that you have a duty to society then to
report it. And in terms of harm, and I suppose what the great risk always is, is
around suicide. So I think they've thought about it more carefully and put
protections around things. I'm with you. It's really, really important, but it
can't be absolute and there have to be specific protections around it. Peter
Stanford, thank you very much. Let's see what we make of all of this panel. I'll
take you back first of all to the ethics of these WhatsApp disclosures and
Stephen Barnard, our first witness. Charles, what did you make of this? A really
uncompromising stance on this. And I'm taking about the fact that he said that
there is no justification whatsoever within the public interest sense, even
though he hasn't seen all of the documents himself. Yeah, I mean, the argument
that there is no public interest is that it's going to come out anyway. It's
going to come out in a public inquiry. That's where it should come out. That's
the sort of, as it were, very grown up position. I don't take the position. I
also definitely don't take the position that he held that the Telegraph is
somehow biased and that the only people who are not biased are the BBC and the
FT. Because you can be biased from the centre, by the way. I mean, even if it's
left, right and centre, the idea that the centre is not a form of bias, it seems
to be crazy. So there is no non-biased journalism. I agree. I've got to say I
agree and I'm really uncomfortable with the idea that partisan outlets can't
mount a public interest defence. I think that's totally corrosive to a
pluralistic media environment. But I thought was interesting is that both Joanna
Williams and Stephen Barnett based their judgment on whether Isabella Oakeshott
was defensible, what she did was defensible, based on whether they approved of
her politics or not. And me, I find myself in the total opposite place. I don't
like her. I don't think she'd piss on me if I was on fire. Careful, be careful.
Pee on me if I was on fire. Sorry, Mum. But she's behaved like a journalist here
and she did her job. Does it matter whether you like or dislike the person
involved when it comes to the moral question, whether it is right or wrong to
disclose this information? Well, actually, Adrian said a really interesting
thing, just skipping forward a bit, where he said motive determines the
righteousness of the pursuit. And I think that is that's pretty clear in terms
of what Isabella Oakeshott is arguing is that I might have done, in your view, a
bad thing. I might have broken trust. I mean, she's saying she hasn't. But, you
know, as far as I can see, I take Joanna Williams point of view, which is people
do bad things. I'm glad if she has done a bad thing. I'm glad she's done it. And
I think most people at home are making moral judgments, not about whether or not
Isabella Oakeshott got paid or is biased, but about Matt Hancock going on in his
WhatsApp. And so that's the other kind of the second moral question you have to
ask is what really matters here when things like this come to light as they
have, what really matters? Oh, libertarians. This is what happens with
libertarians all the time. Oh, pesky moral restrictions. All we want is go
freedom, go freedom, go freedom. And the idea that these are pesky morality. I
mean, so basically anything that's moral is just is looked down upon. What she
did was wrong. What she did was wrong. And I think that's just crystal clear. It
may well even have been in the public interest to still think it was wrong. She
had an obligation. You can't just constantly flag up freedom. Can I just be on
behalf of the Telegraph? Please do. Because it's reporting if nothing else has
been misrepresented. I think our first speaker, I don't agree his position was
uncompromised. It was highly compromised by his own particular biases. No,
uncompromising in his stance. Right. OK. But he gave the impression the
Telegraph had only published select things in order to do a particular anti-
lockdown agenda. But of course, we published stuff that talked about whether or
not people were tested going into care homes. You could argue that that was a
case of there not being enough lockdown. As for the question of neutrality, the
idea that some people out there feel the BBC was not impartial during lockdown.
And I'm not sure I'd be comfortable handing over all those messages to, say,
Gary Lineker, who after all is a journalist employed by this organisation. Now,
I think what Adrian Hilton had to say was very interesting when he made a
distinction between gossip versus enlightenment. Yes. And I think the problem is
that the focus upon Isabella Ockshott's motivations, which are still to some
extent her own business, I think risks actually drawing the story into the realm
of gossip and making it prurient by obsessing about her motivations. Well,
surely you all agree. Rather than the substance of the story itself. You all
agree that you can do the right thing with the wrong motives. I'm not suggesting
that Isabella Ockshott's motives are wrong, but in principle, you can do the
right thing or the wrong thing with the wrong motives, can't you? Yes. And I
think the important thing also is when once the right or wrong thing is done,
what is the effect? I mean, this is actually, you know, again, Adrian was
talking about the fruits of an act, that this is what happens afterwards. And my
problem with someone like Stephen Barnett is that his whole issue with the leak
and or, you know, the publishing of these stories was the fact that it was going
to potentially cause some kind of public health disaster in the future because
no one would listen to scientists anymore. But, you know, I have to really push
back, Giles, and to take it away from Isabella Ockshott, I have to push back on
this idea that it is that, you know, I'm just doing away with morals. If you
take, for example, my poor mother, bought me a, you know, was told by another
parent to buy me a diary to tell me that it was sacred and then to read it. And
she did that. And she saved me from many, many teenage, quite serious mishaps
because I was a rip and put myself in dangerous situations. And I always thought
she was a complete cow for doing that until I myself became a mother and
realised why it was actually morally right to do it. Her motivation just wasn't
prurience. It was something else. But she was a mother, a mother and journalist,
very different vocations with very different sets of responsibilities. And at
the end, we came onto the subject of the priesthood. Yes. And this is where I
found this discussion rather concerning because it lost sight of what the priest
is there to do and why they are not the bloke down the pub. I'm sorry. I'm the
Catholic around this table. And when you go to see a priest, you are not Roman
Catholic. Yeah, but you said you might break the confessional. Well, a Roman
Catholic priest cannot. What happens to Roman Catholic priests if they do that?
They are not only immediately excommunicated, they excommunicate themselves by
doing it. Yeah, I understand. And this is the key point being that the
confession in that situation is a sacrament. So it's a completely different
debate from that of journalism. And I would like to add that there is value in
inviting people even to share horrific truths that will not then be shared.
Because as you all know, Giles, the confessional is not just tell me what you've
done. All right, mate, on you go. It's not that. It's a conversation about
trying to heal someone and to achieve reconciliation through penance. I'm
obviously approaching this in a much more secular context. And I think that
maybe where we're getting stuck is that keeping confidence is not the only form
of trust. Of course, we trust that people do what they say they will do, that
they'll keep our secrets when they say that they're going to keep our secrets.
But we also trust that people will share information when it protects us from
harm and also when it helps us maintain a relationship with reality. Can I test
this motivation point? What if someone says to you, I am happy to breach trust,
to breach a commitment, to reveal a secret if it serves my interests? That's
called journalism. No, just that, that motivation. It helps me. It gets me on a
bit. It's just clearly wrong. Why is it clearly wrong? No, don't just say it's
wrong. Why is it wrong? I mean, it seems sort of properly foundational in what
it's wrong. I mean, you're just, that's basically a description of self-
interest. Why is that wrong? Overcoming your concern for the other. Well, it's
just the nature of what it is to be wrong. You've just described what right and
wrong is. But what if you're acting on behalf of a, you know, of not just your
own sort of selfish perspective, but on behalf of something bigger than
yourself? Fine, that's a different matter. It's a different question. It's a
different question because, you know, for example, people can say that Isabelle
Oakeshott was just doing it for her career and that it was all this, that all
these arguments are levied against her. But in terms of a public interest, that
does have, it does have a kind of, the motive is important because it's
inherently political. We're not talking in the abstract that she's just revealed
something, you know, the colour of Matt Hancock's pants. This is a political
issue. So, so this speaks to confessional and other things as well. I don't
think that's in there, is it? This speaks to confessional and other things as
well, which is, which is that you can reach a moral situation where both
choices, all choices are wrong. It's called tragedy and tragedy is real. So the
idea that we have one option that's good, one option that's bad. I have to say,
if you're, if you, if you believe in the seal of the confessional and you have a
paedophile in, in the confessional, I've got to tell you, there is moral, you
know, it's clearly wrong not to do anything as well. It's wrong. It might be
wrong both ways. Yes, of course. A wrong would be done. And then you in tragedy.
A wrong would be done. And, and I can imagine, you know, we've all, we've all
considered becoming a priest, I'm sure. I, I, not everyone can, unfortunately,
not everyone can. But I have put a course by myself in that situation and I have
sort of thought that I would do the Christ-like thing perhaps of sacrificing my
own relationship with the church and excommunicating myself in order to share
that information. But I would do it knowing that I had excommunicated myself
because I had breached. And this is the critical thing from a Christian point of
view. You're not just breaching the trust of that person. You're breaching the
trust of God. There's a third party when it comes to the sharing of truths and
confidences. So at the end of all of this, is it just the greater good? That's
the only consideration in determining whether it's OK to breach confidence. No.
I think people often dress things up as the greater good when there are some
elements of personal or political advancement, particularly when you're looking
at journalism. It is not just an obligation to truth that drives journalists. It
is also partisan goals. It is also personal goals. And I'm fine with that. If a
mother knew their child had done something very wrong, it might be for the
community's greater good to hand them over. But they wouldn't be such a good
mother if they did. I think it's the day you have to live with your own soul.
We've got to leave it there. Ash Sarkar, Tim Stanley, Giles Fraser and Ella
Whelan, thanks very much. We will be back at the same time next week. And that's
a promise you can bank on it. See you then. The Moral Maze was chaired by
William Crawley, the producer Jonathan Haddowell. And a reminder, you can
subscribe to The Moral Maze on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4, time now, for
the Lent Talk, in which Zoe Clark-Coates reflects on her experience of baby
loss. And the words from the Lord's Prayer, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done.
When I was 21, I married my best friend and soulmate, Andy. We were raised in
Christian homes and had both found our own faith as children. That faith is a
core part of our lives. Before we were married, I trained as a counsellor. My
mother was an experienced therapist, so it felt natural and right for me to
follow in her footsteps. My training gave me a solid grounding in psychological
processes and taught me the mechanics of trauma, grief and loss. I didn't know
when I was studying just how important that would turn out for me personally.
I'd always assumed the maternal clock was a myth until mine started ticking.
When it did, after a decade of marriage, we decided the time was right to start
a family. We naively believed, as most people do, that within a year we'd have a
baby in our arms, just as my sister had. But in the years that followed, we
experienced the darkest of times as we rode a rollercoaster of pain and loss,
losing five longed-for babies. I often refer to this period as the dark night of
the soul. A time when you see no light at the end of the tunnel, when the pain
and trauma feel suffocating, and when tears fall without ceasing. When we
experienced our first loss, we didn't really talk about it. We chose to do what
we knew wasn't healthy or helpful. Push the pain down, keep busy and pretend the
loss hadn't even happened. Months later, we were thrilled to find out we were
pregnant again. We watched our baby Darcy grow on scans and felt truly blessed
to have been given a second chance to raise a child. On one Friday afternoon,
things seemed to change. I started bleeding. Nothing heavy, but anyone who's
experienced any blood loss in pregnancy will tell you, of the sheer panic when
you see any sign of blood. We found a private clinic that agreed to scan me that
same day. And after a scary few hours, we made our way to the clinic and were
truly relieved to see her moving around on the scan. Seeing her little face and
beating heart brought an abundance of peace, and we returned home feeling
reassured and thankful. But the following day, things changed. I had a much
heavier bleed and something in my soul told me that my daughter had died. I
remember falling to my knees in the bathroom, begging God to save her. I rocked
back and forth, clutching my stomach, praying to the only one who I believe
truly controls life and death. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done. We rushed to
A&E, and for a Saturday evening, the emergency department was shockingly quiet.
And for that, we were thankful. But the hospital staff told us that I was still
clearly pregnant and we'd need to wait at least a week for a scan. We went home
full of worry and fear. We contacted a private clinic again, as there was no way
I could wait a week to know if she was okay. On the Monday morning, they called
us to say they had an appointment. We quickly dressed and jumped in the car.
That journey will live with me forever. At the clinic, we were led into a
scanning room. It was a modern facility, so the scan was projected onto a large
screen opposite the bed. We quickly saw our daughter on the screen and I gasped
with relief. She hadn't gone. There she was in all her beauty. But the midwife
performing the scan was silent. And those heartbreaking words tumbled from her
lips. I'm so sorry. There's no heartbeat. Life changed forever in those seconds.
Time seemed to slip into slow motion and it became hard to breathe. The days
that followed were raw agony. As it was approaching Christmas, I remember
staring out from our kitchen window, watching the fairy lights twinkle on all
our neighbours' windows. And feeling like I was trapped behind a wall where our
world was hopeless and dark. I distinctly remember constantly praying over my
stomach, morning, noon and night, begging God to bring her back to life. The one
who performs miracles could surely make a heartbeat again. We had faith that he
could do it. But he didn't. A week to the day after my daughter died, I went
into labour and she was delivered. I don't think anyone would have blamed us if
we had blamed or resented God. But I felt none of that. I felt grateful for our
time with her and was acutely aware that having faith doesn't protect you from
the worst happening. It just helps you journey through the valley. I remember
the first time I saw my daughter. It just helps you journey through the valley.
I remember listening to a Tim Hughes song called When the Tears Fall. At that
moment I felt divinely connected to God. I knew that he understood the pain. He
too had lost a son. And as this was the ultimate gift for humanity, I knew he
knew there was no greater pain one could endure. I knew even if no one else
truly understood, he did. Life continued and we tragically experienced a further
baby loss. And it felt like raising a child would not be part of my story here
on earth. After losing three babies, we then lost our dog. Experiencing this
different type of bereavement pushed me over the grief edge. And I said I cannot
get pregnant again. I can't risk any more loss. But little did I know that I was
already pregnant with our little miracle. Seven months later we were greeted
with the arrival of our beautiful daughter Esme. We desperately wanted our
daughter to have a sibling, so we tried again. And within months we were
expecting a little boy called Samuel. But during a routine scan, our consultant
told us those horrible, familiar, heart-shattering words. I'm so sorry. There is
no heartbeat. Once again we were thrown back into the depths of heartbreak and
loss. And our fourth child was born straight into heaven. Our next pregnancy
involved two surgeries and the loss of one of our precious twins. We named her
Isabella. But we finally got to bring home our next little daughter and we named
her Bronte. All my training as a counsellor prepared me for so much in life. But
it wasn't until I had experienced the heartbreaking loss of my five babies that
I understood how pain and grief changes our lives. Hope felt so far removed and
we clung to each other and to our faith. We talked, we cried and over time we
began to find joy again. As my two daughters grew, I prayed to God that he would
show me how the pain and trauma we experienced could guide others to a place of
hope. Over a few weeks I considered what would have genuinely helped us while
grieving. I knew we needed three things. The first being a formal service to
remember each of our babies. We didn't have funerals for them and this felt
wrong. There's a purpose in these sacred rituals. They are an opportunity to
mark a life lost. They also allow us to grieve together, to have our pain
witnessed and our journey acknowledged. Secondly, we needed support. We realised
we were incredibly blessed to have a counsellor as a parent and other family and
friends who offered an abundance of compassion and love. But many just don't
have this. Thirdly, we knew a change was needed in caring for and treating those
experiencing baby losses. So I now knew what was needed. I told Andy my dreams
and hopes. I shared how I felt we could truly change the world. I shared how I
felt we could truly change people's lives and asked what he thought. Without a
second of hesitation he said, yes, I'm in, let's do this. Practically overnight
the mission commenced. We agreed our motto, Every Baby Matters, and started
arranging the first seven saying goodbye services to provide that much needed
ritual. We decided to hold them only at cathedrals and abbeys to tell the world
that these babies matter and that their lives deserve to be acknowledged and
remembered in important historical buildings. As word spread we soon realised
that we needed to establish ourselves as a charity in order to support people
through baby loss, infertility and pregnancy after loss. So we set up the
Mariposa Trust. Mariposa is the Spanish word for butterfly. A symbol of hope,
transformation and of new life. Though most people know us as saying goodbye.
Baby loss has always existed. It affects around one in four pregnancies. Still
it's been a stigmatised experience where individuals, couples and families feel
isolated. In the UK over 258,000 losses happen yearly, meaning over 500,000
parents will be left grieving for a baby. Many of them feeling alone and like
the only person who is staggering through this living hell. Christian scripture
calls on us to mourn with those that mourn. And through my writing as a grief
and loss author, and through my work, it feels like we are living out this
directive in being alongside those who are suffering. But we also needed to
campaign for change. We were passionate about changing the system. And so worked
to lead the charge in declaring that every baby matters. That partners matter
too. That care within the NHS needs to be reformed. And that all babies should
be given a certificate of life so they are formally acknowledged by the
government. And so much more. I was asked to co-chair the National Pregnancy
Loss Review by the Secretary of State for Health. And five years on, this review
is soon to be delivered. And all parents who have gone through loss will shortly
be able to apply for a certificate. And I'm so proud to have been part of making
this happen. Across society, many people wonder how loss and death sit with
religious belief. They often struggle to reconcile how a God that could stop all
loss fails to do so. I often hear people saying, if God is a God of love, why
did he not answer my prayer? Perhaps this will all be revealed to us when we
come into his kingdom. But until then, I've learnt to become more comfortable in
the unknown. To trust in the prayer, your kingdom come, your will be done, on
earth as it is in heaven. I've learnt to accept that I may never know why these
things happened. But I need to understand that it's not because of me. It's not
to teach me a lesson. It's not so he can use my pain to help others. I don't
serve a God like that. He promises to use our pain for good, not cause pain for
the greater good. If as a society we can get better at recognising when people
are in pain, and be willing to sit with them as they mourn, which is not always
an easy thing to do, then we will be giving people a chance to heal. We are
giving them an opportunity to rediscover their hope. We can never take away a
person's sorrow. But we can listen to them, acknowledge their loss, and let them
know they aren't alone in their pain. For those who desperately need a touch
from heaven, I pray that you will discover him in those hidden places, and that
he will also be your light in the darkness. And always remember, grief is real.
But so is hope. Or you can call for free at any time to hear recorded
information on 08000 158 707. That number again, 08000 158 707. We investigate
the environmental impact of prawn farming in South East Asia. That's after the
news, but first a look ahead to Saturday morning. The new series of Rewinder.
Oddly captivating. Hmm, perhaps you're right. Saturday mornings at 10am.