TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Sounds on your smart speaker. This is BBC Radio 4. Welcome to the world this
weekend. This is Johnny Diamond, turmoil in the Middle East. Dozens are killed
as Israelis and Palestinians make a deadly start to the year. We will do
everything human possible in order to fight terrorists and terrorism and that's
what we do. You don't go to refugee camps and you spree people with bullets,
killing elderly, killing a child. You don't do that. We'll ask President Obama's
special envoy to the Middle East if Palestinians' statehood is an empty dream.
And as Scotland looks for a new First Minister, Alan Little heads home. I've
come back here to think about what it was about the union between England and
Scotland that made it so resilient, why it was cherished by so many generations
of Scottish people until recently. The BBC News is read by Tom Sanders. The
bodies of more than 40 migrants have been found on a beach in southern Italy
after their boat broke up in rough seas. About 80 people survived. A search and
rescue operation is continuing. Our Europe regional editor Danny Eberhard
reports. The small, apparently overcrowded boat broke up just off the coast in
heavy seas. Footage shows timber smashed into pieces washed up along the beach,
along with parts of the hull. A group of survivors, thought to number about 80,
made it to shore. Images show them huddled in blankets, being attended to by Red
Cross workers. Some have been taken to hospital. Initial reports indicate
they're from Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan. It's still not clear how many
people were on board the boat when it sank, nor where it had departed from. The
Italian Prime Minister, Giorgio Maloney, has expressed her deep sorrow at the
tragedy, which she's blamed on people traffickers. Pope Francis, who regularly
defends the rights of migrants, has said he's praying for the dead, the missing
and those who survived. Jordan is hosting a meeting of senior Israeli and
Palestinian security officials to try to bring an end to a recent surge in
violence. 62 Palestinians and 9 Israelis have been killed in the fighting so far
this year. Our Jerusalem correspondent, Yolanda Nell, reports. This is the first
time that we know about in many years that Israeli and Palestinian security
chiefs have met alongside key regional players and American representatives. It
follows a bloody start to the year and comes weeks before the Islamic Holy Month
of Ramadan will coincide with the Jewish Passover holiday. That's expected to
raise tensions around Jerusalem's most contested holy site, the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound or Temple Mount. Local media suggests Israel will pledge not to
announce further settlement building on land the Palestinians claim for their
hoped-for future state. Palestinian officials are expected to announce steps to
restore calm. But that won't be easy, as the latest shooting shows they have
little control over the actions of Palestinian armed groups or lone wolf
attackers. The government has hinted that politicians in Northern Ireland could
be given new powers as part of a fresh deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements.
The Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab said the UK was on the cusp of securing a
new settlement with Brussels, involving less onerous customs checks on goods
travelling from the British mainland to Northern Ireland. Here's our political
correspondent, Oney Wells. For days, ministers have suggested that a deal is
close at hand, with progress made on key issues that have frustrated unionist
politicians in Northern Ireland. This morning, Dominic Raab offered a glimpse of
what the agreement might look like. He hinted there would be changes to customs
checks for goods travelling between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. It's
likely that goods not due to move into the Republic of Ireland could be exempt
from checks. He also suggested the agreement would allow politicians at Stormont
to have what he called a democratic check on any future EU rules that could
affect Northern Ireland. But some Tory MPs and the Democratic Unionist Party are
still worried about the level of sovereignty the EU may retain. It's still
unclear when the deal will be announced, but it could be as soon as tomorrow. Mr
Raab has also said he'll resign if an inquiry finds that he bullied civil
servants. Eight formal complaints have been made against him. The union which
represents civil servants, the FDA, has repeatedly called on the health and
safety executive to investigate claims of widespread bullying in Whitehall.
Speaking to Laura Koonsberg, Mr Raab denied he was a bully, he was also asked
whether he had ever felt that at times he shouldn't have reacted in a certain
way. Look, in terms of working style, falling short of any of the impropriety
you refer to, look, of course we learn lessons as we go. And that's part of the
relationship with civil servants. But I'm confident that I behaved
professionally throughout. And as I say, I think actually the vast lion's share
of the time, the vast majority of cases and the time we spend together, civil
servants and ministers work very effectively together. The Deputy Prime
Minister, Dominic Raab. Thanks very much, Tom. Such is the level of violence in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories that this morning, alongside
international officials, security chiefs from the Israeli and Palestinian
governments got together in what's thought to be the first time in many years in
the Jordanian city of Akhaba to see what cooperation might yield. Today, two
Israelis were shot and killed in the occupied West Bank. Last week saw the
deadliest Israeli military raid into the Palestinian territories in nearly 20
years. More than 60 Palestinians, militants and civilians have been killed in a
bloody start to the year. And at the same time, 11 have been killed in attacks
on Israelis in occupied East Jerusalem, 10 civilians and a police officer.
Yolanda Nell is our Middle East correspondent. Well, just a week ago, the focus
was on the UN Security Council, where the Palestinians were pressing for a
resolution condemning Jewish settlements on land they seek for their hoped for
future state. Israel's new government, the most right wing in its history, had
just announced plans to legalize nine unauthorized settlements and build 10,000
new settler homes, a very large number. After Washington intervened, news spread
that a deal had been struck to lower tensions, the Security Council resolution
was thus downgraded to a statement. But then we saw violence, didn't we, in the
West Bank city of Nablus. This is supposed to be under Palestinian security
control, but Israel's military went in. That's right. On Wednesday morning, the
Israeli military said its troops entered the old city to arrest three wanted
Palestinians, one said to have been involved in the killing of an Israeli
soldier. Now they ended up in an hours long firefight with armed Palestinian
groups. At least 11 Palestinians were killed. Locals said that six were
militants and five were civilians. More than 100 people were injured too, mostly
shot. The next day at dawn, six rockets were fired into southern Israel by armed
groups in Gaza who'd promised retaliation. There was a swift response. Israeli
warplanes bombed what was said to be Hamas militant sites. Now no one was hurt.
And the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu told a special cabinet
meeting, whoever tries to harm us will pay the price. So in the past few days,
we've had the violence you described in Nablus. There's been what, an exchange
of fire down south on the Gaza Israel border. But also the Israeli government
has been working to firm up its plans on the settlements that most of the
international community say are illegal under an international law. That's
right. I mean, despite any agreements reached behind the scenes with the
Americans and Israeli committee went ahead, it took the formal steps to approve
that huge advance in settlement building. Moria Michaeli, a settler, spoke of
the joy when her settlement was authorized. There was excitement and elation.
The next day we all gathered and danced and sang and held a festive prayer. Now
on the Palestinian side, there was growing anger, not just over Israeli actions,
but with what was seen as the weak response of the Palestinian Authority. On
Thursday night, thousands turned out for demonstrations in Palestinian towns and
cities. And then this morning, Yoland, there's been this meeting that's been
taking place in Akaba across the border in Jordan to try and calm things down.
Israeli security officials, Palestinian security officials, Jordanians and
Americans too. The concern is, I think, about the forthcoming meeting of two
religious festivals, Ramadan on the one side and the Jewish festival of Passover
on the other. That's right. I mean, this week, Egypt and the UN have been
working to try to contain the violence. And after the failure of its earlier
efforts, the US is trying again. But it's not going to be easy with the current
leaders on both sides. And, you know, the timing is so urgent, as you say, in
April, we've got these holidays coming together. And that is inevitably going to
push up tensions at Jerusalem's most bitterly contested holy site, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound for Muslims, for Jews. It's the Temple Mount. Everybody is well
aware of just how inflammatory that could be. That was Yoland and Nell Armid,
least correspondent. Well, given the decades of stalemate and gridlock, it may
be hard to believe that once upon a time, a generation or more ago now, it
looked as if there might be a solution to the demands Israelis and Palestinians
put on the same small strip of land in the eastern Mediterranean, a solution
that was meant to end in two separate states living side by side. Yasser Arafat,
the man who sent his men to kill Israelis for a quarter of a century, and
Yitzhak Rabin, who once sent his planes to bomb Arafat's own headquarters in
Tunis. The Oslo Accords of the early 90s pushed away some of the toughest
questions about Israel and an eventual Palestine in the hope that trust between
the two sides could build alongside Palestinian institutions of self-government.
A sort of Palestinian state was established in the West Bank and in Gaza down to
the south, but trust was pretty thin on the ground and it didn't take much for
the violence to erupt and a new generation to experience injury, death and loss.
The second intifada, or uprising in the early 2000s, saw 3,000 deaths amongst
Palestinians and in Israel, a thousand killed, many in a series of bombings and
attacks that terrified and radicalised more moderate Israelis. Death and
devastation in the middle of rush hour. It was 10 past 9 when the suicide bomber
joined the queue for this bus, strapped to his body, explosives packed with
nails. Oslo was over. Neither side saw the other as a viable partner. Over the
years and decades, more and more Palestinian land was taken. For Israeli
settlements, illegal under international law. For Israeli security, a wall that
curtailed Palestinian attacks. And Israeli roads, crisscrossing the occupied
West Bank. Any dreams the Palestinians had harboured of statehood were in
pieces. Israel became stronger, a modern, high-tech economy emerged and some of
the Arab countries that had pledged eternal solidarity with the Palestinians
abandoned them. The Abraham Accords brought Israel a step closer to normal
relations with the Arab world. A treaty of peace, diplomatic relations and full
normalisation. They will each sign three copies. One in English, Hebrew and
Arabic. The latest spike in violence and deaths in the occupied West Bank began
before Benjamin Netanyahu took power a third time late last year. For years
there had been warnings that a new generation of Palestinians could see no hope
amidst claims that Israel's army acted with less and less restraint. Now the new
governing coalition, unashamedly conservative and nationalist, has pledged what
it calls the exclusive and unquestionable right to all areas of the land of
Israel. In other words, the occupied Palestinian territories, home to almost
three million. The West Bank conquered five and a half decades ago, the
coalition says, is Israel's too. And as the government grabs land, it's also
attempting to curtail judicial independence and the limited constitutional
protections of Israel's basic law. In vain have tens of thousands gathered to
protest. In vain has Israel's president warned of catastrophe. In vain has Joe
Biden called for consensus. Whilst most Palestinians, powerless observers, can
only look on and wonder what comes next for them. Dr. Hossam Zomlot is head of
the Palestinian mission to the UK. They asked for his reaction to the numbers of
Palestinians killed in the last year. Maybe depression is not the world.
Depression is a luxury in our situation. We've got to keep on. But sadness is
and frustration is. Indeed, we are absolutely sad and concerned about what has
been happening of late and what are the possibilities for the future. Knowing
that we have no checks and balances, neither local, regional or international.
And it's almost a free fall situation. And those who are receiving the brunt of
this are civilians, ordinary people. So it is heartbreaking in every sense. Each
raid the Israelis say is about pushing back against Palestinian militant groups.
They're lying. They're lying. The absolute protection of the civilian population
is the sole responsibility of the occupy. That is international law. And it is
Israel's responsibility to make sure that civilians are protected. You don't go
to refugee camps as you did in Gineen or in Jericho or in Nablus and you spree
people with bullets killing elderly three elderly died, killing a child. You
don't do that. And over and over again, the international community, the
international rule of law has been ignored for Palestinians. What makes you
think it will get better in the future? The international law is very clear and
it has been affirmed and reaffirmed over the years about the clarity of the
situation in the legal sense in Palestine, that this is occupied territories,
that settlements are illegal and more seasoned, must be reversed. All that, you
know, yet the problem is not in the law, it's the enforcement. And here we see
the unequal enforcement of an international law, the selectivity of the
international community. And here I mean primarily the West. And I'm referring
to Ukraine primarily because it is the same situation of a military invasion of
annexation and all that. And, you know, this is really what the global South is
following. And I think your commitment to international legality is tested not
when you apply it on your foes, on your enemies. It is really tested when you
apply it on your friends and allies. And I must say the UK and the US and the
rest of the West keeps failing and has failed for a long time because they
insist, because Israel is our friend and ally, rules do not apply. But these
rules are the rules that were created by Europe after the horrors of the Second
World War for one man purpose. Never again that we need to live as nations and
state in a regulated globe that prevents countries from taking over territory by
force. That's the premise of international law. So it isn't just about
Palestine, it is also about the rest of us. That was Dr. Hossam Zomlot, head of
the Palestinian Mission to the UK. Elie Verred Hazan is the international
ambassador for Benjamin Netanyahu's Likud party, the largest party of the
governing coalition. He told me he was deeply concerned about the Palestinian
civilian deaths caused by Israel's raids into Nablus and Janine. We don't want
to harm any civilians, any innocent people. At the end, we want to combat
terror. And that's what we are trying to do. More than that, don't forget, as
Jews, we believe in life. This is one of the commandments we've got by God. And
therefore, we don't want to harm any innocent people. On the other hand, we will
do everything human possible in order to fight terrorists and terrorism. And
that's what we do. Israel has lost, I think, 10 citizens this year, two really
very young children amongst them. Are you concerned that the lack of any
political process between yourselves and the Palestinians is contributing to
this increase in violence amongst Palestinians and Israelis? No doubt about it.
No doubt about it at all. But I tell what I think and what I've seen. I mean, I
grew up in Jerusalem since the 1970s. And I've experienced, you know, the terror
attacks every few years. I remember the 1990s when Yasser al-Fatt came as a
promise for peace. And he conducted or at least led or give legitimacy to terror
actions against Israelis. Unfortunately, you have to go to the roots and the
roots of the Palestinians, of the Palestinian leadership. They don't want to
accept us here in the Middle East. They don't want to recognize the Jewish
state. Is it fair to say that for many Israelis, many voters, the idea now of a
Palestinian state next to an Israeli state is dead, the old two state solution,
as it was always called, that most Israelis now just can't imagine a Palestinian
state being established? Yes. And this is another thing. Unfortunately, again,
they killed the two state solution because of terror, because many Israelis
asked themselves, if we pulled out of Gaza completely and we've got missiles in
return, what would happen if we will leave Judea and Samaria? Well, you call it
West Bank. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You call it West Bank. We call it Judea and
Samaria. Let's respect one each other in that case. But what would happen to Tel
Aviv, to Haifa, to the Ben Gurion airport, being under missiles threat? It means
this is the end of the Israeli economy. More than that, we are asking ourselves,
what would happen if Hamas will rise to power in a very similar way to what
happened in 2007? And yes, you are completely right about it, but not because
the Israelis don't want it at the end. They want to live freely and fairly next
to the Palestinians. But unfortunately, there is no, I would say, similar will
in the Palestinian side. Do you have much hope for the future? No, unfortunately
not. I'll tell you why, because the mindset of the Palestinian leadership is so
distorted. So if they hold this mindset, we are in a big trouble. That was Elie
Verred Hazan, the international ambassador for Benjamin Netanyahu's Likud party.
Well, Martin Indik has held a number of key diplomatic posts in the Middle East,
including President Barack Obama's special envoy to the region. He joins us from
the US. Good morning, ambassador. Good morning. Two Israelis killed this
morning, more than 60 Palestinians killed so far this year, 11 killed in attacks
on Israelis in occupied East Jerusalem. You'll be aware there are there's a lot
of talk about a third intifada, a third uprising. Is that how you read it? Is
that what you understand is being discussed, worried about in Israel and the
Palestinian territories? Yes, very much. In fact, I think it's probably already
underway. And one of the intifadas will be exactly like the previous one. But
what you have now occurring on an almost daily basis is what's commonly referred
to as a cycle of violence and terror that that seems to be spreading in alarming
ways. You have this lion's den of Palestinian faction, which does not seem to be
affiliated to the traditional Hamas Fata or Palestine Islamic Jihad terrorist
organizations. It is indigenous. It's young people in Nablus and Jannine. And
it's gaining popular support. There were demonstrations in various towns across
the West Bank over the last few days responding to their call for that. These
are young people who don't remember the last intifada. They have easy access to
weapons all over the West Bank. And since the last intifada 20 years ago, there
there's two things that have developed. One is is more than 200000 additional
settlers in the West Bank, which provides a target free, target rich environment
for for violence. And the crumbling of the Palestinian Authority, which is no
longer able to use the Palestinian security forces to keep control in these
large cities of Nablus and Jannine in the north. Outside observers, rightly or
wrongly, will say that both sides have moved further to the extreme. That two
state solution that you, amongst others, battled for so long for must feel a
long way away right now. It is. And it's easy to declare it dead. Of course, in
the Holy Land, there's a difference between being dead and being buried. And
it's not yet buried. And the reason for that is that there are no other
solutions. Everything else that's suggested, including the continuation of this
status quo, which is a one state reality, doesn't solve the problem, as we can
see. It just is their recipes for continuing the conflict. And those who want to
kill the two state solution and bury it don't have a viable alternative. What,
if anything, will it take for any kind of political process, what we used to
call a peace process, to reestablish? Well, we can't get to a final status
negotiation that would resolve all these very difficult and complicated problems
from where we are today. There's not the leadership and political will and
support on either side for that. And there's no trust in the other side, on both
sides. So there's only one way to get there. And that is to introduce a kind of
incremental process of smaller steps that lead eventually to a rebuilding of the
trust. And it's a tall order in the current circumstances where any effort to
try to rebuild trust can easily be swamped by another round of violence and
terror. But that's what's happening today in in Akbar, where the security
chiefs, intelligence chiefs and political leaders are meeting under the auspices
of the United States, Egypt and Jordan. Israel is in Palestine, it's coming
together in the hopes that they can figure out a path forward out of this
violent jungle. Ambassador, thank you very much for joining us on The World This
Weekend. That was Martin Indic, former special envoy to the Middle East for the
US. Who wants to be first minister of Scotland? Three hats are in the ring, all
of their wearers, pretty low profile compared to the outgoing first minister,
Nicholas Sturgeon, and of course her predecessor, Alex Salmon. But however high
profile those two might have been, they did not get the job done. Scotland is
still in the union and opinion polls are about where they were when Nicholas
Sturgeon took over. Is it one more heavend out or has the SNP marched its
soldiers to the top of the hill only for them to gaze disconsolately at the
downward slopes? It's something our special correspondent, Alan Little, has been
thinking about. He sent us this from the west coast of Scotland. I've heard
these waves crashing against this shingle beach since I was growing up here as a
boy in the 1970s. My family, my ancestors have lived along this coast since the
18th century and even earlier. And here just above the beach is the Cock Inn,
which is the pub that I worked in in the early 1980s during my summer holidays
as a student. And I've come back here to think about what it was about the union
between England and Scotland that made it so resilient, so strong for so long,
why it was cherished by so many generations of Scottish people until recently.
Well, this is the main street of the village that I grew up in, the village of
Glenloos. My grandparents lived in this street when I was a child. For those
generations, it was the British Empire that tied Scotland tightly into the
union. My parents were born here in the 1930s and they lived through the Second
World War as children. And they grew into adulthood in a new kind of Britain, a
Britain that enjoyed immense moral standing in the post-war world, a Britain of
full employment, of the new NHS and of cradle to grave welfare. And of something
else that was new to families like ours, the chance that one day their children
might go to university. That was why the union for those generations was not
just resilient in Scotland, but actively valued. Here in Glasgow, in the banks
of the River Clyde, you walk through a city that was for decades solidly labour.
But this city voted for independence in 2014. The question now is whether that
was the high watermark. Does the independence ambition end with the formidable,
sturgeon-era? I'm standing in front of a 60-foot-high mural of the great
Scottish comedian Billy Connolly. It's well known here that Connolly once worked
as a welder in the shipyards here in Glasgow. And when he was asked in the 1970s
about Scottish nationalism, he would say that he felt more in common with
shipyard workers on Merseyside and in Southampton than he did with many of his
fellow Scots. Back then, expressions of class solidarity would nearly always
trump appeals to a distinct Scottish national identity. Those big working-class
communities that sustained steel and coal and shipbuilding were bedrocks not
just of labour voting, but also of British identity in Scotland. And in the
1980s and 90s, those industries were swept away and the communities that
sustained them fragmented and over time dispersed. And that's when England and
Scotland started to diverge politically. England, embracing the radical new
vision for the future offered by Margaret Thatcher, Scotland repeatedly
rejecting it. And in that context, the independence movement reinvented itself.
The SNP talking the language of social democracy and greater equality, and that
appealed to old labour voters and enthused the young. That realignment of
political allegiances took place under Alex Salmon's leadership. No one embodied
it more fully than Nicola Sturgeon. But there's been no great surge in support
for independence under her eight-year leadership. Even the unpopularity of
Brexit here and the toppling of four Conservative prime ministers at Westminster
have scarcely moved the dial. But drill down into the opinion polls that
consistently show the country roughly divided 50-50 on independence. The young
remain overwhelmingly in favour and there's even strong support among the
middle-aged. Many nationalists believe that puts time on their side, that the
fruit of independence is ripening on the tree of age demographics, and that it
will eventually fall into their laps. The union has been strongest over the ages
when it's been built on shared values and a common sense of purpose. Nicola
Sturgeon's departure is a defeat for independence for sure, but reversing the
slow, generational decline of British identity in Scotland is the enduring
challenge for the union. Alan Little reporting. There are time for one closing
headline. Two Israelis have been shot dead in the occupied West Bank, just as
Israeli and Palestinian officials meet in Jordan to try to reduce tensions.
Carolyn Quinn presents her very last Westminster Hour tonight from 10. This
week's producer was Charlotte Scarr, the editor Scott Adam. I'm Jonny Diamond
and that's The World This Weekend. Thanks Jonny. 37 years ago, the Margaret
Thatcher government privatised British gas and in a few moments we'll explore
how that act helped shape today's energy price crisis and what should happen
next. That's shortly, but first some self-reflective light relief is heading our
way on Thursday. The master of satire, David Sederis, is back with his unique
blend of wit and wisdom. I know that people are now taking pictures of
themselves at funerals because when I looked up selfies at funerals was the
third option. The humorous laughs at life and himself. I've been studying
Japanese and I'll say something to Hugh. I'll say, oh, did you know that this is
how you say? And he says we're only going for four days. A new series of Meet
David Sederis, your Thursday evening comedy at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
This is BBC Radio 4. Over the last few months, our energy supply has risen ever
higher up the political agenda. Down Radio 4 and in a change to some listings,
the documentary maker Phil Tinline explores how we got here, the privatisation
of British gas. I don't know about you, but like a lot of people this winter,
I've found myself thinking twice before I put the heating on. And a lot of
people have had it a lot worse than that. We knew this was coming last summer
when prices were soaring. Energy extractors have been making eye-watering
profits. Some energy sellers have been going to the wall. And the government has
found itself forking out huge sums to subsidise our bills. I've spent most of
the last decade digging back through our recent history for documentaries and a
book to try to make sense of the crises that keep coming our way. So I wanted to
work out how we got here. How did we end up so exposed through our boilers and
metres and radiators to the ruckions of the world? I want this great steam of
nationalisation to succeed triumphantly. The whole country wants it to succeed.
Let's begin in the late 1940s when the Labour government nationalised the energy
system – gas, electricity and, crucially, the coal mines. The whole future we
are trying to build up in our country is for all our people and all our
children. Nationalisation, or public ownership as they often called it, was
meant to boost efficiency and productivity and to ensure that industries were
run for the benefit of the public. At this point, though, the energy industry
that really mattered was coal. Gas had been very much the bottom dog of the
1950s energy market. Well, we'd like to remove the gas works entirely. In fact,
at this point, gas was extracted from coal by the regional gas board in dirty,
smelly gas works. It's horrible, really, here. And then suddenly along came pipe
gas from the North Sea and that really transformed things. The noise you just
heard was, in fact, the 30-foot flame which is leaping out at the top of this
gas rig sea gem, which is 42 miles off the coast out into the North Sea. This
was an astonishing thing to have found – a fresh, cheap source of fuel. They
already know the methane is good. It's almost pure. Not that it was cost-free,
though. Weeks after those workers discovered gas in commercial quantities, their
rig suddenly collapsed. What did it look like? Terrible, the pale, the covered
in oil, the tear filling down the ice. Some of them couldn't stand up. We
carried them aboard most of them. Twelve men died. But they had changed things
for everyone. Millions of homes were converted to use the new energy source
they'd found. And in 1972, a Conservative government created a single state-
owned company. British gas. So on the face of it, this was great. But it wasn't
quite that simple. Natural gas was cheap when it left the North Sea, but not
when it reached people's boilers and cookers. Somewhere, it seemed, there must
be some overhead. Have you any faith left in the gas port? None at all. And I'm
just waiting for them to drop the cooker on the doorstep again. In the 1970s,
there's a growing frustration, maybe not with the concept of nationalisation as
a whole, but certainly with state-run industries. Amy Edwards is a historian at
the University of Bristol and the author of a book called Are We Rich Yet?
There's a growing sense of frustration with the general economic system and the
way it's functioning in the 1970s by the general public. You know, having to
wait forever to get a phone installed. Maybe not dissimilar to dissatisfaction
at the moment with the NHS. It's not people being anti-NHS necessarily, but it
is frustrating when you're having to wait a long time for a doctor's
appointment. But I also think it's not inevitable that that was going to turn
into a widespread kind of public turn against the idea of nationalisation as a
whole. The nationalised industries set up under the Atlee government in the
1940s set off with high ideals and achieved quite a lot of good. In Whitehall in
the late 1970s and early 1980s, Derek Davis was a senior civil servant working
on energy policy. Over these 30-year period, organisations do get a bit set in
their ways and there is gain from shaking things up a bit and going back to some
of the basics and enabling people to look again. In the city of London,
meanwhile, an academic-turned-banker was doing just that. His name was John
Redwood. The socialist ideal had some attractive features. They thought they
could get rid of what they saw as the unnecessary costs of competition. They
thought it would mean fewer overheads, less unproductive advertising, less
expenses of friction, which competition can produce. They thought it meant you
would have regulated profits and they wouldn't be excessive. They thought that
you would have better standards of employment, better treatment of employees,
and that you could express public goods and public aid more clearly through an
industry you control than through an industry created by competing profit
maximising companies. Unfortunately, very little of that turned out to be true.
The conservative part-ender factor really focuses on ways to turn
dissatisfaction into something a bit more specific. There's a worldwide revolt
against big government, excessive taxation and bureaucracy and large-scale state
organisation. People turning against the very notion of publicly owned industry
and publicly owned services. It's been our conservative view for some time that
an era is drawing to a close. Two days after that speech on the 3rd of May 1979,
Margaret Thatcher swept to power. Not long afterwards, John Redwood had a book
out called Public Enterprise in Crisis. In it, he argued that the solution to
all that bureaucracy and expensive overhead was to move state-owned industries
like British Gas back to the private sector. There are genuine costs. It is a
skill to put together a very complex pipe network to keep the pipes functioning
and safe and to get it to every house that wants it, most houses in the country.
I didn't deny that that was a big capital investment and a big skill, but I got
very interested in gas and electricity and the idea of having a regulated
network with much more competition over who used the network. That was the model
that could be applied to both electricity and gas. I didn't have any particular
criticism of British Gas, but I just felt that competing forces might introduce
innovations that would be worthwhile. I think that turned out to be the case.
And then Mrs Thatcher won a stonking majority in the 1983 general election.
Before he went on to become a long-standing Conservative MP, John Redwood went
to work for her in the Downing Street Policy Unit. Along with colleagues like
the new Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, this was his chance to put his ideas into
action. My role was to advise on the privatisation programme. And I did that
within six weeks and I sent two memorandums to the Prime Minister, the first set
out the scale of the programme that we could undertake, which was far more
ambitious than anything the government up to that point in its first term had
been considering, and it included the main utilities. The first of the grand
Thatcher privatisations was British Telecom. But British Gas, powered by all
those supplies from the North Sea, was now a much bigger proposition. How could
you turn the gas system into a market? The civil servant charged with working
this out was Derek Davis, who at this point was the head of the gas division at
the Department of Energy. A lot of people were rather sceptical that it could be
done. But then Davis got hold of an idea. It didn't really matter if a molecule
that was put in by one producer ended up with a different customer from the one
who was nominally covered by the contract and the transmission system would in
effect be a marketplace. It would need to be controlled and regulated like any
marketplace. But regulatory arrangements could cover that. That way, suppliers
anywhere in the country could sell you gas, even if what arrived at your house
wasn't literally what they were putting into the system. But privatising British
Gas was not just about reimagining the energy system. Like nationalisation
before it, privatisation was part of an attempt to fundamentally changing how
Britain worked and even how it thought. As well as introducing competition into
the industry itself, it was about trying to create a nation of share owners.
That was the vision that Margaret liked when I put it to her, that we wanted to
live in a wider ownership culture that we didn't want with them and us society.
And we wanted many people to either own a share in the company they worked for
or to own a share in one of the great British national corporations to have more
identity of the assets they did already own that they didn't know about through
their insurance policies and through their pension funds. So Thatcher talks a
lot about enterprise culture and wanting to reinvigorate a spirit of enterprise
within Britain. Nigel Lawson very explicitly states at one point that the
party's aim is to transform the thinking of two generations. A few days before
the sale of British Gas, the BBC gathered some of those whose thinking was
indeed changing and some who were dead set against the whole idea. I'm a British
Telecom employee and I bought shares in British Telecom. And I've kept them. I
think it's important that people are seen to have a stake in the company. Can I
ask you whether your first shares you've worked for? They were my first shares.
And I suppose if you can ask me if I'm a capitalist now, I suppose I took a step
back and thought, wow, I'm now a capitalist. Some of our public industries,
which I have been very proud to be an owner of for the whole of my working life,
and I'm exceedingly upset that they're being taken away from me and put in my
hands and my very... But there were also objections to the idea of mass share
ownership from somewhere you might not have expected. There are bits of the city
that are still not sure that this is the right way to go. Some of that I would
argue is to do with class and a perception of who is or isn't suitable for
owning shares and what it means if you let people who've never owned shares
before, are they going to be vulnerable? Are they just going to be frivolous and
speculate and it'd be an absolute catastrophe? It wasn't just that some people
in the City of London objected to the untailored masses muscling in on the
mysteries of share ownership. They also thought that trying to handle the sale
of something as enormous as the nation's gas industry through a giant share
offering was a bit like trying to squash an elephant into a briefcase. I then
set out a model for how you could do these things, given the tender consciences
or worries of people in the city who thought these things were a bit big for
them. John Redwood. So I invented the three-way privatisation and I said, well,
yes, we still sell a whole load of shares through the city in the normal way,
but they say they can't manage the whole lot. So we sell another whole load of
shares direct to the public through mail order and through newspaper
reimbursement and we sell another load of the shares to foreigners. This was
really quite clever. It moved things forward with the city and it helped to
build the nation of share owners that Redwood wanted to see. But that also
served another practical purpose. The government was selling a significant chunk
of state infrastructure and wanted to make sure that the big city institutions
like pension funds didn't set the price too low. So if you could build up mass
popular demand for shares, it would also help keep the price at the right level.
The marketing idea was to make it massively oversubscribed to the point that the
government retained control of the price at which the shares are actually sold.
This is Tim Lefroy, then at the advertising agency Young & Rubicam, and he was
the man charged with mass demanding the campaign to make the public aware that
they could buy shares in British Gas. He and his team had a tricky balancing act
to pull off. For one thing, they were supposed to do all of this without
actually suggesting that people should buy the British Gas shares. Strictly
speaking, it was an information campaign. First thing we had to do was announce
that the frustration was happening and that was a campaign of beacons all over
Headlands, all around the country. The beacons were perfect blue British Gas
flames. We then moved to a campaign where we showed lots of different kinds of
people in lots of different occupations, basically saying, this is for you. Soon
everyone will have a chance to share in the shares of British Gas. You're not
able to promote them. You can't say, buy British Gas shares and your life will
improve. Exclusively. Right. Right, exactly. But was there something about just
creating something like that advert very stylish, feels very contemporary for
the mid-80s? Was that a sort of way of saying, this is an attractive offer
without saying this is an attractive offer? Absolutely. They also had to come up
with a campaign that convinced both the government, who really wanted to see
mass share ownership, and the city, where many people really didn't. We were
still struggling, I have to admit, to find the big idea. That was going to take
us through the heavy lift of the campaign. We had taken a number of different
campaigns down to the Department of Energy with the hordes of advisors all
sitting around and we come back with our tail between the legs. But finally, the
account director, Rupert Howell, came in and said, Tim, I think we've got it.
What's up? You know, these British Gas shares, they're really easy to do. Give
them a ring. He said, Tim. An episodic story of the national pursuit of this
mythical figure, Sid. The end point of which is in the last week of the
campaign, a mountaineer getting to the top of a cliff, and there is fog, and he
says, are you, Sid? Yes. Oh, boy, have I got some exit for you. But then in the
fog, he can't find him. Sid! Finally, the government was convinced that the Froy
and his team had something that would really cut through to the public. The Tell
Sid campaign came to symbolise the idea of mass share ownership. So I was
surprised to learn that they hardly discussed the government's great vision.
Obviously, the press were talking about social engineering and the government
was talking about shareholder democracy. We were not immune to that, but that
wasn't our job. And they still had to sell a campaign to the city. A big day for
Rupert Howell and I was to actually go to what was called the Steering Committee
of the Great and Good in the city to actually present the advertising campaign.
I laid out the strategy and the thinking behind it, and Rupert asked permission
to take his jacket off and then went on to present the advertising campaign.
When he'd done that, there was complete silence. And there were probably 30
people sitting around the Rothschild table, I think it was the senior Rothschild
person, stood up and said, Tim, Rupert, would I be right in saying that the
people you are trying to advertise to are intellectually bankrupt in the first
place? Eventually, however, at least some parts of the city did come round.
Debenham's entered into agreement with Quilter Goodison, one of the big, well-
respected stockbroking firms, and they're opening up a shop in Debenham's so
that you can walk around Debenham's, you can consider buying a sofa, maybe buy a
bit of perfume, walk past the pyjamas, and then you'll come across a counter
where there are a bunch of largely young men, that's how it's described in the
press at the time, who will be there and be like, good afternoon, madam, good
afternoon, sir, could I interest you in some British gas shares? I think at the
end of the BT flotation, the total number of private shareholders in the UK was
around 1.8 to 2 million. By the end of the British gas flotation, it was over 5
million. So the privatisation had been hugely successful in getting enough
people to apply for shares to make the sale work. But what about that basic idea
of moving to mass share ownership? How did that work out? People are not doing
the thing that the Conservative Party, at least some of the ideologues in the
Conservative Party, are thinking that privatisation might do, which is becoming
very serious investors who, yes, they'll buy a privatisation share and then
they'll maybe start up a little portfolio and they'll invest in considered ways
in different British businesses. That's a very nice idea, but actually a lot of
people are like, yeah, this is a great way to make 200 quid. And they sell their
shares and the people who buy up their shares are large financial institutions,
largely. So the shares are with people for a hot second and then they end up
somewhere else. The industry had been launched on its journey to becoming a
competitive market. But now that ownership was dominated not by the public or
the state, but profit-making organisations, what did that mean for maintaining
Britain's energy security, ensuring we had enough domestic supply? Was that even
something they worried about? Oh, yes, and we were much more concerned about
practical national security then than I think subsequent governments have been.
On security supply, we made sure that the regulatory frameworks put in place for
gas and electricity took full national energy security very seriously and we
always have more than 100% cover of our own needs. I wish we had that now.
Likewise, in the wake of the privatisation, Derek Davis was advising the Energy
Secretary Peter Walker to maintain domestic sources of gas. One of the first
things to cross my desk was a British gas proposal to contract for a large
import from Norway, from the frig field. We'd done a very full assessment of
that. British gas were keen to secure it. UK producers and some of their
supporters in parliament were much less keen because they argued it would put a
blight on development on the UK side and there needed to be more headroom for
that. And our assessment on the balance of probability of UK reserves at the
time was that it would make sense not actually to go ahead with the Norwegians
but continue UK development. One could always revert to Norway at the next
stage. But that was our advice, don't go ahead. Peter Walker endorsed him. While
gas kept coming down the pipes from the UK producers in the North Sea through
the recently renovated transmission system, Davis was confident that the system
he'd devised would work. They were both strongly positive factors and left me
quite comfortable that what was being handed on would last for a generation but
we probably reached that point now. In the 1990s, the privatised British gas
monopoly was split up into its component parts. Alongside the newly privatised
electricity companies, real competition between household energy suppliers had
arrived. And, as Redwood had hoped, prices fell. But that was not the end of the
transformation sweeping through the British energy system. New technical
developments now meant that you could use gas to generate electricity at scale.
The so-called dash for gas by the electricity industry using gas rather than
coal to generate power has been backed by the industry's independent watchdog.
An international market blossomed, driven by pipelines stretching between
continents and a heady post-Cold War rush towards globalisation. But in the warm
glow of 1990s optimism, something was being lost. Our production climbed rapidly
but so did our consumption. Michael Bradshaw is Professor of Global Energy at
Warwick Business School. And by 2000, our production had peaked. By 2004, we
became a net importer. We didn't run out of it, but our demand exceeded our
ability to produce. We got hooked on gas and then we depleted our own reserves.
We ended up in a place where gas is the most important element in our energy
system and we're having to import half of it. Just four decades after C-GEMS'
epoch-making discovery, the energy security it had brought us, one of the
underpinnings to privatisation, was gone. Instead of carrying on developing the
reserves in the North Sea, investment largely moved elsewhere. So was there a
way to have kept it going? Well, I think we could have done more to offer
licenses and favourable tax regimes to promote the extraction of more gas for
longer. Today, about half of our gas imports are LNG, liquefied natural gas,
shipped from Qatar and America. John Redwood is not alone in arguing that while
we make the transition to net zero, we will have to keep using gas, and so it
would be better to have our own supplies. If you import gas in LNG form, it's
two or three times the amount of CO2 generated by delivering it and using it,
than if you just use your own down the pipe from the North Sea, because
obviously you've got all the energy involved in compressing and liquefying,
including the gas, you've got all the energy involved, and usually a diesel ship
transporting it halfway around the world, then you've got the energy used and
getting it back into usable natural gas shape. You can get rid of all that if
you don't import. For a long time, relying on international markets for imported
gas seemed perfectly sensible. But over time, the sunny, optimistic world of the
1990s grew dark. The Russian president Vladimir Putin has launched a major
military operation against Ukraine. The conflict in Ukraine and the sanctions on
Russia have led to another surge in the cost of oil and gas. If the post-war
nationalised model was too restrictive and bureaucratic, its replacement now
looks very vulnerable to geopolitical shocks. There was a stark warning today
that a conflict 1,500 miles away could have devastating economic consequences
here in the UK. And of course, looming over all of this is climate change.
Together with the threats from a more hostile world, this is driving a new focus
on ensuring that we can keep the lights on with what we generate ourselves. The
government has just created a new Department of Energy Security in Net Zero to
pursue its goal of secure, clean and affordable energy for the long term. While
we transition to clean energy, it's working to secure more LNG and more gas from
the North Sea. Meanwhile, British gases successor Centrica has been working to
reopen a huge discontinued gas storage facility. But Matthew Lawrence of the
think tank Commonwealth argues that the Russian invasion of Ukraine has exposed
long-standing problems with the whole privatised energy system. He thinks we
need to go much further. Ukraine has put such pressure on the system that I
think that has revealed some of its inner structural problems, predated the war.
It predated in terms of the scale of dividends and distribution share holders.
It predated in terms of the lack of investment in renewables relative to what we
need, the lack of investment in insulation and retrofit. The explosion in
dividends and shared buybacks, which are mechanisms by which companies take
their earnings and reward shareholders, and the scale of it, we're talking tens
of billions of pounds over the years since privatisation, that is the purpose of
privatisation really. The whole point is this is a way of maximising shareholder
wealth. That value extraction comes from our bills. Whether you blame the whole
privatisation model or just President Putin, something has clearly gone wrong.
So is it time for a rethink? Here's Derek Davis, who played a key role in
devising how privatisation would work in the first place. It is now quite some
years on from the 1990s when the gas regime broke through to broad competition
for everyone. It would certainly be timely to take a look at how it's gone and
possibly make some adjustments. The issue of what kind of prices, suppliers
should be allowed to nod to under the regulatory system would certainly be one
question. Four decades on from privatisation, how far should any adjustments go?
The alternative is to organise our energy system as a public good, as something
organised by and for the public based on the meeting of clear social and
environmental needs. It's clean energy, it's secure energy, particularly in
light of terrible events of this year in Ukraine, and it's affordable. And so
what Commonwealth argues for, and what I think most of the British public
instinctively recognise if you look at polling, is that energy should be
organised as a publicly owned and its core system. So certainly things like
national grid, certainly things like some of these distribution networks, and
then a public generator to provide clean energy, not to invest to generate
returns. Lawrence and the think tank Commonwealth have contributed to the
thinking behind the Labour Party's Great British Energy Policy, which he thinks
could fill a gap left by privatisation. So you can compare and contrast how, for
example, Norway has stewarded its hydrocarbon wealth and now has vast wealth
fund, has very significant state-owned energy company, versus the UK. We don't
really have that. We squandered much the boon of the sort of oil and gas surge
in the 80s and 90s. If you don't have competition, how do you prevent the
development of complacency, of less pressure on productivity, of a sort of
bureaucratic creep slowly gathering costs, that was the Redwood-type critique in
the 1970s. How do you stop it happening again? First thing to say is that is a
description of right now. But what if John Redwood's dream of a nation of share
owners had lasted and the SIDS still own their British gas shares? Would that
have made a difference over the course of the last year? Not very much. John
Redwood? The big changes you need to have a better outcome in our energy mix is
different government policy. It's as simple as that. I mean, far from
privatisation stopping government, intervening and interfering, in some ways it
made it easier for it because it didn't have the complication of the conflict of
interest of actually owning the businesses and owning the stream of profits or
losses that resulted. And so the government has been all over these businesses
in an increasing way this century, in a way that went far beyond anything I had
in mind. So Redwood thinks that the state has continued to play a major role and
that while some of that's unavoidable, it hasn't always done it very well.
Lawrence, on the other hand, thinks that private business has let us down and
the state now needs to step in. But in a way, what's striking is the parallel
between them. Lawrence is trying to upend the privatisation that Redwood helped
to set in train 40 years ago, just as Redwood upended the nationalisation set in
train 40 years before that. Wheel of history turns and today I think public
ownership is not a panacea but it is a precondition to begin to address some of
the structural maladies and malfunctions manifesting everywhere we look in the
energy system. But I do think that John Redwood model is in some ways exemplary
in terms of someone who, you know, disagree quite substantially with most of his
ideas but nonetheless exemplary in terms of developing those ideas, prosecuting
them, building the political case and momentum and then enacting them. To date,
neither nationalisation nor privatisation have achieved all that they promised.
Changing ownership may simply not be enough on its own. But that doesn't mean
they achieve nothing, either. As he put it to me, one test for Matthew Lawrence
and his allies is this. In 40 years' time, if someone makes a documentary about
the 2020s, will they be talking about us thoroughgoing a change as Redwood and
his allies pulled off in the 1980s? Albeit, in the other direction. The
privatisation of British gas was presented and produced by Phil Tinline. BBC
Sounds What do you think people think of you? As a risk, as a potential risk.