TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 We'll be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at
three o'clock. The Metropolitan Police has apologised to the victims of Wayne
Cousins after the former officer was sentenced to 19 months in prison for
exposing himself on three occasions. One of the offences occurred just days
before Cousins killed Sarah Everard in London in March 2021, for which he's
already serving a whole life sentence. Deputy Assistant Commissioner Stuart
Cundey said the fact Cousins committed his crimes while serving as an officer
brought shame on all members of the police. Opposition MPs and refugee groups
have criticised government plans to ban migrants from re-entering the UK if they
cross the Channel in small boats. Under new legislation, anyone entering via
that route will be removed and be unable to apply for British citizenship in the
future. The Conservative MP and former Security Minister Sir John Hayes supports
the plans. All asylum claims need to be assessed fairly and reasonably and of
course it's true that Britain should provide a safe haven for people in genuine
need but the asylum system has been gamed for a long time now by a combination
of echoing migrants, fat cat lawyers advising them and dodgy interest groups.
Sir Keir Starmer has insisted that he had absolutely no contact with Sue Gray as
she prepared her report and to lockdown parties in Downing Street. It follows
criticism of the Labour leader's plans to appoint the former senior civil
servant as his Chief of Staff. Police in South Wales, searching for five people
who went missing after a night out, have found three dead and two injured on the
outskirts of Cardiff. Gwent Police said it believed the group's car had crashed
in the early hours of Saturday morning. Talks aimed at resolving the dispute
between train companies and the RMT union appear to be on the brink of failure
ahead of more strikes planned for next week. The rail delivery group has written
to the union saying talks could stop if its latest pay offer isn't put to
members. The RMT's National Executive Committee has rejected a so-called best
and final offer. BBC News. Halloumi cheese has become a common sight on our
supermarket shelves but its significance in Cyprus, the island nation it comes
from, is greater than you might imagine. More on that on the food programme in
half an hour. But first on Radio 4, it's time to put your music knowledge to the
test. Counterpoint, the general knowledge music quiz, chaired by Paul
Gambaccini. APPLAUSE Hello. We're welcoming another trio of music lovers bidding
for the remaining semi-final place as we reach the last heat of Counterpoint's
36th series here at the Radio Theatre in London. The winner will be the one who
demonstrates the widest knowledge of music in all its varieties. Let's meet
today's competitors. Hello. I'm Joe East. I'm from Alpington in Kent. And the
first record I ever bought was The Hustle by Van McCoy. Hello. I'm Anne Durkin.
I live in West Yorkshire. And the first record I ever bought was Siwadiwadi,
Under the Moon of Love. Hello. I'm Gary Nickell. I'm originally from Sunderland.
I now live in Edinburgh. And I think the first CD I ever bought was a recording
of The Planets. APPLAUSE Welcome, all of you, and the very best of luck. In the
opening round, we'll test your musical general knowledge. There are two points
available for each question. And if the person asked can't answer correctly,
I'll open it up to the others for a bonus point. In the words of Glenn Frey, the
heat is on. With the first question going to you, Joe East. Featuring pastoral
themes, scenes of croquet on the lawn and fox hunting, the early album sleeves
of which English rock band were designed and illustrated by Paul Whitehead?
Genesis. That's right, for two points. Anne Durkin, music for you. Let's set the
scene for the opening chorus of the second act of an opera. We're in the
bustling Latin Quarter of the city, with a group of children gathered among
street traders selling their produce, including oranges, dates and hot
chestnuts. Which Puccini opera is this? MUSIC Oh, no, Mental Block. Mutt &
Butterfly? Oh, I'm afraid it is not, Mutt & Butterfly. Does someone else know
what opera that is from? And Joe says? Is it called something like The Girl
from... No, I've got it. No, no, no, you were thinking of The Girl from the
Golden West. What was Gary Nichol going to say? La Buena. And that is right for
a bonus point. And here is your own question. From a Latin Quarter to a Latin
Word, the final Queen album released during Freddie Mercury's lifetime has a
Latin-derived title translating literally as Giving a Nod to. The word is
usually used to mean a euphemism or something riskily suggestive. What's the
name of that 1991 recording? I don't know. And Joe East says? Innuendo. For the
bonus point. And Joe, here's your own question. More words, more music as we
give a nod to Carole King and James Taylor. In 2010, they embarked on an
international reunion tour, which they named after the famous West Hollywood
venue where they first performed together in 1969. It shares its name with the
word used for the lyrical poets and singers who traveled around Southern France
in medieval times. I'd like you to tell me what that name is. You just call out
my name over and over And you know wherever I am I'm running just as fast as I
can To see you again Oh yes, don't you know about that Winter, spring, summer,
fall, fall Suddenly come to me. The Troubadour. That's right. The Troubadour,
the club run by Doug Weston and commonly referred to as the Velvet Voice, the
award-winning singer Luther Vandross had a sweet and soulful way with words.
Early in his career, he was a member of the group Listen My Brother, who
appeared in several episodes of an American educational children's TV series
featuring puppetry, animations and live characters. It began in 1969. What is
the title? Sesame Street. That is correct. Gary Nichol, the next question will
be brought to you by the letters D, J and B. Dame Janet Baker was born 90 years
ago this year. Here's the English mezzo-soprano performing He Remembers Me from
Berlioz's Beatrice and Benedict. After you've heard her aria, I'd like you to
tell me which Shakespeare play the opera is based on. He remembers me, he
remembers me, he remembers me, he remembers me. Romeo and Juliet. I'm sorry, it
wasn't. Joe East thinks it's... Much Ado About Nothing. Four bonus points. And
here is your own question. The musical West Side Story is also inspired by a
Shakespeare play, namely Romeo and Juliet. The story focuses on the tensions
between two teenage gangs in 1950s New York, a white gang known as the Jets and
the Sharks, who are immigrants from a US island territory. Spielberg's 2021
remake added this island's national anthem, La Bonanchina, to the music score.
Where were the immigrants from? Puerto Rico. That is correct. Ann Durkin, music
for you. In 2012, the American-Canadian singer-songwriter Martha Wainwright
recorded a version of the last song written by her mother, the folk singer Kate
McGarrickle, before her death in 2010. The song's one-word title refers to the
Roman name of the mythical goddess who was abducted by Pluto and carried off to
the underworld. After you've heard Martha, I'd like you to name the song. I
shall punish the earth I shall turn down the heat I shall take away every morsel
to eat I shall turn every field into stone Where I walk crying alone Persephone.
I'm sorry, it wasn't. Does anyone else know it? No, it's Proserpina. And Gary
Nichol, here's your question. The actress Angela Lansbury passed away in 2022 at
the age of 96. Her last appearance was a cameo in the murder mystery film Glass
Onion alongside Stephen Sondheim. Lansbury often performed Sondheim's music,
including originating which of his leading ladies on Broadway in 1979? Mrs.
Lovett. That's right, Mrs. Lovett from Sweeney Todd. Joe East, here's part of an
oratorio first performed in Vienna in 1799 with a chorus featuring a four-part
fugue titled in German Stimmt an die Zeiten. For the two points, please name the
work. Für die Zeiten, das ist heiliges Und das, und das, und das, und das, und
das Für die Zeiten, das ist heiliges Und das, und das, und das, und das Zadok
the Priest. Oh, I'm sorry, that was not from Zadok the Priest. Does anyone else
know what that was from? And Gary Nichol says the creation and he gets a bonus.
Ann Durkin, the 2021 Academy Award for Best Original Music Score, went to a
Disney Pixar animated comedy drama. The plot follows jazz musician Joe, voiced
by Jamie Foxx, with music by Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross and John Baptiste.
What's the one word title of the film? Soul. That's right. And finally, in this
round, Gary Nichol. 2022 saw the untimely death of the Australian cricketing
legend, Shane Warn. Widely regarded as one of the best players in history, his
bowling skills were celebrated in Jiggery Pokery, a 2009 song about Warn's so-
called ball of the century delivery to Mike Gatting in 2003. This Irish group
takes their name from the complicated mathematical formula used to calculate the
target score in a limited overs match that's interrupted by rain or other
circumstances. After I've bowled you the song, I'd like you to bat the name of
the group back to me. But the ball it span obscenely and out of the rough it
jumped veered back across my bat and pad clipping my off stump It took a while
to hit me I momentarily lingered but then I saw old Dickie Bird slowly raise his
finger Duckworth-Lewis method. Four, two points. Let us see if you're bowled
over with your scores after the opening round. In third place with four points
is Ann Durkin. Lying second with six points, it's Gary Nichol. And in the lead
with eight points, it's Joe East. APPLAUSE In the second round, our competitors
choose special subjects on which to answer their own individual questions. They
haven't come prepared, but I'm about to give them five categories to pick from,
of which they've had no sight until now. They'll choose in the order of their
scores so far. Here come today's categories. The Deadly Sins. Classical
Relaxation. Mythical Gods in Music. Desert Island Discs. And The Deadly Sins.
Desert Island Discs. And A Collection from Cribbins. Joe East, you're in the
lead at the moment. What would you like? Desert Island Discs. And for you, Gary
Nichol? Deadly Sins. Now that leaves three for Ann Durkin. Classical Relaxation.
Mythical Gods in Music. And A Collection from Cribbins. Erm, A Collection from
Cribbins, please. Let's begin with your Collection from Cribbins. Which group,
popular in the 1990s, was named after Bernard Cribbins' novelty song of 1962?
Erm, I don't know. Right said Fred. Here's Bernard Cribbins' other top ten hit
from 1962, Hole in the Ground. Released by EMI on the Parlophone label, the song
is about a dispute between a workman digging a hole and an officious busybody
wearing a bowler hat. After you've heard Cribbins playing both parts, I'd like
you to tell me who the producer of this record was. When along comes this bloke
in a bowler which he lifted and scratched his head. Whoa, he looked down the
hole, poor demented soul, and he said, do you mind if I make a suggestion? Don't
dig it there, dig it elsewhere. You're digging it round and it ought to be
square. The shape of it's wrong, it's much too long, and you can't put a hole
where a hole don't belong. I'm sorry, I don't have an idea. The producer was
George Martin, and Bernard Cribbins performed at George Martin's memorial
service. In the 70s, Bernard Cribbins was a guest on Cilla Black's BBC
television series, where he was joined by record producer Mike Batt, who was
dressed as children's television character Orinoco. They were promoting the
first single release by a novelty group. What was the song? Womblin' Free. I'm
going to give that to you, it was The Womblin' Song, because Bernard Cribbins
narrated the TV series, The Wombles. Here's some music from the soundtrack to
The Railway Children, a 1970 film in which he played station porter Albert
Perks. After you've heard Johnny Douglas' main theme, I'd like you to tell me on
whose novel the film is based. MUSIC Is it E. Nesbitt? That's right, E. Nesbitt
wrote The Railway Children. Bernard Cribbins made regular appearances on BBC
TV's The Good Old Days. Dressed in period costume, he would often perform The
Marrow Song, then later join the cast for a music hall number which closed every
show. Which song was that? I can't remember its name, I don't know. It was Down
at the Old Bullenbush. This music is part of a long-running science fiction
franchise with which Bernard Cribbins was associated as far back as 1966. What
film is this from? MUSIC MUSIC Flash Gordon. Oh, I'm sorry, it's Dalek's
Invasion Earth, 2150 AD. That was from 1966, and Bernard Cribbins returned to
Doctor Who 40 years later to work with David Tennant on the TV series. Finally
in this round, away from the screen, Bernard Cribbins trod the boards for over
50 years with theatre credits including Nathan Detroit in Guys and Dolls at the
National Theatre and the second-rate gangster Moonface Martin, Public Enemy,
number 13, in which musical? Books in Milan. Oh, I'm sorry, it's Anything Goes.
Right, said Paul. Let's see what went in that round. You scored four points.
Added to your previous four, you now have eight points. APPLAUSE Gary Nichol,
here come the deadly sins. Where better to start the round than with probably
the most popular theme in all of music, lust. 2023 marks the 50th anniversary of
the album and single Let's Get It On by which Motown singer? Marvin Gaye? Yes,
that's right, for two points. Let's stay with Motown for a song on the subject
described by the Catholic Church as the disordered love of riches. It is the sin
of avarice or greed. When you've heard Barrett Strong's Money, That's What I
Want, a question will follow. MOTOWN THEME SONG And that was Motown's first hit,
Money, by Barrett Strong. Covered by the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and which
New Wave British band in 1979? I can hear it in my head, but I can't articulate
the name of the band. It's the Flying Lizards. On to the next deadly sin,
gluttony. A late 20th century opera by John Adams has a scene that takes place
in a great hall amongst tables set for 900. A president toasts the company with
these words, Mr. Premier, distinguished guests, I have attended many feasts, but
never have I so enjoyed a dinner, nor have I heard placed better the music that
I love outside America. Which opera is that? Nixon in China. Yes, for two
points. Music from Carl Davis guides you to the next sin. It's Meet the Family,
the opening theme to an award-winning BBC TV series of the 1990s, which I'd
simply like you to name. Pride and Prejudice. That is correct. Sloth is our next
deadly sin. The 1954 musical comedy There's No Business Like Show Business stars
Ethel Merman, Donald O'Connor and Marilyn Monroe. They're joined by Mitzi Gaynor
for the song Lazy, which contains the lyrics, I want to be out in the sun with
no work to be done. Which composer wrote the songs for that musical? Jerry
Herman. No, Irving Berlin. It's Kurt Weill and Berthold Brecht's satirical song
ballet The Seven Deadly Sins. It tells the story of Anna, whose family sent her
on a journey through seven American cities to earn money for them to build a
house. In each city, she encounters a different deadly sin. Here, Envy is
performed by the singer who played Anna in the original production. Who is she?
Sister, we are all born free, and we can walk in the light the way we like. So
let's go straight ahead in triumph, the gates. But where to? But where to? But
where to? You don't know where you're going. Lotta Lenya. Lotta Lenya. Watch out
for her shoes. We end this round on the sin of Wrath. The titles of a 1996
number one hit for Oasis and a groundbreaking play written 40 years earlier by
John Osborne are identical apart from which word? Anger? No, the word is don't.
Oh. Because the play was Look Back at Anger and the song is Don't Look Back at
Anger. But don't look back at anger, Gary Nichol, because you scored in that
round eight points added to your previous six. You now have 14 points. Joe East.
Let's check out your questions on Desert Island Discs. You've chosen a round on
the popular radio series, which in 2022 celebrated its 80th anniversary. One of
the most remarked upon additions is from 1958 when cast away soprano Elizabeth
Schwarzkopf broke with tradition to do what? She chose records that were all by
herself. That's right. Seven of her own recordings, although actually her record
was beaten by British pianist Dame Moira Limpany in 1979 when all eight of her
selection were hers. In 2001, Stephen Sondheim also threw modesty to the wind to
choose several of his own works. His picks included Sweeney Todd, Sunday in the
Park with George, and this collaboration with John Wideman. Set in 19th century
Japan, which musical is it? I'll guess Shogun. I'm sorry. It was Pacific
Overtures. In his 2010 appearance, a poet and broadcaster known as the Bard of
Barnsley chose a piece by John Cage, which consists entirely of silence. This
was an order that people listening to the program would become more aware of the
sounds around them. What's his name and what's the piece that was played? It's
Ian McMillan and the piece that is played is called something like 412 Seconds.
Well, you get the point for Ian McMillan. Nice try, but no cigar, not even a
cigarillo. For 433 by John Cage. Some music now which does include sound.
Program research usually reveals that the most requested composer on Desert
Island Discs is Mozart. This work of his has been a popular choice for
castaways. Jupiter sweet. Oh, I'm sorry. That is from Mozart's Clarinet
Concerto. In 1977, the Australian born writer and creator of Mary Poppins
selected an entire list of spoken word tracks to see her through her time on the
island. She explained that although music is important to her as a castaway, she
would want above all else to hear the human voice. Who is she? Piel Travers.
Yes. Here's an extract from an episode dating from 2001. Can you identify this
musician introducing one of his choices? I've always been in love with people
that improvise. Hence my first record. I was 13 or 14 when I first heard him
with a bass player called David Green who lived next door. He was about 10. We
played this record and he is now a wonderful jazz bass player and I'm whatever I
am. But thanks to this man in a way. Charlie Parker. Ackerbilk. No, it's Charlie
Watts of the Rolling Stones who passed away in 2021. Unsurprisingly, his luxury
item was drumsticks. The series creator and original presenter Roy Plumlee
initially wanted only the sounds of surf breaking on a shore and the cries of
seabirds to open and close each program. However, after some discussion, they
selected a piece of music which has been associated with the brand ever since.
Can you name its title and composer? I think it's called Sleepy Lagoon. Eric
Coates. Yes, by the Sleepy Lagoon for Eric Coates. And as your luxury item, you
get to take away seven points added to your previous eight. You now have 15
points. And so these are the scores after the individual rounds. Playing third
with eight points is Ann Durkin. In second place with 14 points is Gary Nickell.
And our leader with just one round to go with 15 points is Joe East. It's
fingers on the buzzer as we enter our quickfire final round and things can
change quickly. A correct answer wins you one point, but you lose a point if you
buzz in and fail to answer correctly. There are no bonuses. So fingers poised,
here we go. A bartender called Tony features in which bare end? Gary Nickell
says. Cooper Cabana. Yes. According to the lyrics of No More Heroes by the
Stranglers, which Marxist revolutionary got, and Joe says. Trotsky. Yes. In act
one of which Shostakovich opera based on a story by Gogol, does a barber find a
body part in his bread? Gary. The nose. Yes, it is the nose. The director of
Michaelis' musical drama Topsy Turvy is about which, and Joe says. Gilbert &
Sullivan. You're right. In which Michaelis TV play does Alison Steadman dance
and Gary says. Abigail's Party. Yes. Elgar dedicated which major orchestral work
published in 1899 to his friends and Joe East says. The Nygma Variations. That's
right. Which 2022 biographical film directed by Baz Luhrmann stars Austin Butler
and Joe says. Elvis. Stop. That's right. Led by vocalist Dan Smith, which
British indie band share their name with a notorious French prison? And Joe
says. Bastille. The Broadway musical Dreamgirls is based on the story of which
Motown group? Anne says. The Supremes. Yes, that's right. In 2022 during Abba's
Voyage show in London, what name was effectually, and Anne says. Abbottah. Yes.
In 1791 who composed an adagio and rondo for Marianne Kirschgesner, a virtuoso
on the glass harmonica? When in doubt say Mozart. The rock groups Midnight Oil,
Men at Work and NXS all originated in. Australia. That's right. The term
diminuendo is used to indicate that the music and Gary says. Get quieter. Yes,
that's right. Which Danish composer wrote the Helios Overture? Gary. Carl
Nielsen. Yes. Which American rock band take their name from one of the rivers of
the underworld in Greek mythology? And Anne says. Styx. One point. Who was the
only woman to appear on the first edition of Top of the Pops in 1964? And Gary
says. Sandy Shoe. No, I only want to be with Dusty Springfield. And finally, the
Red Hot Chili Peppers, Ronan Keating and Bewitched have all recorded song titles
referencing which amusement park ride? And Joe says. Roller coaster. Yes, that's
right. And after a real roller coaster of a contest, here's the results of this
last counterpoint heat. Third with 12 points, it's Anne Durkin. Runner up with
18 points is Gary Nickell. And our winner going through to the semifinals with
21 points, Joe East. Congratulations, we'll be seeing you again very soon and
warm thanks and commiserations to the other two of you for a very close contest.
Join us next time for the first semifinal of 2023. Until then, from all of us
here in the radio theater, goodbye. Counterpoint is hosted by Paul Gambaccini
and produced in Salford by Paul Bagiore. Welcome to the Spock. I feel like the
monkeys are juggling chainsaws. They're juggling flaming torches, but they could
just as well be juggling chainsaws. The monkeys might be hypothetical, but the
issues are real. Part of what we need to be well is a world that we can feel
that we belong to. I'm Helen Lewis, back with a new series of big conversations,
talking to people who bring radical new thinking to vital questions like when to
quit, social prescribing, scientific fraud and preventing suicide. Small acts of
reaching out, small acts of interrupting those thoughts could be life saving.
The Spock starts tomorrow morning at 11 on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on
Radio 4, it's time for the food programme. I have been waiting to make this
programme for a long time. I love halloumi, that much loved cheese from the
Mediterranean island of Cyprus. Halloumi is the most familiar Greek Cypriot name
for this cheese, but it also goes by the name of hellim, which is what Turkish
Cypriots call it. I love this cheese's rich taste, that squeak you get as you
cut a block into thick slices. Second only to the island where it's made, we eat
more of this cheese than anywhere else in the world. But let me ask you a
question. How much do you think you know about this cheese? Because its value,
both financially and culturally, is way bigger than you might expect. I'm Leila
Kazim and welcome to the food programme, that place for hungry minds. There's
another big reason I love halloumi or hellim as I call it. I grew up with it.
Beyond any other food that my Turkish Cypriot dad cooked, hellim is the taste of
my childhood. And the dishes my dad cooked with hellim were, and they still are,
some of my favourite plates of food. So this is magar nabuli, which is broken
pieces of bucatini pasta that has been cooked in broth made from boiling up a
whole chicken. And then I've just covered it all in grated hellim and dried
mint. You know what, at home we would call it just Turkish macaroni. When I'd be
like, what's for dinner? And he'd be like, Turkish macaroni. It's like the best
day ever. It's medicinal as far as I'm concerned, that it beats any antibiotic
going. It's just pure comfort, like it's delicious. In Cypriot cuisine, hellim
is used in a huge variety of ways. Something you'll already know if you're one
of the 150,000 plus people following food writer and cook Melis Berg on social
media. She is the bestselling author of Melis's Kitchen, Simple Turkish Cypriot
Comfort Food and Fresh Family Feasts. Melis's mum and dad were born in Cyprus
and she was born and brought up in North East London. Now she lives in rural
Essex, where she invited me for lunch. What do you think people immediately
think of when someone says hellumi? Squeaky cheese. And often you think
vegetarian breakfast. Wherever you go for a vegetarian breakfast, there will be
some fried or grilled hellim. And the other thing I keep seeing is hellumi
fries. But there are so many ways to use this cheese, which I think people have
no idea about. Absolutely. I mean, one of my favourite ways, as we were saying,
is to just grate it over pasta. So it's one of those things if I'm running short
of time, I've got, even today I've made Cimabar and Nabuli. One of the most
iconic Cypriot dishes. You know, that pasta dish, of all the pasta and noodle
dishes in the world, it's in my top five. Oh, without a shadow of a doubt.
Hellumi Yorkshire puddings. The combination of hellum and dried mint is a very
standard combination in Cypriot cuisine. So the combination of that with sesame
seeds and nigella seeds on a Yorkshire pudding with roast lamb. Oh my god,
Leyla, you've got to try it. You've got to try it. It's unbelievable. I'm
totally sold. Oh, it's so good. So I'm coming over on a Sunday. Absolutely. I'll
be waiting with the hellum Yorkshire puddings. Yeah, the comfort of knowing that
you're always going to have a meal if you've got a block of hellum in your
fridge. Where do you get your hellum now? My mum has a man who can. He drops
some off to it. Like, loads of people use this man. If the supermarkets are
sympathetic to the flavour, the taste, the texture, the fact that it should only
be sheep's and goat's milk, then there's no reason, obviously it has to be
produced in Cyprus anyway, it's a really, really good alternative to not having
the actual traditional hellum. I don't think I've ever tried a homemade hellum.
Oh my god, my mum's cousin makes it as well. You can freeze hellum. So that's
what my mum does with the man that drops off all the hellum. She's not going to
eat like, you know, 67 blocks of hellum in one go. She'll frost it in the fridge
the night before. Oh my gosh, really? Yeah, I tell you what, if you didn't think
hellum was good before, I bet you love it now even more so. Melisberg with some
serious hellum revelations there. I was starting to realise there was a lot to
this cheese that I still had to learn. And so, it would be rude not to continue
this quest for the real hellum on the island itself. We are in Cyprus and it's
really nice and sunny. It is quite cold, but yeah, we're here and we are ready
to discover a lot about this most Cypriot of cheeses and hopefully also eat
quite a lot too. I was figuring out where to eat first when a voice note from
Melis popped up on my phone. Hello, I've just spoken to my mum's first cousin,
Gülcan Apla, who makes the most exceptional hellum that I was telling you about.
My auntie is calling up the farmer, the shepherd that she gets her milk from and
if she can get it, then all systems go. And if you're up for it, then I think it
will be a really beautiful thing. So, these are the instructions written in
English to make hellum. Look at this, it says 10 kilograms of sheep's milk, one
teaspoon of rennet, one kilogram of rock salt. So, let's go to the cooker. The
schanda. This is Melis' auntie Gülcan. I arrived early evening at her house in a
suburb of the capital of Cyprus, Nicosia, and found her very gently stirring a
big pot in her kitchen. The processes she's done so far is cooked the milk,
added the rennet, cut the curds, separated the curds, pressed it in here. Yes.
You very slowly warm up this whey to get the second cheese, the nor. Put this
pressed curds into the whey. Yes. Cook that. Yes. Then you can fold it. And
she's putting the milk in front of the innit with the salt. This is Ahmet,
Melis' cousin, who has come round for tea and to help translate. Gülcan has been
making her own hellum since she was 13. I'm told it's relatively rare these days
and you can see why. As we watch the simmering whey, I'm realising it's a slow
process. It takes nearly four hours to make it. You've been very gently stirring
the whey and I was thinking nothing is happening here. And then all of a sudden
we have the nor. So it's the same as ricotta. So when you cook the whey you get
like a second type of cheese. Meanwhile, the half-made hellum is resting on the
kitchen table in small plastic cradles. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten. Wow. Nearly ten pieces of hellum. It looks like feta. Yes it
is but it's not. It's hellum. She's getting angry right now. I'm getting angry
too. I love it. It's so unique. It's in its own category. Yes, it's hellum. I
know you're into the category. So Gulcan is putting salt on the hellum, adding a
mint leaf in the middle and then folding it. This is the best part. The best
part, she loves it. The last part of the journey. You can have it straight away.
Yes, if you want it I think. I mean yes. Hot hellum but not hot because it's
been fried or grilled. Hot because it's just been made. Don't leave it. Wow. Oh
my god. It's so good. My first taste of homemade hellum immortalised. I think
you can hear the visceral excitement in that kitchen. But even in Cyprus, this
is the old way. The hellumi or hellum that you find in the supermarkets tend to
be made mainly with cow's milk, which is cheaper to produce large volumes of,
with some sheep or goat's milk mixed in. And of course, it's made on an entirely
different scale. So we've just pulled up in a car park outside a big white
factory. And this is the biggest producer of hellumi in Cyprus. And if you're
buying hellumi in the UK, I believe there is a very good chance that it has been
made in this factory. I'm in Limassol, a city close to the southern tip of the
island. And I've come to visit Harambaris Christis, the biggest dairy company,
in fact, the biggest retail company of any sector in Cyprus. We've now entered
the cheese producing area. And it smells like there is cheese being produced. It
smells good. I'm Marios Konstantinou and I'm the CEO of Harambaris Christis for
the last five years. We actually produce a bit less than a thousand tons per
year. And do you know how much of that ends up in the UK? Nearly half of the
hellumi we produce goes to the UK. So we produce all Tesco hellumi SKUs that you
find in their stores. We work with Morrison's, Pocato, and we do some SKUs for
Waitrose. We serve a lot of ethnic shops through our local distributor, who is
Kransvik. UK is one of your biggest markets. Yes. Where are your other big
markets? I would say Scandinavian markets are quite important for us, mainly
Sweden. And then we export in more than 40 countries all over the world. But up
until two years ago, we couldn't cope with the demand. These are sort of steel
rectangular brick-shaped moulds that are then pressed into the tray of already
pressed curds. And that's what cuts it into the shape that they want. There are
a lot of people and there's a lot of manual elements for this production line.
As we were leaving the office, we've just bumped into John, who is responsible
for the cheese ending up a global product. Well, I'm John Pitas, Janos Pitas,
but everybody knows me as John. I was a co-owner with my brothers of the Dairy
Industries Limited, a company established in 1939. My father taught me one
thing. You have to mechanise the cheese and put it worldwide. Who was the first
mainstream shop in the UK to sell halloumi? And when was this? 1983,
Sainsbury's, Cromwell Road, London. And then how did it end up expanding? Delia
Smith did a very good job for us. Delia Smith? And she was showing how to cook
halloumi, the cheese that grills, plus the fact that a lot of British used to
come here for holidays, plus the fact there's a lot of Arabs living in London,
plus, plus, plus, plus. And the whole thing took off. It's really within the
bones, the DNA of the Cypriot. I mean, it's the first cheese you actually taste
after you are born. Wow. It's even funny because if you open the phone book, you
will see that even the last name of some people are made of like hallou-maggies
or hallou-middies or hallou-mas. Really? And everything. It was like a sort of a
national demand for halloumi or hellim to become a PDO. My name is Socrates
Sokratous. I'm an agriculture officer at the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural
Development and Environment in the Republic of Cyprus. And for the last, well,
six or seven years, more or less, dealing with the halloumi or hellim dossier.
Something huge is happening to halloumi or hellim. In 2021, the cheese was
awarded a protected designation of origin or PDO status by the EU. We're talking
about 45,000 tons of exports, close to €350 million worth. The most significant
export product for Cyprus. Production standards that has to do with the animal
feed, the animal breeding itself, the production of the halloumi or hellim. And
of course, you can only name a product halloumi or hellim if it's made within
the island of Cyprus. With regards to the ratio of the different types of milk
from different animals, I understand that that is now being stipulated in the
PDO. You actually have two kinds of halloumi or hellim. You have the 100% sheep
and goat milk and you have the mixture. If you're going for the mixture,
according to the standard, the proportion will be at least 50% of sheep and goat
milk. So the maximum you can get there is 50% of cow's milk. But we're having a
transitional period, a 10-year transitional period that is ending next year. So
until we reach that transitional period, it's going to be 25% of sheep and goat
milk, 75% of cow's milk. Is there currently enough sheep and goat's milk on the
island? We have a big global rising demand, 20-21% per year. Animals are natural
beings. You cannot force them to produce more. They have a capacity. At some
time, we will have to admit that there is a ceiling. But if we could pose the
number as it is today, around 44,000 tons of exports, yes, in two or three years
we would be able to meet the demand in the sheep and goat's milk. There's
another reason this PDO is unique and controversial. Because if you've been to
Cyprus, you'll know it's a divided island. And to explain that bit of the story,
let me start by returning to that chicken hellen macaroni dish that Melis
cooked. For my dad, it holds a whole other significance. This dish in question,
I don't know, it was just great, great happiness for us to actually know that we
are going to be having that particular food. Because of hardship, it was a rare
occasion, but when that occasion came, we would look forward to it
wholeheartedly. My dad fled Cyprus as a refugee in the early 60s when he was
nine years old. His family were escaping war between Greek Cypriots and Turkey.
Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots had been living side by side across the
whole island, but as a result of the conflict, the Greek Cypriot population
ended up in the southern two-thirds of the island and the Turkish Cypriots in
the northern third. Effectively, a partition was created between Cypriots. There
was a lot of tit-for-tat incidences taking place and the situation was
worsening. We were advised by the authorities that it's possible we may have to
evacuate our houses at short notice, and we weren't allowed to venture out from
the front door, and that had been going on for quite some time, several weeks,
we just kept ourselves in the houses. On one of those days, around that period,
I recall very well how my mother boiled a chicken in the saucepan, and as the
day wore on and the evening was approaching, before we even had the chance to
grate the cheese and break the macaroni and finish the meal off, we did get an
order, an announcement, that we should be leaving our houses. And me and my
brother's sort of attitude was, no way I'm going to leave this chicken behind
and the macaroni behind and leave, because I think the thinking was then that
when we were asked to leave, it would only be for a brief time and that we would
in no time return. But when we did leave, actually, we never did go back because
from there we were made refugees and consequently we came to England and started
our life. Even in recent years, we sometimes mention that, the fact that we
actually had to leave without eating the macaroni. That's my dad, Ural Kazim.
There's still a border in Cyprus patrolled by the UN, and it runs coast to
coast, known as the Green Line. These days, Cypriots can cross the border
relatively freely, and they do. But the two sides of the island are still deeply
divided, culturally and economically. In the south, there's better
infrastructure and more international shops and services. It's our second day in
Cyprus and today we are going to cross the UN border to head to the north side
of the island. So hopefully it will be quite quick. The Southern Republic of
Cyprus is an internationally recognised country and crucially, when it comes to
Halloumi, part of the EU. The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is only
recognised as a separate political entity by Turkey. Producers in North Cyprus
have never been able to export anything, let alone halloumi, directly to Europe.
Until now. Because the European PDO covers cheese produced anywhere on the
island of Cyprus. We just recently passed through the border and it was a very
chilled experience. Today we're going to visit a company called CoopSuit.
They're a cooperative and they're one of the oldest and largest producers of
halloumi on this side of the island. I am Munevver Shatiroğlu. I am in charge of
the purchasing and export department. CoopSuit has been established in 1958 to
help the Turkish Cypriots to sell their milk to get some income because in those
days there were big problems with the Greeks. And how much halloumi does
CoopSuit produce? During the year, 2.5 to 3 tonnes of halloumi production. It
was this company who led the charge for the PDO to also recognise the Turkish
name halloumi as well as halloumi. Now CoopSuit is about to start the PDO
application process, overseen by EU officers. Because of the embargoes we are
not a recognised country. So halloumi in that case, apart from being a very
important cultural food for us, it is also an economical food. For example, if
you sail directly from Famagusta to Lebanon, it's only one night. But what
happens, the containers come from Turkey, that takes one night. The container
goes to Turkey, that takes another night. And there it has to wait at least two
or three days. Instead of one night, it takes one week to go to Lebanon. If you
will then have access to more markets, do you think the demand will increase?
And then would you be able to meet that demand? When you have money, those
problems are very easy problems. It sounds like the PDO is going to be a good
thing for the production of heavy metals. Yes, especially opening of the green
border and sending to Europe is going to be a good thing. Much has been made of
the potential for this cheese to bring people on both sides of the island
together. Possibly too much. So I put that to the man in charge of the PDO,
Socrates Socrates. My dossier is not a political dossier. My dossier is
halloumi, helin. But as a Cypriot citizen, even a small step forward is still a
step forward. Before, two years ago, I was not working close with any Turkish
Cypriot compatriots. Now I have them on my speed dial. We share the same fears.
We share the same thoughts about this product. If that's a small step forward,
it's still a step forward. Since Brexit, the UK legally doesn't actually
recognise Helim Halloumi's PDO. But Socrates told us he intends to apply to join
a list of EU PDOs that we will continue to recognise. But what about the quality
of what we're getting? I have to admit that after tasting Gulcan's Helim, I'm a
bit gutted to hear that the vast majority of Halloumi on sale here in the UK is,
at least for now, made industrially. But I'd heard word of one man on a mission
to change that. And so I ventured out of Nicosia to meet the pilot. And there's
a parrot. The pilot, real name Pantelis Panteli, is a sheep farmer and cheese
maker with a curveball entry into the Halloumi business. You see a picture of me
and the Pope. Oh my goodness, look at you in your pilot gear with the Pope.
Yeah, Benedict. OK, so you were a pilot and now you're a sheep farmer and
Halloumi producer. How did that happen? Everybody was saying Cyprus Airways is
going to go bankrupt. I thought we need to do something else. And it was just
about before Halloumi got its protection from the European Union. So I thought,
OK, how will I differentiate? Why would people buy from me? I need to make the
best Halloumi. To make the best Halloumi I need the best milk. So to have the
best milk I need animals. We got 150 sheep. One August morning and we had no
idea what to do with them. Oh my gosh. The local farmers, pilot they said,
you'll waste your money. I said, I have a plan. But how did you know what good
Halloumi tasted like? My mother-in-law used to make Halloumi and while she was
cooking it we were making notes. When she was testing the temperature with her
elbow, we were testing the temperature with a thermometer. It's a very nice,
interesting profession or job or whatever you call it, but all the restrictions
are holding us back. Pantelis produces 100% sheep's milk Halloumi with milk from
his own flock of Kayos sheep. But he only has permission to sell it directly to
consumers. He wants to export his cheese and so he's currently embroiled in a
battle with government officials. Look at this. So this is fresh Halloumi made
just two days ago. And if this is the real Halloumi, when I put it in the frying
pan, it shouldn't produce steam. If it had 52% moisture, this would be steaming
now. Yes, the government says you can make it with 52% moisture. And call it
traditional Halloumi by the way. What are your thoughts about the PDO? Is it a
good thing? It's a disgrace. It's like cards. You can have a card for 5,000
euros, you can have one for 20,000 euros. I wouldn't mind that if they would
distinguish this is a 5,000 euros Halloumi card, this is a 20,000 euros Halloumi
card. But they say everything is excellent. No, it's not excellent. It's not
equal. It's just so good. And like different texture to when you fry the
Halloumi we get at home. That's not Halloumi, that's chewing gum. After we
chatted, his children arrived back from school and so we moved to the big family
dining table where he explained more. Whenever someone asked, can I have a dairy
plant in the farm, the government would say no. I put that in writing and the
reply was yes, you are allowed. Once the government realised that they made a
mistake, they said you will only send directly to the customer. And I went back
in writing and said, tell me what specifications you want. I will do anything
you want. And they came with a list of things, said, OK, do this, this, this.
And I said, yes, I will do that. And then another department miraculously came
and said, if you upgrade to the proper licence where you can export and
everything, we will shut you down. And I said, why will you do that? They said,
because we want the farms to just produce milk for the big dairy plants. It's
terrible because just producing milk, especially from sheep, is a loss making
business. There are many young farmers that are looking at mine, waiting to see
if the experiment works. Do you think that might happen? Yes. Really? Yes, I'm
sure, because the social media is helping me a lot. I put a post on Facebook,
people come and meet me, TikTok now. Amazing. So how many customers do you have?
Thousands. Really? Yes. It was harder to become a farmer than to become a pilot.
You were so determined to do it. Oh, yes, yes. We spoke to a small farmhouse
producer and he claims that he's been stopped from exporting halloumi, which
meets and exceeds the PDO standards. His is 100% sheep's milk. He's not actually
allowed to export the halloumi he makes at his farm. Well, I think that the key
word here is halloumi made at his farm. Socrates Socrates, government minister
at the Ministry of Agriculture in the Republic of Cyprus. The actual farmers can
use up to 150 litres of milk they produce per day and they are able to sell that
product from door to door to farmers market, but they are not able to sell that
product in the actual stores. Even those small producers, they always have the
option to register as producers, follow the standards of public health and
everything that you have to follow, and they are able to proceed and export
their products and use their products as they like. If he met those
requirements, you think he'd be able to export? When you're talking about
export, you have to be able to meet the demand, right? If you are a small
producer, so fortunately the big companies that they will want to buy your
product, they will need what we call community. I mean, they will need to have
the product all the time in their shelves. It's not like we have a legislation
here saying that if you are a small producer, you cannot export. Be my guest,
you can export as much as you want. But fortunately, this is not how the market
works. Socrates, Socrates. Meanwhile, Pantelis battles on, hoping that one day
soon his halloumi will make it beyond the island. We've come to a place called
Argonia, just off a busy road, kind of like a bakery stroke restaurant. We've
got an incredible spread here. We've got a basket full of local pastries, three
different types of cheese. We've got haloumi. I feel like I've got a problem
because I've tasted haloumi and seen how good it can be. And now, now I'm going
to struggle with the supermarket versions that I often buy. Yeah, what does that
mean for the identity of it? Because then someone in the US, someone in the UK
thinks, oh, this is what haloumi, haloumi is. And then you've got people like my
dad who were brought up in Cyprus and like, this isn't, this isn't haloumi. You
need someone in their kitchen, in their garden, stirring a big pot. Yeah, it's
just so great that I got to see that because how cool is it that I got to come
to my fatherland and learn so much about this cheese that has been a big part
of, I would say, my identity as well, as well as other Cypriots. Yeah, it's been
really, really great. Leila Kazim ending the food programme. It was produced in
Bristol by Claire Salisbury. Next this afternoon, actors from around the world
who've all played the same part will be sharing reflections on what the role
meant to them. This week, Vladimir and Estragon from Waiting for Godot. Roleplay
is after the news. On BBC Radio 4. You're different. Of course I am. I like that
about you. The iconic novel Porgy updated. He's coming, Porgy, he's coming for
me. You're going to have to kill me first. A musical love story featuring new
music by the acclaimed producer Swindle. Yeah, it's on now. Performed by the BBC
Concert Orchestra. Best Loves Porgy on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, beginning on
Saturday afternoon at three.