TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 looking into why DJs all dance to the same beat. You're listening to Today on
BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson and Michelle Hussain. It's seven o'clock on
Friday the 3rd of March. The headlines this morning. Energy firms have told the
BBC they expect the government to continue some of its support for household
bills beyond April. A man and a woman are due to appear in court after a baby's
body was found in woods near Brighton and prominent Conservatives are furious
that the former civil servant who led the Partygate inquiry has been offered a
senior job by Sir Keir Starmer. The BBC News is read by Jane Steele. The BBC
understands that a number of energy companies are preparing for the government
to maintain some level of support for home energy bills beyond April when the
current assistance was due to finish. However the separate £400 winter discount
will end this month as planned so most households will have to pay out more. The
Treasury says it's reviewing the situation. More details from our business
editor Simon Jack. Typical households are due to see their energy bills rise
from £2,500 to £3,000 per year on April 1st as government subsidies are scaled
back. However as wholesale energy prices have fallen dramatically since last
autumn, the cost of those subsidies is tens of billions of pounds lower than
initial estimates. The government has been under intense pressure to use that
unspent kitty to maintain support at or near current levels. The BBC has learned
that some energy companies are already preparing bills for April which assume
that will happen. The clearest indication yet, the government will bow to that
pressure. But an additional £400 discount for all energy customers paid in £66
monthly instalments from October last year is not expected to be renewed beyond
April so most customers will still see their bills rise, albeit by not as much
as feared. The Treasury has said it was reviewing the situation but would not
respond to what it described as speculation. A man and a woman are due to appear
before magistrates today after the body of a baby was found in woodland near
Brighton on Wednesday. The couple face a number of charges. This report from
Aruna Iyengar. The Crown Prosecution Service said Constance Martin and Mark
Gordon had been charged with gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth
of a child and perverting the course of justice. The body of a baby was found in
some woods near Brighton on Wednesday following a two-day search. Yesterday
police said it was too early to say when the infant died but it may have been
some time ago. They said it was not yet possible to determine the sex of the
baby. Ms Martin, who's 35, and Mr Gordon, who's 48, were arrested in Brighton on
Monday after being missing for several weeks. They're due to appear at Crawley
Magistrates Court later today. Several senior Conservatives have expressed anger
that the former senior civil servant Sue Gray has been offered the role of Chief
of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir Starmer. Ms Gray led the investigation into
lockdown parties in Downing Street which was highly critical of the former Prime
Minister Boris Johnson, among others. Here's our political correspondent Damien
Grammaticus. Last year Sue Gray was being held up by Boris Johnson and his
ministers as the most impartial of civil servants while she investigated
lockdown parties. Her conclusion was that those at the top were responsible for
failures of leadership and judgment. Last night Paul Holmes, a vice chairman of
the Conservative Party, said she should be blocked from taking the post she's
been offered as Chief of Staff to the Labour leader after resigning from her
job. Nadine Dorries and Jacob Rees-Mogg, both ministers under Mr Johnson, said
they now thought her report was a left-wing stitch-up. And someone speaking for
Mr Johnson said the validity of her findings had been destroyed. But Jonathan
Powell, a former civil servant who served as Tony Blair's Chief of Staff, said
it was a sign that Labour was ready to take the reins of power from what he
called an exhausted and fractured Conservative Party. The Conservative Party's
deputy chairman Lee Anderson has said he has sympathy with people who've taken
part in recent protests outside hotels housing asylum seekers. Some of the
demonstrations have resulted in arrests for violent behaviour. Mr Anderson told
the Political Thinking with Nick Robinson podcast that it was human nature to be
concerned about a sudden change to a community. They're just normal family
people from from some of these towns and villages that are upset that you know
overnight two or three hundred young men have arrived and when you live in a
community you expect to be safe and you don't like sudden change. That's that's
how humans behave. You can hear the full interview with Lee Anderson tomorrow at
5.30pm here on Radio 4 and on BBC Sounds. The chief executive of HS2 has told
the BBC that various options are being considered to control the spiralling cost
of the high-speed rail project. Mark Thurston said these could include delaying
its completion. One estimate has previously suggested the final price could
exceed £100 billion. More details from our transport correspondent Katie Austin.
Mark Thurston said work on the first stretch between London and Birmingham was
40% complete but he told the BBC the impact of inflation had been significant
and the organisation was looking with the government at ways of mitigating this
from making savings in the supply chain to the project's timing. Mr Thurston
insisted delays did not typically save money in the long run but that a number
of options were being looked at. His comments follow speculation the government
could seek to delay or axe parts of the railway to save money. A spokesperson
for the government said ministers were committed to delivering the project from
Euston to Manchester but they added regular reviews were carried out of its
scope and schedule to ensure it delivered value for money. A prominent lawyer in
the United States has been found guilty of shooting dead his wife and son at
their mansion in 2021. Prosecutors said Alex Murdoch committed the killing in
South Carolina to distract attention from financial crimes. He's due to be
sentenced later today. There's been intense interest in the case across the US
as our North America correspondent David Willis explains. The scion of a wealthy
southern law family whose name came to represent a legal dynasty dating back
nearly 90 years, Alex Murdoch's dramatic downfall has captivated this country as
his six-week trial has played out on cable TV. He admitted embezzling millions
of dollars from his clients in order to feed an addiction to prescription
painkillers but denied killing his wife Maggie and younger son Paul at the
family estate in June 2021 in what the prosecution maintained was an attempt to
cover up his financial crimes but a video taken by 22 year old Paul only minutes
before his death undermined Alex Murdoch's assertion that he wasn't anywhere
near the crime scene at the time of the killings. Scotland has become the first
country in the world to ban hospitals from using the anaesthetic desflurane
because of its environmental risks. Desflurane is a powerful greenhouse gas.
Analysis by the NHS shows it has a global warming potential 2,500 times greater
than carbon dioxide. The drug will now only be used in exceptional
circumstances. Smita Mundasad reports. Over the last decade desflurane gas has
been used widely in hospitals across the UK to help keep people unconscious
during operations but there's growing recognition that it can be harmful to the
environment and many British hospitals have already decided to phase it out.
Different anaesthetics are being used as alternatives. In Scotland NHS experts
say eliminating the gas entirely from its peak use in 2017 will save emissions
equivalent to powering 1,700 homes a year. A similar ban is coming in in England
next year. The Royal College of Anaesthetists says it's very pleased with the
move but much more needs to be done to cut the carbon footprint of the health
service. The broadcaster Ken Bruce will present his final show on BBC Radio 2
today. Ken Bruce has fronted the mid-morning programme for more than 30 years
but as our media correspondent David Zilato explains his career with the BBC
goes back even further. It was 1992 when Ken Bruce took on the mid-morning slot
on Radio 2. Hello chums, everything all right this morning? But he was even then
a veteran. His BBC Radio career goes back to 1977. However just before midday he
will, a few days earlier than he was hoping, be saying his final goodbye. I'll
just be a quick goodbye. I will not be tugging at heartstrings mainly because I
don't want to tug at my own. I'll just be saying right that's the end of this
particular era of my life. Of course it's not retirement. He's heading off to
greatest hits radio and his replacement has already been announced. Vernon Kay
will be taking over in May. And you can hear an interview with Ken Bruce on this
programme in just over an hour's time. Thanks Jane. Yes, Gary's been talking to
Ken Bruce and is very excited about it. We'll bring you there at about twenty
past eight. It is now nine minutes past seven. Do you remember the time when
people going for a walk could be filmed by police drones or fined hundreds of
pounds for sharing coffee with a friend? The time when black dye was poured into
a blue lagoon to put people off wanting to swim? Those were some of the more
extreme decisions taken by police forces to enforce lockdown orders after
ministers ordered them to crack down on breaches of Covid rules. That at least
is what is suggested by the latest Matt Hancock WhatsApp messages released by
the Daily Telegraph. They include him telling the cabinet secretary we're going
to have to get heavy with the police. And after a meeting with the prime
minister, the pod got their marching orders. So were the decisions taken by
police forces the consequence of that ministerial pressure? We can talk now to
the former chief constable of Manchester, Greater Manchester, Sir Peter Fahey
joins us on the line. Morning to you Sir Peter. How do you feel as a former
chief con when you hear those words, plod, give them their marching orders? Yeah
I think lots of people in the police service won't be surprised at the tone of
these remarks. They were faced with, you know, an unprecedented situation. This
legislation was rushed out, it was confused, it had poor definitions in it.
There was this constant confusion between what was legislation and what was
guidance. Often it seemed ministers themselves didn't understand the impact of
the legislation. And just the fact that you've highlighted those particular
instances, that actually caused huge resentment within policing who were trying
to do their best and felt that individual instances of officers trying to do
their best were then highlighted and misunderstood. So I think, you know, as I
say, there'll be no surprise about the tone of these exchanges. The tone is one
thing. The question is, do they reveal that it is a polite fiction that
politicians can't tell police officers what to do? No, I think chief constables
are very, very much aware, you know, about the fact the operational independence
of chief constables and will do the right thing. And I think throughout the
pandemic they tried to interpret the legislation as best they could, give the
right guidance to their officers and officers, you know, who are very close, so
are very close to their local communities, try to show discretion and common
sense. But we're just faced with this huge confusion. And obviously some people
who felt the legislation was not being enforced strongly enough and got very
angry about certain people and other people that feeling that was turning into a
police state. So the police were stuck in the middle. If you're a chief
constable, the prime minister calls you into Downing Street during a national
health emergency and says, come on, we need you to crack down. You need to get
heavy. You'd have to be quite a strong police officer to ignore that, wouldn't
you? No, I think the conversation would be, sorry, the legislation is not clear
enough. The definition is not clear enough. We're trying to do our best. You've
not given us the powers to enforce the legislation. If you remember, people
couldn't gather in their homes, you know, with strangers. But on the other hand,
there was no power of the police to enter those homes. So I think that's the
sort of, I know that that was the sort of messages going back into government as
the police were trying to do their best. What do you think the lessons are for
the future? It's very difficult, isn't it, when it was such an unprecedented
situation? But I think the police service was certainly surprised that
legislation wasn't on the blocks, that there wasn't a greater understanding of
the importance of getting definitions right within legislation and just an
understanding of the impact it would have on the public. But I think, as I say,
I think particularly at the moment, there's a lot of resentment in policing
about things like the pay dispute and things like that. And that just plays into
that narrative of a huge gap at the moment between ordinary police officers and
the Home Office. And I think the lessons for the future is that needs to be
repaired. We don't want to live in a country where the government just, you
know, is always supporting the police. We want accountability. We want
challenge. But at the same time, I think the police service at the moment feels
unsupported and misunderstood. Finally, can I turn to the findings of the
Manchester Arena bombing inquiry yesterday? I know as a former Chief Constable
of Greater Manchester, someone who's Chair of Trustees of the charity We Stand
Together, it's an issue you will have been following very closely. There is a
stark front page of The Sun this morning. The photographs of the 22 victims with
the headline, 22 who should be alive. Do you think that is a fair conclusion
from what we heard yesterday and what do you think the lessons are? It's an
understandable conclusion. I wasn't the Chief at the time, but anybody
associated with Manchester is absolutely devastated at what happened and feels
the pain and absolutely anger and the bitterness of the families and the fact
that those 22 people will never come back again. I think it is a fair and
balanced report. You know, a lot of the emergency services on the night were
just overwhelmed by the trauma, by the size, by the confusion of what was
happening. You know, a lot of recommendations have been put into place. But the
trouble is an inquiry like this can only look at the circumstances on that night
and this particular horrific incident and hasn't got the capacity to look at the
broader issues about the capacity of the emergency services and whether, you
know, MI5 and the police are set up in the best possible way to counteract this
threat. And then what is a changing threat and will be a changing threat from
what was then. So I think we're going to be discussing that in more detail at 10
past eight. Sir Peter Fahey, former Chief Constable of Manchester, thank you for
joining us. 14 minutes past seven now. There's an indication this morning that
government help with domestic energy bills will continue after April. In this
six month period, it's been roughly £60 a month for households, more if you are
a pensioner or on a particularly low income. Simon Jack, our business editor,
has the story. What led you to this conclusion, Simon? Well, I was told by one
company that they were preparing bills for April and they were assuming now that
government support would continue beyond April when compiling those bills. Other
companies told me they were holding off preparing those bills until they got a
government decision. Now there were two bits, if you remember, Michelle, of
government support. One was the £400 universal discount that you mentioned paid
in £66 monthly instalments from October to March. The second announced in July
of last year was a subsidy that protected households from soaring costs, keeping
typical bills at £2,500 a year. Now that was eye-wateringly expensive for the
government. In total, the ABR estimated the package would cost something like
£50 billion across the entire period. But wholesale costs have fallen around 70%
since then. So the cost to government of those subsidies has fallen by many
billions of pounds. That subsidy was due to be withdrawn at the end of March so
that bills would rise from a typical bill from £2,500 to £3,000. The
government's been under intense pressure from consumer champions, people like
Martin Lewis, to use that unspent kitty, now unspent kitty, to keep bills at or
near their current levels. So one company said they're preparing those April
bills assuming that will now happen. Others say, as I say, they're holding off
while they await government decisions. Either way, it's clear the industry
expects now that support to continue beyond April. Martin Lewis will be with us
to talk about this at half past eight. It sounds as if it is an assumption
rather than some of the companies getting the nod from someone in government.
Well, one company in particular said that they were essentially preparing bills
on the expectation. Now, I don't think they would do that unless they've been
given a pretty clear steer that that government support was going to continue. I
wouldn't say this is a 100% done deal, but if companies are getting hints that
this is going to happen to the extent they are actually changing their processes
and updating their bills in a different way, I think it's a pretty clear
indication that that intense pressure has actually had an effect and the
government is preparing to bow to that pressure. Not a 100% done deal, but I'd
be very surprised if it doesn't happen. Understood. But finally, given the way
that wholesale prices are going, it might be only three months of help. It might
be. I mean, the point is, is that if we were to go back to what the old off-gem
energy price cap that the regulator sets, then bills would go up to 3,300 and
something in April. Remember when we were talking about this a few months ago,
there was a speculation that bills could rise to something like 4,000, 5,000,
even 6,000 pounds at one estimate as wholesale prices roared away. So, the cost
of the subsidy has gone down. The government's got more money than it thought in
the kitty for subsidizing bills. In three months' time, it's expected that the
price cap will fall very sharply, 2,800, even less to around the current level
of 2,500, at which point the government's off the hook completely and therefore
they wouldn't have to spend more money on subsidies because they wouldn't need
to. Simon, thanks. Thank you very much. Eighteen minutes past seven. More
financial results are out this morning. That might just give us a sense of how
things are looking in the housing market. Felicity could tell us more. Yes, I
can. We've had full year results out from Rightmove. They show its operating
profit grew 7% last year to just over £241 million. Peter Brooks-Johnson is
Chief Executive and joins me now. Peter, good morning. Morning, Felicity. Now,
in these results, you tell investors the market was more normal last year. It
calmed down after that post-COVID house buying activity, but then it was
disrupted in the last few months by the unexpected rapid mortgage rate
increases. What did that disruption look like? So, what it looked like is,
unsurprisingly, if you were thinking of buying a house and you saw that
surprise, people started to hold on and just review their position. So, we saw
that deals were being agreed much more slowly. What's really great news is
actually post-Christmas, and so we had a slow sort of first two weeks of
January, but it looks like people are getting more confident again with deals
now being agreed at about sort of 11% below normal 2019 levels. OK. And the
Governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, warned earlier this week we
might face more interest rate rises to help tackle inflation. What impact do you
think that might have on the housing market? I think what's worth remembering is
most people buy homes now with fixed mortgages, and those fixed mortgage rates,
thankfully, have been coming down since the announcements of the mini-budget. I
think what we've seen, our data is real-time. What we've seen in the last few
days, even post that announcement, it feels like people are just getting a bit
more confident. After all, most of us buy a home to live in and have all sorts
of other pressures in terms of choosing where we live. And I think now people
are – they've been cautious, but they are starting to do deals again, as I say,
about 11% down on 2019. What insights do you have into what house prices might
be doing as people are a bit more cautious? Oh, I think predicting house prices
is always fraught with risk. I think what I would imagine is there will be a
little bit of pressure on house prices, inevitably. I think it's worth, again,
thinking about it in the middle term. Most of us live in a house for more than a
few years, and actually house prices are up 20% since 2019. So I think we might
see a little bit of settling back as there is slightly less frenzy in the
market, but that's probably good news for the news for actually most buyers and
indeed most sellers. Do you think interest rates need to come down before the
market regains its normal momentum? I think it probably would help if we got
confidence that interest rates had stopped going up. Frankly, I think a little
bit of a fall in interest rates will certainly help us get back to those more
normal sort of 2019 levels. Lisa Brooks-Johnson, Chief Executive of Rightmove.
Outgoing Chief Executive of Rightmove. Thank you very much. Fliss, thank you.
It's 21 minutes past seven. How do DJs beat match? Going seamlessly from one
track into the other, it is a mark of their skill. But Dr. Maria Witek from the
University of Birmingham, who is a scientist of music, has been putting her mind
to what is actually going on inside the brain of a DJ when they do this. And
she's on the line now. Morning, Dr. Witek. Morning. I just assumed it was
because they were particularly good at their job. But do you think there's a
certain kind of brain that is predisposed to do this well? Well, I think there's
something special about this skill. If you think about a regular music
instrumentalist, like a drummer or a pianist, they move their bodies sort of
directly to synchronise with other players, to synchronise with their own
playing. DJs have to change the tempo of two independent records on two
independent motors. So they kind of have to have secondary control of two
records. So in a way, they sort of have to drive the synchrony rather than just
synchronise their own body. And I think that's quite a unique skill that we
haven't really thought that carefully about yet. Okay, so they're not just
choosing the right moment, they're often adjusting the tempo of the incoming or
the current track to make them match. It's usually the incoming track, but
sometimes they can also adjust the one that's already playing. Although you want
to minimise that, obviously, because that's visible or audible to the audience.
So you want to, ideally, you want to adjust the incoming track before it's
audible to the audience, so that when you introduce it, it's fully synchronised
and that transition is seamless, as they say. Okay, well, also with us is Mo
Jones, who's one of the DJs who took part in this study. Morning, Mo. Good
morning. I'm going to ask you to help us understand this, because we've got an
example of beat matching that actually you sent us, two tracks and the junction
between them. So we're going to play this for everyone now and then you talk
about it afterwards. And just before we play it, I just want to say to everyone
listening, so listen particularly carefully, about five seconds into this. Well,
hopefully, everyone picked up on the junction, although the point is you're not
really supposed to pick up on it because it happens so seamlessly. Tell us, Mo,
what were you doing there? What's going through your mind to make that happen?
So I tried to pick some nice gentle drum and bass for the Radio 4 listeners this
morning. The first track was playing and what you do as a DJ is you count the
beat. So there was quite an obvious pause and then what we would call the drop,
which is the start of the next set of rhythms, of bars, you count in bars and
beats. And so after that pause, you started to hear this small chime, like a
dink of a bell sound coming in. And that was the second track mixing over the
first track. As you say, if you're doing a reasonably good job, you shouldn't
really notice that when you're listening. So you didn't adjust the tempo of the
second track? I had already done that. So part of the DJ's job when they're
mixing, you're listening to the tune that's playing out in the club or at the
festival and in your headphones, you're listening to the second track that
you're going to bring in and it's your job to adjust the tempo while your
audience can't hear it. So that awful mismatch of beats hopefully doesn't get
broadcast to your audience. So you've already done that. And then the job is
that you listen to the first beat of that. So on a record, on a piece of vinyl,
you're holding that first beat. You kind of, you sort of flop, flop, flop that
beat over the rhythm that you're listening to. And then at the right time, so
when you've counted to the 16 or the 32 in your bars, you then let go of that
record. And then if you've done a good job, it sort of drops in perfectly in
time and off you go and your audience loves it and carries on dancing. And from
taking part in Dr Vitek's study, did you learn something new about what you're
doing? Did it make sense to you in a different way? Well, it was quite tricky
actually, because there was no, everything was happening inside the headphones.
So the normal scenario is that you're listening to music out loud. And then so
you can make that, you can do that work in your brain sort of because
something's coming in from the outside and what you're, and the tune that's
coming in is in your headphone. Whereas in the study, both were happening in
your headphones. So it was actually pretty tricky. But the whole thing was so
interesting watching those 64 little electrodes in the cap doing their job and
kind of recording the brainwaves. So I can't wait to see what the results of the
survey or what the study come out to show. Can you give us the overall
conclusion, Dr Vitek? So we're still collecting data, so I can't tell you what
we found because we haven't done the analysis. But what we're hoping to see is,
so because the brain is a rhythmic organ and the way the brain rhythms
fluctuate, we know that they can become synchronised with rhythms in the
environment, such as music. And so by looking at the kind of correlation between
the fluctuations of the neurons in the brain and the fluctuations of rhythms in
the music, we can see that the fluctuations of rhythms in the music and the
body, in fact, we sort of hope that that can tell us about how this skill comes
about. And in a way, you can kind of think of the DJ as a kind of distributed
system where both the music and the body and the brain kind of work together to
create this spectacle of synchronised music making. Well, thank you very much,
Dr Maria Vitek. And thank you also, Mo Jones, for letting us into your world and
I guess really letting us into your brain. Thank you. Yep, Michelle's going to
be taking out the decks a little bit later on off the programme. Meantime, 26
minutes past seven, Gary's here with us. Good morning to you. We're charting the
progress of England's cricketers this morning, who are playing Bangladesh in the
second one-day international. England batting, good morning to Kevin Howells
with the very latest. Gary, good morning to you. England 92 for two. I think
they'll be very happy with this. 90 and over has gone. Jason Roy 66 off 69
deliveries. James Vince at the other end on three. The wickets to have fallen.
Full salt for seven. Caught low down at slip off the pace bowling of Tasgin
Ahmed. There were 25 runs on the board in that seventh over. And Dawid Milan,
who scored a really impressive century in the first meeting of these two teams a
couple of days ago. Today, he made just 11. He was out of the spin of Mahidi as
well. The important thing to point out about this tour, this understrength
England team, but the World Cup and they are the reigning champions, of course,
the world champions comes up in India at the end of the year. So to get as much
experience in these sort of conditions, similar conditions to India is really
valuable. And Joss Butler, who actually lost the toss this morning, said he
wanted his team to bat first, which they didn't do the other night. So I think
generally he'll be very happy with the way things have gone so far. Quick
reminder about a couple of changes England have made again, rotating really the
bowler Sam Curran in for Chris Wokes. And it's great to see Saqib Mahmood back
on the field again, returning after a year long out with a back injury. He
replaces Joffre Archer. More with Kevin later. Later today, former England
captain Michael Vaughan is expected to appear at the Cricket Discipline
Commission into allegations of racism made by Azim Rafiq. Sports editor Dan
Rowan reports. Michael Vaughan captained England to ashes glory in 2005. But for
the last two years, his reputation and his career as a BBC broadcaster have been
in jeopardy after he was alleged to have used racist language by a former
Yorkshire teammate, Azim Rafiq. A current England star, Adeel Rashid, has
corroborated Rafiq's allegation. Asked by Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC
of his memory of the alleged incident, Rashid claimed Vaughan had said, there's
too many of you lot. We need to do something about it. Mr. Stoner suggested that
Rashid did not have a clear memory of events, which Rashid rejected, along with
claims that he'd been pressured into backing up Rafiq. However, he did say that
he didn't believe Vaughan was a racist and that he believed the comments were a
poor attempt at humour. Vaughan himself is set to give evidence on the third day
of this hearing, the latest episode in a saga that continues to cast a shadow
over the game. Golf world number one, John Rahm has a two-stroke lead going into
the second round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational Tournament. England's Aaron
Rye is three off the lead. Danny Willett and Mats Vittpatrick are five off the
pace. And Warrington made it three wins from three, coming from behind to beat
Salford 36-20. There are five more games in Super League tonight, including St.
Helens against Leeds in this commentary on Sports Extra. And here are the tips.
One for Doncaster, 345, number four, Mo Vidi, Newbury 430, number three, Gaelic
Jordi. Thank you very much, Gary. Let's look ahead now to next week. Welcome to
the Spock. I feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. They're juggling
flaming torches, but they could just as well be juggling chainsaws. The monkeys
might be hypothetical, but the issues are real. Part of what we need to be well
is a world that we can feel that we belong to. I'm Helen Lewis, back with a new
series of big conversations, talking to people who bring radical new thinking to
vital questions like when to quit, social prescribing, scientific fraud and
preventing suicide. Small acts of reaching out, small acts of interrupting those
thoughts could be life-saving. The Spock starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Quick look at the weather now. Cloudy start for many
today, brighter in the north, cloud breaking throughout the day. And a little
bit later, we're going to have a bit of Nick's conversation with Jon Snow,
formerly of Channel 4 News, of course, about the state of broadcasting and
whether he yearns or yearned to share his own opinions of news on air. No,
absolutely not. I'm delighted that I've got through my entire career without
actually being found guilty of any misdemeanor in terms of balance and the rest
of it. I mean, you think I'm a lefty, I think you're a righty. I mean, it's
rather healthy that the two of us can sit in a studio and have a reasonable
discussion. No comment. But Gary Richardson's turned the tables on Ken Bruce on
his last day at Radio 2. We're going to do a mini Popmaster. These all questions
from the early 80s. Which American band is this? Is that Chicago? Good, thank
you. Well done. Name of the song? Hard to say, I'm sorry. Everybody Needs a
Holiday. Yes, you're absolutely spot on. Thank you. For a bonus, when were they
formed? What year? I think 1978. No, 1967. Get away! There you are. Oh, Gary out
Popmastering the Popmaster. God humiliates him on his final day. The brutality
of the man. Oh, as if Ken wasn't emotional enough and didn't have enough on
today. Anyway, both of those interviews are coming up after eight o'clock. But
now, Jane has the news. The BBC understands that a number of energy firms expect
the government to maintain some level of support for household bills beyond
April. The energy price gap is due to rise next month, with a typical household
expected to pay £500 more annually. But ministers are under pressure to use the
money saved by lower-than-expected wholesale costs to limit any potential price
increase. The Treasury says it is reviewing the situation. Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon are due to appear in front of magistrates in Crawley today, after
the body of a baby was found in woodland near Brighton on Wednesday. The pair
have been charged with gross negligence manslaughter, concealing the birth of a
child, and perverting the course of justice. There has been outrage among some
Conservative MPs that the senior civil servant Sue Gray has been offered the
role of Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir Starmer. Ms Gray led the
inquiry into government lockdown parties. At the time, she was praised by Mr
Johnson and his ministers as the most impartial of civil servants. But allies of
Boris Johnson have suggested such a job move would undermine the integrity of
the civil service. A prominent lawyer in the United States, Alex Murdoch, has
been convicted of killing his wife and son at their mansion in South Carolina in
2021. Prosecutors said Murdoch shot his family to distract from the theft of
millions of dollars from his clients, which they say he used to fund an
expensive drug habit. Foreign ministers from the US and Russia have spoken face-
to-face for the first time since the invasion of Ukraine began. The encounter
took place after a meeting of G20 foreign ministers in Delhi, which ended
without a final statement because of disagreements over the conflict. Antony
Blinken told Sergei Lavrov that Washington was willing to support Kyiv for as
long as necessary. Ken Bruce will present his final show on BBC Radio 2 today.
The broadcaster took over the mid-morning slot more than 30 years ago, but his
BBC Radio career started years before that, in 1977. Vernon Kay takes over in
May. Thank you very much, Shane. It's coming up now to 25 to 8. What is going on
with HS2? In a BBC interview, the chief executive of the now £70 billion rail
project has made clear they're asking their contractors to cut costs and that it
might not open on time. The cost of materials is the latest pressure to hit the
project. The current timeline for London to Birmingham to be completed is by
2033, the crew leg by 2034 and the Manchester leg in 2041. Here's part of what
Mark Thurston told our transport correspondent, Katie Austin. We're looking at
the timing of the project, the phasing of the project. We're looking at where we
can use our supply chain to secure a lot of those things that I've said are
costing us more for inflation. Are there smarter ways of buying our energy, for
example? Are we able to buy the fuel we need for the project in bulk? Looking at
the aggregates from the quarries, where we get the materials from. So on
multiple fronts now, we're looking at how we can make this project as affordable
as we can. Well, with us now is Henry Murrison, chief executive of the Northern
Power House Partnership, which has been pushing for high speed rail from north
to south and from east to west across the north of England. Good morning. Good
morning. What do you think of what you've heard from Mark Thurston this morning?
I think it all sounds eminently sensible. And I think that the challenge is that
this isn't unique to high speed too. We've seen this morning in the Times
reports that Orsted are struggling to deliver their project, their most recent
project out in the – on the coast of the east of the country, because of cost
inflation, very similar costs to the ones facing HS2. And previously, the
Treasury would have insulated departments from the cost of the specific
projects. It's so big this time, they've asked the Department of Transport to
try and find savings. Clearly, this is the biggest line item in the Department
of Transport budget. Mark Thurston is feeling most of that pressure. So I'm very
sympathetic with Mark and his team. I think they're doing the best they can. But
in reality, if we'd built this project more quickly, and not messed about as we
have over the years with numerous reviews in the Johnson years and various other
distractions, we'd have built more of it. And the sad thing is, the longer we
taken, the higher the cost will escalate. And that's not just unfortunately,
from the cost of inflation. When you make changes to projects, it also adds
costs. So redesigning Euston station, there was 100 million pounds of design
work on Euston that has had to be thrown in the bin, largely in order to
redesign it. So when you make changes, you also increase costs. So some of the
critics and sceptics, I'm afraid, have also directly increased the cost of the
project through the changes they've insisted on. From where we are now, it's
eminently sensible, you say, to look for savings. But as Mark Thurston himself
acknowledged, a delay doesn't save money, it just means that the money is spent
over a longer period of time. What would definitely save money would be axing
part of the route. How confident are you that HS2 will reach Manchester? I
remain confident because the current Chancellor and the most likely woman who
will replace it, Rachel Reeves, are big supporters of this project. And that's
because it will increase productivity. The challenge is we have already cut
elements of the project off. So the most, the bit of the project that had the
biggest return on investment, the new line as far as Leeds has already been
cancelled. There's now no plan to get trains to Leeds, but an open ended
commitment to do so. So we've already tried to lock bits off the project to save
money. And actually, that reduces the value for money to the taxpayer, because
it means that very expensive section between Birmingham to London won't bring
benefits to the whole of the UK anymore, it won't bring benefits to most of the
east of the country, north of the East Midlands. So that is already reducing its
benefit to the UK. And I think the reflection would be that it is a bit like a
credit card bill. At the moment, we're arguing about how much we're spending
every year. But the eventual cost of HS2 is the key question. And Treasury
spending rules mean that they treat this project the same as they treat day to
day spending. I think one of the things I would also welcome about Rachel Reeves
approach is she wants to treat capital investment, things that are going to
deliver growth differently to day to day spending. The issue is the current
Chancellor is comparing this as if it was an increase in unemployment benefit.
It fundamentally isn't. The cost increase has to be dealt with. Well, either
way, we don't know yet, do we? What the current, what the cost increase looks
like now on top of the £70 billion, which is already double what it was in 2010.
So it's all we're able to say you're confident because there's political will.
But that might change once we have a different overall costing. I think my
argument, Misha, is that this is an argument you're making against building new
hospitals and against building the energy infrastructure we need as well as
building HS2. No, it's a specific question about how confident you are that it
will definitely come to Manchester given the way costs are increasing. I think
my argument is that you're framing it based on an obsession with the overall
cost for particular projects. The challenge is government's got to deal with the
fact that all infrastructure is going to cost more than we hoped it would
because of the inflation and construction costs. We need to deal with the things
that are causing that, not just in this project, but across the board. Look at
the costs of labour. So we now have reduced freedom of movement of people
because of our departure from the EU. That is going to make it harder to attract
people into this sector. And what we need to do and should have done is invest
more in the training and development of the pipeline of talent we're going to
need from within the UK. But we've not done enough on that. So I think the
government's challenge is that whether it's this project, whether it's the new
hospitals that were promised to Leeds, whether it was in cities like Manchester,
whether it's offshore wind, all these projects are going up in price. And UK
government collectively can control the levers. They can make sure we can get
access to talent. They can do the things to support energy intensive industries.
The steel industry is a key part of the supply chain. Financial help with their
energy bills is also helping to reduce costs on HS2. So I think the issue is
that I'm absolutely very focused on making sure we deliver infrastructure, not
just this project, actually, but the things that will raise productivity across
the UK. And I do think it's a fake debate, largely stirred up by those on the
right of the Tory party to fixate on the costs of this one project. The issue is
that these issues are across the board. And if we don't invest in our
infrastructure, we'll never raise UK productivity, and we will not be able to
compete globally. And so whether it's HS2, whether it's Hornsea 3, whether it's
new hospitals, we need to control costs across the public sector. But where it's
needed, we are going to have to spend more to get the things we need, if it's in
the economic interest of the country. And I think that the current Chancellor
and the woman who's the most likely next Chancellor agree with me. And that's
why I remain confident about HS2 getting to Manchester and about Northern
Powerhouse Rail across the Pennines, which is also critical, not just to
Northern productivity and growth, but to the whole of the UK succeeding over the
next two, three decades. MW Henry Mearison, thank you. HM Mearison It is 22.8.
Time for our Friday look at stories that are making news in different parts of
the country with two of BBC Local Radio's Breakfast Show hosts. This week, we're
hearing from Tony MacDonald, host on Radio Hereford and Worcester, and first
Matt Bailey, who hosts BBC Radio Newcastle's Breakfast Show. We began with
Newcastle United. Or, I asked, are they? MW Henry Mearison Well, this is the
question, isn't it? Yeah, back in the news today. I mean, obviously, you know,
last week, all the right reasons, the trip to Wembley, the League Cup final.
This week, the roller coaster of being a Newcastle fan continues. And the
ownership of Newcastle United very much wants to get in the spotlight now, with
Newcastle's takeover by the Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund being approved
last year to much excitement. What's come out just this week in a US court case,
the Newcastle chairman, Yassir al-Rumayyan, has been described as a sitting
minister of the government. When the takeover went through, Richard Masters,
who's the chief executive of the FA, told the BBC at that point that the Premier
League has the power to remove the PIF as owners of the club if there was
evidence of state involvement in the running of the club. And we wait to see
what happens. Tony, meanwhile, what's most on your mind in terms of stories in
Hereford and Worcester? Tony Clark Well, one of our big stories this week
concerns Herefordshire Children's Services. Last year, an Ofsted report gave
them the worst possible rating and said that children were at risk from harm. So
a children's commissioner, Eleanor Brazil, was appointed by the Department for
Education and she put out a report a couple of days ago that children have been
failed for more than a decade. The council keeps repeating mistakes and lessons
haven't been learned. That's a stock phrase, lessons have been learned. Well,
they haven't in this case. But the department is still going to be run in-house
for the time being. There are various recommendations and targets they'll need
to meet over the next three to six months, primarily trying to recruit more
social workers to the area and sort out their caseloads, because some of these
families are seeing maybe four different social workers a year, some as many as
up to nine social workers a year. So there are big problems there that need to
be sorted out. Toby And Matt, apart from the hard news, how are you lifting
people's spirits on the Breakfast Programme this morning? Matt Oh, Nick, we've
got a lovely story this morning, quite a warming story. It's all about a family
who ensured their gran with dementia could enjoy her granddaughter's wedding
day. And because of the effects of her conditions, she was unable to go to her
eldest grandchild Hannah's wedding. So what they decided to do, I mean, I was in
the same position once with my grandma and I sort of filmed it and took in the
film. But this is a fantastic idea. What they've done is they've dressed up one
of the rooms at her home. They have decorated it just like a wedding day and
they sort of don their beautiful dresses and suits and everything. It's just
such a lovely story. It really is. And meanwhile, Tony, you've got someone who
sounds absolutely extraordinary in the way that he's raising money for charity.
Tony This is John Adams. He's a self-styled MND warrior from Droitwich. He's
raised £20,000 in order to help fund research into the condition. Now, he was
diagnosed back in 2017 and he was only given a life expectancy of 12 to 18
months. But six years on, he's still with us. He's in a wheelchair and he's
speaking via a machine, but he's very active on social media, making people
smile every day. He's regularly at Baggies Games, West Bromwich Albion. So he
has my heart in that respect anyway, being a fan of that. But his next ambitions
are to jump out of a plane or get a tattoo. We're not sure if he'll get either
cleared by his medics, but he'll at least also be playing a big part in his
granddaughter's wedding in June. But of course, he wasn't expected to be here
for that. So he's making sure that he's keeping on and doing as much as he can.
Well, whether it's skydiving or tattooing, I think we can guarantee you'll be
following his story. Tony, Matt, thank you both very much. And the time is now
quarter to eight. Time for Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning is the
author, Rhydian Brooke. Good morning. The announcement that a Northern Ireland
Brexit deal had been agreed seemed to come out of nowhere. Indeed, it would be
easy for a public, jaded and worn down by this seemingly intractable problem, to
miss its significance. Subject to others' approval, could it be that an
unsolvable puzzle has been solved? It turns out that it didn't come from
nowhere. People have been working for weeks in secret, away from the crosswinds
of comment, shut up for hours in badly lit rooms, drinking stewed coffee and
eating stale biscuits, analysing, listening, compromising. Commentators spoke of
timing, trust and the intensity of focus being key, but it wasn't the wisdom of
Solomon that got the deal done. It was something less dramatic. The difference,
according to Ursula von der Leyen, was that there had been a constructive
attitude from the beginning. It turns out that the protocol required to sort out
the protocol was practising basic courtesy towards the other negotiators in the
room. Like the Good Friday Agreement, which was reached 25 years ago next month,
this week's deal is testimony to the idea of compromising for the greater good,
that is, the good that goes beyond our own present wants, peace being the goal.
And yet, compromise is a dirty word for some in this increasingly uncompromising
world. Perhaps we have too much reverence for the ideal of the intransigent
leader. I don't know why. The adversarial, macho approach to negotiation isn't
working. Indeed, it often leads to conflict. How many countries are crying out
for their leaders to get into those badly lit rooms and compromise their way to
peace? In his letter to the Corinthians, Paul, a man committed to his cause,
said, though I am free, I make myself subservient to everyone to win as many as
possible. To those under law, I became like one under the law. To the weak, I
became weak to win the weak. Paul became all things to all people so that by all
possible means he might lead people to a greater good. If his God can
compromise, then so can he. Life itself is one gigantic compromise. It is an
inevitable reality. But when motivated by the telos of a greater good, it makes
sense. It just takes leaders willing to risk losing their own power and status
in order to win something that lies out of sight and imagination. They have to
hope against hope for others, the next generation, for something they themselves
may not live to enjoy. This is so much braver than those who refuse to set aside
their right to be right. Blessed are the compromisers. They may not inherit the
earth themselves, but others might because of their actions. That was thought
for the day with Rydian Brooke. The time now is 13 minutes to eight. Wait for
Sue Gray. Those were the words heard again and again as allegations mounted that
Downing Street had hosted lockdown-breaking parties. She was the senior civil
servant, entrusted with policing standards inside Whitehall. It was she who
called in the Metropolitan Police. It was her report which concluded there had
been, quote, failures of leadership and judgment inside Number 10. It is now Sue
Gray who has to wait to see whether and when she'll be allowed to take up the
offer of a job of Chief of Staff to the Leader of the Opposition. Boris
Johnson's allies say the job offer is proof that an establishment stitch-up
helped to bring him down, and some are calling for her appointment to be blocked
by the Prime Minister. Amongst those who are appalled is Alexander Stafford, who
was parliamentary aide to Boris Johnson. He joins us on the line, along with the
Shadow Culture Secretary Lucy Powell, who was herself a Chief of Staff to a
former Leader of the Opposition. Good morning to you both. Good morning.
Alexander Stafford, a dodgy decision. You called it in a tweet yesterday. Why?
Sorry, of course it's dodgy. How can somebody who only a matter of months ago
condemned one Prime Minister then go and work for the Leader of the Opposition
in such a close capacity? This really doesn't pass the sniff test. It really
undermines the work that she's done, undermines civil service, and really puts
in question Sir Keir's complete judgment. Just to be clear, when Boris Johnson
appointed her, she was impartial, but now Keir Starmer's appointed her, she's
biased. Is that your view? Well, the question is, was she impartial? We need to
see what conversations she's had with Sir Keir's team during that period and
after that period, when she first made contact, when she was off the job. Was
there any deal going on behind the scenes? This really does put in question not
just Partygate allegations, but also Sir Keir's judgment. This is very, very
off. Well, I'll put those questions in just a second. You say it discredits the
Partygate allegations. Correct me if I'm wrong, Suitcray didn't unlock the
bottles of wine, she didn't deliver the suitcases of alcohol, she didn't deliver
a fridge to Downing Street. In what way does it discredit the allegations in
Partygate? Because it needs to work out who was she actually working for? Was
she working for the British public or was she working for a job interview to Sir
Keir's office? I've just asked you who held the parties. Was it Suitcray? Well,
we need to say what was her motive? What was her motive to try and work out? I'm
not asking you a question, Mr Stafford, about Suitcray. I'm asking you about the
parties. Did Suitcray have anything to do with having parties in Number 10? Did
Suitcray have any information that she passed on to Keir or try and look at
information in a particular light? That's the third time you've ignored that
question. That's the third time you've ignored that question. Do you, as you
think this inquiry into Partygate has been discredited, do you now want to have
a fresh inquiry into Boris Johnson's decisions about allowing parties to take
place in Downing Street? What clearly we need to do is have an inquiry into how
she was appointed, why she was appointed, when she started the application
process for Sir Keir. Mr Stafford, you're not a regular on the Today programme,
but we have a habit here, which is I ask a question and you at least make some
appearance of trying to answer the question rather than simply ignoring it. So
I'll ask it again. Do you want a fresh inquiry into the Partygate allegations? I
want a fresh inquiry into every aspect of it, including when she spoke to Sir
Keir. Well, let's leave the interview there, Mr Stafford. If you're going to
simply ignore the questions, I think we'll end the interview there. Thank you
very much indeed, Alexander. Stafford, parliamentary aid in the past to Boris
Johnson. Lucy Powell, the Shadow Culture Secretary, joins us. As I said, she was
Chief of Staff to Ed Miliband when he was leader of the opposition. Lucy Powell,
this row was entirely predictable. It was inevitable. What on earth was Keir
Starmer thinking of? Well, look, Keir has made clear for some time now that what
he's been looking for in this next and last phase of this Parliament, and as we
look forward to the next general election, he wants to make sure that he and the
rest of us in the Shadow Cabinet and the whole team are ready for if and when we
win the next election, because he's got really big ambitions and big ideas about
how he wants to change the way in which government operates. He wants to devolve
a huge amount of powers around the country. He wants to deliver on new ambitious
missions which will involve reorienting how government works. Sure, but the wow
about this appointment was predictable and it was inevitable. And as you know,
when it comes to issues of impartiality, in many ways, perception is reality. So
I ask you again, what on earth was he thinking of? Well, Sue Gray is a hugely
respected civil servant with a lot of experience. And as I say, Keir has made no
secret of the fact that he has been looking for someone with that recent
government experience that can help the Labour Party and help him personally in
the Shadow Cabinet get ready for that big transition to government. But forgive
me, that tells me why she's qualified to do the job. Nobody doubts that she's
qualified to do the job. She's an impressive individual. She was praised by
senior conservatives when she was given the job of investigating party gait. I'm
really asking about Keir Starmer's judgment, though, in risking allegations that
the civil service is not impartial. And they're not just being raised by
partisans, as we were just hearing earlier in the programme. The Institute of
Government described this appointment as unusual and surprising. Well, look, it
will be subject to, obviously, the appointment itself hasn't actually happened
yet, because the appointment is subject to approval by the Advisory Committee on
Business Appointments. And they will look at those issues and they will make
recommendations about potentially a period of gardening leave and other such
issues. And Sue Gray and Keir Starmer have made absolutely clear that they will
abide by those recommendations, which is not always the case in these
situations. So he always knew that it would be subject to those things. But he's
wanted to get the best person for the job that he sees the job as it is. So just
to be clear, the minimum waiting period for people leaving from being a
permanent secretary, which is her status or what's called a second permanent
secretary, is three months. That's the minimum waiting period before you do a
new job. It could be up to two years if that's what the advice is. If that's
what the advisory committee advice. You're saying whichever it is, he will abide
by. Absolutely. That's what he said. But I think the suggestion that somehow
this colours Sue Gray's independent and impartial reports into party gates and
all of those other matters are really utterly ludicrous. As you yourself said,
Nick, you know, she wasn't the one wheeling in the suitcases of booze into
number 10. And the prime minister at the time, Boris Johnson, and most of his
acolytes at the time were at pains to tell us what a formidable and impartial
and independent civil servant Sue Gray was and how she would be able to carry
out this inquiry independently. Yes, but that depends, Lucy Powell, whether she
was having contacts with the Labour Party at the time she was doing the report.
So the fair question raised by Mr Stafford a moment ago is when did Sue Gray
start to have conversations, contacts of any sort with Keir Starmer? Well, I
don't know the answer to that question. But what I do know the answer to the
question is, is that the idea that Sue Gray had conversations with anybody
during that time that she was investigating these very serious allegations, she
wasn't even talking to the to the prime minister and to others in in government
at the time, because she was so determined to maintain her impartiality and
independence throughout and subsequently to that, to that time. And it was only
a year ago. No, forgive me, let me ask the question. You're on the one hand
saying you don't know when there was contact. And then you're saying, but there
definitely wasn't contact at that time. Why not clarify this? Keir Starmer could
publish, the Labour Party could publish a timetable of when the first contact
was made between Sue Gray and Keir Starmer or his office. Will they do it? I
don't know. And obviously, some of these things will be subject to that advisory
committee looking at these issues. But I can be absolutely categoric that, of
course, no conversations would have taken place during that time, because...
What about before that time? Sue Gray... What about before that time? Sue
Gray... Well, look, you know, you said in your introduction that I was... What
about before that time, Lisa? Hang on a minute. I was, for the first couple of
years of Ed Miliband's leadership, I was his Chief of Staff. And I had a number
of conversations with Sue Gray when I was the Chief of Staff to the Leader of
the Opposition, because it was her job to oversee appointments to the House of
Lords, other political appointments. You're saying there may have been contact
before, but it might have been perfectly legitimate. I had those conversations
at that time, as I'm sure others did. But, you know, Sue Gray has been a...
She's worked for successive governments, Labour governments, Conservative
governments. She's worked for Prime Minister Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, Ruthie
Shue and Theresa May, many of whom hated each other. And she's never, ever
spilled beans on any of those. You don't want to stop the country here in the
weather forecast, Lucy Powell. So thank you very much for your time. And before
you, Alexander Stafford. And that's with Helen Willets. Hello, Helen. Hello,
Michelle. Good morning. We've got high pressure with us for, well, the next two
or three days. There's not a great deal of rain in the forecast, but we have got
quite a bit of stubborn cloud this morning. There's a little bit of patchy fog
and a little bit of frost where we've had the clear skies and the sunshine this
morning. So for England and Wales, the likes of the Irish Sea coast across parts
of Lincolnshire, the south coast and the south west have got that little bit of
sunshine this morning, but it's predominantly cloudy. There are a few scattered
showers around. So I think dry, cloudy sums it up for many today. Not as much
sunshine as yesterday, but where the sun does come out, we'll get to nine or 10
degrees Celsius in that March sunshine, more likely seven or eight for most of
us. Northern Ireland and Scotland also have a lot of cloud around today, a
little bit of patchy fog and frost this morning, but the best of the sunshine
probably the north coast of Northern Ireland, northern and western parts of
Scotland. But the cloud is thick enough for the odd light drizzly shower here
and there. And so it will maintain the temperatures around about sixes or sevens
for the most part. And as I say, it's still rather chilly even into next week.
Thank you very much indeed, Helen. Alex Forsyth joins us now to tell us about
this week's Any Questions Morning, Alex. Good morning, Nick. Tonight we'll be at
the Holbeck in Leeds, which is thought to be one of the UK's oldest working
men's clubs. With me on the panel, I'll have the Conservative MP Miriam Cates,
the Labour MP Kim Ledbetter, the Liberal Democrat MP Wendy Chamberlain and Lee
Powell, who's a businessman from Leeds. They will be poised to answer any
questions our audience poses, whether it's the WhatsApp messages of ministers
that's attracting interest or... We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.