TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins next Wednesday evening at 8.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at
three o'clock. Memorial services have been held across Ukraine to mark the one-
year anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. Speaking in Kiev this morning,
President Zelensky pledged to do everything to achieve victory this year. He
said his country had inspired and unified the world and insisted his troops
would not rest until they had liberated all occupied territories. Ivana
Klimpuszcintzadze is a Ukrainian MP. A lot of us feel exhausted but that does
not mean that it changes our attitude towards what is happening and it does not
change the need to kick the aggressor out of the country. So for us it is
existential in order to survive and have the future we have to continue. In the
UK, the king has been paying tribute to the people of Ukraine, saying they have
suffered unimaginably. In a statement he praised their remarkable courage and
resilience. Poland says it has become the first country to deliver leopard two
tanks to Ukraine. The country's prime minister says four of the German-made
battle tanks have arrived and he is ready to send more. Sweden has joined the
growing list of countries pledging to supply the tanks to Ukraine. Junior
doctors in England have announced three days of strike action from the 13th to
the 15th of March. The British Medical Association announced earlier this week
that members had watered overwhelmingly in favour of taking industrial action in
their pay dispute. The government called the move disappointing. The SNP has
confirmed that all three candidates vying to replace Nicola Sturgeon as party
leader and Scotland's first minister have made it through to the next stage of
the contest. Kate Forbes, Ash Regan and Hamza Yousaf secured enough nominations
to go to a vote among SNP members. Vernon Kay will take over from Ken Bruce on
the Radio 2 mid-morning breakfast show from May. Ken Bruce will leave the BBC
after more than 30 years next Friday. He has described Vernon Kay as a lovely
bloke and wished him all the best. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, Peter Gibbs and his
team of experts are ready to answer your queries in this week's Gardener's
Question Time. Hello and a warm welcome to the programme. Today we're tucked
away amongst the hedgerows of hail on the fringe of Greater Manchester.
Welcoming us is the local horticultural society who last hosted us back in 1975
no less. Hello again hail. Obviously pleased to see us back. Well the name hail
derives from an old English word meaning shelter or nook. The Collins English
Dictionary describes nook as a secluded or sheltered place, a retreat. And for
us nature lovers we often feel that our plants and green spaces offer a sort of
revitalising retreat from the challenges of life. Well later in the programme
producer Dan Cocker visits Horatio's Garden in London to hear just how powerful
that can be. But first let me introduce you to our panel. Passionate Plantswoman
Christine Walkton, a veritable encyclopedia of botanical knowledge James Wong
and the Mr Cool of the plant world Ashley Edwards. So let's take our first
question. Hello I'm Sue Riding I'm from Cleveland's Avenue allotments. I've got
a red chilli plant it's still bearing chillies now. If I prune it will it
perform again this year? James can you prune it and keep it going? Absolutely so
chillies are perennial plants. We tend to grow them as annuals in the UK mainly
because it's very very difficult to overwinter them because they require this
kind of dormant period where you have really high light levels but quite cool
temperatures. And our houses are often the exact opposite of that they're often
quite warm and dark so you've already beaten me on the horticulture stakes
because I've tried so many times to grow a chilli bonsai. You can actually train
chillies to create a bonsai and they look incredible but I've never got them to
overwinter so if yours is happy to take off the chillies when they've ripened
you can stick it outside but if you're doing what you're doing just carry on.
Ashley your head gardener at Horatius Gard will be hearing more from there later
on in the show of course. You've got a greenhouse there do you manage to grow
chillies through winter? We do they're only thing when you have chillies in a
greenhouse they tend to be a pest magnet and a lot of pests will overwinter on
those chillies so I've seen chillies with lots of white fly and then next year
that can infect the new plants. But it sounds like you're doing the right thing
you're overwintering it I'd say probably in spring you might want to give it a
fresh pot of compost to really get it going and start feeding away and those
flowers appear start feeding it weekly with a high potassium feed like a tomato
feed is fine. And Christine give it much of a trim back or? You can take it back
by practically down to a third they respond well to pruning the key thing is do
it now because they really like a long season and if you want the wood to be
produced very quickly the the early you prune it to greater length of season I
would go on this afternoon and slaughter it. But it sounds like you're doing the
right thing Sue. Thank you very much. Excellent thanks for your question. And
who's next? Hello Laura Murray plot holder Heel allotment is it worth investing
in a trickle water system or should I just stick with the watering can?
Christine what would what would you go for? I think it very much depends on what
you're trying to achieve if you're having to pay for water if it's metered if
it's regulated if you've got free access to water a supply of water to a plant
is beneficial. One of the things that we fail to recognize particularly
vegetable growing are things called critical watering periods. Not all plants
need water all the time they do need water to establish and then a lot of
vegetable are best left in a classic example of peas and beans. Anybody in this
audience ever seen a pea or a bean a plant wilt? Not a hand inside. No and that
is common now isn't that fascinating and it helps to explain that you shouldn't
really once they've established and they've come through and they're growing
well leave them until they flower and then water very heavily during that
farming period. But a lot of people will water throughout the season get very
substantial growths of foliage and sweet fatty addams thereafter except leaf. So
an irrigation system is fine if you know what you're doing and you just don't
turn it on the runaway. If you know what you're doing and you understand which
plants need watering and when they're watering that's fine. Ashley what are your
thoughts? Well watering is one of those things that's really hard to get a hang
of and it takes a lot of practice to see how the plants react to how you're
watering them. I would prefer that you go down the route of watering with a
large amount of water but less often so that you're encouraging those plant
roots down into the soil. With trickle watering the plants can often form roots
of the surface so when we do get hot weather all those roots of the surface dry
out a lot quicker. So I would suggest watering really well less often but also
having a mulch on top as well which will help conserve water. James? Yeah I
absolutely agree with that because that kind of tendency towards once it was a
little and often you're actually just watering the surface and wasting a lot of
that water because it evaporates. The one time I would think that would be a
really great idea though is if you have lots of pots particularly filled with
bedding plants. If you have a summer like we had last year and you have hanging
baskets you'll be watering literally every day significant amounts and that's
the almost the only way to keep them alive if you're not out with the watering
can every morning at 6am. So in that specific circumstance bedding plants that
need a lot of water in pots that are quite small and dry out quickly then I
would recommend a watering system otherwise perhaps not. Thanks very much for
your question. We'll go over here Mary Burchell Tatton Park Japanese Garden. Can
you tell me how to grow saffron successfully please? So James saffron it's a
type of crocus is that right? Yes that's correct. We might think of saffron as
incredibly exotic because of the kind of foods that we now associate as beings.
So we might think of the region of La Mancha in Spain for example. I think the
biggest producer is India places like Iran which are the key commercial growing
areas. However saffron was once really widely used in cuisine in the UK and in
fact places like saffron Walden are named after that not because of the color
but because it was a huge production area. Even Croydon where my mum has her
garden it comes from the anglicax and word for saffron valley. So saffron was
really widely cultivated in the UK until quite recently the thing that really
got rid of it as an industry was labor. It was incredibly expensive to pick and
it was just cheaper to import it than to pay people to pick it. So saffron can
be grown in the UK and not just grown well because it used to be a commercial
crop. There are a few caveats to how to grow it and one of which is buying the
corn size. Corn sizes that are sold by lots and lots of catalogs can be quite
small and it takes a while to get them to flowering size. So as a general rule
they need to be about 50p sized so really quite a large corn and secondly they
need to really bake in the summer and that can be quite tricky to do. So the
best advice is to plant it on a south facing slope. Don't plant it through grass
as people might be tempted to because it's a crocus. The corms need to get I
think there's a certain number of hours they have to get above 20 degrees for
them to produce actual flowers. So you need to get a really really sunny
environment, south facing slope. If you're going to put them through grass
please keep that grass short. If not something like an alpine bed or a gravel
garden will really work because the gravel not only absorbs the heat it retains
it at night so that can help add to it. Other than that I think a general high-
potash fertilizer just to encourage it a little bit on I'll work that but I
think there are a couple of commercial attempts at plantations at a renaissance
of them in the south of the UK. I'm not sure how well they're doing actually
because it's been a while since I followed them up but I knew there were some
attempts about five years ago so it'd be interesting to see how they're going.
There are various commercial organizations in the UK producing it. Norfolk,
Suffolk, Sussex, Kent. So the dry places. The dry hot places. Manchester, Hale,
in our dreams. I mean you could try covering it with glass and keeping the
water. It's the winter that you didn't have problems with growing it up here.
You could always grow it in a bulb frame and do it that way so that you know
you've a frame specifically for that bulb and you cover it in the back end. Like
a cull frame? Yeah like a cull frame. Cover it from September through until
March and that would keep you dry. As soon as you see the shoots coming then
your water and you may well be successful but it'll be the winter wet that gets
it up here. I'd also watch out for squirrels because squirrels love to eat
crocus as their favourite food and they will be after them so yeah you have to
be on guard. The sparrows seem quite keen on crocus as well. Yes. In my
experience. So when I've grown it in Croydon trying to start the Renaissance
myself, the one thing I say about it is yes you do need lots, however, because
we don't use very much of it in the UK, if you had a dinner table sized plot
that was in a sunny environment and you wanted to have something that comes up
and looks pretty at the end of the year when nothing else is around, October,
November they usually come out, then you don't need very much of it. That's
enough to make you maybe three pyla and how many are you going to have a year?
That's all you need. You could really impress your dinner guests, that would be
so impressive wouldn't it? Yeah, absolutely. Are you still fancying it, Mary?
Yes, definitely. I think I'll go down the bulb frame. Yes. Good. We like a
challenge on this programme. Let us know how you get on. Okay, let's move
swiftly on to our next question. Kathy Tilby. After a walking holiday in the
Dolomites, I bought Edelweiss plants for me and my travelling companions. As a
reminder, they're all looking decidedly ill now. Will they come back to life? I
can't believe that the cold weather would have seen them off. They're pining for
the mountains. James, what do you think? I think they should come back to life.
Tell me a little bit more about how you're growing them. Two of us planted them
in pots and one of us planted it in the garden, but they're all looking quite
dead. Okay, so Edelweiss plants, as you know, from a very high altitude, they
even have specialist adaptations that involve nanotechnology to survive the
really high UV light conditions they get on the tops of the mountains. The white
fuzz that covers them is actually these tiny filament-like hairs that split and
then split again and then they carry on splitting until they're down to the nano
level where they're the same thickness as the wavelength of UV light. We're
actually, as scientists, investigating that white fuzzy structure to keep solar
panels working for longer because just like the living solar panels and leaves,
technological solar panels eventually wear out from the light itself. That story
is to tell you that they don't mind huge amounts of light, really searing
conditions. What they don't like is lots of wet. They grow in very high altitude
where they have very fast draining soils. They can grow in scree environments
and also in meadowlands, but they really don't like wet conditions. Pots could
be an option. They might be a little warm for them in that environment. The
ideal situation is an alpine house. An alpine house is essentially designed to
allow loads and loads of light in but not get too hot. You'll often see alpine
houses like the one at Kew has this really, really high roof. You think, why has
it got this enormous vaulted roof when the plants are tiny? It's essentially to
allow the heat to rise and escape. Like a cool environment, loads of light and
really, really good drainage. Ashley, have you ever tried them? No, I've never
tried them, but I have worked in the alpine house that James was talking about.
We also have the big sails that come up to protect the alpines in the heat of
the summer and cool the whole area down. They're also funnels which blow in
fresh air, this constant breeze that blows through the whole glass house. That's
really important. I'd say place it somewhere where you can get a good air flow.
You don't want it tucked away in a human corner or somewhere where it's going to
sit and rot away basically. Lots of fresh air and well-drained soil, as James
already said. Do you think it might be winter wet that's making it? It could be.
We've had that. It's very humid. The winter's here. It's not that crisp, clear
air where they come from. Very different climatic conditions, I'd say. You might
be struggling a bit. I think so. You need to have a good look because it's a
beautiful flower. I thought maybe the conservatory, but no air. You need to move
somewhere with a high altitude. Yeah, up to the light district. Thanks, good
question. If you'd like to get in touch with us with your horticultural
questions or queries, drop an email to us at gqt at bbc.co.uk or you'll also
find us on Twitter at bbcgqt. Thanks for that panel. We'll get back to the
questions from our audience here in Hale very soon. For a long time, this
programme has championed the health and wellbeing benefits of gardening and the
calming influence of green spaces. Three years since lockdown changed the way
all of us do things, we continue to receive emails and social media posts about
what gardening means to many of our listeners. A common thread being that an
outdoor oasis, a verdant balcony or even a single indoor potted plant can do
wonders for the soul. Indeed, the healing power of nature was officially
recognised at the end of last year when Scottish doctors were urged to prescribe
gardening to improve mental health, assist with long-term health conditions and
as a remedy for loneliness. GQT producer Dan Cocker met today's panelist and
head gardener Ashley Edwards to see how gardening therapy is used at Horatio's
Garden in North West London. Ashley, it's great to be back here at Horatio's
Garden in Stanmore. There are lots of these gardens around the country. Tell us
the story about Horatio's. It's great to have you back here. Welcome back. Thank
you. It's lovely to see you. Horatio was a young man who was an aspiring doctor.
He volunteered at the Spinal Treatment Centre in Salisbury and he noticed there
was a real lack of outdoor space for patients having long stays in hospital. He
went around, did a survey, found out what people would want from a garden.
Tragically, his life was cut short at 17. But the really amazing legacy that was
left behind was the results of his survey and that was eventually what created
Horatio's Garden. The first garden was built 10 years ago now in Salisbury. From
there, we've expanded. Like I said, we have six gardens now and the aim is to
have one at every spinal injury centre across the UK. Horatio's vision wasn't
just about the pretty flowers and the beautiful landscaping. There's a real
deeper meaning behind these gardens, aren't there? Yeah, the gardens are a
sanctuary. They really are. And when you're spending a long time in hospital,
that can be really difficult, not just for you but for your family members. So
to have that space, we can come outside, enjoy nature, see birds, trees, plants,
see the different changing of seasons, really ground yourself with nature. And
that is so beneficial for our mental health and wellbeing and the patients, they
really benefit from that. The garden is quite unique here because it's cut in
two by the ward. So we have a very gregarious side, as Tom Stewart-Smith, the
designer, likes to call it. So very social. We have lots of our music sessions
there. The other side of the garden, which is the north side, more of a woodland
style garden, a sanctuary, quiet spaces you can tuck yourself away into, the
garden pods, there are smaller versions of the garden rooms so they're more
intimate. You can have a private conversation with a family member. Or you might
just want to go in there and have a cry, have an emotional moment. You know,
people are going through some really tough times here, but it's the garden can
really benefit people and allow them that space to feel their emotions and
process what's happened. By the time the beneficiaries leave Horatio's garden,
do you make sure that they have a very good grounding in horticultural studies?
Good to see of you. I try. I do try. A lot of people are like, oh, I can't
garden, I can kill everything. But actually, if you just show someone the
basics, how to sow a seed, you know, and how to water properly, people are like,
wow, I never knew I could do this. And that's, for me, that's the most enjoyable
part of the job is teaching people new skills during the horticultural therapy
sessions. Oh, it's nice in here, actually, it's nice and warm. We've come into
your greenhouse, and this is where you carry out your horticultural therapy
sessions for the beneficiaries, isn't it? Yeah. So in here in the greenhouse, we
do lots of tabletop gardening. We use adaptive tools and just cater it to
people's needs, so if people are wanting to practice their hand function, so we
can do seed sowing and start off with quite big seeds, peas and beans, and then
work our way down to tomato seeds. And that's another really amazing thing to
see how far people come with the amazing help of the ward, you know, the
occupational therapists and the physio team, they really get amazing care here.
And we can add to that by adding this horticultural element. As gardeners, we
know that there are loads of benefits to greenery and being around nature and
being around plants. Why do you think that is, actually? Why do we get so much
joy from being around nature? That's a really good question. It's a really deep
question. I think personally, it's all about slowing down and really taking
notice and observing and in nature, everything moves at different pace. So we're
forced to slow down really. And seeing everything on that minute scale, you
realise how small you are really in the world. It's very humbling to work in
nature and we're part of nature. You know, that is why it feels so good because
really, we're all part of this big biome. And when we tap into that, that is
when we get the major benefits from working with plants or being in an outdoor
space. Well, we've been joined by one of the patients here, Pia Gupta. Hi, Pia.
Hi. What do you think of this garden space? I think it's so beautiful. Like when
I'm here, I don't feel like I'm at a hospital at all. I really like it. How long
have you been here? So I came to Stanmore around like mid-December and I'm due
to leave on the 1st of March. And I think every day that I've been here, I've
actually been in one of the garden pods or walking around the garden. But I've
really been enjoying the space. So I've been walking around seeing like the
winter flora and fauna and then hopefully I'll get to see some of the spring
bloom as well. Were you at a hospital prior to this? Yes, I was at Royal London
actually in my land, Whitechapel area. I was in a hospital bed for a month. I
didn't get to see the outside at all. The closest thing to the outside was this
small window looking onto the operating theatre. So when I came here, it was
such a big change and I really appreciated it. How has this garden helped you? I
think that like due to the garden, I've been able to spend time with my friends
and family away from like the hospital situation. So it encourages them to come
visit me more. And obviously that's really good because I'm quite a social
person and I get my energy from being around people. So having the garden space
is like an escape from the hospital. So I think it's really helped my mental
health that way. And I think from the physical side, obviously I've been able to
practice my walking, like walking around the garden. So I think it's been really
great overall. Well, I wish you all the best for your recovery, Pia. This place
certainly looks like it's doing a great deal for you and all the other
beneficiaries here. Thanks for talking to me. Thank you. Ashley, you do
horticultural therapy sessions here at Horatio's garden. If you're at home and
you fancy a little bit of your own horticultural therapy, how do people start
doing that? Well, you know, you can, if you're lucky enough to have a garden,
just get out there and get your hands in the soil and be observant, I would say,
especially during winter when it's a bit quieter in a garden. But if you really
look up close to things, you'll start to see shoots emerging and that will give
you real hope. I can see around us now, there's lots of narcissized shoots
popping up through the soil and you think, wow, I can't wait. Can't wait for
spring. And I always remember last year we spoke to Oziki Brewster, who's the
horticultural therapist at RHS Bridge of Water. And she said to me that it's
always darker indoors than outdoors. And that really stuck with me. And I think
especially in the darker months, it can be harder to get yourself out there. But
once you're out, you really do realize the light is so much brighter outside.
It's always going to be. So just just get out there. If you can get to a green
space, take a 15 minute walk, you'll feel so much better for it. Amazing.
Thanks, Ashley. You're welcome. Thank you for visiting. Peter Dan with
beneficiary Peer Gupta and head gardener Ashley Edwards, Horatio's garden in
northwest London. And a look at the well-being powers of plants and nature.
Panel, this sort of notion of gardening being good for you obviously isn't a new
one for seasoned gardeners. But how does it make you feel now that horticulture
is being recognized as more than pretty flowers? Anybody following your
Instagram, James, will know how much it means to you being surrounded by
greenery. Yeah, absolutely. I think one of the problems that plants have is that
they're just too pretty. It's quite easy to dismiss them. If you know, if
microchips or crude oil was nice looking, people might dismiss it. I think
people don't understand quite how practical and quite how immeasurable impacts
that plants really have on our lives. We think about them as kind of a quaint
hobby in many senses. But what's really exciting to me is that the evidence is
now coming out very, very strongly in favor of the real measurable benefits it
can have. Originally when some of the early work was done on plants and well-
being, there were some slight problems with it. So for example, they would look
at health outcomes of people living near parks. And it turns out that people who
live near parks have much better health outcomes. Even things like birth weights
are higher. But guess what? Rich people live near parks. And one of the key
determining features is how much money you make. But now we have intervention
studies. So we're not just looking at a population and trying to find parallels
and trying to find connections between two different things. We're actually
going in and taking a community and putting plants in one and not plants in
another. And in that data, those sort of much more rigorous trials are really
coming out time after time for everything from exercise performance right down
to pain medication. There's lots and lots of really measurable stuff. And I
think it's those trials which are really confirming what us gardeners knew
anyway. But that's going to be a big thing to get people like politicians to sit
up and take notice. Actually, it's worth funding horticulture because you save
money in other areas such as healthcare. It's a societal benefit. It isn't just
about being pretty or having a nice environment. It actually makes economies
work better. It makes society's function better. It reduces crime rates and can
improve health outcomes. Thanks very much. You're listening to Garda's Question
Time on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds with me, Peter Gibbs. Joining me on the panel
today are Christine Wharton, James Wong and Ashley Edwards who are taking
questions from an audience of hails finest horticultural enthusiasts. And which
of you has our next question, please? John Ross from the Hail the Lutman
Society. If offered a plot riddled with couch grass, mare's tail and bin weed,
and you intend to adopt a no dig approach, what is the team's advice as to
what's the best starting actions? Given that scenario, I would move on and get
an allotment somewhere else. Because I know that I'm not going to win. It
sounded like it struck a chord with the audience. But it's true, isn't it,
Ashley? There's so many times people really keen to take on a new allotment.
They're getting to the time of year now, they really want to get going. And they
turn up and they're presented with just this horrible, weedy mat. What do you
do? It's hard not to turn around and just go home, isn't it? But I think you
come in with the idea that, okay, you're never going to get rid of all of this
grass or horse tail. It's just not going to happen, and especially not in one
season. So what I would do is just concentrate on maybe a few square metres to
start with, lay your cardboard thick, and then mulch, like heavy, heavy mulch.
And at least then you'll have some weed free soil to grow in. Raised beds can
also help. So if you build a raised bed and lay cardboard at the bottom of that,
and then put your soil and compost into that, then at least you've got some
growing space. But I think it's going to take you years to get it to the point
where you want it. And so you just have to kind of think, you know, am I going
to invest this time? But it's going to be so worth it. Once you've harvested
your first carrots, you'll forget about all that hard work. And the idea of no
dig being, as you say, that you just keep layering stuff up, you never actually
turn the soil over. Is that right? Yeah, so you start with usually cardboard is
the bottom layer. And then on top of that, you put organic compost. And you keep
layering every year, the compost breaks down, worms like to digest it and take
it down into soil. So it's really good for soil health, which then improves
plant health, you get healthier crops, and you also preserve the soil structure.
So when you're digging over, like the old methods that I was taught actually, in
RHS and Q was double digging. And that was like, not only does it hurt your
back, but you also destroy in the soil structure. So it is worth going down this
route of no dig. You were looking for the lazy option. I didn't think I'd get
it. It seems like it's not possible. Grin and bear it, John. Thanks very much.
Let's take another question. Penny Merrill, Hale Allot and Society. We are told
to look after our soil. Given that many of our members are reluctant to use
animal byproducts and are organic, what else apart from compost, leaf mold and
manure can be used to replenish nutrients? And I suppose there's the aspect here
that a lot of people are vegan these days and are looking for alternatives to
traditional stuff that we would have used as Penny says, you know, like blood
fish and bone, for example. So what are the alternatives, James? One that I'm
really excited about recently is woodchip. There's a whole book on it that came
out a couple of years ago that I've become it's so niche and I've become
fascinated by it. And it's because this is born out by significant amounts of
new trial data. Woodchips are stuff that so many people who are having garden
work done will have that you very often have to pay for it to be taken away. If
it's being generated on your own grounds from healthy plant matter, from not
dead or diseased matter, it has an almost miraculous effect used in the right
amount. You can just lay it on the top surface. You don't have to dig it in.
Digging it in would actually be counterproductive. Just lay it on as a thick
mulch. I've been really surprised by the amount it can change soil in a very
short space of time. The one caveat is you need to make sure it isn't chipped
from a plant that's diseased. But otherwise, it's a really exciting new use for
something that we haven't really considered in the past. Yeah, because, Kristy,
I think a lot of tree surgeons probably struggle to get rid of this stuff, don't
they? They generate so much. They do indeed, yes. However, I would slightly
render what James has just said by... Tempered enthusiasm. Well, I think you've
to consider soil types and where you're starting from and where you've been
going from as well. So I think a lot of these new materials, we do need to just
be a little bit cautious of. And like anything to do with the soil, it's very
complex and James will understand where I'm coming from with this one. But you
can build up lignin in soils and that can cause problems. And when you're
looking at trying to maintain soil health, it's very difficult. And I think in
the future, we are going to have to look at growing things that we can compost
to actually put back into the land. Ashley, what do you tend to go with? Well, I
think something I did recently at my mom's garden actually was get some shears,
just chop all the herbaceous stuff down and leave it on the top. And that was me
being lazy. But also it would be really good to incorporate... That will become
incorporated by worms, insects, and that will eventually end up in the soil and
feed the plants. And that's kind of what would happen in nature. The plant would
eventually feed itself with its own dead leaves. So I think that's something you
could do. Chop up your herbaceous plants, leave them in situ and just let it rot
down. What do you think, Penny? So all those of us that have been using woodchip
for our paths have been doing it all wrong. Stick it on the beds instead. So the
thing with putting woodchip on a path is it rots down really surprisingly
quickly. And everyone thinks the word is a nightmare. Well, it's actually a
great thing because people think you can't use it as a mulch because it takes
ages to rot down. Anyone who's put it on a path knows it rots down really fast.
Okay, thanks for that. Let's move over here, now. Jacqueline O'Hanion, Hale
Allotment Society. As our seasons become less predictable, cool dry springs,
torrential rain and drought in summer, mild wet winters, how will future
gardeners achieve the holy grail of free draining, moisture-retentive soil when
mulch is washed away and grit adds to the risk of dry soil? Good question. Yeah,
and virtually every plant you buy in the garden centre on the label it says free
draining, moisture-retentive soil, doesn't it? Always does. Which always seems a
bit of an oxymoron to me. But anyway, James, how do you do it? There are very
few cure-all questions in life, cure-all answers. But one of the times that does
exist, I think, is in horticulture and that's organic matter because organic
matter will improve any soil, whether you have the problem of trying to get it
to retain water or trying to do the opposite, trying to make it free draining.
Organic matter, amazingly, is the silver bullet that does both of those two
things. I wouldn't say that adding an aggregate like sand or grit in outside of
a pot culture in the ground really makes a difference. When this has been tested
scientifically, you have to have so much grit to really make a difference
outside of pot culture. You're talking about lorry loads. Even with a heavy clay
soil? Yeah, I think it's something ridiculous, like 30%. It's tonnes and tonnes
and tonnes. If you think about it, compare visually a plant pot full of marbles
and a plant pot full of flour and then when they pour water through both. The
water through the marbles just disappears straight away. The water and the flour
sits there and eventually may get there. Now, if you start putting aggregates
into that, you alter it considerably. If you put fine aggregates into a clay,
any pores, any air that was there is going to get blocked up so it sets like
concrete. It does sweep faradums to the actual marbles or the large particles.
What we want is an amalgamation of the two. When we get an amalgamation, and
that is a process or a role that organic matter achieves, it brings the
particles together to form a larger size particle and that gives you moisture
retention and air. That's what you're ideally doing. The big problem, of course,
these days is getting enough organic matter. I don't believe that we do enough
with green manures. If you've got vacant land or areas around the edge of an
allotment, you can always put green manures in. Sice it, compost it, sice it
again, compost it. There are ways of generating organic matter. If you're in the
town situation or if you're in your home garden, it is very difficult to get
substantial amounts. With the reduction of transport of organic matter these
days with farming legislation, it's becoming harder and harder. I think long
term, we've got to look at the generation of organic matter on our own pieces of
land to feed on. If you think back historically, farmers have always added
organic matter. Even caveman let things go down. As things change, and
particularly the World War II when petrol was rushing, we stopped moving manure
around. Then we had a big kick in the pants again when foot and mouth came in.
We can't get hold of manure in the way we can. Fertility is declining. During
the war years, that was addressed by using good old grow more and artificial
fertilizer. We've realised now that after a certain period of time, using
artificial soil nutrition, plateaus, and you maintain it, but it doesn't
actually do much to the soil. That old saying, feed the soil and the soil will
feed the plant is as true today as it always has been. Muck, muck, muck, and
more muck is the answer to your answer question. An example of creating your own
green matter is something like a green manure. You're planting seeds into the
ground. You can look them up in any catalogue. There are lots of different
species specifically selected for that. What they're doing is creating that
organic matter right on your plot and digging it in. The miracle of it is it
works both as a physical sponge like literally trapping and holding air and
water. We now know there's a biological action on top of that. It creates food
for microbes in the soil that are then creating things like gels underground
that are keeping that water and air in place. The one thing it aggregates, I
think there's a University of Washington study that's something like 20%
minimum. If you think about how much soil you have in your garden and you're
going to add 20% of that, I mean, the amount that would cost to buy would just
be ridiculous. It's just not worth it. I hope that's useful, Jacqueline. Yes,
yes, it's very useful. Thank you. Thank you. Let's move along here now. Hello,
Bonnie Hadfield, Gulf Road allotment member. We are in the process of downsizing
our home. Unfortunately, this means smaller and often barren garden space. What
suggestions would the panel make to help us create a private garden oasis for
ourselves and birds? I might add we're in our late 70s, so time's not on our
side for slow maturity. Oh, nonsense. Christine, where would you start? Ye
pessimist. That's almost nearly as bad in my mind if people say, I'm putting the
garden to bed for the winter. We can still keep growing and plants do grow
fairly quick. If you want rapid results, I mean, look at the annuals, look at
bulbs, look at plants that are already grown, so containerized plants at a
reasonable size. It's not going to be cheap, but you can create a fairly instant
garden quickly by doing those things. I mean, the greater the diversity, the
greater the attraction of insects and birds and butterflies, et cetera. Think
about the early part of the season and the back end, because most of us, when we
think of gardening, we think of March to around about October. Now, if you want
diversity and you want insects, life and other things coming in, you need to
provide pollen early on. So remember the bulbs, remember the winter flowers,
remember the autumn bulbs that will take you into, remember the fruits and the
viburnums and the prunices and all of that, the critaguses and all of those
things that will provide food. Ashley, I was going to suggest buying bare root
plants actually and buy, your instinct might be to buy instant mature plants,
which will look good, but there'll actually be more work for you. They'll be
really expensive. But if you buy bare root in the autumn plant, those plants
will soon catch up to anything bigger. So buy smaller rather than bigger and
those plants will soon catch up. Also, you could try planting a native hedge and
you can get those bare rooted and you'll get lots of variety in a very small
area with berries, flowers. So there's something every season and you can even
have autumn colour as well. You'll also attract birds and wildlife and that's
beneficial to the whole garden. You can sit out and enjoy the instant effect of
visitors to your garden. James. There's one thing I would add to the
aforementioned list, all of which I agree with, and that's water. So instantly,
if you're trying to add character to a space, adding water will do that. If you
want to attract wildlife to a space, that's one of the key things they need. It
also, the way it plays on light and the sound it makes instantly adds sort of
character to it. I think it's inbuilt into us to be fascinated by the movement
of water. I'll keep you going for the next 30 years. Well, that's all right.
That will do me. Thanks very much, Bonnie. And who has our final question
please? Paula Pearson, Gulf Road Allotments. Our first allotment harvest was a
bumper crop of big, succulent beetroot. The following year, recipe books at the
ready, in anticipation, we surveyed a row of disappointing marbles. Has any of
the panel experienced a similar boom and bust? If so, with what crop or plant?
Caugettes. Christine? Peas. I normally grow really good peas, but last year,
none. Not a single pea germinated. 400 pea seeds. And not one. I have no idea
why. Call yourself a gardener. Well, the nice thing about gardening is it does
throw wobbles like this and it makes you realise you actually know sweet Fanny
Adams. It gives you in your mind. And sometimes I think that sort of question
leads to an awful lot of thought. And you never really know, but we're looking
at climate, soil types, water, all sorts of things, light levels, varieties. The
more you know, the more you can question and the more you can think about. But I
certainly didn't ever come up with an answer, but I had no peas either. It's
very often weather though, isn't it, James? Yeah, absolutely. One year to
another. Yeah, absolutely. I think specifically in your beetroot example, was
your year where you got really bad beetroot last year? No, it was our first
crop, which was about 10 years ago. But I just remember the contrast between
this fabulous, wonderful year thinking that's it, cracked beetroot, and then the
following year, zero, nothing. Well, if you have a really, really hot, dry
summer, for example, they don't have the water that's needed to swell the actual
roots themselves. And I thought it might be last summer. So last summer would
have been a really bad year for that kind of thing. And it is often really
specific parts of weather. And even in a week window, if you, for example, have
a late frost that knocks out all your early flowering fruit trees, it doesn't
matter what it's like for the rest of the year. It could be incredible. But if
they get killed in that tiny window, particularly with something that is an
early flower, like a kiwi, for example, then you're really, really going to be
in trouble. So it is, you know, you kind of think as humans, we kind of think
back on the year and think it was a nice year, because generally it was like
this. From a plant's perspective, it only matters what happened that one night
sometimes that affects the whole year. Blame it on the weather. I think I did at
the time. Thank you. Thanks a lot. That's it, sadly, for this week's Gardener's
Question Time. Thank you to our audience here. Inhale to our questioners and to
you for tuning in. Next week, producer Dom travels to Brighton for a chit chat
about, well, chitting potatoes with regular panelist Juliet Sargent. But until
then, from me, Peter Gibbs, our esteemed panel, Christine Wharton, James Wong,
and Ashley Edwards, and the GQT production team, it's goodbye and may the
weather be with you. Gardener's Question Time was produced by Bethany Hocken.
The assistant producer is Dolcy Wodcock. It's something else production for BBC
Radio 4. This evening, we're adding another five tracks to our playlist as James
Taylor of the British jazz funk outfit, the James Taylor Quartet brings his C3
Hammond organ to the studio, and Ukrainian-born pianist Dinara Clinton sets
herself up at the grand piano. The musical journey will take us to Cape Verde,
to the Gambia and to the Lebanon, and you'll hear it all at 7.15 this evening or
any time on BBC Sounds. Back to you this afternoon and in 15 minutes, it's Last
Word with Kirsty Lange. On today's programme, Dickie Davis, the sports presenter
best known for anchoring ITV Saturday afternoons in the 70s and 80s. The
aeronautical engineer Ralph Hooper, who designed the revolutionary Harrier Jump
Jet. Raquel Welsh, the Hollywood actress who became a 60s sex symbol after
playing a cavewoman in the film One Million Years BC, and Dorothy Pittman
Hughes, who brought black women into the 70s feminist movement and inspired
Gloria Steinem. They're all coming up after the news at 4. Now on BBC Radio 4,
the young manager of a bowling alley struggles to relate to his older female
employee in today's new short work as read by Keelan McCarthy. Menopause by
Karen Quinn My philosophy is always to be kind to everyone and be a good
listener. And if you feel like someone is ready to dig your grave, make sure to
say nothing at all that gives them access to a shovel. And while I always keep
this in mind with most things in life, for some reason, while I really am a good
guy, I am hated by a good-hearted menopausal woman. I think it's best for me to
start from the beginning. My name's Joe Jr, son of Joe Senior, and the proud
owner, technically the CEO, of Joe's Big Balls, our wee local bowling alley. Two
generations of Joe's have managed this business, and I hope another wee Joe will
come along to keep the tradition going someday. Yes, my little JJJ, Joe Jr Jr.
I'm not thinking about pro creating right now though. I'm in my mid 20s, a Gen
Z, and I don't need that kind of content on my Instagram right now. And let's
face it, managing a bowling alley is not easy, especially when you have a
diverse set of employees. A couple of noteworthy workers were hired during my
father's reign. They're my second generation boomers, people that are, as I like
to call, emerging pensioners. Yes, this particular group can be a handful.
They've no sense of how to make Joe's Big Balls even bigger. They don't
understand what a hashtag is, and they think TikTok is me rudely telling them to
hurry up when they ask about marketing strategies. And if I'm being completely
honest, I know they're ready, but not quite ready to leave work. You know what I
mean? They're driving solidly in the slow lane, spending extra time in the tea
room, discussing legal gardening equipment, the local football clubs and tidy
towns. And then, of course, there's Madge Doyle. And she's a whole new dimension
of stress. She's not slowing down, despite being on the early stages of emerging
pensiondom. No, in fact, she's quite high key, always on the go, anxious and
spending a lot of time in my office discussing her hot flushes and puddle-like
brain. You see, Madge is going through the menopause. And fam, I cannot relate.
It all started when she read a magazine called Holistic Woman. Apparently she
came across an article called Loud and Proud, where the writer was encouraging
menopausal women to speak out about this transitionary period of their lives,
and in particular, let their bewildered bosses know about it, loudly and
proudly. Honestly, it's sort of like menopause positivity on heat. It's the hot
topic on everyone's lips, and because Joe's Big Balls is mostly led by a
powerful bunch of fantastic and, at times, scary women, I'm starting to feel a
little outnumbered. And let me tell you, Madge has been well and truly spilling
the tea, telling everyone about her experiences. Now, don't get me wrong, I'm
all for my staff being extra. The quirkier, the more memorable, the more follows
we get on the socials. However, this is a magnitude of extra I find hard to
handle, mainly because there's absolutely nothing I can do that is not offensive
to my team. For example, one day I said to her, you have a glow about you today,
Madge. Now, seriously, all I meant by that was, you look happy, Madge, you know,
because she was smiling. But no, that's not how she took it. Cue a moment of
stunned silence, Madge walking off into the tea room because, you know,
apparently nobody works anymore, and then she wailed. And I'm not being
dramatic, I mean Madge proper, wailed. Like she was attending the sudden tragic
funeral of a loved one and she was wanting to scare the ghost of the departed
away from this life and on to the next. It was that level of wailing. So,
naturally, I went to see if she was okay. However, I was soon met by a human
shield of angry women. Give her the space she deserves. They say, allow her to
redirect her negative energies. And here I am, ready to open another two lanes
for a party of ten tipsy teenagers with absolutely nobody apart from 70 year old
Louis Parnell with a bad hip willing to work for me. But I couldn't say
anything, could I? Because Madge is an emergent pensioner with a lot of
failings. Failings I can never understand. But damn it, I like Madge. And I know
my dad would chew my ear off if he thought I was disrespecting our big balls
legend. So that's when I started to do some research. And apparently, men, back
in the day, were a bunch of shit. When I started reading about classical
medicine's view of the menopause, I honestly wasn't sure if it had been written
by a person with a brain or if it was some sort of dystopian fiction novel where
women were told to jump off a cliff once they reached 50. So I guess instead of
an emergent pensioner, in previous generations eyes, menopausal women were
emergent corpses. However, I am not one of them. I am woke. I know stuff. Well,
basic stuff. Reading about what happens to a woman during the menopause made me
a bit sick. But I'm mostly woke and I want to make a difference. I want to be a
proper manager. A good one. One that the women who keep our alley number 36 in
the 37 best places to visit in Northern Ireland list respect. I want to be the
best male managerial feminist out there. I want to be an advocate for women who
have naturally malfunctioning organs and let them know that I know that's okay.
That's the kind of manager I want to be. And it all starts with making Madge's
life a little bit better. So, naturally, I thought a good old fashioned HIIT
workout would do the trick. I read that menopausal women feel happier after a
bout of exercise, so I thought I needed to raise the roof a bit. Now, of course,
I was thinking about our Louis and his bad hip too, so I bought a bunch of those
inflatable space hoppers and got everyone to bounce around the alley for about
15 minutes. Initially, I thought this was a good idea, until Madge said that she
felt hot, and I responded with a very enthusiastic, yeah you do, Queen. This
didn't go down well. Because, apparently, those flushes do not make women feel
attractive in any way. Then after that, Louis fell over and had to spend a night
in hospital. He's grand now, but that was a bad day. After that, I bought a
bunch of electric fans and placed them all around the alley. However, the
strength of the fans started to blow over some of the pins, leading to a local
hashtag trending called hashtag Big Balls Tornado that showed endless footage of
the pins blowing over to the chorus of MJ's Earth song. And if that wasn't bad
enough, Madge then made a complaint herself. She said that the noise of the fans
were making her headaches worse, headaches that I never even knew were a thing.
And this led to a bunch of her colleagues telling me that I was not considering
her holistic well-being. I felt like saying nobody was considering my well-being
either. After all, there was no managing menopause for manager's manual ever
handed over when my dad retired. After that, I turned my attention to the
uniform. As a team we needed to glow up. We've been using synthetic fibres for
decades and now I know that those fibres wreak havoc on the well-flushed
menopausal woman. So I opted for a quality green soft cotton and presented the
team with their new kit. Initially, it worked a treat. Everyone was commenting
on the soft fabric and even Madge seemed a bit lighter on her feet. The next day
proved to be a different story though. The new cotton did not wash well, with
everyone showing more of themselves than they probably would have liked. As I
was checking the vibes with the rest of the team, I overheard Madge saying that
she looked like a Granny Smith apple. I was devastated. Weeks of trying to make
Madge happy only resulted in me making her feel like a piece of fruit. I went to
my office. I needed to decompress, have a herbal tea, use headspace and quote
some affirmations in the mirror before I faced the big balls world again. I was
feeling utterly miserable. My dad never struggled with managing people, but so
far I had hospitalised one staff member, gravely insulting another and sent the
rest after me with metaphorical pitchforks. Honestly, I didn't want to return to
work. I knew as soon as I left my office I was a dead man walking. I could
already see the crossed arms, the bitter glares and the biscuit tin snapping
shot in the tea room. To them, I was the enemy. I was not woke. I was no ally to
the woman on my team. To them, I was the male chauvinist melter. Then there was
a knock at the door. At this point I was ready to hide in a cupboard. I mean,
without even answering, I knew who it was. Of course it's Madge. She's been a
frequent visitor ever since she read that call to action article. She was
getting ready to come in here, take a seat, have a complimentary chewy caramel
and list off all the things I had done wrong. And let's face it, it was going to
be a damning catalogue of prat-worthy condemnations. I took a deep breath and
opened the door. Lo and behold, there she was, green and apple-like. Our Madge,
ready for the next round of scoldens. I invite her in and she takes a seat. We
stared at each other for a while. Her, chewing her caramel. Me, chewing my
tongue. Try to think up an excuse to explain my behaviour. Things like a bad
batch of cotton shirts and unexpectedly powerful electric fans. I looked at her.
If this was a game of chess, she was waiting for me to make the first move. So
as my head was spinning with menopause quotes and facts and stupid fitness
recommendations, I decide to blurt out the first thing that comes to mind. I
look at her straight in the eyes and say, Madge, things are changing beyond my
control. There's silence then. She looks at me for a moment, still chewing her
caramel. Then, after taking two decades to eat the thing, she swallows, takes a
breath and says, dear, that makes two of us. And that's when I saw hope. On the
way out of the meeting she grabbed my arm and threw me a wink. I'm over the
moon. Why? Because in that moment I knew I could read books, attend talks and
interview Perry Prime and post-menopausal women and I still wouldn't have a clue
about what was going to happen next. And you know what? That's okay. Madge just
needed me to listen and I just needed her to see me try. I took a bite of a
caramel. Well done, Joe Jr. I said to myself. Keep trying and failing and trying
again because that's how you put the men in menopause. Menopause was written by
Karen Quinn and read by Keelan McCarthy. It was produced in Belfast by Michael
Shannon. It was a BBC Northern Ireland production for Radio 4. On BBC Radio 4.
We are all a unique accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge.
The poet Lem Sisay looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly
unique every time it happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a
room full of graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about
it. Not me! Lem Sisay is the one and only one who is a member of the BBC. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you are listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.