TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 That's in a couple of minutes here on BBC Radio 4. The point of the protocol is
to avoid a border between the North and South of Ireland. The way it does that
is by putting Northern Ireland under some EU laws. EU law will continue to have
some role in Northern Ireland. We won't get a vote on it and the EU's court will
have a role in interpreting it. So we have to wait and see whether potential
opponents are willing to compromise a bit and allow some role for those EU
institutions. The dissident Republican group the New IRA has claimed
responsibility for shooting an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was seriously injured in the attack in
Oma on Wednesday. Six people remain in custody for questioning. There are fears
that more than 100 migrants may have died when their boat sank in rough seas off
southern Italy yesterday. At least 62 people are confirmed to have drowned. It's
believed around 200 were on board the vessel, many of them from Afghanistan,
Pakistan and Somalia. The energy regulator Ofgem has cut by nearly £1,000 the
price that suppliers can charge customers for gas and electricity from April
after wholesale costs fell. But the typical household in England, Wales and
Scotland will still see their bills rise to £3,000 as government help is scaled
back. The RAC says drivers are being charged 20p a litre more for diesel than
petrol, despite there being little difference in the fuel's wholesale prices.
The motoring group is calling on retailers to cut diesel pump prices to fairer
levels, which reflect costs. BBC News In half an hour, Evan Davis will be
investigating the potential of artificial intelligence in the business world.
While AI might be able to help increase efficiency and develop new products,
what are the risks of handing over even more power to machines? The bottom line
is at half past eleven. But now here on Radio 4, don't log off as Alan Dean
continues his online adventures around the world, connecting with strangers via
social media. Today, Alan's meeting people who are discovering a positive
outlook on life, sharing messages of joy and spreading what some of us like to
call good vibes. I grew up in a place called Soweto, which is a township. I'm
speaking from the wilderness of the Yukon Territory. Wherever people are in the
world, there's a chance to discover a common bond between their stories when we
connect online. We watch movies with them, just to enlighten them and make them
feel happy. Sometimes they want to talk about searching for a positive outlook
in life and why they want to share their feelings with others. I felt like I had
to do something so people can also enjoy the same experience that I did. It is
important to feel like you are in a space which you belong to. I'm Alan Dean and
this is Don't Log Off. Let's do it with music and don't forget to smile. In the
icy wilderness of the Yukon Territory in northwest Canada, Gerdie is spreading
messages of joy. He makes Punjabi dance videos in the snow and posts them on
social media. Oh, hey! So this is a workout. It feels like that you're running.
So I'm a little bit out of breath now. How would you describe what you do
visually? How do you like to present yourself? How do you like to look for the
camera? So when I dress up for my videos, I like to dress up bright in bright
colors because the landscape is mostly snowy. Eight months in a year, we receive
snow or winter time and most of the time we have that white blanket on the land.
And I like to use bright colors so that I can create a great contrast with that
landscape. And I wear an orange turban that is bright and it gives a very happy,
good vibe. And I set up my music and then I just dance. I dance for joy, hope
and positivity and to create good vibes in the world. Hello. Hello. Is this
Leisha? Yes, it is. How are you? Leisha means beautiful hope in Zulu. She's 26
years old and lives in Soweto. It's an old abbreviation of South Western
townships and originally created in the 1930s by South Africa's white government
as a black residential development on the outskirts of Johannesburg. Growing in
Soweto for me was fun, especially because we were not born under the apartheid
regime. So we had a lot of freedom. We were kids who used to play a lot. There
was always crime, but the fun part of it, the fun part of growing up in Soweto
is the freedom that we get to have to be children. And yeah, so it was quite a
beautiful experience for me. And who did you grow up with? Tell me a little bit
about your family background. I grew up with my with both of my parents and then
I'm the first child of four. I have three younger siblings, which are my
sisters. And then my mom left when I was I think I was about 14. And since then,
we've been raised by our single dad. Hello. Hello. Hello. How are you? I'm good.
A huoma is in a city in southern Nigeria. Tell me what is around you. I can hear
some sounds behind you. Tell me what exactly is happening around you. I'm in a
store. It is a store that sells phones. I'm not here to get it. I'm here to sell
it. Oh, are you? OK. Have you got another one? I use my mom's one. My mom's
phone. I get back home. Right. So why are you selling your phone? Because I need
money. My mom's sick. She's in the hospital right now. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
That's fine. Shall we speak in half an hour when you're back home? No problem.
That would be so cool. Thank you. And good luck. I hope you get the money you
need for the phone. Sure. Thank you. I was born in a farming family on a farm
with open land, open fields, where there were so much land to run, to play, to
do different things, even to dance Bhangra. Gurdip grew up in Ziar, a village in
the North Indian state of Punjab, where the summer months particularly are
extremely hot. But he fell in love with Canada, even the subarctic climate of
the Yukon Territory, thousands of miles from his former home. Here in the Yukon,
I feel that vastness here. This open landscape, it connects me in such a way
with nature here. And I feel connected to my farms in my village Ziar. It's
amazing, isn't it? You can travel so far and feel that still the connectiveness.
It's the world is a small place. Where you are now, could you tell me a little
bit about where you're actually living? So right now I'm standing outside of my
cabin. I'm totally 100% surrounded by the wilderness. 360 everywhere I see,
there's a beautiful boreal forest, just surrounded by beautiful, amazing snow-
filled trees. They are quiet, they are calm, they are just like a poetry. They
are wonderful. And I love here. What I would love to hear is the sound of the
snow under your feet. Okay. Okay, I am now walking in the snow. I'm not sure how
much you can hear it, but I'm walking on the snow and the snow is making sound
and that crunchy, crunchy sound. As the eldest of four sisters, Leisha Nsoweto
has had to adapt to a life in a family without a mother. It programmed me to be
very overprotective of my sisters. So I'm just that one person who's just very
overprotective. You know, if they need to go somewhere, I'm going to be there
with them. If they need to do something, I'm going to assist them. So it just
really programmed me to be that person. Because I don't want anything to happen
to them in any way. Exactly. And I wonder, growing up in Soweto, what is it like
for a young woman, as far as making sure that you can focus on your studies and
focus on getting a job? It's quite tricky. It's very difficult to break that
circle, because living under such circumstances is very easy. You're susceptible
to using substances or dropping out of school and resorting to crime and all of
that. But the thing is, with me, I had so much belief in myself and wanting to
see a better life for myself that I couldn't give up on myself. I don't know how
to say in English, but it sounds like this. Look. Andrea is giving me his best
impression of the birds which populate the San Andreo district, where he lives
in Barcelona. It's a very quiet area with a lot of old people and a lot of
birds, dogs. And, you know, I don't know if you can hear my neighbour's dog now.
I can. I can. It was very good that you mentioned dog. It was very good timing.
Tell me a little bit about your relationship with the city Barcelona. Is it the
city you were born in? Yeah, I was born and raised in Barcelona. I'm one of the
few people that was born and raised here, honestly. And I'm still living here,
right? So, yeah, I grew up here, went to school here. All my family is from
here. So I think I'm planning to stay long. Ten years ago, Leisha discovered a
community youth theatre near her home in Soweto. Called Nguizi, which means hear
me, it gives students like Leisha a safe space to come together, perform and
build confidence. I've always felt alone for most of my life. And it's good. The
good thing is that my sense of belonging and that togetherness, I found it in
theatre. I found it in that kind of space. But other people find that kind of
sense of belonging in like, you know, the wrong group of friends and bad peer
pressure and, you know, being misled and all of that. Because it is important to
feel like you are in a space that which you belong to. I feel like that saves
you from a lot of things. What did some of your friends, people you know, people
who live near you, your neighbours. What did they think of what you were doing?
The idea of being a performer. Could they believe that it's possible? They did
not believe it's possible at all. You know, sometimes when people ask you what
did you want to do when you grow up, what you want to be when you grow up and
you tell them you want to be an actress, you want to be a performer. It's like
it's especially from the background that we come from, you know, the communities
that we come from. That is something that it feels like it's not something that
is acquirable by an average person. And also your father. Do you think he
believed that it was possible for you that you would become a performer on
stage? This was something serious. This was something that could be a career.
Honestly, I don't think he thought it was going to be possible. It's either that
or he was afraid of, you know, the stigmas that are attached to being an artist,
because he also had his own experience of being an artist. He was a musician
also, and he got a lot of exploitation. That was way, way before my time. I was
not even born at that time. I'm not really clear of his experiences, but he was
not really supportive of it. In Barcelona, Adria has moved on from his studies
and into full-time employment in telephone marketing with the promise of a
lucrative pay packet. I was called calling, which means that I go to the office.
I have a list of people to call. I have a script and I have to call them and
just follow the script. So the more I call, the more sales I get, the more money
I get at the end of the month. And the more I was supposed to be more happy, I
would say. What were you trying to convince those people that they should buy? I
was calling to restaurant owners to sell them advertisement packages. And then I
would go home and then go to sleep. And then the next day again and the next day
again. It was like that for a few years. It's me. Hey, how are you? I'm fine.
I'm at home. Yeah, you're at home. Okay, well, it's good to catch up with you.
I'm back on the line with Ayuoma in Awari, Nigeria. Did you have much luck
selling your phone? No, not really. I'm sorry. What happened? The price, the
phone has some issues. We are pricing it for a lower amount. Yeah, you were
saying that you were hoping that the money would go towards some medical bills
for your mother. What does she need? What kind of things are you trying to get
for her? She has a heart attack, but they asked me to pay bills for her. She's
on a life-supporting device. So I'm to pay for it and then oxygen. I'm to pay a
hundred thousand there for three hours. So she needs to be there for one week.
I'm just frustrated right now. And how is your mother today? I've not actually
gone to see her. I'm still looking for a means to go get money. I can't go there
because actually seeing her face makes me cry. A hundred thousand naira is about
£175. That's a small fortune for Ayuoma to raise to be able to keep his mother
on life support for the week. Meanwhile, for Adria, it was clear that things
were not really working out for him at the office. There was one day, one very
particular day that I was in a meeting room with my team and my boss. And my
boss said something that was not nice to me. I don't remember what was that, but
it was the last thing I wanted to hear that day. So without me being angry or
something, I just decided to quit. We were in the meeting room. I closed my
laptop, I closed my notebook and I said, I'm going guys. So I left the office
and then I had this feeling inside of my chest, this anxiety feeling that it
feels like you have a tennis ball inside your chest. So I decided to go to
Barcelona mountains. I was with my headphones on. I was listening to Linkin
Park. I don't know if you know that group. I was listening to Linkin Park songs
and just walking. I walked at least for two or three hours until I made the top
of the mountain. It was a very, very dark day. It was foggy. The day before it
was raining and I decided to take off my headphones. And it was just me, the
darkness of the night, because it was already nighttime. It was the skyline and
just my thoughts. And suddenly, kind of out of nowhere, an old man with a long
beard came, talked to me and said, you know, Adria, it's not like you are not
happy with life. You are not happy with the life you're living now. It was a
very, very, very nice talk. I tried to look for the man again, but I never could
find him again. His name was Ramon. If he's listening to me, then he knows I'm
looking for him. And just to say thank you. So it was on that moment that I
realized how important it is that people have somebody to talk to without being
afraid of being judged. Ikeoma works part-time as a psychiatric nurse. On his
ward, most of the patients are living with severe mental illnesses. At that
moment, they are not actually aware of what they are doing. So at times we help
them, we feed them, help them take their bath, we help them wear their clothes.
We watch movies with them, just to enlighten them and make them feel happy. And
that is the important thing. Give them some joy in their lives. And it sounds
like that's something that is part of you, that you can give that joy to people.
Have you always wanted to do that kind of work? Is that something that is
important for you to do this kind of work? Yeah, of course. Since I've been in
primary school, I felt like I really needed to do something that would help me
have a close contact with people. Something that I would be in a position where
I would be able to help people. And I promised myself that when I make it, when
I have enough money, definitely I'm going to have a hospital here in Nigeria
where I will treat the elderly ones for free. That's wonderful. That would be
such a wonderful thing to do. And what a great ambition to have. While Leisha
began to devote more and more of her time to acting, at home she still needed to
be around for her family. I really wanted to help my dad out because he's a
single dad and he's stressing over making sure that we don't go to bed on an
empty stomach. We have all the needs that we need for school and we have
everything that we need. So under that circumstance, I was really desperate to
be able to assist him. Did he see you perform when you started being involved in
community and performances? I wonder what he felt, what he thought of you on
stage and was he proud of you? This is a story that I love telling because ever
since I started performing, my dad had never seen me perform. But on 2017, I was
performing at Soweto Theatre and I told my dad about it and told him I'm
performing at Soweto Theatre on this day, at this time. I did not really think
he was going to come, you know, because I know he's really busy. He's always
trying to make sure he finds the next job to make sure that we eat. So he
doesn't really have time to sit down and relax and all that. So on the day of
the performance, I went to the theatre, I performed. After my performance, I get
home and my sister's so excited. She's imitating everything that I was doing on
stage. And she's telling me she was sitting there with my dad and they watched
me perform. And that was the first time my dad came to see me perform on stage.
As he was growing up in his village in Punjab, Gurdeep was also drawn to
performance. Since my childhood, I loved dancing Bhangra. Bhangra came from our
heritage. It's a Punjabi folk dance. And whenever I wanted to dance, whether it
was at a college or university stage or with the family or friends, I always
danced. But when I moved to the Yukon, I became more passionate about sharing
this dance because no one in the Yukon knew about Bhangra dance or this culture.
So I will continue to dance. I will continue to send these messages of cross-
cultural togetherness through dancing Bhangra. Oh, what a lovely expression.
Cross-cultural togetherness. Beautiful. So how old are you now, Gurdeep? How old
I am? I'm 43 at this time. You sound so youthful. I would never have guessed.
You're not the first person to say that to me. Well, of course, all the dancing
is going to keep you fit and healthy and also happy. And I think happiness is
something that I'm sure everyone would agree and keeps you young in a way. I
think I think it's so important. I agree with that. Like age is all about
feeling good. As long as you are feeling good, you are feeling happy, you are
feeling excited about things around you. You don't lose that inner child in
yourself. You are young forever. The conversation Adria had with Ramon, the old
man with the beard he'd met on the mountains above Barcelona, inspired him to
take some positive action. I felt the power of how important it is to talk with
somebody that you will never, ever see again. You know, it's a person that is
just there for you. And whatever you say, he doesn't care that much. So you can
feel free to say whatever you feel like and he won't judge you. I felt like I
had to give this back to society and I had to do something so people can also
enjoy the same experience that I did. What kind of things were on your mind as
you were thinking about that conversation and perhaps what you will do next?
Well, it was everything quite spontaneous. Like I said, you know what, I'm going
to the city centre this weekend. I will bring two chairs and I will just write
down on the floor three conversations. And it was interesting to see people's
reactions in general. They were saying, some of them, they were thinking, Adria,
you're definitely mad. You know, I mean, you lost your mind. But I am so happy
that I took that decision. It's a decision which has led Adria to the bustling
Cathedral Square in central Barcelona, where passers-by take up his offer of a
free conversation. The first person, it's a funny thing, she was a Japanese girl
who couldn't speak either Spanish or either English. Of course, not Catalan
either. So the first conversation lasted around 12 seconds, I would say. But
then the first conversation that we could communicate well, it was from a woman,
with a woman, also like 70 years old from Yugoslavia. Well, Yugoslavia from back
when it existed, right? Yeah, former Yugoslavia. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And she
shared a very interesting story about how her family lost all their money when
the war happened. And how from being very, very rich, how was she to be very
poor the next day? I remember she said, on Tuesday, I was very rich and on
Wednesday, I was very poor. And in some senses, that could have been you. You
had a good job, you were doing very well. Yeah. And now you were, your next part
of your life, you decided that you were going to offer your services as this
listener. I would say when I was sharing that with my family and friends, there
was different kind of reactions. Yeah. You know, as everything in life, you can
listen many opinions, but at the end of the day, you need to do what your heart
says. So what it's encouraging me to keep doing that is to see people's faces
when they are talking to a stranger. And to see how many people, they ask you
for a hug after the conversation or they cry or they look into your eyes. And
you see how they are getting emotional and they say, thank you very much.
Because it's been a long time I don't have a good conversation with somebody.
Ikewoma feels the same about the significance of communicating with his
patients. He's 23 now and studying at university, but finding it hard to make
ends meet through his part-time job as a psychiatric nurse. Actually, I think it
should be equivalent to five dollars for a month. Five dollars for a month. Five
dollars for one month's work? Yeah. That doesn't sound like very much money at
all. No, but I keep pushing and doing my best. Like being at work makes me
happy. Happiness makes me not feel my pain. But I only get happy when I go to
work. Once I'm out of the workplace, my mood changes. And I'm still a student,
so definitely I can't go to work every day. I go to work twice. I'm just happy.
That is the term, happiness. Seeing them, most of them are seeing me. They run
to me. One of them calls me Nurse F. Nurse F. And tell me what Nurse F stands
for. Nurse Focus. She can't pronounce focus, so she shortlisted it to be Nurse
F. I love it. Nurse Focus. These days, Leisha works with an organisation that
helps fund emerging filmmakers. She's also still active with Nguize Community
Theatre in Soweto, and goes to auditions, hoping for the next role to push
forward her acting career. I really hope to succeed in my field. I really hope
to succeed. I really want to make a film of my own. I'd also like to see myself
still doing more theatre performances. And I'm also looking at considering going
back to school to either study media law or psychology. It's a positive story.
It's a story that says, look at what I can do if I'm only given the chance. It
sounds like in Nguize, the community theatre has been so important for you on
this journey. I'm saying like, I really wish that all of our young people could
find a space like that, that is filled with positivity, because then you are not
on the wrong track. You know, if you find a space that brings so much positivity
in your life, I feel like that's the right place to be in. And in that way, you
will be able to thrive and make a difference in your life. We wish that everyone
will always have somebody to talk to and have a conversation with. Adria's way
of spreading good vibes has inspired a whole movement, with volunteers now
offering a free conversation in different countries around the world. All you
need is two chairs, a written sign and a listening, non-judgmental ear. I was
speaking with somebody from Hong Kong who wants to start doing the project
there. And yesterday I was talking with our volunteers from Mexico. So we really
are a group of people now that joined the movement. More and more people across
the globe are logging on to watch Gerdiep dance and spread his good vibes in
that deep, crunchy snow of the Yukon Territory. I am going to play the music
very soon. I'm just setting up my sound system. Thank you, Alan. Thank you for
connecting from such a faraway place here in northern Canada, in this winter
wonderland. And I'm sending good vibrations and thoughts of joy, hope, healing
and positivity. I love it. Thank you. Happy now with the music. And a message
just in from Aikuoma in Nigeria. There's great news about his mother. Well, my
mum is getting better. She just finished a surgery session last week, last week
Thursday. But she's fine now. Thank you. Alan Deem was presenting Don't Log Off.
The producer was Connor Garrett. That was the last in the current series, but
you can find all the episodes from this and previous series on BBC Sounds.
People without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! He'll like
an aw. Now on Radio 4, it's The Bottom Line, which this week is asking how
businesses should harness the growing power of artificial intelligence. Here's
Evan Davis. Or is it? Welcome to The Bottom Line, the programme where we explore
the biggest jabber and challenges facing businesses today. What the heck? Who is
that? In this episode, we'll be discussing the exciting and rapidly evolving
field of artificial intelligence, or AI, and its jabber potential to transform
the business landscape. All right, well, I'm definitely going to intervene here
because that was not me, nor indeed did I write those words. But I have with me
Bottom Line producer Simon, who will tell us what's going on here. So, Evan,
this is an episode about AI, obviously, so I thought I'd take the unenviable
challenge of creating an AI Evan. So what I did was use a chat bot called
ChatGPT that we're going to hear about in the episode to write part of the
introduction to the show, and then another piece of software to essentially
mimic your voice. I think if listeners were listening carefully, they will have
noticed the word jabber. It's not a word that often comes up. Why did AI refer
to jabber? Yes, jabber. So the piece of software I used to mimic your voice was
a free edition, which only came with a certain number of words to get the full
gamut of the English language you had to pay. And so, yeah, there is the
occasional jabber. It puts jabber in as a placeholder. Well, look, let's hear a
bit more of what it thinks this programme's about. As companies across
industries increasingly invest in AI technologies to streamline operations,
personalise customer experiences and gain a competitive edge, the opportunities
for innovation and jabber are seemingly endless. It's not entirely wrong. That
last jabber was meant to be growth. Obviously, work in progress because there
are many well publicised defects emerging. But it is undeniable that there have
been some pretty striking advances in AI. And as this is a technology, perhaps
like electricity or computing, that has as many different applications as there
are different businesses. We'll look today at what it means for companies, not
just those in tech, but companies beyond carmakers to car washes. And I'm joined
in the studio by three guests to talk us through it. And first up is Priya
Lakhani, founder of Century Tech. It is a teaching and learning platform. And
Priya, this is a company that is using AI. Tell us what Century Tech does. So at
Century, we've built a platform where imagine you're a learner anywhere in the
world, any subject, any language. And you have those digital courses, digital
content on our platform. We track the mouse movement of every student. We use AI
to understand how they're learning. So we've blended AI with neuroscientific
theory. So, Evan, when does something go from your short term to long term
memory? When does the system need to remind you of something? Are you struggling
in kinetic energy and physics actually because you can't solve equations in
math? And then the system will predict how you're going to behave before you
behave. And then provide you with that little nugget of content to solve gaps in
knowledge to stretch you further. And it's in use with over a million students.
So it's a teaching aid. Is it just saving the teacher's labor? Yeah. Because you
wouldn't have enough teachers to personalize for everybody? So it's solving a
key problem in the delivery of teaching and learning. And that is that we don't
have enough teachers. So, yes, I think if you had a one to one teacher or maybe
a two to one, that's the sort of experience that you would be receiving. But
when we have class sizes of 25 to 35 children and that's only getting bigger, we
need to use technology to try and augment the teaching and learning experience.
So you're the student you can log in and it will provide you with
recommendations. It will fill in those gaps. But because it uses big data, it
analyzes data and provides the teacher, this really powerful person in the
classroom, with all of the insights. So that's a very, very difficult task for
any human to do. It's not just figure out people are struggling in my class, but
why are they struggling? And an AI can do that with precision in less than a
second. I haven't even heard of this product until we got you on the program.
You say a million people are using it worldwide. Yeah, over. And are they paying
for using it? Is it for business? Yes, absolutely. It is. I mean, we do provide
it. It's a social enterprise at heart. So there's a school in Malindi, which is
an orphanage in Kenya that's using it. Obviously, that's probate in Malawi.
We've launched it in Malawi with the Alan Turing Trust. But predominantly, it's
used across British schools and international baccalaureate schools. All right.
Well, there's one application in teaching. My next guest is Scott Petty, who's
chief technology officer at Vodafone. Scott, are you using AI at Vodafone? Yeah,
we certainly are. I think most importantly, actually inside the business,
looking at how we drive productivity. We have masses of anonymized data inside
our network, and we can use that data to better plan our changes in the network,
to make sure that we can cope with outside adjustments. A great example of that
would be during a train strike. The flows of people around London changed in
those periods, and we need to make sure we've adjusted our capacity in the
network. We can take lots of data sources and make predictions about what's
going to happen in our network today and adjust the network parameters to cope
with that. We started by focusing on creating what we call a data ocean, taking
all of that data and putting it into one place, bringing in data sources from
lots of different places, and then building machine learning and AI models that
sit on top of that to help us with our predictions. Really simple things,
predicting when equipment's going to fail, before it fails, so that we can send
a maintenance engineer to replace that equipment to avoid a failure. Do you
employ your own programmers to produce the software that analyzes the data in an
intelligent way? We do. Or do you just buy that off the shelf? No, we've had a
big focus on building our own software engineering capability. Across our
Vodafone footprint, we have 11,000 software engineers today, and we plan to add
a few more thousand over the next couple of years. We really see our ability to
understand our data and build those models with our own data scientists as
probably a competitive advantage. See, I think I have, as in fact a customer of
your company, I think I have encountered AI when trying to get custom service
being given access to a chatbot thing in the corner of my laptop screen. That is
AI, isn't it? It is, yeah. Like lots of companies, we use a chatbot. It's called
Tobii. We're really upfront about it being a chatbot and that you're using it.
We use it to help us with customer service, particularly what we call the low
end of the pyramid, the tasks that people ask us about every day. That allows
our contact center agents to deal with more complex tasks. It also plays a role
in our sales journey, so predicting the right promotion to give you as a
customer when you're interacting with us. Ah, okay. So it's got a sales brain as
well as just a customer service. It can, yes. Okay, well, look, my third guest
is Colin Murdoch, Chief Business Officer at one of the world's biggest AI
developers, DeepMind. Colin, we should say DeepMind, a British-originated
company. That's right. And then bought and now in Alphabet, which is the bigger
parent of Google. So you're part of the Google empire. That's exactly right,
Evan. And actually my job at DeepMind is to take AI out of the lab and put it to
good use in the world. I sometimes joke it's a bit like running a dating
service. So let me give you a concrete example. Yeah, let's have some examples
because I want this whole program to be about actual applications. So data
centers. I think when the amount of compute that is being put into data centers
these days is quite mind-blowing. And guess what? If you just leave computers to
their own device, they get very, very hot. For that reason, data center owners
have developed really complicated systems to try and keep data centers cool. We
were able to take an AI system and plug it into one of these data centers and
reduce the energy required to keep them cool by 40%, which I think is completely
mind-blowing. A 40% reduction. A 40% reduction. How does DeepMind work? So do
you basically sell your ideas to the parent company, to Alphabet, and then they
take them? I mean, how do you actually work as a business unit? So we operate
through this matching process. So we develop the AI solutions and breakthroughs,
and then my team is responsible for taking those ideas and scouring Google and
Alphabet for various problems that we can solve with this technology. And then
we work with the teams at Google to incubate those ideas. And if it works out,
it doesn't work every time, then we go ahead and launch that. What has failed?
Give us one that hasn't worked. The first version that we did of a battery-
saving solution. So one of the biggest requests for Android, which is an
operating system or phones used by billions of people around the world, is
improved battery life. We were trying to predict, based on users' past usage,
which apps they might use next and which they won't. Through that, we can then
use that information to help optimize the Android's battery systems so that we
can extend the battery life. The first time we tried to do that, it didn't work
out, but we came back with an alternative technique, and in the end, it worked
out. And it's actually brilliant. It's rolled out all around the world now and
saving lots of people, hopefully, anxiety about their batteries running out. OK.
Look, we've got where you're all coming from. And Priya, we should say you're
also on the AI Council, which is what? So the UK government's AI Council is a
body working with the Office of AI in UK government to advise on the national AI
strategy and the rollout of the roadmap for the UK. So we've got the broad
picture. Someone, tell me what has happened recently. It feels like chat GPT is
why there is so much sudden conversation about AI. What has actually just
happened? I can have a go at that, Evan. Well, I think what's surprising,
actually, is that the technology that underlines chat GPT has actually been
around for a number of years. What's happened in the last few months and years
is that these systems have been really scaled up. And by that, I mean trained on
very large amounts of data and examples. And I think that's done two things. The
first is these new systems can work on tasks they've not been trained on before.
The second thing, which I think is possibly more important, is why you've maybe
encountered it, is that they've been trained on what we call natural language.
So the way you and I would normally converse, they've been trained on that. So
they can interact with you in a natural language way, which makes them very
accessible. And it can do incredible things out of the box, like summarize a
document for you or draft an email for you or write some marketing copy. I think
we're really just beginning to explore what's possible. It can do a lot more
than that, though, right? And I think the reason why it's exploded is they
released it. What OpenAI did was they released this and they made it available
to the masses. People are trying it out. They're seeing how it works using
natural language. I mean, I've been talking about AI for over a decade, Evan,
and thinking, you know, people aren't listening as to how this is going to
affect huge sectors and create disruption and transformation. And then one
morning, ChatGPT is released and there's all sorts of use cases. People are
using it to create games. They're saying to ChatGPT, are you familiar with a
particular game and the strategy involved in that game? Can you now create a
different game? They're using it for risk management, which is extraordinary.
You know, can you outline the risks if I were in X business at Y time? And then
it's producing these risk management tables for them. There's a bit of caution
because some of what it does, it makes up. We'll come to that. Brush over the
facts and top them off. Yeah, it does. It told, I think, one of our maths
teachers, the Battle of Hastings was not won by William the Conqueror, and he
was really upset. It made up quotes on Othello, and then it actually makes up
its own sources to the quotes, which means that it's actually quite difficult to
detect by anti-plagiarism software, which is, I think, what most parent
listeners here are sitting there threatening, thinking, is my child using this
to do their homework? But actually, it's pretty extraordinary on the AI journey.
Scott, do you use it at Vodafone? Did you look at it and think, this is
exciting? Yeah, we do. ChatGPT is interesting. We're using it in software
engineering to predict what code a software engineer is writing. It will present
the next function or the next best information to help them be more productive
in the way they write software code. So traditionally, they would have gone and
searched on the internet. They would have looked up a textbook for a particular
function. Now, Codebase can do that for them as part of that process. We're also
using it as a summarization engine because you can take the hundreds of
thousands of chatbot interactions that we have, and it will summarize all of
those hundreds of thousands of interactions and then give you recommendations.
Now, for humans to do that, that's months and months of work going through and
analyzing that information. I think at this point, we should just talk about,
and Colin, sorry to sort of dump this on you, but the Google versus Microsoft
battle here because Microsoft is in bed with OpenAI, and they're the people
behind ChatGPT, and they are putting it into their search engine. It suddenly
seemed like, my goodness, this is the first real threat to Google's domination
of search for decades. Just give us the inside story then. I think it's
important to note that the innovation that underlies these technologies actually
originated at Google and DeepMind. That T for transformer came from researchers
in Google in 2017. And it had BARD, which was its equivalent of ChatGPT for
search, and was going to be built into the Google search engine. And then BARD
made a mistake, quite a basic mistake, about what the James Webb telescope had
discovered. And Alphabet SharePrice really reacted. Subsequent, there have been
so many mistakes discovered in ChatGPT. I'm not sure the playing field is not
very level on all of that. One of the reasons I think at DeepMind we're very
careful about this and we don't just roll it out to the world and make it
accessible just like that is because we believe it's really important to be bold
but also responsible with this technology. There are these inaccuracies that can
arise in them. And one way you can help with that is through using human
evaluators to work with these models to give them feedback. AI is really too big
and too important to move fast and break things, and that's very important to
the way we operate. Okay, and we'll come on to some of those things. But look,
firstly, just some vocabulary that people might need to know. There's AI,
there's generative AI. Is that what ChatGPT is? What's the generative?
Generative is creating text, media, images using those language models. Gotcha.
And that's not to be confused with artificial general intelligence, which is
what? ChatGPT doesn't understand the concepts it's talking about. It has a large
language source that it's leveraged, and it can accurately predict, in most
cases, what you thought was going to come next, and that's why it feels human-
like. It doesn't actually understand what it's saying to you. It doesn't
understand the words. It understands how one word sits in a sentence with
another set of words, but does it understand the word? So artificial general
intelligence is something that would actually understand what it's doing in much
deeper ways. And artificial general intelligence, as we define it, a deep mind
is a system that can perform well across a whole range of different tasks at the
same level as a human being, and we're really just at the very early stages of
that. Okay, just answer me this. A business tool that has emerged in the last –
well, emerged in the 1980s with a company called Lotus is the spreadsheet,
right? And for listeners who don't know spreadsheets, it's really just a
ginormous blank table that you can put numbers in, and then you can manipulate
those numbers and add columns together and turn them around, and it's a
ubiquitous business tool. You can put your cash flow and accounts in there. You
can trace the numbers of people watching your film. You can look at whether a
solar panel is worth installing. You can create anything you want. Is AI a
business tool like that? Is it as big as the spreadsheet? So in a spreadsheet,
the human is inputting all of those numbers. The human is then having to decide
the relation potentially between one column or one row and another cell
somewhere else in the spreadsheet and then creating maybe visualisations of the
correlations between one and the other. Now imagine all of those numbers filling
up in a spreadsheet, but you're actually using unstructured data. So when a
human inputs those numbers, you've got that bias, haven't you, because you're
thinking of all of the different data fields that might relate to one another.
With an AI, you're using big data. You're using data that potentially you have
no idea whether one column would relate to a different column or a different
row. And you can then use algorithms and you can train models upon all of that
unstructured data to then come up with predictions and analyses that would, as
Scott was saying earlier, take months if not years for a human to come up with.
So it's like a spreadsheet on steroids. It's a super-powered spreadsheet. The
best way to think about it, a spreadsheet can have hundreds of thousands of data
points and you can use it to help you analyse them. An AI can have bazillions of
data points from many, many different sources and make much better predictions
in the areas that can help you in your business. Well, look, OK, quiz time now.
So I'm going to name some businesses and I want you to give me some ideas as to
how AI might be useful. I run a car dealership. I'm listening to these three
people who definitely drank the Kool-Aid and get it. Give me the kind of things
I should be asking myself as to how I might be thinking about this new suite of
stuff that's rolling in. First of all, you have to work out where is my data and
how am I going to get that data in a place to help make those predictions? And
that's the biggest problem for all companies to solve, is how do I get it out of
my financial management system, my spreadsheet, all of those things? How do I
get into a place that these models can apply to sit on top of that? And what
external data sources could I have that could help me? So if I'm a car dealer,
how do I connect into the manufacturer of those cars to get their data about the
supply chain, the features of the car? I need all of those data sources to be
able to apply whatever AI or chatbot models I think about on top of that. So two
of your biggest issues as a car dealer, right, is that you have to ensure that
you've got the right cars at the right time. So you could use artificial
intelligence to start tracking who's coming in, what's the demographic of those
customers, what's their income levels, how much have they purchased in the past?
And then you can start to use artificial intelligence far better than a human
would be able to to predict which cars do I need at what point in the year. The
second thing is, let's say you're a really large car dealer, right, you then
have connections to your entire supply chain, and we obviously know with cars in
the last few years the issues they've had with supply chain. Now, if you had
historical data on the supply chain, and let's say there is a pandemic and there
is a regional shutdown, you'd be able to predict in advance the disruption to
your business and be able to then create processes in your business to mitigate
the impact of that disruption. I'm a car dealer. I'm not a tech person, big data
handler type person. Is someone going to produce a piece of car dealer software
that all car dealers will buy? Is there going to be a piece of generic software
where you kind of tailor it to your business needs? How do you see this
evolving? Because clearly the car dealers are not going to personally hire
programmers to kind of get into big data analysis. I think we're going to see a
couple of things, Evan. The first is I think AI will get integrated into the
tools that car dealers already use. And going back to our discussion earlier
around generative AI, what's one of the amazing things around that is it's very
easy for anyone to just pick up and use. I think as the technology evolves, it
may also be able to do really interesting things like send an image to the
customer about how the car might look with their minutes so they can begin to
experience the car they would like to buy before they've arrived at your
showroom. The other thing that's going to happen is large providers of AI
systems will make their AI available through cloud services, which will allow
other businesses with expertise in the car dealership industry to build AI
systems that are relevant and useful to you as a car dealer. Should a window
cleaner be thinking about this? Is that something which is going to be useful?
Do you want a scalable window cleaning company is the question that I would ask
you. I mean, you're managing your own business. You may well be using AI right
now. Say, for example, if you're using accounting software to help you do your
bookkeeping, to invoice, marketing software in the local town, depends if you're
using technology for that, then you might have the sole trader who's not
interested in looking at a screen because they've got enough panes of glass in
front of them every single day. Well, we've talked about some specific
applications, very helpful to hear about actual examples. Tell me, what are we
going to use AI for and humans for? Clearly, humans are going to have a place in
all of this for the foreseeable. I mean, do you think about that, Scott? What is
the AI doing and what's the natural intelligence doing? We do. What AI is really
good at, if it has the data sets and the models, is prediction. In our case,
changes in traffic patterns, failure of equipment, the question that someone's
going to ask us on our chatbot, you have to balance that with how accurate is
the answer that it's giving? Are you sure of the traceability of the data
sources that it's coming from? Are you sure that it's not biased in the way that
it's creating those answers? Are humans curating and deciding whether that's a
good answer to give to humans or not? Those are things you need to think about
on the ethical side. Presumably, Toby, it gets cleverer because it evolves as it
goes. It does. We keep training it and we keep focusing on how do we improve
those journeys. Some are just too complex. The technology is not good enough
today to solve those, but it solves a huge percentage of the things that
customers want to interact with. And that's something we measure every single
day. And it's in the high 70s to low 80%. On the AI-generated chatbot, because
most customers' problems are fairly regular problems that other customers have
gone through as well. Yeah, and they're asking things about their account that
are really easy for the chatbot to answer. Evan, in the education sector, this
is the key question, right? What are we actually educating young people for in
the future? And so it's really important to differentiate the HI, the human
intelligence, and the AI. What's really, really shocking is the UK comes top. We
won the gold prize for the country where memorisation strategies is the key to
passing any assessment. Now, what we all know from... I mean, just learning
stuff. Recall and regurgitation, rote learning. In exams. In exams. And so the
problem with that, of course, is that we've all seen with chat GPT, well, it can
do that pretty well, and it's only getting better. Every second anyone's on that
system, it's being trained further. So in education, we need to separate that HI
and AI. And so there's been so many reports over the past couple of decades,
whether it's the World Economic Forum, whether it's OECD, saying it's about all
of those skills to do with collaboration, leadership, kind of all the skills
that we actually learn often in sport, drama, music, all of those subjects that
actually have become less important in the English curriculum. And I think what
we do need to do is have a dramatic shift from our current education system,
where it's currently focused, to one that can augment AI to superpower the human
intelligence. You don't want to overinvest in getting people to do calculations
mentally if there's calculators ubiquitous. Yeah, exactly. It's how to use the
technology, how to apply it. You do want people to understand the calculations
they're doing on the calculator, not necessarily to be as fast as the
calculator. And we still need our researchers. We still need our scientists. We
need our innovators. So it is about having a breadth of curriculum that can
teach us all of these different types of knowledge and skills together. Another
example is in drug discovery. It's impossible for the human to imagine all the
different molecules that could be important to solve a disease. There are more
molecules than there are atoms in the universe, way, way, way more. So it would
take a human way too long to explore that space on their own. But with an AI
tool to assist them, they're able to produce a drug more quickly that we hope
will be more effective to treat disease. As Colin was saying, actually, one of
the most phenomenal advances of artificial intelligence is to be that teammate.
So with diagnostics and screening in health tech, which we haven't talked too
much about, it can be absolutely phenomenal where you don't have enough staff.
So think about radiographers. How many radiographers do we need? This is
brilliant. This is a brilliant application. Absolutely. So I do know that
DeepMind have been working in this area, obviously. And then we have amazing
companies like Chiron that have Mia, which can buddy up with a radiographer who
might look at, for example, breast cancer screening. I've actually got a good
friend who's a radiographer called Mike, and I've had this discussion with him.
I remember having the discussion a few years ago, and he was sure that actually
it wasn't going to change the way he worked. But it has actually, because the
system he's now used is being trained on millions and millions of different
images. It's like having an expert radiographer sit by you. And so now what
happens is the AI system can surface examples to Mike and his friends, and they
can then much more quickly identify what might be wrong and what might not be
wrong. I suppose it does take you to a world where the humans do the kind of the
interesting stuff and the machines do the more routine. Well, one of the, this
is a fascinating example for me, as we think about a cleaner and greener energy
future, there are people trying to build nuclear fusion reactors for many years.
It's like building a mini star on this planet so we can generate cleaner and
greener energy. It's very, very difficult to control that mini star. It's very
unstable. If it touches the sides of the reactor, it breaks down immediately.
And there are very clever people that have spent a lot of time, humans this is,
human intelligence, trying to develop algorithms to control these plasma stars.
And very recently, we've been able to develop an AI system that's been able to
control the plasma in a nuclear fusion reactor at a much greater level than has
ever been possible before. And it worked fantastically well. And I think that is
an incredibly exciting application of AI. Look, we've had a good conversation
about some of the applications. Let's just think about the businesses in the
business of AI itself briefly. And interestingly, there are some quite sticky
intellectual property, IP issues, aren't there, about who owns the data on which
they've been training the AI. Priya, talk us through that. There's a recent case
of, you know, Getty and Stability AI. There's a class action suit in the USA as
well. And so if you don't know Getty Images, they essentially are an aggregator
of images. Massive, massive library of photos. It's huge, like one of the
biggest players in this area. And if you want to buy an image off Getty Images,
you have to pay Getty Images. And then they obviously have a model with the
creatives that originally created the images. And so there have been
allegations, this is by Getty, to Stability AI, which has created stable
diffusion. So they're creating generative AI and images have trained on the
Getty image set. And Getty have said, well, if you have done that, then you owe
us the license fee or the applicable royalties. Now, the generative AI companies
are saying, well, it's fair use. And so what we have to do is separate what is
the data trained on, what's the input to create these generative AI images. And
then you have to separate that from the output. Now, if what you're outputting
is an image that is exactly the same sort of image, which is very, very
significantly similar, then there is typical sort of trademark and copyright law
over the output of that image and its similarity. The controversial area is the
input. You know, what are you allowed to mine in order to create your generative
AI technology? And that will differ across different jurisdictions. But the
difficulty with artificial intelligence and technology is that it's global. It's
a minefield. Colin, is this a big issue at DeepMind? Yeah, I'm not an IP expert,
so I'm not going to speculate on how exactly it works. But intuitively for me,
it feels like there should be room for agreement, because as humans, we learn
and develop and we do things inspired by other people's work. And as long as we,
if we reproduce some other work, we recognize that, then I think it's generally
accepted in society that that's OK. I think there's a really important area that
builds on this that all businesses should think about, and that's related to
privacy. And they're far more likely to get on the wrong side of the line
related to privacy than to IPR laws. Do you have permission to use the data that
you're using to train the models that you're now using within your business? If
you're taking your customers' data, have they explicitly given you permission to
use that? I think what another area, Evan, that's really, really important here
is, if you're a consumer of these images of this media, did you know that it was
developed by a generative AI? The technology that I know that some companies are
trying to develop is watermarking technology. Very much like a banknote. It
hopefully wouldn't impact the aesthetic of the image or the text, but somehow
there would be a watermark embedded in it, so you could tell it was generated by
an AI system. Well, look, I hope at least we have stimulated our audience to
think about the multiplicity of different things that AI can bring. Thank you to
my guests, Priya Lakhani from Century Tech and the AI Council, Scott Petty from
Vodafone, Colin Murdoch from DeepMind. Thank you for listening and we're going
to be back next week. Do join us then. Evan Davis, The Bottom Line was produced
by Simon Tulett. And you can subscribe to the series on BBC Sounds. This year as
part of Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How about Pat
Butcher's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe a House
of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's ten score paddle from
Strictly? Not that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items that
could be yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone! To enter, find
out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash rednoseday.
Where you'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or
over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th June.