TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 FM, on Longwave, on digital and on BBC Sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. The
reaction to the deal from Belfast. It's only when people from Northern Ireland
look at the finer print that they can then better understand the complexities
post Good Friday Agreement and the delicate balance that lies within the
communities. Also this morning, the BBC has discovered that a Kuwaiti man who
led prayers at a Devon mosque and became close to the Manchester Arena bomber
was suspected of being a radicaliser more than a decade before the attack. We'll
also be discussing Jet Zero, there is a commitment but also problems with all
the potential sustainable fuel alternatives. 20 previously unknown short stories
by Sir Terry Pratchett have been unearthed by his army of superfans. And... We
couldn't exist on the moon. Well that's quite reasonable, conditions are wrong
for us. That was Patrick Moore 60 years ago but now there's a bid to put the
tech conditions in place that would sustain life. The BBC News is read by
Caroline Nichols. MPs are studying the details of Rishi Sunak's new deal with
the EU on post-Brexit trade for Northern Ireland. Many senior Conservatives have
backed the Windsor Framework which the Prime Minister says they'll get to vote
on. The Democratic Unionist Party, which is blocking a government in Stormont in
protest at the current trading rules, says progress has been made but that it
still has concerns about the deal. Here's our political correspondent Helen
Catt. It has been an encouraging start for Rishi Sunak. He told the Commons
yesterday evening that the agreement was a decisive breakthrough. The tone of
the two and a half hours of questioning which followed was markedly calm. Some
prominent Brexit backers even lavished praise on his negotiations. The Northern
Ireland Minister Steve Baker became tearful as he told BBC Newsnight it was an
amazing achievement. But some MPs are keen to examine the fine detail of what is
in the agreement. The Democratic Unionist Party has said it wants to study the
legal texts and will not be pushed into a hasty decision. President Biden has
praised the new agreement between the UK and the EU about Northern Ireland. In a
statement Mr Biden said the framework was an essential step in preserving the
hard-earned piece of the Good Friday agreement. Our correspondent Gary
O'Donoghue reports from Washington. The Biden administration has been watching
the talks closely and has made it clear that it believed a negotiated agreement
rather than a mere withdrawal from the protocol threatened by Rishi Sunak's
predecessor was essential. In his statement the President said the US stood
ready to support what he called the vast economic potential of the region and he
has appointed an envoy for Northern Ireland to drive this forward. The President
also expressed the hope that the political institutions in Northern Ireland
would soon be back up and running. And he warned everyone that the achievement
of peace had been neither easy nor inevitable – a clear sign that Washington
regards as anathema anything that could put it at risk. But there was no mention
of the likelihood of a future US-UK trade deal – something the British
government wants dearly and something the President has made clear is not a
priority. Schools across the north of England and all of Scotland will be
affected by teacher strikes today. Some schools will be partially closed because
of the walkouts. Teachers in England want an improvement on their 5% increase,
while a union in Scotland has rejected a 6% rise. These Year 11s at a school in
Sheffield shared their thoughts on the strikes. I'm not as worried because I
know that the teachers will come back and they'll give us like the support that
we'll need and go over the topics that we're struggling with. I can see why
they're doing it. I mean, I can understand. Obviously, I'm not necessarily happy
because it's disruption. I can't really afford that much disruption with Covid
and that, but I mean, I don't blame them. A couple who disappeared with their
newborn baby more than seven weeks ago have been arrested in Brighton, but their
child is still missing. Police found Constance Martin and Mark Gordon after a
tip-off. An urgent search operation is underway to find their baby, who's not
thought to have received any medical attention since birth. A BBC investigation
has found that MI5 suspected a Muslim preacher who was close to the Manchester
Arena bomber of being a radicaliser more than 10 years before the attack.
Mansour Al-Anaizi was also close to the man behind an attempted suicide bombing
in Exeter in 2008. A group of five bereaved families have said they're
disappointed the connections don't appear to have been investigated. Daniel De
Simone reports. It was said that Al-Anaizi, who is now dead, was arrested after
another friend of his tried to carry out a suicide bombing in Devon, exactly
nine years before the Arena atrocity. But the BBC has now established that MI5
had been investigating Al-Anaizi as a suspected radicaliser even before that
first attack, and he was also barred from a Plymouth mosque. There was no
mention of either of those things in the inquiry's public hearings, although
there were also secret sessions focused on intelligence. The Royal Mail has
unveiled the final set of stamps to feature the late Queen Elizabeth's image.
She'll appear on a commemorative set of 12 stamps to mark the 100th anniversary
of the steam train, The Flying Scotsman. Our Royal Correspondent, Sean Coughlan,
has more. It's the end of an era, with a final issue of commemorative stamps
showing the familiar silhouette of the late Queen Elizabeth. This design has
been in continuous use since 1968 and has appeared on hundreds of special
commemorative issues, on themes from the launch of Concorde to Star Trek to
famous comedians. The Royal Mail has stuck with publication plans made before
the Queen's death last September. In future, such commemorative stamps will
feature the new profile of King Charles. Cricket England's men have lost to New
Zealand by just one run in a second test thriller to draw the series in
Wellington. New Zealand set the tourists a target of 258 to win, but England
were all out for 256, with Neil Wagner taking the decisive wicket of James
Anderson. Caroline, thank you very much. Six minutes past six, time for the
weather, which is with Chris Fawkes this morning. Hello, Chris. Hi, Michelle.
We've got our area of high pressure we've had for a number of days now still
affecting us. It's to the north of Scotland and it's driving in a northeasterly,
chilly airflow across the country with a lot of cloud trapped underneath it. So
for most of us, it is going to be a cloudy day and there's some damp weather to
come across parts of England and Wales. Now first thing this morning, southern
England will actually get some sunshine, but it's a cold start here with a
widespread frost, lowest temperatures down to about minus five degrees Celsius.
So a cold start. Elsewhere really across northern England, across the Midlands
and eastern areas of Wales, we've got thick layers of cloud this morning,
bringing with it some light patches of rain. It's also quite cloudy for West
Wales and East Anglia. And I think where we do start off with the morning
sunshine across the south, it's not going to last too long. We will see the
cloud tend to thicken. And I think that light patchy rain that we've got across
northern England, the Midlands, East Wales will tend to drift its way southwards
through the day. So there's a threat of a few patches of light rain working into
southern areas of England as we head on through the day today. So certainly
clouding over. For Northern Ireland, we're looking at a lot of cloud. I think
here we probably will see some breaks coming along, particularly for Antrim and
Down later on today. And for Scotland, eastern areas will have a lot of thick
cloud, again a few spots of light rain or drizzle. The western side of Scotland
stays dry today, with the best chance of seeing some breaks and a few sunny
spells coming through as we go through the day. Temperatures today, round about
8 or 9 degrees Celsius, pretty widely. But it's going to feel a bit colder than
that due to those cold northeasterly winds that will be across the whole of the
UK. More quiet weather to come tomorrow. High pressure still in charge, but
maybe one or two more breaks to come along. That's the latest. Chris, thank you.
Eight minutes past six is the time. So a look at the papers and of course the
deal on Northern Ireland trade. Dominates the front pages. Brexit breakthrough,
the Times headline. Inside it says the devil's in the details of the deal
designed to meet DUP demands. The Daily Mail asks, has Rishi done the
impossible? It says a feared Tory revolt melted away after Rishi Sunak unveiled
what it called the historic deal. The Daily Telegraph in its editorial comments
said it was arguably his best day yet as Prime Minister, adding time will tell
if he has pulled off a political triumph. One thousand two hundred and fifteen
days late. Brexit deal is finally done is how the Metro puts it. The Sun's
headline says, got Brexit done again before adding in brackets, hopefully.
Inside the paper, the Foreign Secretary, James Cleverley, has written an article
in which he says the agreement is a turning point for Northern Ireland and that
he was proud that they secured what everyone needs. The Guardian reports the
choreographed agreement has been broadly welcomed, but that the Prime Minister
still faces opposition from hardline Brexiteers. The DUP have sounded a warning
over the claim Stormont will be able to veto new European law, according to its
political editor, Hugo Gey. He says that Boris Johnson is weighing up whether or
not to intervene. In an editorial, the Dublin-based Irish Times sees the deal as
a route to stability and progress, but it adds the very nature of Brexit means
that no agreement is going to give everyone all that they're looking for. In his
column, Sam McBride, the Northern Ireland editor of the Belfast Telegraph, says
the Windsor framework is more democratic and less unpalatable for unionism, but
it is not what Rishi Sunak has claimed. He says the Prime Minister's spin is not
backed up by the fine detail of a phenomenally bureaucratic new system, and the
reality is that the Irish sea border will be staying. The Daily Express says
Number 10 has been accused of dragging the King into political issues after
asking him to have tea with the European Commission President Ursula von der
Leyen as the new Brexit deal was struck. The Daily Mail's editor-at-large
Richard Kaye asks, could this meeting be a moment the King comes to regret? One
of a kind is the headline in both the Daily Express and The Sun as they pay
tribute to Betty Boothroyd, the first female Speaker of the Commons who has died
aged 93. The Guardian quotes the current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, who called
her an inspirational woman. The Daily Telegraph said that she was renowned for
her fair play, sense of humour and passionate belief in the sovereignty of
Parliament. And the Daily Mirror reports that the ashes of Peter Sutcliffe, the
serial killer known as the Yorkshire Ripper, have been scattered at a beauty
spot near the Cumbrian village of Arnside. His niece Emily told the paper that
he visited there as a child. Finally under the headline, it's all happening in
the world right now, the Star reports that the President of Mexico has claimed a
mythical tree-climbing elf has been captured on camera. Yes, the actual
President, the paper says, it prints a grainy photo of the creature up a tree.
Let's have a quick look at it, I can't confirm or deny that it exists, the
mythical creature. Something we'll get back to later. No sign of that elf as far
as I can see in the Northern Ireland papers, but like the UK ones, they're
dominated by reaction to the New Deal. You mentioned Sam McBride there. On the
front pages, the newsletter, Crunch Time for Unionism, Donaldson, that's the
leader of the DUP, held significant progress in a number of areas. Belfast
Telegraph, make or break, a pun there on one of the measures in the New Deal,
the Stormont break, which will give politicians here a say on EU rules. The
Irish Daily Mail, a new chapter for the North and the Irish News PM seeks
unionist backing for Deal. And it's clear that lots of people here are going to
be welcoming the changes that are promised as they digest all the detail. But I
have to say, there is some cynicism after everything they've been through. One
business leader told us, this isn't our first dance at this rodeo and businesses
have been burnt before by the small print. But it's important, I think, when
you're looking at Northern Ireland to look at the big picture. If you think
about it, this is all about trying to get divided communities to share power
together. That was the aim of the Belfast Agreement put in place on Good Friday
nearly 25 years ago. And it was designed to put an end to all the political
violence we saw in the Troubles over so many decades. But I think it's fair to
say the devolved government has been unstable. First Sinn Féin pulled out of
power sharing and then more recently and crucially in these circumstances the
DUP. And you'll remember that the party was objecting to the Northern Ireland
protocol, a post-Brexit protocol. So, will the changes announced by Rishi Sunak
be enough to keep the DUP back on board? Well, we're going to be talking to the
Prime Minister live here in Belfast just after 8 a.m. We're going to look at
some analysis as we usually do from Chris Page, our Ireland correspondent.
Morning, Chris. Hi, Martha. So, the reaction of the DUP, very important. And I
think it's fair to say we're hearing different voices, aren't we? Yes, we are.
Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, the DUP leader, as many people have been expected, I
suppose you could say he gave the deal a soft landing. He didn't say yes or no.
Said there'd been significant progress on his party's concerns, but that key
concerns remain, particularly pointed to the fact that EU law would still apply
in some sectors of Northern Ireland's economy. Two prominent members of his
Westminster party, the MPs Ian Paisley and Sammy Wilson, were much more publicly
negative about the deal than Sir Geoffrey, for example. Mr Paisley said that his
thoughts at this initial stage was that it didn't cut the mustard, it didn't
provide the basis for the DUP to return to power, sharing its stormwind. I think
it's worth saying that both Mr Paisley and Mr Wilson have been seen to have more
hard-line positions on the protocol, and they haven't been afraid to state their
positions publicly. But nonetheless, I think that the fact that they have said
what they've said in the last 12 hours or so demonstrates that at this stage, at
least, there is significant opposition in the party to what's on the table at
the moment. So does that mean it could be a while, if ever, that they return to
power sharing? It'll certainly be a while. Sir Geoffrey Donaldson has made very
clear he's not going to be rushed on this. Political agreements in Northern
Ireland, Martha, as you know, do tend to be very complex documents, and this
one, I have to say, to my mind anyway, is particularly that way. So lawyers will
be involved in going through exactly what various measures in it mean for trade,
for politics, for the way the Stormont Assembly, if it is restored, would work
as regards EU regulations. So all that will take time. Something else that is
coming up, council elections here in just over two months' time, the 18th of
May, DEP strategists, I think, will be mindful of the fact that the main
electoral threat to them in those elections is a more hard-line party, the
traditional unionist voice. So compromising before then could be electorally
problematic. And looking at the nationalist parties as well, and in particular,
you spotted something around the so-called Stormont break and how that might
cause some anxiety. Yes, the Stormont break is one aspect of the agreement that
I think people are trying to really get their heads around at the moment.
Essentially, it gives the Northern Ireland Assembly the ability to raise an
objection to an additional EU regulation. It means that if 30 of the 90 members
of the Stormont Assembly register their concern, well, then that veto can be
taken to the British government, who then can veto the EU regulation in their
joint committee with the EU that oversees the protocol. So according to Rishi
Sunak, that means the regulation wouldn't apply. Now, this is based on an
existing mechanism in the Stormont Assembly designed to create a cross-community
veto to protect minorities. That's the way it was designed, at least. Many would
say it hasn't been used that way over the years. So there are concerns about the
whole basis, I guess, of how that mechanism in Stormont at the moment works.
That's why I've had nationalist parties, the Cross-Community Alliance Party,
saying they have concerns. Historically, the unionist veto has had a very
powerful meaning for nationalists in particular in Northern Ireland. So they, I
think, will be wary of the possibility of unionists being able to veto EU
regulations if indeed it does go that far, and what that might mean for the
future of the land border with the Irish Republic. Could it still be kept open?
Chris Page, many thanks. And as well as hearing from Rishi Sunak, just after 8
o'clock, we'll also be hearing live from the leader of the DUP, Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson, at half past seven. Looking forward to that, Martha. Thank you very
much. Let's turn to business community reaction now, because Sean's been looking
at that. Sean? Yes, there's going to be a lot, Michelle, for business owners to
digest with this framework once it all gets signed off as well, if it does. But
the most significant changes maybe appear to be around customs checks for those
that do trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland and vice versa. Goods
travelling from Great Britain to Northern Ireland will now travel through a so-
called green lane with reduced checks and paperwork if it all gets approved.
Goods destined for the Republic of Ireland, in effect the single market, the EU
single market, will be in the red lane with the same number of checks as before.
We're going to hear from the Prime Minister live after 8 o'clock. Here's a
little bit of what he had to say about this yesterday. The same quintessentially
British products like trees, plants and seed potatoes will again be available in
Northern Ireland's garden centres. So I've got Angus Wilson with me, the chair
and founder of Wilson's Country, a potato processor serving supermarkets and
restaurants throughout Ireland. Got 135 staff himself. Morning, Angus. Good
morning, Sean. Now, Angus, since the start of 2021, seed potatoes have been
prohibited from entering Northern Ireland. What has that meant for your business
in the last couple of years? Yeah, we've had a difficult two or three years, but
our concerns were really going forward. Just to give you a bit of context,
Northern Ireland grows about three and a half thousand hectares of potatoes,
which delivers about 120,000 tonnes. We have relied for many years to a greater
extent on Scotland for the source of our seed. Seed potatoes, just to explain,
there's a vegetative process that we take from the mother tuber and then each
generation of potatoes that comes from that is what we call the seed. And
Scotland's particularly good at that. So clearly you wanted those seed potatoes
from Scotland. Why were they banned for a couple of years? They were banned
really because, I mean, we're talking about the green and the red, Lee, and
Europe wanted to protect its border so it could manage the health status of its
potato crop across Europe because it couldn't control that within the island of
Ireland, then hence the border on the Irish Sea. So what does that mean now? If
all of this does get signed off and the rules change, as we heard Rishi Sunak
saying there, what difference will that make to your business and to the sector
in Northern Ireland? For me, as a potato producer representing 20 growers in
Northern Ireland, we're delighted that we can access the right varieties and the
right quality and health status of the Scottish seed, which has obviously
developed over the years. So this is good news for us, albeit we haven't read
the detail in case there's any problem, but DEFRA assures us that this is good
news. And what's your take overall on just watching the press conferences, if
you did yesterday, seeing the tone and seeing the deal itself? Will this change
things for the business sector in Northern Ireland? I think it's a positive. I
mean, originally whenever there was talk about a border within the island of
Ireland, I was terrified as a small business that we couldn't trade with our
partners in the south. So we were accepting a border on the Irish Sea as a sort
of second, better than a border on the island. But now that seems to be a way as
well. So no, we're very happy. We're nearly getting back to where we were,
albeit we need to read the detail. Well, I've got a veg grower with me, Angus.
I've heard this morning one person telling me that they'd seen a bit of potato
restricting at their local supermarket because we've seen little now during the
fray of limiting how much certain veg and fruit people can buy. Do you have a
view on why this is happening and what's needed to resolve it? I suppose, well,
there's obviously there's some talk about weather issues, but I think there is
some issues on the food chain in terms of crops being grown across in Spain or
wherever, concerns about fuel costs and so on, and concerns that growers
wouldn't necessarily get the return that they required. So I think some of the
crops were limited, what was grown out there, hence add two or three layers of
complexity and hence there are shortages. I think we need to get back to maybe
following the seasons a wee bit and maybe be more used to having our salad in
the summertime and use our winter crops that are grown locally in the winter.
Potato processor says eat potatoes. I get the message, Angus. Thank you so much,
Angus Wilson there, Chair and founder of Wilson's Country, that potato processor
in Northern Ireland serving supermarkets and restaurants throughout Ireland.
I've got Shanti Kellerman with me, who has been closely following the market
news this morning. Shanti, was there any reaction at all to the deal that has
been done between Rishi Sunak and the European Commission? There wasn't a strong
reaction. Sterling was up slightly yesterday, but it was a very small amount
that you might see on any day of the week. I think the bigger thing this opens
up is just better relations with the EU, more cooperation going forward,
potentially with the US as well, because we know that President Joe Biden had
Irish ties and was quite interested in this. So I think it removes a level of
risk for the UK economy, maybe opens up some more cooperation, potentially some
more people to think about investing in the country. A few other businesses
updating us on how they've been getting on, including Primark, Shanti, and its
owners, Associated British Foods, saying its profits are set to be better than
expected in the year to come. What's going so well for Primark at the moment?
Can they give us an idea of where prices are going to be heading? So I think
what Primark's benefiting from is a lot of consumers, you know, worried about
inflation, worried about costs, are trading down. So if you were shopping at
John Lewis, maybe now you're going to Primark. If you were at Waitrose, maybe
you're going to Sainsbury's. And Primark's, you know, place sort of at that
cheaper end of the spectrum. They've benefited from that. I think the only thing
in the results was a bit worrying is they are holding a lot more inventory,
which means they have sort of more cash tied up in their operations. And right
now, given where financing costs are in the in the economy and interest rates,
investors are a lot more worried about making sure there's capital on hand and
cash in the form of, you know, whether using it for dividends or to buy back
shares. And the Manchester United share price, Shanti, down 10% yesterday,
continuing its fall in recent days. I thought it was all guns blazing for a
bidding war there. Yeah, so we don't know anything specific, but it's possible
that maybe we won't have as many bidders as we thought. There's also some
speculation that the bids might not be what the sellers would like to achieve.
Maybe it won't be sold at all. Some of that, you know, it's a great brand. The
club's been doing well recently, but they do have some issues, things like, you
know, how much do you need to update their stadium? It's one of the older ones.
They have a lot of debt and it's all in dollars, which means the debt's worth a
bit more relative to the revenues because the dollar's been up. And it's also a
club that pays very high salaries, so it doesn't generate a lot of cash flow. So
great brand, but then how do you value these types of sports teams is tricky.
Shanti, thank you. Shanti Kellerman, Chief Investment Officer at M&G Wealth. Now
figures out this morning show women make up 40% of boardroom positions across
the 350 biggest listed companies here in the UK. And that is ahead of schedule.
This is the FTSE Women Leaders Review, which is sponsored by the government.
It's set a voluntary deadline for these businesses of 2025 for hitting the
milestone. I've got Denise Wilson with me, who is the Review's Chief Executive.
She was a senior executive in the energy sector as well at British Gas, National
Grid and the like. Denise, morning to you. Good morning, Sean. What did you make
of the findings when they landed on your table? Well, we're clearly delighted.
Our 40% women's representation on FTSE 350 boards was unthinkable just a decade
ago when there were only 9% women. And progress has been made under entirely
voluntary means with various stakeholders in business coming together and
working hard. And the progress that we've made in the UK is admired on the
international stage. So there's plenty really for British business to be proud
of today. And the layer just below the board, so that's the leadership layer,
the Exec Committee Direct Reports, there we've seen good progress again this
year and now at 33% representation of women and on track to meet the target in
2025. What's particularly changed in the last few years to enable this
acceleration, two years ahead of deadline? We don't often hear about that. I
think the voluntary model has worked well for British business. And this topic
used to be a fringe subject, a hushed water cooler conversation amongst mainly
women. And now it's a core and critical business topic with the vast majority of
big business working really hard to make progress for women. There's no doubt
that there are competent, capable women out there. The pipeline is full to
overflowing. So it's good to see that we're using in the UK at the top of
business now all of the talent pipeline, instead of just part of it as we were a
decade ago. Something we've discussed before, and actually I've been talking
about recently, is research from elsewhere, Cranfield University for example,
looking at finding that only 9% of executive positions are filled by women at
the moment. So roles a bit like chief executive, chief financial officer. Why is
that still a low number when you talk about the acceleration and the boardroom
overall? Well, I think no one doubts that there's more to do and real and
lasting change as we see take some time. But the CEO role particularly, there's
only two executive roles on a board. So the vast majority of roles on a board
are non-executive, hence that was always going to be where most progress was
made. And the CEO role is the biggest in the organization. There's only 260 of
them in the UK. The highest paid, most influential, most senior roles in British
business and highest paid too. The turnover is very low and therefore, you know,
progress, this was always going to be the last hill that we climb. So that's why
one of our recommendations is that every company should have a woman in one of
the four key roles. And we've made good progress on chairs, very good progress
on the senior independent director. Looking like fledgling progress in finance
directors this year, certainly for the FTSE 100 with six more. But we've got a
way to go on that CEO role. And when we start to see good representation of
women in that role, then, you know, we know this job is done. But we're a long
way off there. But the bigger gains are still to come. Denise. Denise Wilson,
the chief executive of the FTSE Women Leaders Review. Sean, thanks. 28 minutes
past six to Robin the sport. Morning, Justin. Well, the bare bones of the second
test at the Basin Reserve in Wellington are that New Zealand beat England. So
the two match series is drawn and England's winning run ends at six. But the
detail is quite astonishing, barely believable. England lost by the narrowest of
margins, as our chief cricket writer, Stephen Shemmelt, explains. The bare facts
are that England have lost a test following on for the first time, are the
second team to lose a test by one run and the series was shared one all. But
that does not do justice to a breathtaking day of test cricket. Chasing 258,
England were 80 for five. Joe Root and Ben Stokes added 121. Then England were
eight down with 43 needed. The runs required was down to seven when last man
James Anderson shuffled out a moment of pure theatre. He sensationally clipped
Wagner for four, only for Wagner to have the final say to a deafening roar at
the Basin. So here's England's Kiwi head coach, Brendan McCullum. I think it was
an epic encounter and exactly what I guess when we started out on this campaign
we endeavoured to achieve. Obviously, it would be nice to come out on the right
side of it, but just to see a full house here at the Basin and seeing what was
one of the great test matches is what this game is all about. Test cricket needs
relevance and for two teams to play like they did and to duke it out there at
the end is exactly what things are about. And now New Zealand's Neil Wagner who
took that final crucial England wicket. Pretty special test but yeah, who
doesn't think test cricket is alive? That's pretty awesome. Amazing effort to
get on the right side of it but England played some serious cricket throughout
this series. Well elsewhere, manager Serena Wiegman, Women's Coach of the Year
and Mary Earps, Women's Goalkeeper of the Year. Those the FIFA awards to follow
England's victory in last year's European Football Championships. From Mary
Earps, thanks to Wiegman for believing her, she said, in the way you have. While
there was this from Serena Wiegman herself. It's all about the team. Without
very good players, without great staff and the support of their vein and the
people around me, you can't do it. So actually this award is just for all of us
and I'm the one who just was the lucky one to pick it up or to receive it. Well
the Best Player of the Year awards went to PSG and Argentina's Lionel Messi and
to Barcelona's Alexia Puteres who plays for Spain. So then to the tips,
Leicester 430 number one getting closer and with a nod in the direction of one
of the great singer-songwriters of the last 50 years, I offer this. Catterick
445 number five, Just Call Me Al. Oh very good. I like that one. Thank you Rob.
I'll call you Betty. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End
is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter! The order has entered the 1960s. Barely
eight years late. But the midwives of Nonata's house are forever constant.
You've a home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We
will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. 29 minutes to
seven is the time you're listening to today on Radio 4. I'm Arthur Kearney in
Belfast, Michelle Hussain in Justin Webb in London with Catterick 430 number
one. Thank you for watching. I'm Rob McClendon. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Rob
McClendon. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Rob McClendon. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick
430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm
Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430. I'm Caterick 430.