TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I'm Haruka Koda, a fourth-year student at the Faculty of Science. I'm Arisa
Takanohashi, a fourth-year student at the Faculty of Science. I'm Mizuki Ote, a
second-year student at the Faculty of Science. So, we have two fourth-year
students, a second-year student, and Mr. Hirotaka Arai. Welcome, Mr. Arai.
Aloha! I'm Arai. It's been a while, everyone. Wow. I'm finally here. You haven't
changed at all, have you? No, I'm definitely getting older. I heard rumors that
this Handbell Choir you're playing will be the last one to perform in Hawaii
this year. That's right. I'm a junior in the Faculty of Science, and I'm a
senior. I'm a Handbell, so I'm not a member of the choir. So, I think this will
be the last time I'll be able to perform in Hawaii. That's why I'm here today. I
see. There's a concert at the Central Union Church starting at 7 p.m. today.
Yes, it's an hour-long concert. If you don't mind, please come. After dinner, or
after work, please come to the Central Union Church, the corner of the Beltanea
P. Co. Yes, please. Mr. Arai, how many years has it been since you last played?
35 years. So, it's been 35 years since I started playing the Handbell. During
the pandemic, you were very restricted in your activities. Of course, I
understand that you couldn't come to Hawaii. Yes, I haven't been able to perform
for a year since the pandemic began. So, I have no members in my third year. I
couldn't meet my friends because I was in a web class. I was very lonely. But
now, I'm allowed to perform a little bit. I see. So, you don't have a third
year. You have a fourth year, a second year, and a first year. Of course, I have
a first year. I see. Today, you came to the Central Union Church as a
representative. Ms. Mizuki, you are a second year. Did you decide to join the
Handbell Choir and go to the University of Hakodate? No, I decided to join
another club. You decided? Yes, I did. But I heard the sound of the Handbell and
I was fascinated by it. Oh my. I decided to join the Handbell. Did you know that
it was a famous university? Yes, I did. But what did you want to join? I wanted
to join another music club. You have two seniors who fascinated you. I'm Haruka
Goda, a fourth year. Ms. Haruka, you have been a member for four years. Please
look back on your activities since you joined the club. I was originally a music
major, so I went to see the music major. After that, I went to see the Handbell.
I heard it for the first time near the club. I also attended the experience
meeting. When I heard it near the club, I felt the sound of the Handbell and the
power of the Handbell. I was fascinated by it and decided to join the club. I
understand the power of the Handbell. I heard it live. I thought it was not only
a gentle sound. I thought that everyone was playing it and it was perfect
timing. I thought they were practicing hard. How was it when you joined the
club? May I say my name? I'm Arisa Takanohashi, a fourth year. I also learned
how to play the piano. I had music experience. When I went to hear the
performance, I was so moved that I cried. When I joined the club, I thought it
was a great atmosphere to make music together. I think it was a tough training
after you joined the club. How was it? I enjoyed playing the piano. I never
thought it was so hard. I had to hold the bell a lot and it was hard to play. I
had muscle pain and my hands hurt. But I enjoyed it and I continue to play the
piano. There are many words like that. You are a strict teacher. But you are
strict. I heard many times that you enjoyed playing the bell together. Yes. How
did you meet the bell? I heard the bell for the first time in a university in
Tokyo about 36 years ago. I was fascinated by it. I thought it was wonderful. I
didn't know anything about the bell. But I was fascinated by it. You are a
teacher. Do you play music? I am a vocal music teacher. I sing opera twice a
year. Your voice is coming into the microphone. It's a wonderful voice. You sing
at concerts sometimes. Yes. I will sing Sakura Sakura today. Today, the
University of Hawaii and UH Community College will hold a concert called Hawaii
Handbell Farewell Concert. It will be held at Central Union Church. It will be
held on Thursday, 7 p.m. Central Union Church is located in the corner of
Punahou and Virginia. The address is 1660 South Virginia Street. You can enter
the church for free. Please come. I just said welcome back because of the
farewell. But this is Mr. Arai's project. So we want to bring you back to enjoy
the concert for the last time. You are very strong. Especially you two, the
fourth graders. You have been with Mr. Arai. Please send a message to Mr. Arai.
I have been with Mr. Arai for 4 years. I will still perform at the graduation
ceremony. I will still perform at the graduation ceremony. I will be grateful.
As a guest, I hope you will come to teach handbell as a guest. I hope you will
get along with Mr. Arai. I like Mr. Arai's strict teaching. I like his strict
teaching. I hope you will get along with him. I want to tell you more about the
message. I will tell you about the message. Please tell the teacher. Like you, I
feel the passion and love for music in your teaching. I am grateful that you
have taught for 4 years. I will do my best to play well. I am Mizuki from 2
years. I thought it was amazing that Mr. Arai's teaching is very good because he
can learn only the technical things of music. Thank you always. I am still a 2nd
year student so I will do my best. Mizuki, as a person who has received your
strict teaching, you have to tell your teacher's spirit to your juniors. Do your
best. Thank you. Mr. Arai, you will play a song today. What kind of song? It is
a song from a Disney movie. It is a song from the beginning of the movie. I will
play the melody. Please get ready. Today, we have 3 representatives of the 35th
Handbell Choir of Hakuou University. Let's listen to the song. Wow! It is
wonderful just by listening to it. I feel like the staff has been purified
today. Mr. Arai, you are finally participating in the Honolulu Festival. Yes.
You are a member of the Honolulu Festival. That's right. Lastly, please say a
few words to the listeners and the people of Hawaii. We will be participating in
the Honolulu Festival. We will hold mini concerts at the Arowana Center Stage
and the Convention Center. On the last Sunday, we will be walking and playing
and moving a little while performing. I think you will be able to see a
different side of the Handbell. Please take a look at the video. Yes. Today, we
will be listening to the performance of the Choir at the Central Union Church
and the parade played by the Choir. You all have very advanced techniques. We
will be performing at the parade. If you could turn the mic to the side, we
would be happy to do so. Mr. Arai, thank you for your time. Thank you. You are
still young but you are a teacher. You have a younger student. I am not a
teacher anymore but I am a leader and I am able to stay as a teacher. I want to
continue to create a new world of the Handbell. Thank you. I am looking forward
to hearing your song about the cherry blossoms. I will bring it to you. Thank
you. Thank you. We have invited Mr. Arai Hirotaka who has been in charge of the
arrangement of all the songs of the Handbell Choir. 《Handbell Choir》 《Aloha
Hotline》 《K-2 Radio》 Hello, everyone listening to the K-2 Radio in Hawaii. It is
warm like the summer in April in Tokyo. I am Norie Matsuo from Tokyo FM Edogawa.
Aloha, everyone from FM Edogawa. I am Karin from K-2 Radio. Did you say it is
like the summer in April? Yes, it is. Is it the same as Hawaii? In Edogawa, it
is 21.6 degrees. It is 8 degrees higher than the average in April. How is it in
Hawaii? It is 24 degrees. After this, it is 19 degrees and 20 degrees. It is
almost the same as Hawaii. Yes, it is. Yesterday, it was 23 degrees and this is
the temperature in May. It was quite warm. We are wearing only winter clothes in
front of the counter. So our clothes are getting cold. I feel like I am spending
a good time in the summer like Karin. I can't imagine you are barefoot all year
long. I see. It is the same as Hawaii. Today, we are talking about cherry
blossoms. Yes, I see. The cherry blossoms are expected to bloom in this warm
weather. We were told that they will bloom around March 17th and 18th. But
according to the information we received yesterday, the date is early. It is
expected to bloom on March 15th. The warm weather has accelerated the growth of
cherry blossoms. If you look at the past, the earliest record for 2020 and 2021
is March 14th. It is predicted that the cherry blossoms will bloom as early as
March. So, it will be early nationwide. I see. The new year's calendar is March
21st. The cherry blossoms will bloom around that time. The cherry blossoms will
bloom in the spring. It is like a sign of the spring. I thought that the cherry
blossoms will bloom in Tokyo. I was surprised when I saw the early record. It is
almost the time. I think so. The early cherry blossoms and the pink-colored
Kawazu cherry blossoms are becoming the cherry blossoms in some places. I am
glad that the spring has come and I want to catch up with the clothing. I see.
The spring has come. I see. In Tokyo, the cherry blossoms are a popular spot
during this time. This year, there are some spots where the cherry blossoms are
blooming for the first time in 4 years. I would like to introduce some of them.
For example, Ueno Park in Kaito Ward is a popular spot for the cherry blossoms.
Due to the COVID-19, the Tokyo City Council has been asking the residents to
restrict the cherry blossoms during the trip park. This year, the COVID-19
situation is improving. The mask is going to be used on 13th of this month. So,
the residents are not allowed to wear masks during the trip. The mask is going
to be used on 13th of this month. The government has decided that the mask will
be used on 13th of this month. The government has decided to restrict the mask
during the trip. When you receive medical care, or when you get on a bus, you
are asked to wear a mask. That is the policy. So, based on that decision, the
Tokyo City Council has decided that the cherry blossoms are allowed during the
trip park. The park is being managed by the government. For example, the cherry
blossoms in Meguro River and Chidori River in Chiyoda are not allowed to be used
for cherry blossoms. They are operating the same way as before the pandemic. For
example, the night lights and the cherry blossoms are allowed to be used during
the trip park. So, it's not that the coronavirus is completely gone. But the
fact that the mask is not allowed is a big problem for the event. I think it's a
big problem for the event. I see. I think there are many people who are worried
about the cherry blossoms. For them, there is a company called Hanami Taxi in
Tokyo. It's an international company that operates taxi companies. They are
planning to reduce the stress of the event and enjoy the cherry blossoms from
the windows of their cars to the road where the cherry blossoms are lined up.
They are planning to enjoy the cherry blossoms while taking a taxi using the
route that allows them to pass through the road. The price is 17,080 yen for a
three-hour course and 2,770 yen for an additional 30 minutes. The price is a
little high. If you ask for a taxi, you can go to the station and have lunch
there. You can take a course like that. My grandchild has bad feet. I thought it
would be difficult to invite him to walk or go to the cherry blossoms. But if he
uses this taxi, he can go with his family and it's a good deal. I see. In Tokyo,
there are many one-box-type taxis like the four-seater. It's a good plan to have
a family ride a taxi and enjoy the cherry blossoms. I think this year the cherry
blossoms and the tourists will be seen in the city. I think it's a good plan.
It's the graduation season so from March 13, the students will be allowed to
wear masks and the graduates will wear masks or the staff will wear masks. I
think it will be a different scene from before the pandemic. I think so. I think
so. The coronavirus will spread and the situation will be the same as the flu.
So the students will have to endure the virus for 3 or 4 years. But I hope the
new year will be a good year for the students. Yes. In Hawaii, the students have
a spring break and this weekend there is a festival called Honolulu Festival and
the Japanese people are looking forward to it. The festival is back in action.
This time, there are many students and there are many people who are looking
forward to it. There are 11 and 12 free events and the stage is set up. There
are many people going out to see the festival. The festival was canceled in
March 2020 so it was canceled for 1, 2, 3 years and it is finally back this
year. I think the people who are involved in the management of the festival will
be motivated and motivated this year. Yes. There is still a little bit of time
left in Hawaii, but we are going back to the festival and we are going to hold
an exhibition about the disaster and we are going to think about Japan more and
more. Thank you. Could you introduce a song from Hawaii? You know the song
called Hanawa Saku but in the Hawaiian version there is a song that is a
collaboration between a Japanese artist and a Hawaiian artist so please listen
to the song called Nappua Mohara. Thank you. I am looking forward to hearing
more about Hawaii next week. Thank you. Mahalo. Aloha. Aloha. Ke lihi nā mino
aka Ohi li mai iki tangaha e Nappua, Nappua Nappua mohanga Tona a haano na e Iki
mai aka Nappua, Nappua Nappua mohanga Nappua pahai a e Ala a ala Ke lihi nā mino
aka Ohi li mai iki Tangaha e Ala ala Ike a Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Ike li a mai Kawana a
A e o mai Kapo ike a Oh Ka e ka Mana o Ka noho nā Nua ka hapū e Waku Ku i a tu A
ku i a mai Kōro male I ka wai Makae te Uho i mai Ka hao e Ka haine a Ka hao e Ka
haine a A hu i noho A hu i ka ihi Mana o La nā no o Ke kanata Iki ke wā Na nā i
a ke A hao A ku o ka Rū u e Nappua, Nappua Nappua mōhau a Naudaha Nauda e Iki
mai a Nappua, Nappua Nappua mōhau a Nappua pahai a E ka ala ike a Oh Nappua,
Nappua Nappua mōhau a Naudaha Nauda e Nappuda A Nappuna I I Low Oh, I Say again
I Nagaru Huh This is Radio KZU AM 1210 Honolulu, Hawaii, where the time is
now... Radio KZU AM 1210 Honolulu, Hawaii, where the time is now... 4 o'clock 30
minutes. 4 o'clock 30 minutes. 4 o'clock 30 minutes. Thank you for having me.
Thank you. And thank you for the lecture in the classroom the other day. I
learned a lot of things in the classroom. I was surprised when I was told that I
was in a voice class in the EM Hawaii seminar. I learned a lot of things, but
what I learned was that it is important to be more aware of your daily voice. I
was told that by Karin. I thought, that's true. I want more people to know about
Karin's voice class. I'm a little embarrassed, but I hope I can tell people what
I've been doing. I think so too. Thank you. I'd like to hear from Reiko today.
I've been thinking about it since Karin's lecture. This may be related to the
title of the program, but I thought it was important to be more aware of the
meaning and value of your existence. I thought that it was more important to
live with the idea that you are needed for someone or something than for
yourself. It's a little personal story, but I'd like to talk about when I became
an interior designer. Some of you may know, but Reiko was a producer at CNN, an
American television station. She was transferred to an interior designer when
she was 42 years old. It's a completely different job, and I think it's amazing.
What made you decide to change your career? Thank you. I've been wanting to work
in TV journalism since I was in 6th grade. I quit my job at a Japanese TV
station and worked at CNN for about 16 years. I felt that working at CNN was
very rewarding. But at the time, I started to have doubts about my existence
because I started to treat my immunity. I was wondering if I, who was a criminal
who couldn't even be a mother, was really good enough to exist in this world.
Looking around, you can see that society is under pressure. Women are naturally
born and raised with children after marriage. So if there are no children, it's
a crime. I was also a bit serious when I was in my 30s. There is a torture
called hole-digging in Nazi Germany. They dig a big hole all day and fill it
with holes the next day. They repeat this every day. I thought it was a very
good torture to mentally drive them into it. At that time, I felt that I was
working for a long time without finding any meaning in my life. I felt like I
was working for a hole-digging group. I was completely lost. Was it a job that
was too busy? Of course, journalism is a very meaningful job in society. I can't
think of it as a meaningless hole-digging job, but it means that you couldn't
find meaning in yourself. That's right. I think it's about how you're conscious
of it, as I said at the beginning. In my case, I was wandering around trying to
fill my heart with emptiness while holding a sense of emptiness. Was there a
reason why you wanted to do interior design? There is a painter named Mark
Twain. He said, there are two most important days in life. The day you were born
and the day you knew why you were born. It seems that seeking existence is to
acquire a great power to move oneself from within by asking fundamental
questions about yourself. In my case, I felt the importance of living in a 90%
interior space, especially a house, in such a mental depression. A house is not
just a place to lie down on a bed and go home. It's a place to rest your mind, a
place to make a difference for tomorrow, a place to study for tomorrow, a place
to study for the future. Recently, it's become a place to work. That's right. By
creating a place to rest my mind, I thought that maybe I could support people
like me who are a little depressed and depressed. Who can I contribute to? What
can I bring to that place? Also, what role can I play? And where is the place
and people that need me? I decided to take the path of interior design with that
in mind. The company's name, Ventus, means wind in Latin. I named it because I
thought that when your ship leaves the rough waves of life, I might be a small
wind of support. As Karin-san said earlier, 42 years old is not young in Japan.
I think it's more like an old woman. It is said that it is the 120th year of
life, so I think that the direction of wind can be changed at any time. I think
it can be changed at any time. Maybe some of the listeners are suffering in the
same way. It may be called a modern disease, but it may be part of Reiko's way
of life. Will you have a seminar again this month? That's right. From 1 p.m. on
March 31st, Hawaii time, we will have a hybrid session with Zoom. For those who
are not good at Zoom, we have prepared a large screen for you to watch in a
relaxed reclining chair. This month, we will talk about how to leave your child
and cognitive impairment, and basic knowledge of cognitive impairment that is
thought to be very useful when nursing your parents. I would be happy if you
could invite your friends and participate. It doesn't have much to do with
interior design. The time is March 31st, Hawaii time, right? Yes. It's 1 p.m. in
Hawaii time, so some people will participate in Zoom in Japan time. Many people
from Japan will participate. April 1st, Saturday, 8 a.m. is Japanese time. It's
a good time. The live venue will be held in the Anaha condominium theater room.
The participation fee is $10. $13. $13. Cognitive impairment is unpredictable. I
am like that, but so is my family, and I can't predict it. It's something that
happens to everyone. It's difficult without support. Yes. I would like to ask a
famous doctor to talk about it. I see. You can talk to a specialist in nursing.
You can call Reiko directly. Yes. You can call us on Facebook. You can
participate from Eventbrite. I see. Eventbrite. The number is 808-358-9135.
808-358-9135. The email is r-luis-at-ventas.design. Reiko, how many times have
you participated? It's the fifth time. It was around autumn. Yes. I hope to
continue to participate in this way. I would like to hear your opinions, so
please contact me. I see. Reiko is giving a life-saving course for the senior
generation. You will learn the basics of cognitive impairment, which determines
the care of your parents. Please call Reiko directly. 808-358-9135. Reiko is the
only interior designer in Hawaii who is doing both Japanese and English. I'm
glad you are doing well as a Japanese. Japanese people, including the WEC, are
doing well in the US and many of them are returning to Japan. Thank you. I will
do my best. Please do your best. Thank you very much. Thank you. Do you have
anything to say? I don't have anything. I'm just grateful. I'm glad to hear that
many people are listening. I hope you will use this seminar as a real thing.
Thank you for listening. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Mahalo. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. I'm a normal housewife, you're a gifted one
That's fine, isn't it? Isn't it wonderful? Isn't it the perfection of the proof
of use? I can't live with a dream I won't be irresponsible Just don't be broken
by that habit Every time I throw away that habit I can see your feelings We're
animals too We're animals too If you say it like that, it's normal We're animals
too We're animals too So we have a natural, original nature Don't classify
yourself I'll break that habit I'll break that habit I'm an adult, so I say
things I shouldn't But I'm happy to teach I can't even make a fish out of a fish
But you're a chance to move forward Get used to it, that's a win-win It's a
shame, isn't it? It's up to you in the first place I'm not interested in that
kind of thing What do you want to do in the future? I want to do what people ask
I want to believe it's not the end But if it's not, it's a pretty serious
situation You're just a normal box that's been classified I'm in life-changing
mode I'll sleep there forever I'm short in the first place So I struggled and
struggled and cried bitterly If I classified my past It's obvious from anyone's
eyes In this world, there's a lot of things Like love, luck, and fate Why do you
have to put them all away? We're more vague Like something that's complicated
and filled Don't get angry, pretend you've realized I don't have the ability to
classify you We're animals too This is a habit If you say it this far, it's a
poison From the bottom of my stomach, it's a habit We're animals too So we're
obsessed with original modifications Don't classify yourself I'll destroy your
bad habit We're animals too This is a habit If you say it this far, it's a
poison From the bottom of my stomach, it's a habit We're animals too So we're
obsessed with original modifications Don't classify yourself I'll destroy your
bad habit The Fall of the Park The fall of the park is waiting It's teaching me
how to fly It's kind of you If I could be that way I'd give anxiety to a cat
lying down And I'd want to see you What kind of words, wishes, and scenery Would
make you smile and happy? I don't have a map, but I'll walk and look I'd give it
to you The difference between coincidence and fate Is written on your face The
meaning of life Was in the rain you gave me I touched what floated around you
What can I make? I'll support you with my unreliable determination I'm making a
pattern of my world It's not fashionable, but it's the only way I want you to
smile You in me, and me in you Are definitely not the same There are pliers at
the station, and shoes on the promenade