TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 World News Day is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. It's five o'clock in London. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC
World Service with James Koppner and Catherine Biarra-Hunger. The UN General
Assembly debates a resolution calling on Russia to withdraw from Ukraine. We'll
hear about this and other diplomatic efforts to push back against Russia's
invasion. Speaking to a former US ambassador to the Western Defence Alliance,
NATO. We'll take a look at a country emerging as a key source of support for
Russia to China. Nearly a year into the war we'll get a sense of everyday life
in Ukraine with a baker in the southern city of Odessa where it's hard to get
hold of wheat. Also, Kenya opens an investigation into a BBC report about sexual
abuse on tea plantations. We'll head to Nairobi to find out more. And we'll get
the latest efforts to beat the power cuts and get the lights back on in South
Africa. Sports coming your way too after this bulletin with the latest world
news. BBC News, hello. I'm Gareth Barlow. A final day of campaigning is getting
underway in Nigeria ahead of Saturday's presidential poll. The election in which
three contenders are thought to have a chance of winning is the most competitive
since the end of military rule in 1999. Manny Jones reports. It's the first time
since Nigeria's transition to democracy that there's been a third leading
candidate. Peter Obi used to be part of the People's Democratic Party, the main
opposition, but is now with the lesser known Labour Party. He has the support of
a vocal contingent of young activists on social media who say they're tired of
the ruling All Progressives Congress and the PDP. His presence on the ballot has
made the result more difficult to predict and introduced the possibility of a
runoff, something that would be another first for the country. The United
Nations looks likely to approve a resolution calling for Russia to withdraw from
Ukraine immediately and unconditionally. The vote is due to take place later on
Thursday, the eve of the invasion's first anniversary at the UN General Assembly
in New York. Nada Taufik reports. The draft resolution is largely based on
President Zelensky's 10-point peace formula. It calls for a just and lasting
peace involving the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal of all
Russian forces from Ukraine's territory. Western diplomats expect wide support
for the resolution, but Russia's allies, including Belarus, China and Iran, have
warned it will further a Cold War mentality and stoke tensions. The Mexican
Senate has approved a controversial and wide-ranging reform of the agency that
oversees elections. The changes include removing millions of dollars of funding
and closing many of its local offices. Will Grant reports. In passing the
measure, 72 votes in favour to 50 against, the Senate has approved a motion
close to President López Obrador's heart. He has long argued that the country's
electoral body is no longer fit for purpose. His complaints date to his
unsuccessful presidential campaign in 2005 in a close-run vote, which he largely
blamed on alleged vested interests inside the electoral agency. In essence, the
reform will reduce the budget for the agency, known as the INE, and water down
its responsibilities. Opponents say it's the latest step in an increasingly
autocratic control of Mexico's state institutions by Mr López Obrador and his
party Morena. A TV news journalist has been shot dead while working at the scene
of a murder in the US state of Florida. A nine-year-old girl was also killed
inside a nearby house. Police have arrested a 19-year-old suspect. He's also
been charged with murdering a woman earlier on Wednesday. The news crew had been
dispatched to cover the discovery of her body. World News from the BBC. Israel
says Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip have fired a number of rockets the
day after a deadly Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank. Israel's military
said it intercepted five of the devices over the south of the country. The other
landed in a field. On Wednesday, Israeli troops killed 11 Palestinians and
wounded about 100 others in Nablus. Several Palestinian gunmen were among the
dead. The British government has announced plans to make major changes to the
way English football is governed. The proposals include setting up an
independent regulator. Dan Rowan reports. This is a hugely significant moment
for the English game. The independent football regulator is designed to prevent
a repeat of the failings that led to the collapse of Bury FC in 2019, one of a
host of clubs to suffer financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee
a licensing system to ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a
strengthened owners and directors test, give fans a greater say in key decisions
and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like the European
Super League. Ministers say they want to preserve the top flight's global
popularity but insist a governance overhaul is now needed for the good of the
wider game. Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New Zealand's
North Island, which are still recovering from a cyclone earlier this month that
killed at least 11 people. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are expected in Hawke's
Bay and the Coromandel Peninsula. Cyclone Gabrielle was the deadliest storm in
New Zealand for decades. Researchers say a 54,000-year-old cave site in southern
France holds evidence that the first modern humans to reach Europe hunted with
bows and arrows. The use of such weapons on the continent was previously thought
to have been far more recent. Tiny fragments of flint arrowheads were discovered
during excavations in the Rhone Valley. Live from London, that's the latest BBC
News. Thanks for that. Thanks for that news. And welcome to Newsday on the BBC
World Service with Catherine and James. In the programme today, diplomatic
efforts to end the war in Ukraine. And could Russia get more support and even
lots of weapons from China? We'd love to hear your thoughts on this. Our text
number is plus 44 77 86 20 50 85. We'll head to Nairobi as Kenya opens an
investigation into a BBC report about sexual abuses on tea plantations. And
we'll have plenty on the Nigeria elections throughout the programme with Alan
Kastuja in Lagos. And we'll have the sports and business too. We begin now with
a special session of the United Nations General Assembly, where a motion has
been tabled calling on Russia to withdraw from all Ukrainian territory and for
an immediate cessation of hostilities. The vote has no legal effect, but those
behind it have said it will send a message about the strength of support for
Ukraine internationally. UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has condemned
Russia's invasion of Ukraine ahead of Friday's first anniversary of Moscow's
attack. The one year mark of Russia's invasion of Ukraine stands as a grim
milestone for the people of Ukraine and for the international community. That
invasion is an affront to our collective conscience. It is a violation of United
Nations Charter and international law. Well, for more, I've been speaking to a
leading American diplomat and politician. Kay Bailey Hutchin is among other
things, a former US ambassador to the Western Military Alliance, NATO. That was
during the Trump administration. I began by asking her just how significant
these talks at the UN special session are. Well, certainly, I think when the UN
speaks overwhelmingly with a varied voice, it's good. But I think NATO and the
security organizations are most certainly the ones that are making things happen
and are united completely, whereas the UN always has differing views that
sometimes are against the majority. Sometimes it's not as security minded as
NATO. Okay. So if for you, then the focus should come through NATO, what do you
make of President Biden's meeting with the Bucharest Nine, the countries on
NATO's eastern flank? I mean, they want a much greater security presence there,
don't they? Absolutely. And I saw that all the time that I was at NATO. The B-9
are very strong and they came in after the Cold War. And we see now with this
invasion of Ukraine by Russia, that that was a very important step because
Russia would have been much stronger, Putin would have been much stronger if
those countries had not come into NATO and built their democracies and their
militaries to be ready for exactly what has happened to Ukraine. You're not
concerned that strengthening their military presence escalates in some way the
conflict with Russia? Oh, not at all. I think that Putin has had a
determination, and I saw it when I was over there, but we've seen it even before
that, that the breakup of the Soviet Union was the worst thing that has happened
in Russian history. And he wanted to bring back the mother Russia and start
putting the Soviet Union back together. And I think that the fact that the B-9
group became so strong, that has protected them and most certainly has protected
Europe. Because if Putin had made a success, it would be another world war. He
would have gone into the other parts of Europe as well. I'm interested in your
thoughts on the relationship between China and Russia, talks that they described
as productive in the last couple of days, and we're expecting a major speech on
Ukraine by President Xi Jinping. What change, if any, does that bring to the
situation? Well, we're very concerned. I'm very concerned, and many of my
colleagues are, about China trying to apparently put in more lethal support for
the Russian position. In the last year, China has been decidedly neutral, but
for China to start giving Russia weapons would be a very dangerous move. And
that is where, in my view, Europe must stand solid with the United States and
Canada and all of the Western democracies, the Asia-Pacific democracies as well,
must stay solid in standing firm against China getting involved with this
horrendous assault on a sovereign nation in Europe. And the way that the unity
can make a difference is in economics, in trade, because Xi will not be able to
support his own economy if the Western democracies, which are also the strongest
economies in the world, really do put in sanctions that would cripple the
economy of China. That's one thing that I think Xi would be smart enough to
realize is a price that would be too heavy. The thoughts there from the former
US ambassador, Kate Bailey Hutchison. Well, China has become an increasingly
important trading partner for Russia as it seeks to soften the impact of
economic sanctions imposed by some countries in response to its invasion of
Ukraine. The United States now says Beijing is considering supplying weapons and
ammunition to Russia, allegations which China strongly denies. Let's get more on
these deepening ties between the two countries now and hear from Anastasia
Shaposhkina of the Eastern Circle's Geoeconomics Think Tank. Anastasia, well,
we've seen China's top foreign policy official Wang Yi in Russia on Wednesday
with Mr Putin, with Mr Putin saying the two countries' relations could soon
reach new milestones. What does he mean by this? From the very outset of the war
and even before the full-scale invasion since 2014, Russia has bet on Chinese
support, both in replacing the European market for its energy exports, which
determine the well-being of its economy and are absolutely crucial, the backbone
of it, and also with increasing military cooperation. Since 2014, we have seen
an exponential increase in the meetings between different levels of Chinese and
Russian military, the joint military exercises, which have not been interrupted
in 2022, and the increasing cooperation in the military sector, different
levels. And this, of course, brings us, and this brought a lot of questions and
a lot of optimism to the Russian leadership about the Chinese possible support.
Yet, we have seen that so far throughout the year, throughout 2022, the effect
of China's behavior rather has been more comforting toward the optimists, which
is we haven't heard about Taiwan. The tensions there have been suspended because
we all have been optimistic, thinking, oh, maybe China is going to see how
painful the economic sanctions on Russia are and rethink. Well, now let's see
what's actually happening. And what we have seen is that the patrol experts and
petroleum products experts have been completely rerouted from Europe to China
and to India. And thus, we can say that China could have learned one lesson,
could have learned that you can have at least 150 different ways to go around
Western sanctions. Even the prohibited exports, such as microchips, can be
eventually imported through Turkey, through Qatar, through Kazakhstan, many
other destinations. And finally, when we get to the military plan, of course, we
have seen in the last months, increasing Russia, North Korea military
cooperation, which last time I remember, North Korea was a geopolitical actor,
independent geopolitical actor, is no time. So it is China through the back
door, so to say, of Chinese military presence, which is already we are
observing. And if we're looking in the future, and if we are thinking that maybe
this year we've been a bit more too much optimistic, and Russia has been more
realistic, we can see a much further development, of course. Indeed, and just
very, very, very briefly, could we see China moving closer to Moscow? Because
we've seen obviously relations spiralling between the US and Beijing in recent
weeks over those alleged China spying balloons? Yes, and it depends really,
first of all, on Chinese decision, whether it is ready with almost a third or
over a third of US's military budget, but a much greater number of the
population, an unprecedented, absolutely unparalleled industrial capacity,
including the military industrial complex with one of the largest fleets,
whether it is ready to challenge the US as the global power, not just
economically, but also militarily today, when the US is being already dragged
into the conflict. And of course, that would change the entire paradigm of the
global governance, as we know it today. Wonderful. Thank you, Anastasia
Shapochkina of the Eastern Circle's Geoeconomics Think Tank. Music heralds Isaac
Fannin with the sports. Yes, indeed. Two Champions League matches on Wednesday
to tell you about. Algeria's Riyad Mahrez scored his 12th goal of the season,
but that could only help Manchester City win one, draw 1-1 away at RB Leipzig in
their round of 16 first leg match. Osco Vardyol levelling things up for the
German side in the second half. Romelu Lukaku came off the bench to score the
early goal of the game for Inter Milan as they beat Porto 1-0 at the San Siro.
There's been some fairly big news in English football. It's the announcement of
a new independent regulator by the UK government. This regulator will be able to
stop English teams from joining breakaway leagues like the European Super
League, which of course was super controversial a few years ago. We'll have a
little bit more on that story in half an hour. And before I go, Panama are the
final women's team into the World Cup later this year. They beat Paraguay 1-0 in
a playoff match. Congratulations to them, Isaac Fannin, thank you. Let's get our
business news now. Katie Silva joining us from our business desk in Singapore,
but we're going to be talking South Africa, Katie, a government bailout to get
the power back on track. That's right. So this is, of course, the crisis hit
state power company Exxon. Basically, it's been struggling with a huge debt in
the order of about $23 billion. And now the government says it's going to take
on nearly two thirds of this debt. And that's because we're seeing breakdowns at
their power plants, causing unprecedented power cuts across the country. And
that is hurting the country's economy. To give you an idea, Exxon is responsible
for nearly all of South Africa's power supply. And what they say is that these
aging power stations are collapsing. And that's causing delays, these financial
constraints are causing delays when it comes to investing in new supplies, as
well as we've seen looting at power stations there in recent times. It's hoped
that the decision today by the country's Treasury will help free up some money
to help spend on maintenance, transmission and distribution. But we've also seen
in the last 24 hours, the company's chief executive stepped down with immediate
effect. André de Routier had already quit back in December after three years in
the post. And he was due to leave next month. But he gave a pretty explosive
interview on South African television over the weekend, in which he implicated
senior politicians in the ruling party in corruption. He basically said that
they were that Exxon was in the grip of organised crime, and that even worse
outages are likely to follow other than these that we've been seeing, which are
in the order sometimes of up to 12 hours a day. He said that looting and
infiltration had occurred by at least four crime cartels. So that's a part of
it. Last year, for instance, we saw an attempt to kill him with a coffee laced
with cyanide in his office, which he survived but made him violently sick. As I
say, he stepped down today. It's hoped that this deal this paying off debt may
help South Africa's power crisis alleviate somewhat. Katie Silver, thank you.
This is Newsday on the BBC World Service. Good morning. This is where we raise
Radio 4 from its slumbers with thanks to our World Service colleagues for their
endeavours overnight. I'm Chris Aldridge with my colleague Wayne Moses at the
controls. Later this hour, we'll be hearing of one solution to Britain's salad
shortage. First, a look ahead to this evening and a fresh helping of witty
observations on the human condition. Now, BBC Radio 4, it's time for us to meet
Darren Bett. Thank you very much, Chris. Good morning. This is the Shipping
Forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard
Agency at 0505 on Thursday, the 23rd of February. There are warnings of gales in
Viking, North Utsira, South Utsira, Fisher, Fitzroy, Sol, Fasnet, Hebrides,
Bailey, Fair Isle, Faroes and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at
midnight. High pressure 200 miles west of Rockhall, 1037, slow moving, declining
1029 by midnight tonight. To the area forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking,
North Utsira, Northerly or Northwesterly 4 to 6, backing southerly or
southwesterly 6 to gale 8, then veering northerly later, rain or showers good,
occasionally poor. South Utsira, northerly 6 to gale 8, backing westerly or
southwesterly 4 to 6, then northwesterly 6 or 7 later, rain or showers good,
occasionally poor. Forties, Cromarty, Forth, Tyne, Dogger. North or north-west,
backing west for a time 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in forties and Cromarty, perhaps
gale 8 later in forties, rain or showers good, occasionally poor. Fisher, north
6 to gale 8, backing west or north-west 5 to 7, rain or showers later, good,
occasionally poor. German Bight, Humber, north or north-west 4 to 6, backing
west or north-west 5 to 7 later, rain or showers good, occasionally poor.
Thames, Dover, White, Portland, Plymouth. North or north-east, backing west
later in Thames, 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4 later in Dover, showers good,
occasionally poor. Biscay, north 4 to 6, becoming cyclonic 5 to 7 later, perhaps
gale 8 later, rain or showers good, occasionally poor. Fitzroy, Sol, Lundy,
Fasnet. North or north-east 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 at first except in
Lundy, decreasing 4 to 6 later in Lundy and Fasnet, squally showers good,
occasionally poor. Iris Sea, north 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4 for a time,
showers good. Shannon, north 4 to 6, showers good. Rockall, Malin. West or
north-west, veering north later, 4 to 6, showers good. Hebrides, Bailey, Fair
Isle, Faroes. West or south-west 6 to gale 8, veering north or north-west 5 to 7
later, rain or showers good, occasionally poor. And south-east Iceland, westerly
6 to gale 8, becoming cyclonic 4 to 6, wintry showers good, occasionally poor.
Now here are the weather reports from coastal stations for 0400. Tyree
Automatic, west north-west 2, recent drizzle, 14 miles, 1024, falling slowly.
Stornoway, south-west by south 3, 16 miles, 1021, falling. Lerwick, west 3, 24
miles, 1016, falling slowly. Lucas, west 2, 22 miles, 1022, rising slowly.
Bridlington, north 5, 1017, rising. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic, north 4, 2
miles, 1013. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic, 5 miles, 1014. Jersey, north-west
3, 16 miles, 1015, falling slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, east north-
east 5, 1015. Silly Automatic, north by east 5, 16 miles, 1018, now rising.
Valencia, north 3, recent rain, 15 miles, 1027, rising more slowly. Ronaldsway,
north by east 4, 1022, rising more slowly. Malin Head, north by west 3, 7 miles,
1024, now rising. Now here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours, issued by
the Met Office at 0500. The general situation, a ridge of high pressure sinks
southwards across the United Kingdom through Thursday, ahead of a band of rain
which will move southwards across Scotland and into parts of England on Friday
morning. So, Caperath to Rutteray Head, including Orkney. Westerly or south-
westerly, 3 to 5, increasing 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 for a time in the
north, veering northerly 4 to 6 later. Fair, then rain, then showers later,
good, occasionally poor. Rutteray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North-westerly, 4
or 5, backing westerly or south-westerly, 5 or 6, then veering northerly or
north-westerly, 4 to 6 later. Occasional rain later, good, occasionally moderate
later. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North, 4 or 5, backing west, 3 or 4,
increasing 5 or 6 later, then veering north-west later, occasional rain later,
good, occasionally moderate later. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North, 5 or 6,
backing north-west, 3 or 4, then west, 4 to 6 later, showers, becoming fair,
then occasional rain later, good, occasionally moderate. Gibraltar Point to
North Forland. Northerly, 4 to 6, backing westerly, 4 or 5 later, occasional
rain, becoming fair for a time, good, occasionally moderate for a time. North
Forland to Selsey Bill. Northerly, 3 or 4, veering north-easterly, 5 or 6, then
backing north-westerly, 2 or 3 later, occasional rain at first, moderate or
good. Selsey Bill to Lime Regis. North or north-east, 4 or 5, occasionally 6,
offshore, showers at first, good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles
of Scilly. Northerly or north-easterly, 5 or 6, occasionally 7 at first, near
Isles of Scilly, decreasing 3 or 4 later in the east, showers until later, good,
occasionally poor until later. Land's End to St David's Head, including the
Bristol Channel. Northerly or north-easterly, 4 to 6, occasionally 7 at first in
the west, veering northerly or north-westerly, 2 to 4 later, showers at first,
good, occasionally poor at first. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St
George's Channel. North, 5 or 6, decreasing 3 or 4, backing north-west, 4 or 5
later, mainly fair, good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. North, 4 or 5,
backing west or north-west, 3 or 4, increasing 5 or 6 later, mainly fair, good.
Isle of Man. North, 4 or 5, backing west, 3 or 4, then veering north-west, 5 or
6 later, mainly fair, good. Lockfoyle to Carlingford Lock. Northerly, backing
westerly, 3 to 5, then veering north-westerly, 4 to 6 later, showers, good. Mull
of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel.
Northerly, 3 or 4, backing westerly, 4 or 5, then veering north-westerly, 4 to 6
later, fair, then showers, good. Mull of Kintyre to Adnamuckan Point. North-
west, 2 to 4, backing west, 4 to 6, then veering north-west, 5 or 6 later, rain
or showers, moderate or good. Adnamuckan Point to Cape Wrath. South-westerly, 3
to 5, veering westerly or north-easterly, 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in north, then
north, 4 to 6 later, rain or showers, good, occasionally moderate. And finally
Shetland Isles. West or south-west, 3 to 5, increasing 6 to Gale 8, then veering
north-west, 6 or 7, then north later, rain or showers, moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Well that completes the Shipping Bulletin, but I'll be back
with the General Weather Forecast in just a few minutes. In business, the
Government wants to subsidise the cost of energy for 300 companies exposed to
high electricity prices. And in sport, Manchester City were held to a draw in
the Champions League last night. Police in Northern Ireland say a serving
officer who was shot last night by masked men in Oma is in a critical but stable
condition in hospital. The victim was off duty, coaching young footballers when
the attack happened. He's a senior detective who was the lead officer in several
high-profile cases related to both dissident Republican violence and crime gang
murders. Political leaders have strongly condemned the attack. Tom Elliott is a
member of the Stormont Assembly from the Ulster Unionist Party. It's absolutely
despicable. We thought we had got past this. And, you know, it throws back too
many years ago whenever we were hearing of this on a regular basis. And it's
just terrible, particularly in the circumstances that it was, you know, I'm
told, in front of young people out there when he was taking a football coaching
session or just ending the session. The Home Office is to scrap face-to-face
interviews for 12,000 asylum seekers from five countries in an attempt to cut a
large backlog of cases. People from Afghanistan, Yemen, Eritrea, Syria and Libya
who applied before last July will now be asked to fill in a 10-page
questionnaire which will be used to assess their claim. The Home Office says
applicants from the five countries already have 95% of their asylum claims
accepted. The government has confirmed it plans to establish an independent
football regulator in what it describes as a radical transformation of the way
the sport is run in England. The new body will be tasked with preventing
financial failings seen at a number of clubs, including Bury and Macclesfield,
which both collapsed. The regulator will also ensure a fair distribution of
money from the Premier League down the football pyramid and have the power to
block clubs from joining breakaway competitions such as the European Super
League. The chief executive of Brighton, Paul Barber, shared his thoughts about
the proposal. Frankly, we should be running ourselves in the right way anyway
and where we don't, if it takes the regulator to impose those disciplines, then
so be it. That's what we have to work with. That's what we've partly brought
upon ourselves. I'd like to think that the game itself will work constructively
with each other to limit the power of the regulator by actually doing the right
thing anyway. Media in the United States say the daughter and son-in-law of
Donald Trump have been summoned to testify before a federal grand jury. They say
Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner have been called to give evidence on the former
president's role in the storming of the US Congress two years ago. Both served
as White House officials in the Trump administration. Western diplomats have
clashed with their Russian colleague at the UN General Assembly, which has begun
debating a motion calling on Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. Dozens of countries have sponsored the non-binding resolution
almost a year after the conflict began. Russia's ambassador repeated Moscow's
claim that Ukraine is ruled by neo-Nazis, but the UN Secretary-General, António
Guterres, condemned the invasion. That invasion is an affront to our collective
conscience. It is a violation of the United Nations Charter and international
law. It is having dramatic humanitarian and human rights consequences, and the
impact is being felt far beyond Ukraine. An island in North Wales has been
declared one of only 16 dark-sky sanctuaries in the world, and the only one in
Europe. Arnis Enhli, or Bardsy Island, is protected by its mountains from
artificial light coming from the mainland, making it an ideal location to see
the stars at night. It's hoped the status will now attract investment to
safeguard the island's uniqueness. That's the BBC News. Now time for us to look
at the daytime skies with Darren Budd. Thank you very much indeed. Good morning.
We've got cloudy skies to start the day across the southern half of the UK,
clearer skies further north. Quite a cold start this morning in Scotland. If we
look at the details first of all for Scotland, we're going to see cloud
increasing from the northwest actually as the breeze picks up, a west-to-
southwesterly wind. That will blow more cloud in from the northwest during this
morning. Some southern and eastern parts of Scotland hanging onto the sunshine
through the morning, but even these areas will cloud over in the afternoon. Now
the cloud will bring some rain, mainly for northern Scotland during the
afternoon, which will turn heavier I think in the highlands later on in the day.
And by then in northern Scotland we'll have some strong winds. Across northern
Ireland a chilly start. We're going to see some sunshine this morning, a bit
more cloud during the afternoon perhaps, but it should stay dry here, not as
windy as in Scotland. And across England and Wales, well we start with a lot of
cloud across Wales, the Midlands, southern England. There may even be one or two
showers running into some North Sea coasts further north as well. But underneath
the cloud we've got some patchy light rain for the most part. That rain and
cloud will push its way southwards. The rain dying out this afternoon, but cloud
lingering in southern parts of England. We should see the sunshine through much
of the day across northern England, sunshine coming out in Wales and the
Midlands during the morning and then during the afternoon across East Anglia.
Temperature-wise today, 7 to 9 degrees. But as we head into tonight, there could
be an early frost across southern areas before that cloud continues to move its
way southwards. 25 to 6, thanks Darren. We'll look at the newspapers now. And a
number lead with the government's plan to reduce the asylum backlog by scrapping
interviews for some migrants from Afghanistan, Eritrea, Syria, Yemen and Libya.
The Daily Mail says the fast lane has been dubbed an amnesty in all but name and
warns it's been told by a senior source that the change would encourage other
people from the five countries to come to the UK. The Conservative MP Marco
Longhi tells the Daily Telegraph the scheme appears to be completely wrong and
people who'd entered the UK illegally should be removed and have their claims
processed overseas. But the Daily Express says the plan is a practical solution
to a long-standing problem. Just take no for an answer is The Sun's message to
Shamima Begum after the former member of the Islamic State group lost a legal
bid to restore her British citizenship. The paper says her lawyers boasted that
the battle was nowhere near over and appeals are set to cost the taxpayer
millions. An editorial in The Times says the government hasn't yet given a
convincing answer on why Shamima Begum must not return to the UK or what threat
she still poses that couldn't be countered by close monitoring. The paper
acknowledges that keeping an eye on her would take up scarce security resources
but adds that punishing people by leaving them stateless in a desert is no
answer to terrorism. The Daily Telegraph highlights a warning from BT that the
Chancellor Jeremy Hunt will send Britain in a drastically anti-investment
direction if he forges ahead with an increase in corporation tax. The chief
financial officer of the telecoms firm Simon Lowth fears the increase from 19 to
25% will reduce business investment and slow down economic growth. According to
The Guardian, pollutants known as forever chemicals which build up in the body
may be toxic and do not break down in the environment have been found at high
levels across the UK and Europe. The paper says the chemicals, valued for their
non-stick and detergent properties, have made their way into the soil, water and
sediments from consumer products, firefighting foams, waste and industrial
processes. In the UK, the highest level was detected in a discharge from a
chemicals plant on the River Wyre near Blackpool. Finally, almost all papers
feature images of the late musician David Bowie in some of his extraordinary
costumes, which have now been gifted to the nation. The Daily Mirror says his
personal archive is donating a collection of his handwritten lyrics, letters,
sheet music, costumes, photography, music videos, album artwork and awards to
the Victoria and Albert Museum, which will open the David Bowie Centre for the
Study of Performing Arts in 2025. That's our look at the papers, more in the
Today programme from 6 o'clock. Now though, we'll turn to business. The
government has announced plans to subsidise the cost of energy for 300 companies
in sectors that are particularly exposed to high electricity prices, such as
steel, metals, chemicals and paper. The Business and Trade Secretary, Kemi
Badenoch, said the carefully crafted support would help the firms remain
internationally competitive and enhance the UK's attractiveness as an investment
destination. Katie Silver has the details. Ministers say the initiative, called
the British Industry Supercharger, is designed to ensure that the energy costs
for key UK industries are in line with what their competitors are paying in
other major economies around the world. Currently, electricity prices for
industrial users in the UK are higher than in other comparable countries. The
government says the 300 companies employ about 400,000 workers. Consultations on
the scheme will be held in the spring ahead of a planned rollout next year. UK
public services are in desperate need of more cash, according to the Institute
for Government. The think tank says funding increases announced in the
Chancellor's autumn statement will not be enough to return public services to
what they were before the pandemic in time for the next election. It also warns
that the government's response to a wave of strikes will further exacerbate
staff shortages. And the boss of the Philip Morris tobacco firm admits he would
rather keep its business in Russia than sell under tough terms imposed by the
Kremlin. In an interview for the Financial Times, Yarchik Alchuk says he can't
just abandon his shareholders' assets in Russia worth more than £2 billion. In
the markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones finished down 0.25% at
33,045, and the FTSE 100 lost 47 points, finishing at 7,930. In Japan a short
time ago, the Nikkei 225 was down 1.3% at 27,104. And the currency market, the
pound, is trading at $1.21. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.14. That makes a
euro 88 pence. Katie Silver, now in sport, Manchester City have been held to a
one-all draw by RB Leipzig in the Champions League. With more on that and the
rest of the action, here's Richard Newman. The Manchester City head coach Pep
Guardiola says his players should feel proud of their one-all draw at RB Leipzig
in the first leg of their Champions League last-16 tie, rather than
disappointed. He brought his team in for a huddle on the pitch at full-time
because he said too many had their heads down. Inter Milan beat Porto 1-0.
England's women thrashed Belgium 6-1 to retain the Arnold Clark Cup as the
European champions continued their build-up to this summer's Women's World Cup.
The Wales' rugby union team will not go on strike after reaching compromises on
some issues surrounding a contract dispute with the governing body. Saturday's
Six Nations match with England in Cardiff will go ahead. In cricket, England
have named an unchanged side for the second Test with New Zealand in Wellington,
which starts tonight. James Anderson will play, having returned to the top of
the world's bowling rankings at the age of 40 after taking seven wickets in the
first Test win. And Andy Murray produced another marathon performance to beat
the Olympic champion Alexander Zverev in the last-16 of the Qatar Open in a
match which lasted over three hours. Thanks Richard. Now a glance at some of the
stories that were making news on this date in years gone by. Two years ago, the
golfer Tiger Woods was rushed to hospital for surgery after the car he was
driving in Los Angeles left the road and overturned. Police said he was lucky to
be alive. At the start of the Covid pandemic three years ago, Italy became the
first European country to impose draconian restrictions to halt the spread of
the virus. In 2016, four people were killed when a building being prepared for a
World Cup being prepared for demolition at Didcot power station in Oxfordshire
collapsed. It took several months to recover the bodies of the victims. That
completes this morning's news briefing. Now on Radio 4, it's time for Prayer for
the Day with Hope Lonergan. Good morning. One morning I wasted an hour wrapping
up an empty Coke can with plumbing tape. Why? No reason. No reason whatsoever.
This was just another one of those pointless rituals that mark the passage of
time. A minuscule procedure with a futile objective. To cover the can in tape so
the tape totally covered the can. Despite the needlessness of this act, ritual
is actually a fundamental part of spiritual practice. Whether it's ritualized
courtship, communal dancing, synchronized shrieking, or the more personalized
rituals. As anthropologist and cognitive scientist Demetrius Z. Galatas writes
in Ritual, Rituals are highly structured. They require rigidity. They must
always be performed the correct way. Repetition. The same actions performed
again and again. And redundancy. They can go on for a long time. In other words,
they are predictable. This predictability imposes order on the chaos of everyday
life, which provides us with a sense of control over uncontrollable situations.
The world is buzzing, cacophonous, full of attention-grabbing and social media
sharing. A world alive with visual clutter and oral detritus. In such a world,
sometimes you need to just stop, take a breath, and cover a can with plumbing
tape. With this in mind, God, thank you for the feeling of togetherness
experienced during collective rituals, and thank you for the discipline and
order of my own repetitive action patterns. With constant noise, change, and
fluctuation, it's nice to have the continuity of daily customs. Go lightly.
Amen. That was Hope Lonergan. Now on Radio 4, on Farming Today with Kaz Graham,
amid salad shortages in the shops, we speak to a Lancashire tomato grower about
what would help people like him. Good morning. Today, as more supermarkets
ration salad at the tills, I visit a Lancashire tomato grower who says UK
horticulture needs government help for building state-of-the-art greenhouses.
What this sector really would benefit from would be some sort of recognition
from government to help us invest in better structures like this that would
create more volume, more food security, more availability for the British
public. More on that later. First, though, all this week we are looking at
reintroducing species to the UK, from plants and mammals to birds and insects.
And it was something that DEFRA Minister Therese Coffey talked about in her
opening remarks. Now, while we've had some successful translocations and
reintroductions of species, I don't want farmers to constantly have to worry
about these issues. We've got plenty to do with the habitats that need improving
and expanding, but that is why I won't be supporting reintroductions of species
like lynx or wolves. We just don't need to, and we won't do. Well, we'll have
more from Therese Coffey at the NFU conference a little bit later. But among the
high-profile reintroductions, there are others like the pine hoverfly, a small,
elusive and very rare insect whose habitat is among Scots pine trees. The last
population in Britain is in the Cairngorms National Park, and that's where
conservationists from the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland are involved in a
breeding programme which has been releasing pine hoverflies back into the wild
for the past two years. Nancy Nicholson caught up with Dr Helen Taylor, the
conservation programme manager at the Society's Highland Wildlife Park at King
Craig, to find out what's involved. So we're now going into the main breeding
facility for pine hoverflies on site here at Highland Wildlife Park, and this
really is the heart of the pine hoverfly conservation breeding programme. This
is where all the sort of magic happens. Right, it's a wooden hat, Helen, and
inside you've got lots of cages which are empty at the moment. Yes, so these are
our mesh flight cages. If you came in May, June, these would be absolutely
buzzing with adult pine hoverflies, feeding, mating and producing lots more
larvae for the breeding programme. As an adult, they're not like the kind of
hoverflies you might see in the garden with the sort of black and yellow colour
that people are familiar with. This is a fly that's kind of almost all black,
but with a very striking orange tip to the abdomen. And they are incredibly
rare. This area is the last remaining part of the country that we can find them
in. Yes, they are one of the most threatened species in Britain. They are found
in Europe, but they seem to be in decline wherever they're found, and nowhere
more so than in Britain, where they are reduced to just one site here in the
Cairngorm. Why are these insects so rare? They need complex forest. They need
big granny pines, they need a healthy understory of rowan and blaeberry,
cowberry, all of that kind of stuff going on, not just a uniform pine forest.
And because of deforestation and land use change, that kind of forest is really
rare in Scotland now. And so there's really important habitat restoration work
going on out in the wild as part of projects like Cairngorms Connect. But then
once you've done that habitat restoration, you need the animals to go back out.
And that's where the conservation breeding programme comes in. But let's go and
take a look at the kind of habitat that they hold. Right, so we've walked
through the park and we've just passed a sign, Helen, that says wolf wood. And
you've brought me in here. Don't be afraid, Nancy. Where are the wolves? Are
they nearby? The wolves are just beyond the fence line over there. This is their
paddock here. Right next to the wolf wood, what we've got here is some
experimental habitat development that we did on site, where we've created the
kind of artificial rotholes that are out at our release sites. Rotholes. Yes,
it's a really glamorous name, isn't it? Are we climbing over this fence? We are.
We are, right. OK. This is not a bad one. OK. Lifting up a couple of blocks of
wood. So it looks really wet and soggy in there. Yeah. Those are the conditions
they like. This is what they want. Yeah, it's not super glamorous. And as you
can see, this not only provides habitat for hoverflies, but also for lots of
other species. So we've got slugs in here. We often find spiders hanging out.
Lots of other animals. We found newts in artificial rotholes out in the wild
before. And here we are. We're kneeling on the ground just beside the wolf
enclosure. And I keep peering over the fence there. Also here, the wildcats,
Scottish wildcats, are being reintroduced. These are projects that people get
really excited about. How does it feel to be doing something that is so
underwhelming? So for me, the important point here is that, yes, I've worked on
the beaver project. We're working on the Scottish wildcat project. And those
projects are phenomenal and super exciting and important. However, species like
this are what keep ecosystems going and keep them healthy. And if you want
ecosystems to release big, exciting, fluffy species into, you've got to look
after these little guys as well. And so I'm actually really proud that here at
RZSS, as part of the rare invertebrates in the Cairngorms project, we're working
at both ends of the scale. We're looking after the little guys, and then we've
got the big charismatic projects as well. So I don't have a problem with that at
all. Dr Helen Taylor from the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland. Well, we
brought you a packed programme from the NFU conference in Birmingham yesterday
with Labour leader Keir Starmer, the farming minister Mark Spencer, and even a
cameo video link from the prime minister. Well, the conference continued on
Wednesday, and farmers saw the death for Secretary Therese Coffey take to the
stage. She ruled out any further money to pay for ELMS, the environmental land
management schemes. And NFU president Minette Batters asked her if she would use
new powers in the Agriculture Act to intervene to deal with what she described
as market failure in pigs and poultry. I understand the costs are high. That's
why we're working on energy security. I'm not necessarily seeing a market
failure. We saw a market failure with pigs and poultry. Well, I'm not sure that
we've seen a market failure with poultry. We had a billion less eggs in 2022 to
2019. That's not necessarily a market failure. We've lost businesses. Hey, I'm
not denying that people have chosen potentially not to restock on certain
things. That's why we're still going through our supply chain reviews, which we
were close to concluding. Aspects are certainly on dairy and the pigs, and we
will consider potentially other sectors. But, you know, frankly, sometimes it
doesn't help when you have people, not you Minette, it was somebody else, goes
to Parliament, tells them there's this massive shortage of all these problems
about the poultry sector. And what a surprise. Farmers are going nuts at
Christmas time because they've got a glut of free range chicken, and they're not
getting the prices they wanted for it. You know, there are challenges. I've
accepted that about the input costs and similar. But I don't believe that the, I
think it's Section 20 of the Agriculture Act is there to be invoked because of
some of the challenging economic situations that we have. I'm not seeing it as a
market failure. I think you wanted to speak to Jake, is it? Jake Fines and
Thomas Binns. Hey, I can talk about this for ages. But as I say, I've got to,
unfortunately, our session started a bit ten minutes late. So let's go to it.
Jake. Conference President. It's not my fault if we can't be on time at the NFU
conference. Come on then. Therese Coffey. Closing the conference, Minette
Batters concluded by saying that something needs to change to support food
supply chains. We have been warning of food supply issues for so long now. The
situation in the egg sector and the poultry meat sector, the situation with
horticulture, all of these things, they can be overcome, but it really needs a
fresh approach by government. I did take real exception to the Secretary of
State's denial that we weren't in market failure in the egg sector. A billion
less eggs in 2022 compared to 2019. It's been a really, really tough time for
some. Minette Batters talking about food supply issues. One food in short supply
in our supermarkets at the moment is salad. It's something we reported on
earlier this week. Weather extremes have hit growers in southern Spain and North
Africa and affected supplies here. On top of that, some British growers who
plant early salad crops under glass haven't done so because it costs too much to
heat their greenhouses. At the NFU conference, there were calls for government
to give producers who have big energy bills because they're growing undercover
the same kind of help available to other energy-intensive businesses. In a
moment, we'll be hearing from a tomato grower. But what did Farming Minister
Mark Spencer have to say about this when Farming Today asked him the question,
should producers growing undercover have support with their energy bills? Bays
are looking at that and the Treasury are looking at those schemes and they're
being reviewed at this moment in time. We, of course, are making representations
into that sector. Mark Spencer. Lancashire has got a long tradition of salad
growing. Flavour Fresh, based near Southport, grows around 250 million tomatoes
a year in glasshouses. I went to meet their grower, Andy Rowe, and we met in the
farm power plant. This is where your energy is produced, Andy? Yeah, that's the
heart of the business. That is where the energy, the heat, the CO2, the
electricity, that is the hub that everything feeds off. The majority of tomato
grows across England, Holland, Belgium have CHPs on site. And a CHP? A combined
heat and power. So it is generating electricity and exporting it to the grid. We
live off the by-products, so we take the CO2 into the greenhouse for
photosynthesis and the waste heat coming off the engine that is obviously red
hot, we store that and then we keep the greenhouses warm using that. So if
tomato producers have systems like that, how has the energy crisis affected you?
A lot, basically, because we have not been able to run the engines because of
the economics of running the engines, burning gas at the price of electric. We
have not generated the carbon dioxide, so we have not been able to have the
photosynthesis at optimum. So yields have come down, prices have gone up. Yeah,
it has been a tricky 18 months, mark my words. OK, let's go and have a wander
through the tomatoes. Where is it a bit quieter? This way. This is just over
8,000 square metres, so two acres of glass. We have got the sun blazing in and
these fantastic gleaming red tomatoes. And we have got these pink lights, LED
growing lights that are shining down on some huge tomato plants. Well, they are
currently four metres high, but they will end up being around 15, 16 metres
before the end of the season. These are our cherry variety piccolo tomatoes.
Could you afford to heat and to light a glasshouse like this if you weren't
creating your own energy? It is challenging. We can do it, but it sacrifices the
yield a little bit. We have to plant later and we have to grow cooler, so we
don't get the same volume and the same quality. You have got lots of tomatoes
here. We can see thousands of them in front of us. Tell me about the fact that
there are none in the shops at the moment. There are none in the shops at the
moment due to a number of factors. Obviously, the energy market is having an
effect across Europe. The Spanish growers aren't able to put any heat in because
it is too expensive. The Dutch growers would normally grow with LED lights. They
have reduced their areas quite significantly. Given the weather over in Spain,
there is a virus, a disease over in Morocco causing availability issues. So, all
combined, a perfect storm. Some producers have found that it is just not worth
their while planting and they haven't planted as well. We work to a small
margin. We really do. In this greenhouse, we are in one of the most modern
greenhouses in Europe. What this sector really would benefit from would be some
sort of recognition from government to help us invest in better structures like
this to create more volume, more food security, more availability for the
British public going forward. Anyway, through this door here... We have moved
into an older greenhouse now that is 35, 36 years old. You can see it is lower.
No LED lights. This is more of a traditional method where we are growing on the
floor. We are not able to plant as early because we have not got this modern
facility. We have not got the energy screen, but we do have this polythene film
that we have put over the crop. It is more like a polythene tunnel within a
greenhouse to keep the energy and keep the temperature within this older
greenhouse. Well, you have almost, like you say, created a polytunnel within a
glasshouse. Yes, and it is purely energy management. Do you get any support from
government with your energy bills at the moment? It is a complicated question.
Because we are running a combined heat and power system on site, the energy
model is slightly different. But no, it is not so much the energy that is the
issue with this shortage of British tomatoes. It is the investment on
infrastructure. If we had the investment for new infrastructure, new
greenhouses, better quality greenhouses, that would make us more profitable to
be able to reinvest going forward and then start producing up to 30, 40, 50% of
the tomatoes consumed in Britain. Andy Rowe from Flavour Fresh. And that is all
from us for today. I am Kaz Graham. The studio manager is Ilse Ladderman and our
producer is Rebecca Rooney. Thanks, Kaz. Now on BBC Radio 4, it is Tweet of the
Day with Michael Morpurgo. I am lucky enough to live in one of the most
beautiful and hidden parts of our country, Devon. And I have a walk I go on to
most days of my life. And almost always, on the way down there, I will begin to
hear or see a buzzard. Now, of course, it depends on the weather. They do not
like rain very much. They hide away. What is wonderful is you know you hear a
buzzard mew, you know two things. One, the sun is about to come up or it is out
already. And there is another thing you know pretty quick. And that is that
there is another one around. Because they love to be together. High, high up,
you see them wheeling and mewing, crying to each other. And I do not believe
that is anything to do with hunting. They are far too high up for that. I think
this is simply the joy, the exuberance of being alive, of feeling the warmth on
their backs, in their feathers. And it is just majestic the way they spread
their wings and do nothing except float. I think they are rather maligned. As
birds of prey, they may look a bit stubby compared to a kestrel. It does not
have the size or indeed the grace of an eagle. But they do very, very well. I
would call them working. And the buzzard seems to me to suit the kind of farmers
that we have around. They also have to work very hard. So I think they suit the
farmers and the farmers suit the birds.