TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 here on Radio 4 or you can hear the whole series now on BBC Sounds. Cos that's
right the Lions are back. Now all of a sudden, they say their primary focus is
the Dissident Republican Group known as the new IRA. Reverend Graham Hair, the
Rictor of the nearby St Columbus church, says the attack has shaken the
community. The tragedy here is that here we have a public servant, a man who put
his life on the line in the pursuit of justice and the pursuit of peace. And
here he was serving his community as a football coach alongside his son and
friends, these evil cards choose to come and gone on down. New data shows the
number of asylum seekers waiting for a decision on their case in the UK has
soared to record levels with around 166,000 people in the backlog. Yesterday,
the Home Office announced plans to streamline applications from certain
countries by replacing interviews with a 10-page questionnaire. Sakeer Stama has
set out plans for five national missions should Labour win the next general
election, including making the economy the fastest growing among the G7. The
other four would be reducing health inequalities, tackling crime, making the UK
a clean energy superpower and raising education standards. But critics say his
speech didn't contain enough detail on policy. The sports minister, Stuart
Andrew, has paid tribute to the football commentator John Matson, who has died
at the age of 77. Mr Andrew told the House of Commons he'd had an incredible
impact over his 50 years working at the BBC. His family have said he died
peacefully in his sleep. The Oscars will introduce what it calls a crisis team
to handle any real-time incidents this year. In response to Will Smith slapping
Chris Rock on stage during last year's ceremony, the chief executive of the
Academy says the new unit hopes to be ready for anything. BBC News. We'll be
taking a walk in the Breckenbeekens in just a moment for a rather romantic
edition of Ramblings. But first, a quick look at some new drama. On BBC iPlayer.
Six robbers have carried out an armed raid, stealing almost three tons of gold.
Inspired by Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift three tons of gold?
Slowly. 26 million pounds worth of pure gold in the possession of people who
didn't expect to have it. If you could handle a job like this, then I'd have
heard of you. You only hear about the people who get caught. Stealing it was
just the start. We're looking for six robbers and three tons of gold. Every
ring, every watch. If you're looking for the gold, it's all around you. The
golds. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now on Radio 4, let's join Claire Boulding in South
Wales for Ramblings. It is a glorious winter's day. Honestly, the best day that
we have had for this series. I love doing the winter series because hardly
anyone's around. If you get a day like this, it feels magical. Even if you come
to a really popular spot, and I have done today, I'm in Waterfall Country in the
Brecon Beacons, just north of Mirthatidval. It's fresh, but it's not too cold.
There's barely any wind. The birds are singing. The trees are completely
silhouetted against a blue sky. Leaves not yet apparent. And it just feels fresh
and invigorating. And Roger and Sam are with me. And this really is a love story
as much as it is a walk. But this place is special and we haven't even got to
the good bit yet. No, we haven't. Not yet. Yeah, this is one of our favourite
places to be. We do it quite regularly, don't we? It was the first place we ever
met, wasn't it? It is. It is. It is. But it's just something about it. We do a
lot of cold water swimming as well. So there's always nice little private areas
that you can find. You have the main waterfalls, of course, but we go off the
beaten track sometimes and we always find a nice little private spot. Most
occluded spots, aren't they? Yeah. Well, the Brecon Beacons is vast. It's 520
square miles. There's something like 1,200 miles of walking routes. I know that
in the summer, this spot becomes almost unbearably busy. So I'd really recommend
visiting it off-peak. Yes, definitely. 100%, that's the best times to do it.
Definitely. But whenever you can, it's always different. It always looks
different. You always get a different perspective and you always leave feeling
really grateful. But that's how I feel anyway. You said this is where you first
met. How? So we're part of a walking group on Facebook. It's actually how we
met. She asked for the postcode for a free parking. It was here. So we decided
to meet up for a walk, just as like-minded people, wouldn't it? Yeah,
definitely. We were just into the same things. So we decided that we would meet
up as friends initially. Well, that's all I wanted. That's all we wanted. And so
yeah, we met up here and went for a walk. We decided that we would do a dip as
well. And that was November, November 2021. So yeah, it was quite cold, but we
took one of those Swedish candles. Swedish candles, yeah. What's that then? It's
basically like a block of wood, but it's got almost like a natural fire layer
inside. So they burn outwards. So it just gives you warmth, really. Yeah, you
brought it along and I was a bit like you. What's that? Since we've used it
quite a few times and it's very handy when you come out the water just to warm
up. But yeah, so we met here and we started chatting. We talked a lot. We got so
much in common. And we just carried on doing our little meet ups. But it was
quite funny because the time that we decided that it could possibly be a bit
more than friendship and we thought there's going to be a date now. We decided
to meet. Have you heard of the diving board? It's near Pennevan. There's got a
thing called the diving board on it. It's just a rock that outfaces so you can
like stand on it and look over. Just look after the valley. It's an amazing
view. What happens then at the diving board? It's the first date that we have
diving board. We actually met on different mountains because I thought the
diving board was somewhere else. So we did our own individual walk. We did our
usual solo walk. So rang her a few times and she was like no I'm definitely
here. I'm not, you're not. Because I am. Yeah, so what was that? Hour and a half
I reckon we had our own solo walks. We did. Yeah. And then we met up after. We
had some more. Yeah, I had enjoyed it. It was a nice walk. We eventually met at
the bottom in between the two at the cafe. We're heading steeply downhill into
the woods and you can hear in the distance a rush of one of the four waterfalls
because this is known as the four waterfalls walk. Is it a circular route? I
want to say circle. It goes off around and bends and stuff like that but it's a
pretty easy walk to do. Wouldn't it? Yeah, it's nice because it's got quite easy
paths. They're wise, they're not particularly treacherous. You know there's some
bits that are steep. The steepest parts and the most challenging parts are the
steps down to the falls and coming back up them. You need good leg muscles for
them. Yeah. Because they are quite steep but. And this is not somewhere you
would go for a swim is it? Yes. We have dips in the four falls. Oh, okay. Is
that, were you planning to do that today? No. No. You're all good. Not today.
Not today, no. Do you know there's a science to why the air around waterfalls is
good for us and it's to do with negative ions and negative ions are a good
thing. Okay. So even way back someone like Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the poet, is
suffering from really bad depression. He found walking in and around waterfalls
to be particularly beneficial and it genuinely is because the air is broken up
by the water and it changes the nature of the air around you. So if you're here
for a good half hour it will have a massive positive effect. Oh, I know that it
has an effect with meditation so you can look into the waterfall and not get
hypnotized but almost, you know, get into a meditative, meditative state. Yeah,
state. Yeah. It's very calming and you've thrown out that everything that's
around you and you're just focusing on being present in the moment. It's the
best time, you know. Did you want to go and have a look down here? From this
angle we can see the water dropping down hugely steeply, ledges of rock and
there is an upturned tree, the whole of it, roots heading up the waterfall that
is right in the middle that's been washed down there. But that first drop must
be 12, maybe 15 feet and then the next one, god, more like 16, 17. I think as
well as the scientific side of it, of the air being different because the water
changing the molecules, it's the presence of that force and that natural force
of water, I think that makes you feel different inside. Yes. So for me it kind
of makes me realize just how small I am in the world, how much natural beauties
are around me that I think a lot of people take for granted, you know, me
included. We paused at this spot, having just come over the bridge because the
stream turns and is about to head towards the waterfall and start its first
major descent. But here it's just beautifully, it's moving obviously but it's
not rushing, it's not frantic. It's really quite clear as well today. In the
summer this is where a lot of people come to just play about really. It's a good
place for children because it's quite shallow. And actually I know there have
been issues around here and again be careful, just be careful. Respect the water
as well. Yeah and you know you have to think about as much as obviously when
there's been heavy rainfall and that's when the waterfalls look they're more
magnificent, you know. But it can be so dangerous, so slippery. Every time you
come out to places like this you have to be aware that there's going to be a
risk, you know, you are going to take a risk every time. There are freak
accidents and tragedies that happen. And there are a lot of boards up warning on
the safety side of things. But I mean it is open, they've got signs but if you
were going to go against those signs then... It's your risk isn't it? Yeah,
there's only so much people can do. And also there's always that balance between
wanting places to stay on the spot so you don't want signs and fences and
cordoned off the areas. The beauty of it is it's the fact that it is natural.
Yeah, definitely. Yeah. So we're going to head up these steps, the path gets
much narrower here so we'll go single final. And just because of the time of
year what's lovely about this is being able to constantly look up towards the
sky and being able to see right through the branches of the trees. And Roger,
had you always been an outdoorsy kind of chap? What was your childhood like? I
used to get made to go on walks when I was a kid by my parents which obviously
stuck with me. I'm happy as long as the walk's a good walk really. Because when
it's not destroyed and mankind haven't taken them completely over it then happy
with any walk really. You haven't really got a plan, have you? No, just do
whatever comes to mind really, isn't it? Just we've got a time limit with the
school run which usually we go on our walks when the children are in school. And
what age are the kids now? So I've got a six year old and an eight year old. And
Roger your kids are... 10 and 10. Oh gosh. So they're all semilacres. Yeah,
yeah. They all get on so it's a lot of boys for me. Is it four boys? Four boys.
Wow. But isn't that funny with all the dating apps and the different ways in
which you might have met and actually both having two kids the same age would
have been a common factor. But actually what did it was just both happening to
be in a walking group. Yeah, that's a natural way of progressing. Well that's
the thing. We weren't looking to be in any kind of relationship at all at the
time that we met. And it was purely based on friendship at the start. It was. It
was just... And just... You know, constrain on our self care and not others
around us really. I think it's helpful when you go less pressure. You know when
you go on a dating app and you expect them to date and then there's expectations
and there was none of that with us. So it was just enjoying each other's company
and getting to know one another in the most natural surroundings that we could
find. You're listening to ramblings on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds and today I'm in
the Brecon Beacons walking the Four Waterfalls walk with Samantha Chapman and
Roger Taylor and we've been discussing how the two of you met here. You know,
they say when you know you know. But it is like that. It is an actual thing,
yeah, when you know you do know. Because we didn't think it would ever happen
really, did we? No. It's how similar we are. We are literally the same person in
female and male form. Just didn't realise that a relationship could flow so
easily. You know? I think as you get older and you've gone through different
things in your life and you kind of just expect certain things to be a certain
way and you expect them. You're like, well, it's bound to be like that because
I'm the age I am and there's been a running theme all my life. But it was
completely different, completely different. It was effortless. Go through
lessons than you in previous relationships so then find what you actually want
and what you deserve really more than anything. And I think you learn a lot
about yourself as well and actually knowing what makes you stressed and avoiding
it is a really important part of life and knowing what makes you happy. And how
wonderful that actually it is something that's free, that's accessible, that you
can fit into daily life. It's physically and mentally good for you and that you
share it. Yeah, we do it together. Yeah. And we're fortunate enough that our
work schedules allow it. So what do you do? I'm a dental nurse but I'm part-time
because obviously I've got the children. So I have Mondays and Tuesdays off,
which is lovely. And I run a handyman company and I work for Tesco's in the
evenings but I have Mondays off. So we always got time to do something that we
enjoy about children. Yeah. Just love the feel of this place. You know the
peacefulness of it and then you get the raging of a waterfall so that sort of
force hits you. There's so many different aspects to this walk. And also I think
I had, because of the walking I've done in the Brecon Beacons before, has been
up onto high ridges, very bare, you know, open land. I'm not sure I'd
appreciated that there are pretty woodland walks that you can do that are this
gorgeous. There's so many to choose from here. There's so many. And they're all
quite close to one another. So there's so many to choose from here. So you've
got engaged now. Yeah. And is there a plan? Do you have to say that's wedding
days then? Oh, it's all booked. Oh, isn't it? We booked the wedding day, yes. Is
it? When is it? August, 2024. Oh wow. Oh, congratulations. Thank you. How many
of the group that were at your original meeting and that walking group, are you
friends with those people or was that sort of? No. No? No, but this really was
the most extraordinary coincidence. Yeah, yeah, we didn't know anyone that she
knows. Nothing. I don't know anyone. Literally, just complete solo walkers. I
added the chance, yeah. I added myself to the group because I wanted to have
ideas where to go next and I posted, everybody posted their pictures and Roger
commented on it. And yeah, just completely by chance. So I don't know anybody
else in the group. The group is a very big group though. It's very large space.
There's what, 10,000 people in there or more? No, there's no more. And what is
it? What's it called then? Walking in Wales. Walking in Wales. Walking in Wales,
Facebook group is a very good group. And they're all very communal, aren't they?
Everyone's very nice. They'll comment on your picture, nice stuff. Yeah, so I
felt the need to, when we did get engaged, just do a little post to thank the
group for, you know, existing and bringing this man into my life. And it just
went a bit viral after that with over 9,000 likes. I wasn't expecting. But just
to make it absolutely clear, they still weren't getting invited to the wedding.
Yeah, I ain't going to mind to invite that many people. Lovely as that is. I
love all these branches, all these roots. I've always loved this little section.
Oh there, where it sort of looks like an interwoven fingers and toes of the
trees. Links like hands. I just see it as like a timeline, you know, of how long
it's all, you know, been here and how expansive it is. And yeah, I just, I
always love this little bit. The colour of today as well is that burnt orange of
leaves that are still left, but also the bracken over there on the far side.
It's by far my most favourite colour. It's our colour for the wedding, isn't it?
Yeah. Yeah, it just reminds me of being outside and as much as I like it when
it's green and it's, you know, spring and summer time. But yeah, autumn, winter,
colour wise. Yeah. We incorporate everything into nature, don't we? Even like
the engagement ring, we've made that nature by the day. What have you done to
us? Yeah, that's me, everyone, me. Yeah, now that was based on nature, isn't it?
Yeah. Leaves and things like that. Are you wearing it under the gloves? Yeah.
Can I have a look? Oh gosh, that's absolutely beautiful. So a teardrop diamond
in the middle and green. Savarite is. Oh, how lovely. As you say, the leaves on
either side. Yeah. Of a central, so more than a teardrop, more like a seed in a
way. Yeah, in a way, yeah. Or a centre of a... The centre of a... Yeah, the aim
is to be like her in the middle and then like the leaves sprouting off her
really, like it was in a nature vibe. So that was the plan. I didn't know that.
That's because I'm awesome. I didn't know that's a big day. Can't help being
that awesome, love. It's okay. How lucky are you? I know, I know. You keep
talking about it? Yeah, that's... I mean, I was blown away by the ring. I
just... One more could you want, mine is completely tailored to you. It's
designed about everything that is you. The engagement happened on a walk. And
was that with the full production of ring and down on one knee? Yeah. He
proposed though and showed me the ring and then was like, oh, let's go in the
water. And all I wanted to do was put the ring on. So I was in the water going,
I don't want to get out now. I didn't really enjoy the bit that day. So Roger,
where did you grow up? Reading. Well, Wokenham to be exact. Just outside of
Reading. I know. Well. And what brought you to Cardiff? So my mum is Welsh. So
she moved down here and then I decided to follow. Really? And then bought my own
house and well, I love it here. And within an hour of anything I want to go
through really, no matter what. So I could go to a beach one day and then go on
like a long hike the next really. This Robin has been following us. He does it
every time we're here. Yeah. So we sort of get to a wide, it just checks in,
pops down onto a branch because I'm still with you. We call it up ahead. We do.
Every time we come. Every walk. There's always a one. Really? I think he
convinces the same one. Every single walk. We've never not had that Robin. That
one will get an invitation to Reading. He'll just turn up anyway. Yeah, exactly.
Well, I can hear the waterfall. It's the rumble. We're going to head down to the
waterfall now. These are the ones that you can walk behind. And how do you say
that? Scud. Scud-era. I'd say Ira. Ira. But my Welsh is great. So it's about
S-G-W-D. New word Y-R. New word E-I-R-A. So we've got 170 steps down this path.
Some of them are steeper than others. This way's coming back up it. They're not
all even. It's okay going down. Yeah, yeah. We've come all the way down those
170 steps and now staring at the waterfall that's gushing over in three distinct
channels. And there is a path that goes behind it and I've just seen a man walk
from the other side and I've talked to women and it is a case always of just
checking it's safe. Yeah, I mean, I've done it many times and I suddenly don't
forget. I couldn't allow you both to come here and not do it. Whoa, this is
fabulous. The water's falling right in front of us now. And we're into the good
news. That was magnificent getting right in behind it. So come out the other
side and we're going to head back through and go back up those 170 steps. And do
you know the strangest thing of all when we came through the waterfall, who was
waiting for us on a branch the other side, our little Robin, and I can see him
over the other side going, are you coming back now? That was so good. You have
to scramble a fair bit over the rocks to get to the path that is behind the
waterfall. Exactly as you said, so worth it and you feel like you've been doused
in magic water and we're not even wet. I mean, I should point out you don't go
in there to get wet. Literally just the mist from the falls. Surprising how much
room is behind the falls because when you look at it head on, you don't think
that you can even get behind it. And also an appreciation for the solidity of
those red sandstone rocks. And the way that that water has carved through them
and then, you know, hit a point where the drop is the only thing that can be
done. I think it's quite a romantic spot as well. We've seen lots of couples
going in behind there and having a quick kiss. I was unfortunately ruining that
moment for you. So I've got a wet beard, you wouldn't have done it anyway.
Right, we've got to climb back up those steps now. Oh, hello. Hello, little
Robin. Please follow us. Come now. It's not funny. I've never had that before.
Because I, before, when I first, when I saw him again up here, I thought, oh,
that's a different one. Now I absolutely know it's the same one. Yeah, every
time we come here, isn't it? Every single time. You sit on the rock when we
haven't had it. Wait around there. Well, it's quite hard work in the end. I'd
put that walk in the challenging basket, but so worth it. I feel renewed and it
must keep having that effect because you've done that lots of times and you're
glowing. It literally brings us wild to my host every time. There's never a time
where you have a bad trip here. It's always a nice walk, isn't it? It's magical.
Just brilliant to share this walk with you and to hear about your love story.
And good luck with the wedding. Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you. And
bye-bye to little Robin who I think is going to leave us here. Yeah, if you come
back, you'll meet him again. He'll be there. Thank you. Thank you. Ramblings is
presented by Clare Balding and produced by Maggie Eyre. And you can find
hundreds more walking suggestions by searching for ramblings on BBC Sounds. Now
the international soloist trumpeter Alison Balsam makes the Radio 4 appeal on
behalf of the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain. I fell in love with the
trumpet when I was seven. It was free at my state school in Royston, so everyone
who wanted was able to enjoy it. At 15, I joined the National Youth Orchestra
and was completely immersed in the joy of playing with others. It changed my
life. Working with so many talented young musicians taught me about different
ways to listen, communicate and build relationships. Education research shows
that playing together is key to young people's all-round development, but
chances to do this are diminishing. Budgets are being squeezed in state schools
and local music services, and many families don't have the money for music
lessons. Young people are being locked out of the opportunity to develop their
talents and life skills through music and deprived of the joy it brings. That's
why I'm delighted that the National Youth Orchestra has NYO Inspire, a free
nationwide program, giving thousands of teenage musicians every year the chance
to learn and play music together. Like Kai, who fell in love with the violin
when she was six. As a teenager in Hastings, there was no orchestra to help her
reach that next level. She was stuck, playing her violin in her bedroom alone.
When she first joined NYO Inspire, Kai said she was nervous. She thought she
wasn't good enough, but Kai's musical skills and passion flourished. She played
in this NYO collaboration during lockdown. Kai joined all the Inspire activities
she could and became one of NYO's workshop leaders, showcasing orchestral music
in schools nationally. Kai said she would not have had the confidence to do this
without the National Youth Orchestra. This is what NYO Inspire does. It offers
free musical opportunities across the UK, breaking down barriers and bringing
teenagers together. That's why I'm making this appeal. You can help thousands of
teenagers unlock their potential. A life-changing day for one young musician
costs £127. Any donation can help towards this. And an incredible group of NYO
supporters will match your donations pound for pound to make every gift go
further. You can give now, just search online for Radio 4 Appeal or call 0800
404 8144. Or you can write a check to the National Youth Orchestra of Great
Britain and send it to Free Post BBC Radio 4 Appeal. That's Free Post BBC Radio
4 Appeal. Please remember to mark the back of your envelope NYO. Thank you.
Alison Bolton, calls are free from landlines and mobiles. You can find all the
details for giving online if you search for BBC Radio 4 Appeal. If you're a UK
taxpayer and you want the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain to collect
the gift aid on your donation, then please include an email or postal address so
that they can send you a gift aid declaration. On BBC Radio 4. I think there's
something peculiar about this house. I hear noises. A modern retelling of the
classic thriller by Patrick Hamilton. The gas lights over there, they sometimes
go right down. Then after a while, they go right back up again. The origin of
the word gaslighting. Do you think we should be seeing the doctor again? I'm
telling the truth, it happens. Rebecca Knight and James Purfoy star in Gaslight.
Why do you keep hiding it? I really haven't touched it. You don't even believe
that yourself. Available now on BBC Sounds. In sickness and in health, my
darling. Now on Radio 4, here's open book with Chris Power. The World and All
That It Holds is a big, bold title for a book and it belongs, fortunately, to a
big and bold novel. Its author, Alexander Hemmon, hasn't lived in his native
Bosnia since the siege of Sarajevo and reading him you know that the world of
his books and all that they hold, chaos, exile and displacement, comes straight
from the heart. Opening with the fateful assassination of Archduke Franz
Ferdinand in 1914 and zooming across war-torn Eastern Europe, the new Soviet
Empire and all the way to China, this latest offering is no exception. At the
heart of this journey, cheating death, gaining a daughter and getting embroiled
with spies are fellow Sarajevans Pinto and Osman. When I spoke to Hemmon, I
began by asking him why he made these two soldiers not only lovers but
specifically Jewish and Muslim lovers. Well, I mean, being Jewish and Muslim was
not uncommon in Sarajevo at that time because the city was small and people
interacted. They lived in different neighborhoods, probably they would have
encountered each other in Sarajevo. However, they met in the army, right, where
all of those ethnicities and nationalities were packed together, were not
organized along ethnic lines. It was perfectly plausible and possible that they
were sleeping next to each other in the barracks. As for there being lovers, I
sold a book on proposal in 2010 to my British publisher for some reason. And
that proposal, which I read only once since 2010, they were friends. And the way
I wanted to set it up back then was they would be friends and they would be
longing for Sarajevo and all they wanted would have been to return to Sarajevo.
But they would be moving away from the city, as is the case in the book now. At
some point, I guess I understood that would set the pitch of the book at the
level of nostalgia maybe increasing, would be kind of a flat pitch. I have
written a lot about nostalgia in my characters and also in my artistic work. So
I thought it would be more interesting if they were lovers. But also I wanted to
test the limits of love in the most unfriendly circumstances, the most difficult
circumstances. How can one love, how can people love each other in a situation
where the world is continuously and repeatedly falling apart? You certainly put
them through the ring, which I'd like to talk a bit more about later. But Osman
himself is so lovable into Pinto clearly, but also to many other soldiers in his
company to whom he tells stories and sings songs. And you make him really
attractive to the reader as well. Could you tell us a bit more about him and his
background? Well, I love characters like Osman in real life and in books, this
charismatic storytellers who engage with people around themselves and create a
makeshift community, as it were, that's incredibly valuable in the situation of
war or serving in the military. And there's also a kind of person that in
contrast, Pinto, who's reflexive and contemplative, this kind of person that it
seemed to me Pinto would like, that two of them would complement each other. And
in all of my work, including this storytelling as a means of engagement and
communication and distributing knowledge, as it were, plays a crucial role. So
very often there's a storytelling character in my work. And here it's Osman and
who tells lovely stories. I want to talk about language, which is a theme
running throughout the book. Can we hear a passage? This is from Pinto and
Osman's time in Tashkent just after the war, and this shows really how language
intertwines in the book. Ever since he woke up in the hospital and Isakah
Brahmovich welcomed him back into the world, Pinto spoke in Bosnian to him while
the good doctor spoke back in Russian. From the beginning, they would pick the
words from the other's language and insert them in their sentences and thus they
exchanged and learned them. Pinto sometimes clandestinely imported Spaniel, just
as Isakah Brahmovich smuggled in Yiddish words while Osman added Arabic words he
had learned in mosque. Over time, they developed their own pigeon and they
understood one another. No need for any translation. That extract shows how your
characters blend languages and the text of the novel itself is a babel of sorts.
It's written in English, but it contains a certain amount of untranslated
Bosnian and German. Most fascinating of all, you mentioned in the passage
Spaniel. Can you describe that language for people who don't know it? Spaniel is
commonly known as Ladino. It's the derivation or the descendant of the 15th
century Castilian Spanish that the Jews carried along on their journeys east
after they were expelled from the Iberian Peninsula. What I read about in this
passage and what really interested me in the book is the notion of Macaronic
language. It's from Macaroni, the Italian pasta because it's a kind of language
or kind of linguistic discourse where you hold languages together like a bunch
of Macaroni that is commonly used among immigrants and migrants. Unless
languages are geographically isolated, there's always a Macaronic aspect to the
overlapping of languages that creates new language. This is particularly the
case in parts of the world like Bosnia. There were parts of empires, colonized
places where there was the language of the empire imposed from top down,
bureaucratic language, and then all the grassroots languages, people who use
people in daily interactions. So Sarajevo in that sense was multilingual at that
time, as were many, many cities certainly in the Ottoman Empire. From this, a
very rich and beautiful language emerges. You've spoken before about your
uneasiness in writing about the siege of Sarajevo without living through it.
You'd gone to America for a short visit, I think, just before the siege began
and then you were sort of stranded in America. It's a subject you return to
again here in the book's epilogue. Of course, you recreate Pinto and Osman's
experience in the trenches. What are the ethics for you when it comes to writing
fiction set you in order? Well, with the siege of Sarajevo, there were friends
and people who I knew who had that experience to the fullest, unfortunately.
They still are around and alive and they remember things. It is not for me to
pretend as though I was there. As far as trench war in 1914, we're all equally
distant from that. The only access to that experience is by way of someone
else's testimony. None of those people are alive. That kind of levels the
playing field. I suppose my ethics as a writer is to respect other people's
experience, to try to imagine the experience of trench warfare in 1916 in
Galicia. I need to imagine what it smelled like, which is different from reading
books about tactical positioning, so the organization of the trenches, the
networks of trenches, which I read too. Everyone has to, I have to imagine a
sensory experience, what it felt like, what would be the easiest part of the
body, the easiest part if you had slept in the trenches for two years. In your
book, Nowhere Man, you wrote, Sarajevo in the 80s was a beautiful place to be
young. In this novel, again, we get to see Sarajevo just before a war breaks
out. It's a constant presence in the book, although we get to spend very little
actual time there. You, obviously, as you've been saying, had a very different
experience to what Pinto and Osman go through, but you must have drawn on your
own feelings of absence and longing when you were describing theirs. Of course.
They are displaced and they're moving away from their place of origin, from
their home, and therefore from everything that constitutes them or constituted
them in Sarajevo. That is interaction with their family and friends, and also a
social organization that requires presence of other people, like a city. This is
what I was talking about earlier, the idea of nostalgia in which people can
remember their previous life, but devoid of all the glitches and problems, like
retroactive utopia. Part of the reason for that nostalgia, or part of that
nostalgia, is the sense that once upon a time in some other place, I was a
complete person and haven't been complete since. It is this thing that they long
for in some ways, where things would be clear to them and about them. Pinto has
a fantasy of returning to Sarajevo with Osman and showing him the neighborhood,
as in, this is where I came from. As they try and get back there, it's like
peristalsis. They're kind of getting, the world is moving them further away from
it. The world's constantly being remade under their feet, whether it's the
collapse of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires at the end of World War I,
or the birth of Soviet Russia or the reshaping of China. You've written
elsewhere of the relentless flow of calamities we call the world. Did it feel
like you were solely looking back when you were writing the book, or did present
day events intrude in any way? Well, the present days for a very long day. The
war in Bosnia is a central fact of my life and of everyone else I know in their
lives, my parents and family and these friends. And then, of course, we have had
very rough past few years with COVID and the rise of American fascism. And then
the war in Ukraine started, which started in 2014 and now it escalated further.
And so there are no new things that happened that made me think, oh, I should
add things to this book now. It was all there already for the taking. For many
of us whose lives were changed by a rupture that they had no control over, it is
my little theory that biologically people move toward the space, or it's
biologically determined that people want to move toward a space where they have
greater agency, where they can find food or education for their children or
jobs. And they don't always know where exactly that place is. It's just a
distant horizon. And that allowed me to access painters consciousness. He wants
to go going somewhere where his daughter, Rahela, will have something to eat and
sleep. And he keeps moving until you find such places. Millions of people are
doing it right now. So this whatever theory of displacement and migration,
narration I might have, it's come from my experience and experience of my
people. Well, one of those places to which they're displaced in the latter
stages of the book is Shanghai in the 1930s, which you present as this very full
on city of extreme wealth and extreme poverty. It's a wash with refugees and
criminals and political agents. You've taken us there before in your fiction.
What's the fascination that it holds for you? Why? I mean, I love cities in
general. Cities has these conglomerates of eudestimies and experiences and
people and the constant tension in some ways, cities are not supposed to survive
at all these disparate elements. There's a kind of a crypto-fascist logic that
monolithic entities last longer. So you have to purify things, the language, the
state, the city, protect the country from more immigrants. And my ethics and
aesthetics and experience, the more complicated it is, the more life there is in
there and there are more people and experiences, which is obviously narratively
stimulating. And while it was not entirely enjoyable to live in Shanghai, back
in the day for a lot of people, it is the number of stories that came from
Shanghai to me just by reading books about spies and revolutions and history is
enormous. I think because such was the administrative regulation or system in
Shanghai, there was kind of the worst kind of colonialism. I mean, the control
of Shanghai. I don't want to teach the BBC listeners. I'm sure they know this,
but just to make a point, there's international settlement control by the Brits
and Australians and Americans and French concession and the Chinese part. And
this was a consequence of Chinese defeat in the European wars and the same
treaty that gave the UK Hong Kong for more than a century created this Shanghai
administration system. But that allowed for this kind of chaos that you
described, spies, gangsters, prostitutes, refugees, enormous wealth. So there
was this preponderance of chaotic humanity in Shanghai that is eternally and
entirely fascinating to me. Yeah, me too, I need to get your reading list after
this. Okay, just finally, some literary gossip, if you'll permit me. In the
epilogue to the book, you describe a meeting you had with someone who sounds a
lot like Susan Sontag from your description, which occurs in Jerusalem in 2001.
Did that meeting happen? Was she as angry with you as she appeared to be? And if
so, why? Well, I was in Jerusalem in 2001. I was in Jerusalem 2014, I believe,
and Susan Sontag was not there. I did meet her in Toronto in like, I think, 2000
or so. And she wasn't angry with me as I perceived it, but she wasn't exactly
enthusiastic to meet me. We were introduced to each other and she said, a little
bit of a scary war, she said, oh, I know exactly who he is. And I froze. And I
didn't know what it meant. And so then I, in that confusion, I said, well, I
know exactly who you are. And if anyone was unmistakable, you could not confuse
Susan Sontag with anyone else. And I loved her work. I had read it and this was
even before she went to Sarajevo and produced a play with some of the people who
are friends of mine, are friends of mine. So I dramatized it for that reason to
dramatize a sense of guilt and disorientation by the character who vaguely
resembles me. But she did receive the Jerusalem prize around that time. So it
was plausible that she was there. It's just that I wasn't there. Well, whether
or not she was happy to see you, we are always happy to see you. Thanks for
talking to me today. Thank you, my pleasure. My thanks to Alexander Hamon. The
World and All That It Holds is out now published by Picador. And speaking of
holding things, let's find out what Roddy Doyle would never let go of. It's his
book I'd Never Land. The book I'd Never Land is sweet soul music by Peter
Goralnick. It's a brilliant, vivid account of some of the major figures in soul
music, the names that would be familiar to a lot of us. Hodes Reading, James
Brown, and then perhaps slightly less familiar, Solomon Burke. And I bought the
book in 1986 in London. I was over there. I was a regular visitor to London,
still am. And it coincided with my writing The Commitments, which is a story
about a group of kids here in Dublin forming a soul band. And I think the energy
and spirit and the personalities that I was reading about in Peter Goralnick's
book, infected in a very good way what I was writing. So the book really means a
lot to me. And the particular edition I have, it's lived in a fair few beds,
it's two houses. I suspect at one stage it was maybe resting on top of a
radiator. I took it down recently and I realized if I crack it open to read from
the center of it, it was going to fall apart more than likely. And it's a
beautiful edition. So I did open the book very, very carefully and gingerly and
photographed part of a page from early on. It's a passage about Solomon Burke.
So I'll read it now. And I'm going to tell every woman and every man tonight.
Solomon had no competition. There has never been a warmer, more charismatic
presence on stage. And when he stretched out his arms to the audience, when he
declared at the outset, there's a song that I sing and I believe if everybody
was to sing this song, it would save the whole world. There was scarcely anyone
in that frenzied crowd who could resist either the message or the conviction
that seemingly lay behind it. When I first met him some 15 years later, he was
just the same, only bigger. His 200 plus pounds had swelled to 300 plus pounds.
His congregation, on the other hand, had diminished from a theater full of
secular parishioners ready to testify to a small club in New York City whose
sparse audience was made up mostly of white faces and a few curious Japanese
tourists. I selected that passage because it's a bit tragic in a way. Instead of
a description of a star on the up, it's a star on the way down. Luckily, it
didn't stay that way because Solomon Burke had a resurgence of popularity later
on, quite close to his death actually, which is a nice way to go. But it's very
human as well. And his, the charisma of the man, and I've been in that audience
myself, if he says, this song will change the world, you're inclined to believe
it. I think in the almost 40 years, 37 years since I read the book, my love of
soul music hasn't diminished and four decades later, the term timeless still
bang on. And I think the book brings me back to a time when I was in my 20s, a
school teacher, setting out on what I didn't know would be a career in writing.
And it seems to me, when I think of the book, I feel as fresh as I did back
then. So it's very precious to me. There have been later editions, and there's
another edition on the way later this year. But this particular edition is, it's
almost biblical or like a Bible to me. Roddy Doyle on the sacred text that is
sweet soul music by Peter Guralnick. Roddy's latest collection of short stories,
Life Without Children, is out now in paperback from Vintage. He's also a judge
on this year's BBC National Short Story Award, which is open as I speak to any
published writers among you. More details can be found online, and there's also
a link to it on our website. You're listening to Open Book with me, Chris Power,
on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Finally today, a fresh and exciting novel from Hong
Kong, a place of multiple languages and a contested history where numerous
challenges face its contemporary writers. Alish by Dorothy Che is a rare beast
in more than one sense, an experimental piece of fiction from a city rarely
celebrated as a literary hub, and one among relatively few Hong Kong titles
which has been translated into English. To discuss it, I'm very pleased to say
that Dorothy joins me from there now, along with the translator Natasha Bruce
down the line from Amsterdam. Welcome to you both. Dorothy, Alish takes place in
a dreamlike reality where Professor Q falls in love with a porcelain doll. It
unfolds in Nevers, a city of protests. Can you tell us a bit more about this
unusual world? Indeed, Nevers is a place inspired by Hong Kong. For me, Hong
Kong has always been an interesting place, not just because of its unique
history and political situation, but as a densely populated city, it has a lot
of hidden spaces, you know, like second floor book shops, rooftop farms, for
example. Shopping malls went from being palaces of commercialism into gathering
places for protesters. So in my novel, Flu a Professor's Hidden Desire for a
Music Box Barrerena, I hope to review the hidden size of a city. That reminds me
of something I read in your afterwards the novel, where you describe Hong Kong
as a city that exists at the intersection of dreaming and being awake. Is it
simply that for you, that's the most accurate way of depicting Hong Kong as this
kind of otherworldly place? I think there is a moment during the political
movement in 2019. People like to say when they protest, we are going to dream.
It's a way too high from the escaped kind of like censorship of the internet to
talk about you're going on to a protest, you're going on dreaming. And so I
think I has a strong feeling about like the city's energy at the time, like how
people were, we used to think Hong Kong is like a very capitalist city, but in
fact, during the political movement, I see the other side of the city. And I
think what I try to grasp in my novel is this energy and subconscious rather
than what's happening on the surface. I'd like to turn to Natasha now. Natasha,
could you tell us a bit about the translation process and how it worked with
Dorothy? I mean, you spent time in Hong Kong. Was that very helpful when it came
to translating this book? I'm sure it was. I would say that actually also the
translation of Alish has been kind of quite a unique process for me in terms of
translating a book because I've been able to collaborate with Dorothy really
closely on it. And I did live in Hong Kong for a few years before Dorothy
finished Alish. And I was working on some of her short stories in that period.
But then actually just as I was living Hong Kong, which was 2018. So just before
the 2019 protests, Dorothy was finishing Alish. And we had this idea that we
would apply for some residencies together in the US. And it was really
interesting because Dorothy was finishing Alish and I guess had a bit of
distance then to finish writing the book away from Hong Kong. And I was working
on the opening chapters because we thought, OK, then we'll have them ready to
show to English language publishers. But at that point, because Alish hadn't
even yet been finished in Chinese, then I felt that we were having this really
interesting conversation about where the book was going. And I saw some drafts
that then ended up changing quite dramatically later on in 2019, I think also
once things had changed more in Hong Kong. That's incredible. What an intimate
translation process. Dorothy, there's the magazine Fleur de l'Étre, which you
helped found. Could you tell us a little bit more about that? Sure. The magazine
was funded by a group of writers and scholars and visual artists in 2006. And at
the time, internet was not very popular. We really wanted to create a platform
for younger writers and also make the magazine more visually attractive and
appealing to a wider readership. We also saw the magazine as a way to intervene
in the social and cultural issues in the city. So the magazine is still running,
but under the current political situation and atmosphere in Hong Kong, it is
facing some challenges now. Well, to return to Alish, when I read it, I thought
of it in terms of magical realism. Do you see it that way or does it connect
with other literary styles in Hong Kong that we might not be so aware of in the
West? Yeah, I think many people would describe my work like surrealist or
magical realist. And I do think that there has been a tradition of maybe
modernist and even postmodernist tradition of literature in Hong Kong. I think
it even can trace back to 1930s when the time when Shanghai is a cultural center
and Hong Kong is very connected with Shanghai. And Hong Kong has been like a
cosmopolitan city and it's very easy to follow the latest cultural trends in the
world and writers are very open to world literature. For example, people are
very familiar with Covino, Kafka, Macass. So I just feel that there is a
tradition of avant-garde writing in Hong Kong. And there's a wealth of writers
from the region, but there aren't a huge amount of them that get translated from
Chinese into English. Are there any Dorothy that you'd like to see celebrated
outside of the region? Yeah, I do feel a little sad that like Hong Kong
literature is not very well translated. And I think many of the writers should
be translated. For example, there is one of the most beloved writer called Cece
from Hong Kong. And she just passed away a couple of months ago. And most of her
work was not translated. And I'm very glad that Jennifer Philly, the translator,
is going to translate one of her novel called Allergy for Breast. And then I
also recently co-translated a poetry book by a Hong Kong poet called Yung Gong,
who he used a lot of Cantonese in his work. And the book is called Moving a
Stone, which I co-translated with James Shea. So I just hope that like more and
more Hong Kong writers can be can be celebrated outside like Chinese language.
Fantastic. Titles to add to the book list. Natasha, do you have any
recommendations? Yes, I was actually hoping to add to that list. This is a title
also translated by Jennifer Philly, who is having a really prolific year. But
next year, a book called Tongue-less is going to come out by a Hong Kong writer
called Lao Yiwua. And this this is I'm very excited because I think it's really
a kind of psychological thriller noir kind of book about two rival teachers in a
Hong Kong secondary school. And they're told that they have to switch their
language of instruction from Cantonese to Mandarin. And that's the premise and
it goes from there. And I think I think, yeah, I'm looking forward to it a lot.
My thanks to the novelist Dorothy Che and translator Natasha Bruce. This is out
now published by Fitzcarraldo editions. And all those books we've discussed
today are listed on the Open Book website. Next week, Johnny is here talking to
Tom Buhle about Saan Helen, a journey through Wales past, present and future.
But for today, from me, goodbye and happy reading. Open Book was presented by
Chris Power and produced by Kieron Birmingham. BBC Sounds. If you own a smart
speaker, did you know you can access a whole world of BBC content through it to
get started? Just say it open. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams
are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC stream you
are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an
internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the
manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to
stream on BBC Sounds. After the news, the infinite monkeys are back and this
week they're looking to the staff.