TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-20-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 A' next. Tomorrow morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC sounds. BBC News at 9
o'clock. Police and Lancashire say they have formally identified the body found
yesterday in the River Wire as Nicola Bully. The 45-year-old was last seen
walking her dog more than three weeks ago. In a statement her family thanked the
community for their support but criticized some recent media coverage as
absolutely appalling. Our reporter Katie Barnfield is at Lancashire's
contemporary headquarters. She says the force is facing mounting questions about
its handling of the investigation. Many questions for Lancashire please mounting
questions particularly after they made that decision last week to release some
very personal and private information about Nicola Bully specific
vulnerabilities and of course more questions now this morning after that body
has been found and identified as Nicola Bully as to why it took three weeks to
find her. We understood she was found in a section of the River that police had
already searched. Joe Biden has pledged the United States long-term support to
Ukraine in its fight against the Russian invasion. He was speaking during a
surprise visit to Kiev today which for Vladimir Zelensky'd hailed as the most
important visit in the history of US-U-Krain relations. seismologists say an
earthquake of magnitude 6.3 has struck southern Turkey near the city of Antikya.
Some damage to buildings has been reported, two more powerful quakes hit
southern Turkey and northern Syria earlier this month killing more than 46,000
people. The Northern Ireland Secretary Chris Heaton-Harris says the UK
government will pass a law introducing an opt-out organ donation system in
Northern Ireland. The devolved government at Stormont had intended to introduce
the legislation before it collapsed in 2017. It's known as Dahi's law after a
six-year-old boy who's waiting for a heart transplant. And supermarkets are
facing a shortage of tomatoes with shoppers across the UK unable to find them on
the shelves. The supply issues have been caused by bad weather in the
Mediterranean and usually cold conditions in Morocco delayed the tomato's
whitening before rough conditions stopped ferries and lorries crossing to
Europe. BBC News Now ready for we ask is psychiatry working? Welcome to this
journey along the troubled edges of the mind. Breakdowns of any kind can be
terrifying. Lots of people have them and with help lots of people find their
ways through them. Four years ago I had one, I spent 17 days on a psychiatric
ward before I was discharged. My experience of treatment was mixed on the ward
which was a caring place two antipsychotic pills drained the madness out of me.
But brief appointments with psychiatrists and apparently haphazard prescriptions
for powerful long term drugs made me skeptical. At the time I've held the
clinicians writing the prescriptions could have been replaced by dispensing
machines. I've used a much more nuance now but I'm not the only former patient
with questions about treatment models. Four years ago my solution was to turn to
therapy. In this episode my co-presenter, the renowned psychiatrist, Femioi
Obodian, I are examining the relationship between psychiatry and psychotherapy.
My name is Hurecia Claire, I'm an author and journalist and we are asking is
psychiatry working? We have to stabilize the actual symptoms in my view and then
you've got a chance to repair all the other things have gone wrong. When I first
attempted to take my own life I actually went to a police station before being
taken close to I was arrested and made it to be a criminal. I think we have
these two opposite poles, we have excessive coercion at one end and we have
exclusion at the other. We live in a world that's absolutely obsessed with scums
and blood tests. I've had diagnosis, it's people making a judgment about other
people's behaviour. What's key to this work is love and kindness and on round
the shoulder a hug in the morning. In researching heavy light the book I wrote
about my experiences, I came to the conclusion that psychiatry views the causes
of disorders as multiple and complex, almost beyond reckoning and addresses
their consequences with medication. I felt psychotherapy seeks to address and
treat those complicated causes. So FEMI, first, what is psychotherapy? I simply
put psychotherapy as a use of language, a use of words as a means of treating
another human being, so that is essential what it is as a talk therapy. So the
difference between a psychotherapist and a psychiatrist. I'm not sure there's
much of a difference to be truthful. Biometries are trained in medicine before
they're going to, especially strain as a psychiatrist, but the psychiatric
training itself involves exposure to and training and supervision in
psychotherapy. And I suppose that in the lay person's mind the term
psychotherapy usually means somebody who is not medically qualified, who however
has been trained in some form of psychotherapy. And when do you say it's the use
of language and words to treat somebody? There are different kinds. Yes, there
are different kinds of psychotherapies. So originally, we would normally think
of psychoanalysis as a form of psychotherapy, so that would be a form of
psychotherapy, which was invented by Zigman Freud, which has this idea that
experiences in early childhood has an incredible force in developing personality
and affecting how we interact in behave and form relationships and adulthood. So
that essentially is a psychoanalysis. In modern terms, a lot of people would
talk about dynamic psychotherapy, which is a modern version of psychoanalysis.
And then we've got the other kinds of psychotherapies, so we've got behavioral
therapy, which is based on the idea that behaviors as adults can be due to
particular ways in which we've been conditioned so that anxiety and obsessive-
compulsive disorder and things of that sort, that they derive from impairments
or abnormalities of learning in early childhood or in adulthood, in fact. And
cognitive behavioral therapy, which is very popular, which most people would
know as CBT, was a further development along the lines of behavioral therapy,
essentially invented by Aaron Beck. And that says that our emotions are
dependent on our thinking. Therefore, there's an attempt to alter our thinking
so that our mood, our emotions can then be altered. And psychiatry sees a role
for all of these. Of course, of course, all psychiatrists are trained at basic
level in psychotherapy and then some psychiatrists choose to specialise in
psychotherapies, so they would normally be called medical psychotherapies. So my
distinction between psychotherapy treating causes and psychiatry treating
symptoms is too crude. Oh, definitely. But of course, you're not alone in
thinking about it like that. There's absolutely no question at all that
practically also countries are fully aware of the ways in which experiences in
early life influence behavior in adult life. Throughout this series, we're
speaking with expert patients. Antonio Ferrera, the student of cognitive
neuroscience, speaker and trainer, spent a considerable amount of time in
inpatient psychiatric services. He's used a combination of medication and
talking therapy to ease his symptoms of schizophrenia. You know, I only find out
about my diagnosis of schizophrenia when I went into a psychiatric unit. After
that came in motion, I said, I would personality disorder and those two are my
diagnosis. No. And what symptoms were you coping with? So I experienced auditory
hallucinations, hearing voices. I was also experiencing delusions, you know,
having the wrong perception of reality. I was experiencing depressive symptoms,
you know, they're called positive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia. This
is a student in me. And yeah, you know, it was paranoia as well. And you can
imagine, you know, you have these symptoms, but these symptoms also create
emotions. So I'm also feeling frustration and also feeling disappointment, you
know, hopelessness. So it's a whole like I call it a ratatirial thing, you know,
you've got everything mixing here going on at the same time and talking therapy
helped you. Yeah, I think first and foremost, you're getting opinions from
someone else, right? When you're on well, you know, with a mental diagnosis, you
only listen to yourself. And so I'm a lot of the time you isolate yourself. So
you only hear from yourself, you know, you answer your questions. When you
actually go to CVC, you learn a different perspective. And you know, people
always say to me, did you prefer a white therapist or did you prefer a black
therapist? And I always said that in every matter of the white or black, it just
mattered if they were culturally competent because, you know, I had white
therapists who taught me a lot, you know, they really taught me to look at
things from a different perspective. Then I also had black therapists who taught
me the same thing, right? I remember one therapist saying to me, he just said,
it's not that deep and turn you. And you know, a lot of people might think
that's not a lot, but because he was relatable, he understood what was going on,
he really, you know, he just said, it's not that deep. And sometimes you just
need to hear it to believe it. You know, one thing I learned, you know, you have
this classic example where you, you walk into a room full of people talking and
when you walk in, they stopped talking, you know, automatically might help their
talking about me. When you go through CBT, you learn from other people actually,
maybe they're talking about something private and confidential, right? And these
different perspectives was why I really enjoyed CBT. Normally we expect somebody
who is on a child and adolescent mental health unit to perhaps have some
introduction to family therapy. Yeah. Because of course you're still at the age
where you're at home and where in general our view is that there's a family
system and that the family system has a bearing either or an ameliorating or in
some cases causative and so on. So were you, did you have any family therapy? We
was introduced to family therapy but this is, I think, where it comes into that
cultural over resilience, I'd call it because my parents are the ones that
always rejected family therapy. You know, they always be like, no, we don't need
them involved in our family. It was that over resilience from, you know, coming
from such a culture. And it's a wonderful term you've used, isn't it, over
resilience. I mean, tell me a bit more about that. Yeah. You know, it's like
again in analyzers and everything looking around, you know, the journey and just
seeing everything around now with a clear mind, you realize my nerdy ethnic
groups have this thing called over resilience because one, what's it called,
generational trauma, is it? You know, you get passed down this over resilience
because your parents, you see your parents doing so much but they're challenging
everything. They're not expressing their mental health and like, expressing
their weaknesses of vulnerabilities. So you think you also have to be like that.
You know, I've never seen my dad down, never seen my dad cry. So I can't cry. I
have to be this rock. And that is what develops over resilience. Right. So now
we don't talk about vulnerabilities. We don't talk about our weaknesses. If
something's wrong, no, no, no, nothing's wrong. You know, we just power through
and that's probably why we only get sought out that crisis point. FEMI Antonio
makes the point that a lot of people might think that in schizophrenia, hearing
voices is the worst of it, but actually he talks about the effects on his mood
and self-esteem. That's right. And he made a very good point that the feelings
of hopelessness and also he was anxious. And you can imagine how that might
happen because the content of the voices might be humiliating, it might be
saying that he's a worthless person and that sort of stuff. And that's where
psychotherapy comes in. That's where cognitive behavior therapy, for example,
can be very, very helpful. And it can help be helpful in two ways. And one way
to think of it is to say, if you've got residual symptoms of schizophrenia such
as hallucinations or indeed delusions which have not fully responded to drug
treatment, there's good evidence that cognitive behavior therapy can be helpful
in that regard. But also that the kind of feelings of hopelessness and sadness
which resolve from having suffered from a serious illness which is disrupted
your life, which is affected your relationships, there in that sort of
situation, cognitive behavior therapy is also very helpful. Antonio also said
that it didn't matter who gave him therapy in terms of culture, ethnicity. His
phrase was, it didn't matter as long as they were culturally competent. So it
might be helpful if I just say something about whether or not there's ethnic
congruence, there's some work and some people believe that you've got to come
from the same ethnic group where you're doing psychotherapy and that that is
much more likely to produce good outcomes. I myself have difficulty with those
sort of ideas. I suddenly agree with Antonio that cultural competence matters.
In other words, you've got to have a therapist who is flexible and open minded,
who is able to recognize that their own cultural narratives, that their own
cultural context is not superior and is able to take account of the fact that
there are other ways in which human beings live. And this would be true for
whether we're discussing a patient who comes from a working class cultural
context and you've got a therapist who is upper middle class culture. So the
same issue arises. It's just like these issues, they are essentially amplified
when you've got a cultural difference which is of greater magnitude because the
person comes from Asia or Africa or from the Middle East or something of that
sort. Antonio references it and my own experience of inpatient care speaks to it
too. How much is available and is it sufficiently explained and understood, do
you think, both by psychiatry and by patient? If we're talking about what's
available in inpatient services, I think very little is available. The duration
of stay in inpatient services definitely in England that present is on average
21 to 20 days. And so people are coming in when they're very disturbed and
they're being discharged even before they fully return to what we might call
normal. Therefore, the ability to do psychotherapeuroveting kind in that state
and in that short duration is obviously compromised. But it's also important to
say that we used to have inpatient psychotherapeoservices usually dedicated
explicitly to people with personality disorders and the funding for those
services have been cut. Therefore, even the dedicated inpatient
psychotherapeoservices no longer exist as they did. So there are profound
differences between what psychology and psychiatry offer. In psychiatry, the
tools are overwhelmingly but not exclusively chemical. In psychotherapy, speech,
thoughts and behaviour are the focus. Therapists cannot prescribe. Katie Mason
is a psychiatrist who takes what she calls a holistic approach. She specializes
in talking therapy. She works in forensic and community services in Manchester.
There's evidence that psychotherapy can be used with a lot of different
illnesses. For example, schizophrenia, the treatment psychotherapy is better as
an adjunct to medication. As a standalone, it wouldn't reduce admissions or
relapses. But what it can do is have an impact on symptoms and the distress
caused by them. And in illness, as say, like bipolar effective disorder, it
might only have an impact in the short term, but it can actually help prevent
relapse. And why does that is it addresses symptoms that occur in depression. So
it can be really, really helpful just as it would be for treating depression
because of depression rather than bipolar effective disorder. But also it helps
address feelings of guilt or negative thoughts that you've had if someone's had
a what we call a manic episode, whether not themselves and they're very high.
They can sometimes do things which cause them a lot of guilt and shame and
actually being able to work through those feelings can really help someone come
to terms with the illness that they've had. It can also help prevent relapse
because if people have come to terms with their diagnosis better, they might be
more likely to go to the doctor to present to the doctor and say, actually, I
don't think I'm feeling very well. I think I'm starting to get on well again and
we can catch it earlier. And so having some therapy can help people identify
when they're becoming on well. Could you talk about what was called the
therapist effect, the idea that the most effect thing about therapy is the
relationship with the therapist as opposed to the modality? Yes. So there's
definitely evidence that a lot of the therapies seem to come out with a common
evidence base in that they seem to work as well as each other and they've
identified that the key thing is the relationship with the therapist. So things
that might be kind of common factors, things about the qualities in the
therapist, having that structure, having that treatment, that place to go to
think about yourself and that time to focus on yourself and your difficulties.
Yes. And when I still practiced on a day-to-day basis, I used to be concerned
about the fact that psychotherapists were, if you wish, averse to risk and that
if there were patients where there was a risk of suicide or harm to others, then
it was generally speaking quite hard to persuade psychotherapists to take on
those sorts of patients. And I suppose what I want to ask you is, you know, what
are the methods and systems that are available to psychotherapists in the NHS to
take on people who, if there wasn't a risk to suffer others, they might have
been regarded as suitable. We need the systems around therapists to be able to
deliver therapy effectively so that if somebody does become very, very
distressed about what's happening in therapy, their therapist isn't the one
that's making decisions about do they need admission to hospital, do they need
medication because that power dynamic can really impact the therapy and make it
effectively break down. And so I think the systems need to be in place that if
people are struggling with therapy, that they can get help alongside the therapy
from somebody totally different. But also, I guess, if somebody is in the place
where they are feeling very, very suicidal, it may not be the right time for
them to start exploring what's made them feel that way, although that might seem
a bit paradoxical, but you need to be in a slightly better place to be able to
manage to do that. I wonder as a psychiatrist who focuses a lot on talking
therapies, is psychiatry working from your point of view? I think it could be
better. I think psychotherists at the moment need more time to have their
relationships with their patients, the doctor-patient relationship. When you're
dealing with chronic mental health conditions is really, really complicated. For
example, if someone is feeling suicidal, there isn't an obvious time when they
need to come into hospital. It might depend on a lot of things how much that's
going to disempower them to be able to cope on their own, what their support
structures are like at home, whether being an inpatient has helped them. And
that does not a kind of an algorithm that can tell you that you've got to know
your patients. And I think psychiatry could be a lot more relational than it is
at the moment. We sort of seem to be getting pushed into boxes of will you do
the prescribing? And that's just not true. And I don't think our patients want
that to be true at all. And I think it's so frustrating when you've got patients
who might do really, really well with some therapy and really keen and really
want it and they can't get access to it. There are as many different therapies
as there are therapists and a multitude of types. What you get depends on what
you can find, access or afford. Art therapy, movement, music, dance, guest-
stalled, family, humanistic therapy. The British Association of Counseling and
Psychotherapy lists over 30 categories. I had an extremely positive experience
of EMDR. I movement desensitization and reprocessing. It's one of the newer
modalities and known to be especially effective with trauma. It is available on
the NHS if you have a diagnosis or post-traumatic stress. I have to go private.
Dr. Robin Logie is a clinical psychologist and EMDR therapist. He's been doing
this type of work for two decades. To be honest, I thought it was load of hocus-
pocus when I first encountered it because it did seem very strange, but it kind
of suited me very well because I kind of like the structured approach of CBT.
But I wanted something that would sort of take me back to what had actually
happened to people and to actually help and to reprocess the traumatic events or
adverse life experiences that they'd had earlier on in their life. Can you
explain why it might look from the outside and it did to you at like Hocus-pocus
and what actually happens in an EMDR session? I think the Hocus-pocus bit is
where we're actually asking the client to think about what's happened to them
with the negative belief that's accompanied that and the emotion and where they
feel in their body whilst moving their eyes from side to side. And that does
seem very strange. But actually when you find out what's involved, it does start
to make sense. What I first do is I take a thorough history and really get a
sense of what the problems are that you have and how they relate to what's
happened to you. And then the second stage is to make sure that the client is
prepared that they are actually psychologically have a firm enough psychological
platform on which to stand before they start looking at the trauma. And then
what we do is we do a very careful assessment procedure where we ask them to
think about a particular key event in their life that is still causing them to
have the negative feelings and negative beliefs that they have. For example, it
may be they were in a broad traffic accident and the negative belief might be
I'm not safe. So we identify that and when then we get to find out what they
would like to believe, which would probably be I am safe, then we get them to
tell us what emotion is associated with that and where they feel that in their
body. And we get all those together and that's when we start to do the eye
movement bit. It's not clear why the eye movement works, but there has been
quite considerable amount of research that shows that if you do exactly the same
thing with them without eye movements that it doesn't seem to be so effective.
And so there's a number of theories and one of the dominant theories is to do
with the way in which the eye movements are kind of distracting the client and
keeping them to certainly extend still in the here and now whilst they're
actually revisiting what happened to them in the past. Can I understand a little
bit more about do you work with people with depression and how does EMDR help
them? I do. Initially it was only with people with post-traumatic stress
disorder, which is an obvious population with which to use the EMDR because the
actual nature, the diagnosis relates to trauma, but we're using it increasingly
with people with, for example, depression, phobias, excessive compulsive
disorder, psychosis, and although the research evidence isn't as established in
those areas, we're getting extremely kind of interesting, exciting results with
a whole range of different psychological disorders. And in my experience, people
with depression have had attachment related problems as a child very often. What
I mean by attachment related problems is they haven't been able to form a secure
attachment to a parent, a mother or a father. So I had a client who told me that
a particular moment in her life has summed up her adolescence and what happened
was that she she come home from school with a couple of mates and they were just
going to stay at her house and hang out together. And when she walked in front
door, she found that her mother was comatose on the sofa having been very
heavily drinking. And the first thing that she did was she told her friends that
they couldn't stay in, she'd see them the next day, and then she roused her
mother and helped her up the stairs and put it a bed, cleaned up the house,
started cooking the dinner. And when her dad came home from work, he said, how
are you? And she said, I'm fine. I've got the tea ready, mom's upstairs having a
rest. And by just finding that particular key moment in her life, which was
obviously a moment that represented many other similar things that happened to
her in her life, it helps us to sort of tap into what had been going on for her.
She was the person in the family who was expected to look after everybody else.
And she therefore had no feeling of valuing herself as an individual, no feeling
of I'm an okay person. And she had in relation to that feelings of
worthlessness, feeling not good enough, which is often kind of relates to
depression. It's so telling. And so then you locate a place in the body for
that. Do you? Yeah. I would ask her, yeah, what negative beliefs? So I might be
I'm not good enough. What you'd like to believe is I'm an okay person. And then
what emotion she's experiencing and where she experiences that in her body. And
then we just, well, we just get to hold those things and a mind while she
starts, we start doing the eye movements. What was the effect of the therapy? I
know that it was very effective and we didn't have to go and look at all sorts
of other things that had happened during her childhood. It generalized if you
liked her whole childhood. She was dying to feel okay about herself and feeling
that she was a worthwhile person. So for me, the sense we got from Robin Logie
is that trauma underlies a huge spectrum of mental health problems and the EMDR
targets it. How does psychiatry think about trauma? There are problems
associated with the term because there's a kind of objective way of thinking
what trauma might be made of. So you could argue that trauma usually would be an
experience where your life has been at risk or where you have witnessed
something which is uncommon. So you might have witnessed somebody being stabbed
or witnessed a relative being killed in a very traumatic sort of manner or you
might have served in the army in the frontline. So everybody would agree that
those are objectively true experiences of traumatic events. And then there's the
complication that subjectively you might think that you've had an experience as
traumatic, which if you were then to describe that to other people, they might
feel that it somehow is relatively trivial. That's not to say it's not traumatic
because of course there what we're discussing is how you might yourself label
something because it may be totally out of proportion to the background
experiences that you've had or it may be that even though it sounds relatively
trivial, it occurs so frequently that the cumulative effect is substantive. So
that's just discussing how to look at what trauma might mean. I think that it
can't be true that all psychiatric disorders are consequence of trauma. But
that's not saying that trauma doesn't produce psychiatric events. In the course
of this series we've examined lots of different disputes and questions about how
psychiatry sees things versus how perhaps sufferers see things or how
psychotherapists see things. But my sense in this episode is that psychiatry and
psychotherapy are coming together in many ways. And despite the sort of headline
disputes from the more extreme wings, there is a recognition doesn't there that
there are two sides of the same hopeful process. I don't think there are many
psychiatrists practicing in the UK who don't accept that psychotherapies
important. And I don't think there are people practicing the UK who don't agree
that the combination of drug treatment and psychotherapies the best that's
available to us at present. So yes I agree with you that there's a kind of
conference of ideas and beliefs. As a travel writer I have been privileged to
make some extraordinary journeys. Among them, my experiences of therapy.
Venturing back into early childhood, the understanding of how outwardly
confident person can be beset inside by profound doubts about self-worth,
leading to all kinds of repressions and divisions, and understanding how these
influence behavior and perspective was life-changing. Many breakdowns lead to
journeys of healing and recovery. In the next episode we go in search of answers
to the questions that mental suffering asks. What are the ways forward? How can
we best be healed? What does the future of recovery look like? That's next time
in our series is psychiatry working. If you need support with mental health or
feelings of despair, there are lists of organizations that can help us available
at bbc.co.uk forward slash action line. We can call for free to hear recorded
information on 0800 O double 6 O double 6. Is psychiatry working is presented by
Horatio Claire and FEMI O you, Bodhi. Now I'm Radio 4 with a look ahead to the
world tonight at 10, which are in my redlushar. Hello Amanda, tonight President
Biden made a surprise visit to Kiev today. We report from the eastern Ukrainian
town of Bakhmut where Russian forces are closing in. A senior adviser to
Ukraine's Defence Minister tells us the defence of Bakhmut won't continue if the
price is using soldiers as cannon fodder. Also Nicola Bully's family have paid
tribute to the one who made our lives so special before criticising media
intrusion will consider the role in conduct of the press in missing persons
investigations. A trial of the four-day working week has been declared a
success. We ask a firm which took part how they did it and we debate why
religion and politics are often an uncomfortable pairing. That's all coming up
on the world tonight at 10. Thanks Mr. Le. Now I'm Radio 4, here's Adam
Rutherford, we'll start the week. Hello today we have ancient wisdom both
empirical and folk and humankind's position in nature. Alexia in the valley at
the end of time is the new book by Kapka Kasabova in which he takes us to the
southern Balkans to explore the relationship between the land and the plants and
the people of the ancient river valley of the mister. We're introduced to the
Poemax, a persecuted group of healers and mystics who are enchanted by the
edible earth. We're submerged in nature and are placed in it as well in a new
staging of Vorjax opera, Risalka, the tale of a water sprite who undergoes a
brutal transformation for love only to find humankind holds little love for her.
Code Director Anne Ye invites us to contemplate our attempts to own and tame the
natural world. But we begin with Anaxiomander. Who? You may well ask. Well
cosmologist and writer Carlo Ravelli's biography makes a bold and persuasive
case that this ancient Greek philosopher scientist was the first geographer, the
first biologist, a pioneering astronomer and the founder of critical thinking.
Quite the resume, so why have we not heard of him? So Carlo, let's just start
with the biography, who and when was an axiomander? Thank you Adam. Anaxiomander
lived a 26th century ago in what is now Turkey. It's we are in the early period
of the Greek civilization, so he lived in Miletos, was a Greek city on the coast
of Asia-Mener and it's sometimes considered as one of the first philosophers. We
are just a situated before the classic period, before everybody you can think
about in Greece, like Plato or Stodel or the Great Poets. Well I think we want
to talk about the astronomy more specifically, but justify that claim that he's
the first geographer and the first biologist. Here's the book, the book is
called Perfusis on Nature and from the name of his book, a fusis, a nature
physics scan, which is my field, our field. There is a jump between everything
we can read before him and him and his school and what happened next and the
jump is very strong. Up to that point, the justification of explanation of all
the natural phenomena was always connected with the existence of God's
supernatural. Suddenly with an axi-mander in his school, that period, there's a
new way of thinking that comes in, which is talk about physical phenomena in
terms of physical phenomena, it turned a naturalistic explanation. That's a big
jump. Let me make one example, just so sir, before going into astronomy and
cosmology, which is really here, he's a great claim of fame. When it rains,
where does rain come from? I mean I remember starting it as school, and I
remember being quite fascinated, the rain comes down, water comes down with
rain, goes to the river, to the ocean, then evaporates and then goes up in the
sky, and then it condensated, it comes down, so the circle of water, so the
water of the rain comes from the operation of the seas. Well who understood
that? An axi-mander. Up to that point, any reference to the rain was that rain
comes because some God sends it, the winds come because it's a God who is
blowing and so on and so forth. So there is a sudden change from supernatural
explanations to naturalistic explanations. And together with this, an now-a-come
was probably his central point, and what really started my love for an axi-
mander, because I'm in love with this guy. He is a moment in which humankind
started thinking that reality can be very different than the way has been soaked
up to that point, and you can rethink the world entirely in a new way, and
that's magic, that's fascinating. And he broke about what is I believe, and
that's a core of his legacy, what is the greatest revolution in human thinking,
because it's the first one, which is realizing that this car is not just above
us, but it's all around us, that the earth is a storm that floats in the middle
of the space without falling. And whereas most other cultures, and thinking of
where the earth is in relation to the heavens, is it simply above us rather than
surrounding us? Well where does this, this is an empirical view for him? Where
does it come from? How does he reach that conclusion? The interesting thing is
that in a sense it's not too hard to realize that this guy is not just over our
head, but is also below our feet, because we see the sun going down in the west,
right, and then the morning after we see it coming out in the east, so where did
it go through? And we see the moon and the stars all going sort of clearly
around us, so it's come pretty natural to think that this guy is rotating around
us somehow, and so should be empty below the earth. Central is millennia of
previous civilization, in China, in India, in Africa, in the American
civilization. All the other civilizations, until they learned from the Greek and
from an ecseman, always soque that the earth has to rest on something, more
earth, or some columns, like the Bible, or a big elephant, or a turtle, or some
turtles all the way down, and so on. Exactly. So how come that nobody makes this
jump? Well, because it's very hard to think that earth doesn't fall. So the
genius and ecseman was to address the question, all right, so this should fly so
that everything goes around. Why doesn't it flow? And the genius was why, for
him to reformally the question, and ask why should it fall? We see things
falling, but why should we extrapolate that to the earth itself falling? Maybe
falling is just relatively what you are, where you are on earth. But to do that,
you have to rethink what is the meaning of up and down, of high and low. You
have to re-conceptalize the world, and this is science. That's how science
starts. When you have a vision of the world, and you realize that maybe I can
think completely differently, and maybe it makes more sense. And he convinced
everybody, he convinced the Greek, and then slowly the Greek convinced the rest
of the planet. I was just thinking as Karl was talking about this, the merging
of specialities which used to exist versus this, the sharp division of
specialisms. We have a very little understanding of our committee today, it
mostly has a psychological dimension, and so it should. But alchemy is really
the basis of chemistry, and it was only in the 16th, 17th century that with
Nicholas Karl Pippa who was the great English medical herbalist, that this
separation occurred, a radical separation between the world of botany and the
world of medicine, and that's where alchemy fades out and chemistry comes in. So
I was just thinking also of Herodotus, who I think is a contemporary of an
Ximanda who was a historian, a geographer, a philosopher, an early
anthropologist, an ethnographer. Again, that kind of fusion of specialisms, and
I'm kind of, I'm yearning in my own writing and research for this, I suppose,
plurality of interests. Well, I think that the separation of the problem is it's
always something that blinds us to think, and the view of an Ximanda suffers
exactly for that, because the reason some people who planned it into aleximanda
consider him one of the greatest thinkers of human kind. So why is not more
known? Because the scientists don't look at the historical figures like an
Ximanda, and the people who look at historical figures like an Ximanda don't
understand science, and that's where all people will complain. Okay, let them
do. This reciprocal blindness has the fact that misses the importance they had
in the history of the musician, precisely because those who think about history
and the history of philosophical idea usually has a formation, an education, not
a scientific training, and those who have the scientific training don't look at
philosophy and history. So there is a separation of knowledge that makers blind
the complexity, and Ximanda is, to me, many more than almost three million ago,
I think in thinking what happened at the time, and how historically this way of
thinking started something that comes to today, we understand better the roots
of our own understanding. So that prefiguring ideas like evolution, like
Darwinian evolution, which I think you make a persuasive case for, but one of
the key things that you talk about in an Ximanda thinking is that he's quite
open to being wrong. He makes many mistakes as everyone does, and in fact, as
you argue, scientists should aim for that being wrong is really a cornerstone of
how he work out what is right, and that comes from your guy. Once I wrote a
small article on Einstein, noticing that Einstein is the one who got more things
right about nature, probably that anybody else in the last century, last three
centuries, towards the century. But he's also the one who made more mistakes. I
could list the mistake of Einstein 2030, very big mistakes. So he was not afraid
of making mistakes, and I think that's the point. Understanding that what we
know can be wrong, that what we say can be wrong, and what we learn can be
partly correct, but then it will be corrected and ameliorated again. That's a
core of critical thinking. And in antiquity, there is criticism, of course,
through it Bible, what it says about Babylonian knowledge is just brutally
critical, or there is a faceful falling a master and falling a school, but not
criticizing anything. So an examiner comes out, or at least what happened in
Milleto at that time, comes out to discover your façade way. You can learn from
the past, and at the same time be aware that what is in what you learn is wrong.
That's the beginning of critical thinking. Which also means that you contribute
to something, knowing that you could be wrong with somebody who can correct it,
and that's fine. So the idea of being wrong and being self-correcting is
fundamental to science, I want to move on to Recalcur and Anya, the co-director
of the new opera Vorjak's opera, where, in fact, trying to work out what
mistakes you've made is a crucial part of the plot. Perhaps you could just begin
by summarizing the overall story. Risulka is a Czech fairy tale about a water
spirit who falls in love with the human prince. In our production, we will
explore during the prelude to Act 1, this moment where the prince dives into
Risulka's lake, and they experience what he experiences, this amazing feeling of
being in the water, and she has this amazing experience of being close and
connected to a human. From that experience, she decides to leave her natural
environment, lake the surrounding woodlands, which is an idyllic place to be,
absolutely beautiful, full of harmony, full of adventure, and she tells her dad
that she wants to leave and join the human world. Her father warns her of the
dangers of the human world, but she's determined, and therefore she has to go
find this wise woman in the woods, the only medicine woman who's capable of
assisting her in this transformation. She discovers she has to sacrifice her
watery identity and her voice in order to become human, which is an incredible
statement to ask a woman to lose her voice and an opera singer to lose her
voice. And it is a brutal transformation too, but bloody and and gory. Not
normally portrayed in the libretto, Risulka traditionally goes into a hut, and
Yajubaba transforms her inside the hut, and then she comes out as a human. What
we've done, what Natalie and I have done in our production and our design team,
is we have asked questions about what it means to sacrifice and decided to place
it theatrically in the space, and so you watch the watery array be removed. It's
very striking a moment, so and then she comes to the surface world and a more
contemporary setting and with her prints and things don't quite go according to
plan. No, no, they don't quite go according to plan. It's not unlike, I think
anybody's human experience of thinking, oh, if I do this, it's going to be like
that. Here's an idea of something and that idea will be exactly what I think it
is. You make the sacrifices, you make the choices, then you arrive in the new
world, and no, it's not what you thought it was at all, especially if you don't
have a way to communicate, especially if you're out of your element in another
new culture that isn't being quite receptive to the fact that you are unsure of
what's going on. So the Prince betrays her, spoiler alert, and because she has
no voice and can't communicate, she's kind of lost and her father comes back and
takes her back. In Act 3, then, the Prince, tortured by his betrayal, comes back
looking for Risaka and she is now in a cursed loneliness, in a very barren
version of the previous Adil that we saw in Act 1, almost apocalyptic, and he
begs forgiveness. And in this particular fairy tale, forgiveness means death,
and so she grants him peace. It's an unexpected redemption story. It's a very
dramatic scene in the Second Act when Risaka is stripped of her voice, which is
very bold move to have a pretty much a whole act where the Soprano makes not a
sound, but is present on stage. But there's a sort of wedding party scene, and
it's witty and funny, and it's like a vampire wedding, but they're all covered
in oil. Yeah. So a sticky gloopers, as they vogue around the stage, and this
feels very much like well, this is our exploitation of fossil fuels. We want to
demonstrate their appetite, and so we've covered the chorus in this kind of
reflective Amory Woods, our costume designer, this kind of reflective slick
costume, and the chorus in the dancers, ooze around the stage, around Risaka,
who's strapped into this kind of corseted idea of molding her into a new
culture. Sustainability is part of the production as well, the way the set is
designed under also, and the forests with enormous tendrils. Tell us about how
you wove sustainability into the production. So it's that we asked ourselves a
lot of questions. So originally we had water on stage. We originally in the
dreaming up of the design had fire on stage. You ask yourself the questions, the
water's going to have to be heated, the water's going to need chemicals in it,
it's going to have to change over. How do we represent the devastation in act
three with the poison slime of the water? Oh, we'll have to color the water. And
then you kind of see the footprint of all of these choices. And then you go to
your, you, we asked ourselves these questions. We asked our creative team these
questions. Do we need that? What else can we do? And then you go to your
imagination, which is your primary resource, and you go what's another way to do
that? So we no longer have water on stage. We no longer have fire on stage. And
the forest, the tendrils that come down are primarily made from recycled
materials and costumes from a 1991 carmen at the ROH. It's very effective. Can't
I? How do you deal with the fact that if I get it this right, at the end, the
prince has a choice between kissing her or not. And kissing her means asking for
forgiveness, but also means dying. It seems a very pessimistic alternative. The
only way for him at that point to accept love is to renounce life. How do you
deal with it? I think that in the poetry of it to recognize that you're part of
a whole and that the whole requires give and take and sacrifice and loss. And he
comes back and he specifically says, kiss me, kiss me, kiss me forever. He's
very clear that the only release from his actions, his pain, what he's going
through is death. And I think it's just, it's a beautiful exchange of seeing
someone sacrifice and understanding you can make your own. I think opera is
always about life and death and these really big conversations. And so you can
take that and expand it, see how it can transform into other actions. Well, I
think we've seen that in Risalka, there is this learning from one's mistakes and
that that has resonance with an axamander and collar of Ellie's work. But KAPCA,
you must have seen so many resonances in Risalka in the relationship between the
land and people and exploitation and sustainability in everything that you
write. Absolutely. I was just thinking, what an alchemical tale in a way Risalka
is, in the sense that it's a tale of transformation. It's, you know, the word
heal comes from whole, from an old Germanic word meaning whole. And I explore
that in my book. Okay, well, let's talk about Alexia, which is the title of the
book, The Subtitle is in the Valley at the end of time. Set it in time and space
calling it to this valley the end of time. Where is it? Why is it so special?
This is the upper basin of an old river called Mesta or Nestos in Greece. It
traverses Bulgaria in Greece. And I focused on the upper basin of it, which is
framed by three mountains, three of Europe's great mountains, Rilla, Radopi and
Pyrene. It's an extraordinarily beautiful place. It's also, despite the various
ravages brought by exploitative politics during communism and neglect post-
communism still largely preserved compared to other, I suppose, other
biosphere's other ecosystems that we're familiar with. And I was drawn to that
place first of all instinctively. I fell in love with it. It's a very electrical
place. The mountains have these electrical storms. And I sensed that there was a
trail to kind of to follow there. And I started meeting the people of the
valley. It's actually several valleys. You know, it's quite an extensive
geographic sort of territory. But I focused on staying with different
communities there and getting to know how people relate to their place and
discovering a lot of suffering at the collective and personal level and a lot of
old knowledge of plants. And yeah, and the story there is vast. Tell us about
the peoples of this region because you spend a lot of time with the Po-Mac. And
I was unaware of their existence as this European ethnicity or group of people
who are really right in this valley and they are absolutely central to your
tale. Yes, this is their territory. The Po-Macs are very little known Europeans
and yet they're tremendously interesting culturally. They're a syncretic
culture. They're Muslims, Bulgarian speaking Muslims and they're spread
throughout the sudden Balkans with the greatest concentration in Bulgaria but
also in Greece, Turkey, Macedonia. They are indigenous people who at some point
adopted Islam, we're talking a few centuries ago. And the reason why they have a
deeper connection still with place is not because they're not affected by mass
emigration, economic desperation and all the other kind of fallout of the end of
communism. And this link with the land, I think, has given them at least on the
collective level of cohesion that other communities may lack. So yes, they are a
specific syncretic culture because they combine a sort of form of Islam with a
pagan form of relationship with the earth. You might say a kind of, you know,
nature cults are still alive in those communities. How do you fit into this? How
do you feel comfortable in this area? You're born in Sophia, but you live in
rural remote Scotland today. How did you feel like you fitted in with the people
in the landscape? Well, I speak the language, but for me this was a completely
new kind of region. It was a process of discovery for me. I wanted to learn
about plants, about people, about their history and, you know, going back to
this idea with Anna Ximandra of sort of mixing different currents. This is very
much, for me, the process of writing about the place is almost the process of
mirroring the nature of that place as it emerges, you know, the spirit of the
place through the guides that I find on the ground based on the stories of
people who generously kind of, you know, took me with them through the story of
their lives, but also through their valley, you know, through their plant
knowledge. And some of these people are walking in cyclopridius. These people
have no worldly power but a lot of earthly power. And so for me, it was a deeply
humbling process of learning, the full extent of what it means to be, for me, a
citizen of the earth. Their integration and indeed your integration with the
plants, you talk a lot about edible plants. There's amazing naming of plants,
many of which people have heard of many I hadn't. But when you talk about edible
plants, it's not traditional vegetables, as you might buy, from the supermarket.
Is this part of, in your narrative, you deliberately trying to disabuse us of
what we consider edible plants? Well, I wasn't deliberately trying to do
anything. I was simply following these people on their, you know, on their
trails. So for example, I spent time with plants, gatherers. These are, you
know, some of Europe's top experts in medicinal and gourmet plants. So we're
talking about gourmet mushrooms, which we end up, you know, buying at a premium,
you know, in small, in small packets in our deli shops, porcini for our risotto.
Well, the people who pick these mushrooms are usually Roma, gypsies, you know,
they make almost no money from it. And there's all the medicinal plants that are
gathered in, you know, in the region, again, sort of the premium. So I became
interested in this whole question of the supply chain, you know, from picker on
the ground, a person with great plant knowledge to the wholesale buyer. And I
spent time with a guy called Locally Known as Rocket in Chanta, called After a
Flower, you know, with Dubbed in Chanta. It's actually Red Evans. He is a
walking encyclopedia, you know, he can name over 700 plants, medicinal plants,
plus their regional names. And do you think that this knowledge is being lost?
How do we maintain that knowledge? This is, this is what I found so poignant
that all of these people work in lineages of plant knowledge. These lineages go
back to antiquity. They go back to Theofrastus, who was one of the first
botanists, and we do have his works. I tapped a little bit into his description,
there's a tremendous description by Theofrastus of a man who turns into a plant.
You know, we're in the realm of magical poetry here, which is also a big part of
being a plant, Gathera or a plant buyer or a herbalist. You have to understand
the language of plants. And the loss of the lineage is something poignant,
Rocket in Chanta, was keen for me to spend time with him, even though there is
always the fear that you will steal some of the knowledge. Now this is another
sort of ancient thing that, you know, it should be sort of guarded, you know,
the knowledge should be guarded. It's only for the adepts for the initiated.
Yet, you know, he said to me, you know, my children are not interested. I have
nobody, you know, this business, this whole thing dies with me. This feels like
a theme that runs through both an axamander and Risalka that how do we maintain
knowledge? How do we learn from the mistakes? Do you see Carlo, do you see
parallels? Well, what happened at Samanak's Mando was exactly the moment,
exactly the moment in which the idea that knowledge should be kept secret was
supplanted by the idea that if you write a book and spread the knowledge to
everybody, this is an advantage for everybody. This is a century when writing
became a common knowledge among people and people started writing book. And what
an axamander did, which was a big break with tradition, is to write a book,
putting everything he knew in prose. In fact, the little that was published
before was in verses in poetry. And by breaking this millionaire tradition of
secret knowledge, from now on, knowledge could be diffused and contested and
developed by everybody. And that is why books like Lexier, Bi-Cappicacibova need
to be read. That is out now, Carlo Ravelli's, an axamander and the nature of
science, which is translated from the original Italian by Marian Nana Rosenberg.
That is published later this week. And Rosalco, co-directed by Anya and Natalie
Avrahami, is on at the Royal Opera House until 7 March. Many thanks to today's
studio engineer Tim Heffer. Next week, capitalism under the spotlight, Tom
Sutcliffe talks to Bernie Sanders, but for now, thank you and goodbye. Start the
week was presented by Adam Rutherford and produced by Katie Hickman. Now just
before the world tonight, let's take a quick look at the weather. Tonight,
Northwest Scotland will have spells of rain, which could be heavy. Much of the
rest of the UK will be cloudy with missed and drizzle possible. Tomorrow, most
of the UK will again be rather cloudy and mild with some drizzle possible.
Northwest Scotland and the Northern Isles will have more persistent rain for a
time, and the west of Northern Ireland and Northwest Scotland will see spells of
heavy rain later. Then on Wednesday, we'll have more rain pushing east across
the UK, with sunny spells and showers following on behind. On 92 to 95 FM. On 1.