TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Bark starts next Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at
11 o'clock. A man and a woman have been charged with gross negligence
manslaughter after the body of a baby was found in a wooded area near Brighton.
Prosecutors say Constance Martin and Mark Gordon are also accused of concealing
the birth of a child and perverting the course of justice. They're due before
magistrates tomorrow. Speaking earlier, Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford
said a post-mortem examination hadn't yet been carried out and officers had been
unable to determine the baby's gender. We are truly devastated by the outcome
and we know this emotion is being felt here in Brighton and across the country
today. Based on our inquiries we've carried out so far, we believe sadly the
baby may have been dead for some time before they were found. The head of MI5
has apologised after a public inquiry found the security service missed the
chance to take action that might have prevented the Manchester Arena bombing in
2017. MI5's Director General Ken McCullum expressed his deep regret. The inquiry
chairman Sir John Saunders said the security service could have intervened
earlier and referred the bomber Salman Abedi to the government's counter-
terrorism programme. 22 people died when he detonated his device at an Ariana
Grande concert. The former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has accused the
journalist who published more than 100,000 WhatsApp messages he sent and
received during the pandemic of breaching his trust. Isabel Oakeshott, who
helped Mr Hancock write his memoir, has admitted breaking their non-disclosure
agreement but said she acted in the national interest. 57 people are now known
to have died in Tuesday's train crash in Greece. Rail workers across the country
have held a one-day strike, insisting they'd repeatedly warned about decades of
poor standards and under-investment. The Scottish government has announced that
the Caledonian Sleeper, which runs overnight routes from Scotland to London,
will be nationalised in June. The current operator Serco is having its contract
terminated seven years early. The Transport Minister Jenny Goulruth says this
move will provide stability and certainty for passengers. BBC News. You are a
national treasure. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And
you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. Now let's welcome back the News
News News team, Frank Hovis, Callum Gilhooly, the Reverend McMinn and lots more
in the second episode of this series of the Absolutely Radio Show. 33 and we
have breaking news that there are calls for the resignation of MP Barry
Sinclair, Minister of State for Pensions, after his contentious comments
yesterday in the House about all pensioners being bastards. We go over now live
to our reporter Debbie Kinghorn outside number 10. Hello this is Debbie
Kinghorn, as you say Brian. Hello I'm Brian, as you say Debbie. Has the Minister
resigned yet? Well Brian, thus far Barry Sinclair is hanging on to his post. He
claims he misspoke. What did he actually mean to say then? Apparently what he
actually meant to say was that some pensioners are bastards. Well thank you
Debbie, this is very exciting watching someone lose their job. I have with me in
the studio Martin Baines, our resignations correspondent. Martin, what do you
think of Mr Sinclair's defence that he misspoke? Do you think he should go? Yes,
pensioners are up at arms, those that can manage it. It's just a matter of time.
Well thank you Martin. I'm hearing that Debbie Kinghorn has some more breaking
news for us. Yes Brian, he's gone. The Minister has now resigned. Well that
really is a terrible shame. It's all over far too quickly. I had hoped that this
would play out over a few days and perhaps other mistakes would have come to
light. Yes, unfortunately the Minister's penchant for gambling and his much-
discussed drinking habits have not been revealed. Until now that is. And we have
breaking news now from Ewan Douglas. Yes indeed Brian. Words just come in that
newcomer Alison Marshall has been appointed as the new Minister for Pensions.
Right, and what do we know about Ms Marshall, Ewan? Not much, although we do
know that she's just resigned. Really? Yes, she's gone. She's walked just in the
last few seconds. Alison Marshall has resigned. The pressure on her has been
building and she felt she was about to say something inappropriate about
pensioners. Oh, but hang on. We have further breaking news from Debbie Kinghorn.
Yes Brian, we're now hearing that the PM has moved quickly to appoint yet
another Minister for Pensions. Oh, who is it this time? Simon Brotherston,
moving across from the Treasury. Hang on Debbie, you and her some news? He's
gone. Already? Yes? Yes, Simon Brotherston has resigned. On being appointed he
punched the air in delight as he left number 10 and knocked out the policeman at
the front door. You have news Robin. Margaret Dunbar is the new Minister for
Pensions. Never heard of her. Well Brian, she's in. Martin? She's out. Turns out
Margaret Dunbar isn't an MP. She just happened to be passing Downing Street at
the wrong time. And we're back to Debbie Kinghorn. Brian, we have a new Minister
for Pensions. Incredible, that's five in one day. Technically five, yes,
although in fact the new Minister for Pensions is none other than Barry Sinclair
who was the first Minister for Pensions to resign earlier today. The PM now
feels he's ready to return to the government. So it's as you were. Well thank
you Debbie, a complete and utter waste of time in other words, but we love it.
That's all from us. Good night. Bigger, better, faster, louder, stronger than
any other radio station. Any other f***ing radio station. Come and have a go if
you think you're hard enough. Outside now! Yes, I do know what is the social
media. Social media does tell you what is happening in the world and what famous
people do say and if they are fat or thin or fugly. And mainly it has pictures
of a family called the Kim, Kanye, Kendall, Kylie, Kris Kardashians. And
everything on the social media is called content. But that is a bit funny
because on social media nobody does seem content. And on the news it does also
say that you must not let children and teenagers go on social media at night
because they will be too sleepy at school the next day. So at bedtime your mum
and dad hide your sister's phone in your mum's pants drawer with your mum's
special wand what makes a buzzy noise. And on social media there's also the
Instagram. And my big brother says it is called Instagram because you can go on
it and get someone to bring you an instant gram. But I do not know what that
means. And on my big sister's Instagram page she does have a special grumpy
picture of herself what looks like she has got her lips stuck in a jam jar. And
if you do go on Instagram and Snapchat and someone does be mean about your
picture then it is called body shaming. And people what do shame and hate is
called trolleys. And my mum says you must never body shame people. But then she
said in their wedding photo my dad looks like a pig in a suit what fell in a
bin. And also you must watch out in case you get the grooming. And the grooming
is nothing to do with horsies. It is when a smelly old man what you can't see
does pretend to be your best friend and ask you to take pictures of your twinkle
or your wee pipe. And if that happens you must always tell your mum and dad.
Because your mum and dad do say that your body is your body and no one must take
a picture of it. But then they do put lots of bare baby photographs of you on
Facebook. So everyone can see your bum without permission. And on the social
media you must be very careful you do not catch mental elf. And mental elfism I
think is like a term for a person who is not a good person. And mental elfism I
think is like a little elf what gets stuck in your brain and gives you bad self-
esteem. And my dad says that mental elf is silly because when he was young no
one had mental elf. And now everyone has mental elf. But my dad can't get to
sleep without 10 pints and a wacky backy cigarette. And all the mums and dads
say the government must do something to help all the young people with the
social media and the mental elf. And they are mainly worried that children might
see roodery doodery. So at school all the computers have got a children lock so
that you do not accidentally see bad pictures of um I think bare ladies and mens
having a downstairs body kiss. But when you go home you can see that on your
dad's iPad anytime you like. And that is what is the social media. It is, it's
true. Now we dip into the archives with our series about the Dunkirk evacuation.
We have never before heard audio archive from some of the brave people both on
the beach and aboard the little ships that sailed from as far north as Glasgow
and far south as the Isles of Scilly to rescue troops. We set sail on the 26th
of May 1940 with a three-man crew and our dog Sausage. Sausage was the dog's
name. We did not take some sausage made of dog. We are not heathens. We were
beset with storms. It was the hardest endurance test of our lives. But we
finally sailed into Dunkirk on the 27th of May 1941. A year too late. So we
turned around and came back home. But without our dog Sausage it had taken so
long we'd eaten him. Wow I was only seven year old at the time. Mother said
girls wasn't allowed to go on the little ships to Dunkirk. And when I asked her
why she said because girls on ships are bad luck. Wow you can imagine I wasn't
having any of that bad luck my arse. So I stowed away in the hold of my father's
fishing boat with just a pasty and a pen knife. Several hours from land's end I
was suffocating. But I couldn't get out or make myself heard above the sound of
the motor. So I got me pen knife and I cut a tiny air hole in the wood.
Unfortunately this caused the boat to fill with water and sink which was a bit
unlucky. Well at the time I held the world record for swimming the channel. I
had shoulders the width of a wardrobe. So I didn't wait for the boat to come in.
I got me trunks on the ones me mam knitted. Lagged meself in lard and set off
swimming tappy lappy to Dunkirk. I knew I could return with at least two light
infantrymen clutching on me biceps. When I strode up the beach approached a
young man and strapped him onto me back. He started struggling to get away. As
it happened I'd overshot the mark and ended up in the Netherlands. To make
matters worse I was arrested for indecent exposure. Me woolly trunks had
unraveled in the water. I didn't get out of prison until 1952. Yes I well
remember the Dunkirk evacuation. I was standing on the beach with my regiment
and watched the boats appear on the horizon. A marvellous sight. Brought a tear
to the eye. Or it would have done if I hadn't had dysentery. Because at that
exact moment I catastrophically soiled my undergarments. So it has a rather
different meaning. For me the Dunkirk evacuation. Now it's time for the late
night musings with the Reverend McMinn and his... And this evening's thought for
the hay. Hello I woke up on Thursday morning with an irresistible urge to eat
some cakes. Not Underscratchers obviously. No cakes, the Polish fruitcake. So I
untethered my Mulberry six-wheeled chollie and hastened along to my local
minima. Well what a calamitous sight I befell as I rounded the Kiddly Widdly
stand. To a spy Polish corner. No cakes, the Polish fruitcake. So I untethered
my Mulberry six-wheeled chollie and hastened along to my local minima. Well what
a calamitous sight I befell as I rounded the Kiddly Widdly stand. To a spy
Polish corner. No cakes in sight, just three cheese babkas well past their
prime. And of course the ironic carton of flakie. Or as we would know it, soup
de tripe. I was about to leave the minimart as keckless as the day I was born.
When I heard raised voices coming from the chilled meat cabinet. What a sight
befell me. The European Holy Trinity. Michel Barnier, Jean-Claude Junckers and
Donald Tusk. Surrounding our very own pocket battleship, Nicolas Sturgeon. With
Tusk waggling in a very threatening manner, a frozen mealy pudding. Don't get me
wrong, the colour of Nicolas Apparel was a borderline criminal offence. What is
it with shorter people in public? Do they think we can't see them? A barrage of
day glow. This one, canary yellow. So I sought to even up the odds by holding
the antique carton of flakie above my head. Finger on the quick release flap and
shouting, by the power of Schott's Bonnacourt's very own Susan Boyle. I dreamed
a dream and that dream was your hard exit from this situation through the far
from frictionless border of that minimart window. Now, the threat may well have
been enough, but sadly the red mist descended once again. Suffice to say that Mr
Tusk resisted but ultimately fared little better. Minging as only a person can
covered an ancient flakie. He then had the ignominy of setting the security
alarm off as he did have a frozen mealy pudding inserted in his purse. Luckily a
custodial term was averted and I earned the eternal gratitude of the European
Politburo. As thanks to my scatter soup approach, Nicolas Canary Two-Piece will
never see the light of day again. Good night. Welshmen are getting a bit of a
handful these days. Alright, right here you are, front page. You see they've got
a story about Welsh actor Bumfrey Hogart. Ooh, what do it say, Tenzil? Bumfrey
Hogart, it say, who in the film of Treasure Island played the part of Long John
Silver's crut. Have won an Oscar for best supporting actor. Well I'll be
swanseed. I used to go out with Bumfrey Hogart. What, Bumfrey Hogart? What was
in Die Hard, the Welsh porno film? Yes, Tenzil, I met him when he was filming
The Magnificent Seven. What, the cowboy film? No, Tenzil, the one about the
river. And he told me I looked like Shirley Bassey. Shirley Bassey? In what way?
We are both women. And then he said I was beautiful. Goodness, goodness,
goodness, listen to me now. You are the only person I know that look normal in a
hall of mirrors. How could he say you are beautiful? Because he was wooing me.
Ooh, oooing you, is he? And he took me to the club Smonkin and wooed me there as
well while we drank Chateau myself. What, I took you to a club, Gwynedd? Yes,
Tenzil, but it was Club Mercadnoith, the Welsh language striff club, and you got
us thrown out. I didn't understand. I thought I was the one that had to get
undressed. And he wrote me poems. I've got one now. I keep it in my brassiere
next to my heart. I'll read it to you and you will see how beautiful it are. You
are a flower, I am a bee, and I thought that you should know this. I'd like to
probe inside you a bloom with my great big hairy proposes. Anybody can write a
poem, Gwynedd. Somebody from Ur-el could write a poem. Let's see what else has
happened in Ur-el's today. I see J.Y. Kelly, the inventor of K.Y. Jelly, have
died. I used to go out with him as well, Tenzil. For Swansea's sake. All right,
Gwynedd, what is he like? J.Y. Kelly? On the whore? Very nice. Ach a wee,
Gwynedd. Ach a wee. And now it's time for the 23rd part of Two-Line Terry, the
story of the remarkable Scottish singer and whistler, Terence MacCruna, who had
many hits in the 1940s and 50s with his short two-line songs. It was now almost
the end of the war, and Terry was finding life in the Royal Navy very difficult.
However, this all changed when he fell in love with Charlotte Potatoes, a
beautiful young wren who was sailing with him on HMS Furious. VE Day came, but
Charlotte didn't adapt well to life outside the Navy, and Terry sang about this
in the beautiful ballad Crestfallen Wren. Sadness, unhappiness, sorrow and woe
When she resigned from her maritime profession I think she was suffering post-
naval depression Miss Potatoes' depression led to a serious drinking problem,
and she began to have accidents. Terry wrote about one of these in the song
Charlotte Had a Mishap. She had a mishap and drank too much Fell out of a taxi
She got rushed to the hospital With a bollard up her jacksy After a complex
bollard removal operation, Charlotte stopped using taxis and cycled everywhere.
But she continued to be depressed, and her behaviour became increasingly
erratic. Terry felt he could never trust her, and he described this
untrustworthiness in the song Bicycle Boasting. She boasted of having 300
bicycles I was quite surprised Then she was arrested by the police and accused
of peddling lies And in conclusion, I would like to say that we will all miss
you hugely, Dad. We will miss you, but we will never forget you. Thank you,
Alan, for those heartfelt words. We will now sing... Sorry, Reverend, my son
Jack has requested that he be allowed to say a few words about his papa. I think
he's a little young to speak at a funeral. Well, he is young, yes. I am nearly
five. But if Jack feels he has something he wants to say, I think we should
respect that, don't you? Well, yes, I suppose. Ladies and gentlemen, Joe's
grandson Jack will now say a few words about his grandpa. It's actually bumper.
I called him bumper because rather musically, when I was little I couldn't say
grandpa. About his bumper. My bumper was good fun and I loved him very much. He
would buy me chocolate and one time he put an ice cream cone on his head, which
was very funny. I will miss bumper very much. Well, thank you very much, Jack.
Those are lovely words. I'm not finished. It wasn't all fun with bumper. He
smelt funny and weed himself quite a lot. Thank you, Jack. We will now sing...
He also used to swear and give the V-sign to granny behind her back when she
annoyed him. We really have to move on. I'm not finished. I want to sing my song
for bumper. Tell him, Alan. Is this necessary? He's very talented. We're just
keen to let him explore his creativity at this stage. Bumper's down, bumper's
down, bumper's down. Bumper's down, bumper's down, bumper's down. Enough,
enough. We must let him finish. Bumper's still down. As you can see, there is a
lot of promise there. Do you see my dance for bumper? No, no. There will be no
dance for bumper. Let me in the box, then. If bumper can't get out, I want to
get in. Let me in the box. You cannot get into the box. Please tell him, Alan. I
think if Jack wants to get into the box... we should respect that, shouldn't we?
Really? OK, I'll get the crowbar, shall I? And then Jack can squeeze in beside
his grandfather's dead body, if he'd like. It's up to him. And if he wants to
get burned in the fire with bumper... No, wait! What's up, Jack? I don't want to
go in the box any more. No? Can we resume? Is that OK with Jack? Yes,
everything's fine. I think Jack has learned a useful lesson. That he doesn't
want to lie in a box with a dead body and then get burned. Yes, he's learned
that lesson for himself, which I think is very important. Oh, please, shut up,
Alan. Right, we will now sing... No, we're out of time. Let's just burn bumper!
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. I'm Frank Hovis. The first morning of our
holiday in Gryll, in North Wales... I opened the curtains and saw there was a
pier. And a policeman shouted at him and he stopped doing it. And you know when
you're on the beach and you want to impress the girls... you put a couple of
rolled up socks down your swimming trunks. It's quite important you don't put
the rolled up socks down the back of your trunks. Well, that's what they do in
Gryll. You know, there's an old saying in Wales about Gryll... If you're driving
along and you see someone hitchhiking to Gryll... do the decent thing. Gun them
over. And when you're on holiday, sleeping in an unfamiliar bedroom... there's
always that risk, isn't there, of getting up in the middle of the night... and
mistaking the wardrobe for the gavotry. I didn't do that, but I did do the
opposite. I mistook the gavotry for the wardrobe. Flushed away a perfectly good
suit, ladies and gentlemen. Next morning I was walking along the beach, thinking
about my suit... and boom, down there it was, washed up on the sand. And there
were a couple of condoms in the pockets that weren't there before. Yeah, my wife
had started smoking in bed. Not cigarettes, friction. Hence the need for some
well-lubricated condoms. And my wife's favourite thing on holiday is souvenir
shops. She just loves all that tasteless rubbish. And it's total crap, absolute
real crap. So she was in this souvenir shop and she really fancied this little
plastic figure of a Welshman... not having sex with a sheep. Which is something
you see surprisingly often in Wales. But she hadn't got any money on her, so she
did a deal with the shopkeeper. She said, if you let me have this little figure,
I'll let you have a look at my bosom. So that's what they did. It was tit for
tat. But probably the best holiday I ever had was in England. But probably the
best holiday I ever had was in Egypt with the rest of the gads. We went to see
the pyramids and all that, and one of the gads fell in the river. But he
insisted he hadn't fallen in the river. There's no doubt about it. He was in
denial. And one night, the same bloke got very, very drunk, ladies and
gentlemen. Absurdoci-paragetic he was. So we carried him back to the hotel, got
him undressed, got his teeth out. I think we should have got him back to his
room as well, but... I think we should have got him back to his room as well,
but... You can't think of everything, can you? The next morning, he was
absolutely yog-ious, ladies and gentlemen. Yog-ious he was, because apparently
he didn't have false teeth. Yog-ious he was, because apparently he didn't have
false teeth. He does now, obviously. I think we'll leave it at that. Good night,
ladies and gentlemen. Good night, ladies and gentlemen. Just have a seat there.
I'm Brian, by the way. Hi, I'm Callum. I don't think I've cut your hair before.
No, I don't think I've cut yours. So what would you like done today, Callum? I'd
like a haircut today, Brian. I mean, how would you like it cut? Can you be more
specific? Quite a bit shorter. But not as short as the last guy who cut it. And
how short was that? Too short. OK, well, perhaps I could do a number two at the
side and the back. I think I'll give that a miss. Sorry? I don't fancy a number
two on my back and my side, eh? Now, why don't I just use the scissors? Aye,
good idea. So are you going on holiday this year? Oh, yes. Oh, that's good.
Where are you going? No idea. Are you going on holiday this year? Yes, yes, I'm
going to Corfu. Corfu? That sounds good. Staying in Mosonga. Nice wee place.
I've been there before. There's lots of tavernas and bars near the beach. Sounds
brilliant. Oh, it's a great wee place. Mosonga, you say? Yes, Mosonga. Maybe
I'll come. I really wasn't suggesting you come on holiday with me. Well, you
seem to get on OK. I've only known you for about two minutes. Oh, come on. It's
nearer three. I was just making conversation. I'd rather be on my own. Well,
what if you get lonely? I won't. I always meet people. I'm people. New people.
Well, we could try to forget we had this chat and then I'd be new people. I
won't be able to forget we had this chat. So I can't kip at your place after
all? Sorry? It's all off, eh? It was never on. Oh, I'm just kidding you. Are
you? Aye, of course. Sorry. Of course you are. I nearly heard you there. Yes,
you did. I'll get my own place, Mosonga, and then I'll come and find you. Oh,
no, wait a minute. Look at my hair. What have you done? Oh, I'm sorry. It was
all this talk about you coming on holiday. I must have lost focus. You've given
me a mahican. I tell you what, sir. You can have this cut for free. I do, right?
I can. And I'll tell you what. I'm never coming back here. Oh, dear. Is that
right? Never mind. Oh, I'm just kidding you again. I'll give you one more
chance, Brian. I enjoyed the chat, and I quite like the mahican. You talking to
me? You're talking to me, huh? I love the deer, Hunter. The Absolute Remedial
Show is written and performed by Pete Baigie, Moenna Banks, Murray Hunter,
Gordon Kennedy and John Sparks. The producers were Gordon Kennedy and Gert
Beatty. And it's an absolutely gussman production for the BBC. And there'll be
more from the Absolutely team at the same time next week. Now let's look ahead
to tomorrow. On BBC Radio 4... We are all a unique accumulation of our own
unique experiences and knowledge...the poet Lem Sissay looks at uniqueness.
Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it happens. Reflecting on
the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of graduates, people without
degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and
only. He'll like an aw. Starting tomorrow morning at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Now to Westminster for Today in Parliament. Order! Order. Good evening,
this is Susan Hume at Westminster, where there are condolences for the victims
and bereaved families of the train disaster in Greece. And MPs across the
Commons are worried about dangerous overcrowding on one British railway. It's
not safe, Minister. At some point, somebody will get injured or killed as a
result of this. Also concerned that hospices offering end-of-life care need more
than charity fundraising. Imagine if maternity services relied on second-hand
jean sales to fund care. And on behalf of victims, a call to stop sex offenders
changing their names to hide their pasts. Joanna's fear is this new identity
erases Clive Bundy, erases the terrible harm he did. But first, the Transport
Secretary has said the government will offer any help it can to Greece following
the train crash on Tuesday, which has killed dozens of people. A passenger train
carrying 350 people, many of them students, collided with a freight train after
both ended up on the same track. The front carriages burst into flames and
rescuers are still sifting through the wreckage. The incident has led to
protests, with demonstrators claiming that neglect and underfunding had made the
rail network unsafe. In the Commons, Mark Harper offered his... Sincere
condolences to the people of Greece following the terrible rail accident
yesterday. My thoughts, and I'm sure the thoughts of the whole House, are with
the victims, the first responders and all those affected. The Prime Minister has
written to the Greek Prime Minister to offer the condolences of the government,
and we stand with our colleagues in Greece ready to offer assistance should they
require it. And the Transport Secretary's words were echoed by MPs across the
chamber. But there were safety concerns about the railways in the UK too. A
Labour MP, Clive Efford, was worried about the impact of timetable changes on
southeastern rail services coming into London. I myself was on a train on the
7th, where due to delayed trains, the train was so overcrowded, someone fainted
in the carriage that I was in. What we've got here is that the system has been
cut back to the point where there is no slack in it. Whenever there's a delay,
there is dangerous overcrowding. And the Minister has got to address that before
something serious happens. He said the new timetable was supposed to reduce
congestion and overcrowding, but it had done the opposite. The Rail Minister,
Hugh Merriman, said he'd listened and more services had been introduced. But his
Conservative colleague, Sir Bob Neill, hadn't seen much improvement. He too was
worried about safety, especially at London Bridge station. I've seen the chaos
there. I've actually stood outside the station because it had to be closed on
occasions. It's not safe, Minister. At some point, somebody will get injured or
killed as a result of this. Hugh Merriman again claimed that the aim had been to
reduce congestion. The timetable change was brought in to try and add more
resilience, to reduce cancellations, but we have got issues with regard to
network rail, infrastructure, and of course we have industrial action. All of
those matters I seek to resolve. The RMT union has announced another four strike
days in the coming weeks. Under the strikes bill, the government wants to change
the law to ensure a minimum service in vital sectors such as rail. The SNP's
Chris Stevens said he was interested that this seemed to apply in Scotland,
where transport was devolved. So he wondered... What the response of the Heads
of Department will be if the Scottish Parliament refuses to implement the
minimum services legislation, if it assesses it's not conducive to good
industrial relations and dispute resolution. Hear, hear. The Transport
Secretary, Mark Harper, said the strikes bill dealt with employment rights and
that was not devolved. Well, if there are problems with the trains, MPs across
the Commons were not reassured that taking the bus was a realistic alternative
following cuts to services. Labour's Luke Pollard didn't expect the Minister to
know about the details of the number 31 bus in Plymouth. But I do expect him to
care about the people who can no longer get that bus now it's been axed. The
older people, the elderly, who can't get to their GP and hospital appointments
as easily or bring their shopping back from town. So will the Minister agree and
adopt Labour's policy of handing power over bus routes back to communities? And
a Conservative, Ian Levy, was equally worried about bus routes into Newcastle.
My constituents plan their journey only to find out that buses are simply late
or not coming at all. So many groups are already at a disadvantage, Mr Speaker.
The young, the old, people on a low income, these people rely on these vital
services to access healthcare, education and leisure. It is critical that we do
not let them down. The Minister, Richard Holden, said he recognised the
importance of buses, which is why the government had allotted £155 million to
protecting services in England and extending for another three months the £2 cap
on fares. Now, health officials have been told the public are being kept in the
dark about the harm caused by alcohol consumption. The financial watchdog, the
Public Accounts Committee, heard that alcohol increases the risk of cancer and
is a factor in 40% of ambulance call-outs. Christina Cooper reports. There is no
safe amount of alcohol. That was the message from Professor Ian Gilmore, who
treats people with cirrhosis of the liver. What people don't know is that
alcohol is strongly linked to seven cancers, two particularly common ones,
breast cancer and colon cancer, and the evidence is that there is no safe limit.
Giving evidence to the Public Accounts Committee, Professor Gilmore said
consuming 14 units of alcohol a week equated to a 1 in 100 chance of dying from
an alcohol-related disease. Drinking less than 14 units, most people would
accept that as being a reasonable risk, but we cannot say any more that alcohol
in moderation is safe, but the risks are relatively low. He said alcohol was the
biggest single factor in deaths among men aged 15 to 49, but older people were a
particular worry. They've often got more disposable income. I remember the
president of the Intensive Care Society telling me how they had ITU beds blocked
by older people falling down the stairs going to bed at night when they were not
fully compass mentis. After many years treating patients with alcohol-related
diseases, he said the penny finally dropped for him, that a public health
approach was crucial to help people tackle alcohol dependency before it caused
serious health problems. He said treatment for alcohol addiction worked, but
that was being hampered by a lack of resources. With one in 20 hospital
admissions being alcohol-related and a staggering 40% of ambulance time taken up
with alcohol-related problems, so golly, we need the treatment services to work.
The Labour MP Dan Carden campaigned to raise awareness of the harm caused by
alcohol, giving an emotional speech in the Commons two years ago on his own
personal struggles. He asked the National Audit Office to conduct some research
on alcohol treatment services in England. He said one of the most shocking
statistics in the report published last month was that in the 20 years after
2001, deaths through alcohol rose by 89%. And asked Professor Gilmour... Over
that 20-year period, how have you seen alcohol harm change and impact people
through your eyes? It's just got progressively worse, as you imply, and it's
been particularly frustrating, I think, not having any national alcohol strategy
for over 10 years now. Issues that Dan Carden raised with health officials who
appeared on the next panel of witnesses. There is no specific policy on the
prevention and treatment of alcohol harm. How difficult does that make your job?
A question for Jonathan Marron, the head of the Office for Health Improvement
and Disparities, who said the harm caused by alcohol was recognised in
government. He said the availability of treatment had declined since 2014, but
there'd been some stabilisation of services, and he was confident there would be
improved access to high-quality treatments in future. We've seen very
significant investment going into these services, and a significant increase
seen to date, and of course far more increases to come. But Dan Carden
complained there'd been no reviews on the price and availability of alcohol, and
the public weren't given information about the contents of their alcoholic
drinks. Whereas we've seen action taken on tobacco, on gambling, on obesity, on
alcohol, we're keeping the public in the dark. We're not doing anything to
tackle the harms that the industry poses in this country. Answering this time
was Sir Chris Wormald, the top civil servant at the Department of Health. He
didn't accept the government wasn't taking any action on alcohol. He said what
did and didn't work was a very well-researched area. Actually, what the right
approach is, is highly contested, both politically and between different
experts. And he insisted there was no defensiveness or group-thinking
government. Alice Wiseman, the Director of Public Health on Gateshead Council,
has run a public health campaign in her area. Alerting people to the link
between alcohol consumption and cancer. She said the evidence on tackling
alcohol problems was very clear. And she pointed to the impact of minimum unit
pricing in Scotland, where alcohol sales have fallen. We need minimum unit
price. We need restrictions on marketing. We certainly need to protect children
from exposure to alcohol marketing. It is not good that our ten-year-olds are
able to name alcohol brands because they're plastered over the front of their
favourite football team. It isn't good enough. And I think that we really could
take some robust action in that space. She wanted a national strategy to inform
people that alcohol is not a safe product. And because many people didn't accept
that they had a problem. Christina Cooper there. MPs say hospices are facing an
existential crisis, despite the increasing need for end-of-life care. Hospices
receive about a third of their income from the government. The rest comes from
donations and fundraising. The SNP's Patricia Gibson said hospices' energy bills
had gone up five-fold. She quoted Heidi Travis, who heads the palliative support
charity Sue Ryder. In order to pay the salaries of our doctors and nurses, who
provide expert care, pain and symptom management to people at the end of their
lives, we rely on people buying second-hand clothes from our charity shops, or
running a marathon and asking their friends and family for sponsorship. It is
unfathomable that such a critical part of our healthcare system is hanging by a
thread. Patricia Gibson said the way hospices are funded wouldn't be acceptable
in any other area of healthcare. Imagine, for example, if maternity services
relied on second-hand jean sales to fund care. There would rightfully be uproar.
Yet to care for dying people, hospices must rely on increasingly fragile sources
of income at a time when their costs are soaring. While Labour's Bambos
Sharalambas had an example of how those costs were soaring. Just in my
constituency, North London Hospice, they are now facing an increase of £280,000
to a bill of over £460,000 just in energy costs in 2023-24. Al-Ibdem Munira
Wilson argued that hospices needed vast amounts of energy to power essential
medical equipment, and yet... Hospices have not been classified as an energy-
intensive industry, whereas lots of other places like botanical gardens, I
think, even, have been classified as energy-intensive, so they're not getting
the additional support. The Health Minister, Neil O'Brien, said the government
was acutely aware of the challenges facing hospices, and he explained what
financial help would be available when the current relief scheme expires at the
end of March. The energy bills discount scheme will provide all eligible non-
domestic energy users, like hospices, with a discount on high energy bills until
March 2024. It will apply to all UK domestic energy users in the voluntary and
public sector, including hospices, and we will invest up to £5.5 billion to
support those non-domestic users. The Health Minister, Neil O'Brien. You're
listening to Today in Parliament with me, Susan Hume. Still to come, an
evergreen request from Labour. Get your finger out, Secretary of State. But
first, a minister has said that talks will start shortly between the UK
government and parties in Northern Ireland over a key part of the Prime
Minister's new Brexit deal. Peers wanted to know how the Assembly would be able
to object to new EU laws, the bit known as the Stormont break. Rachel Byrne
reports. Under the Brexit Northern Ireland Protocol, which was agreed by the UK
and European Union back in 2019, some EU laws on goods and customs apply in
Northern Ireland. But politicians at Stormont had no formal way to influence
those rules now that the UK has left the EU. The deal, unveiled by Rishi Sunak
at the beginning of this week in Windsor, introduced a mechanism to allow
elected representatives in the Northern Ireland Assembly to raise an objection
to any new goods rules they don't like. Lady Ritchie, a Labour peer, wanted to
know exactly how the Stormont break, as it's called, would work. When will we
see that actual legal text showing how the break will operate in practice or is
it already prepared and shown to others? The Northern Ireland Minister, Lord
Cain, said the government was trying to address the democratic deficit resulting
from the protocol. He said documents published on Monday set out the new deal,
known as the Windsor Framework. There are some details that are yet to be filled
in and will be dealt with in legislation and they will follow consultations that
my right honourable friend, the Northern Ireland Secretary, intends to begin
with the Northern Ireland parties almost immediately. The former DUP Westminster
leader, Lord Dodds, said that according to the government the new mechanism
would apply to future laws. But, he asked the Minister, how about existing laws?
Lord Cain said one of the effects of the new deal was to reduce very
significantly the amount of EU law that applies to Northern Ireland. I think the
figure is something like 1,700 pages of text have been removed and Northern
Ireland will now be subject to less than 3% of EU law. In terms of the specific
question he asked, the break will apply to new laws that fall within the
existing protocol or amendments to laws that fall within the existing protocol.
Lady Fox, an unaffiliated peer and former Brexit party MEP, was unimpressed by
what the Minister had said on EU law reduction. When the Minister says 1,700
pages will be removed, how many laws and regulations does that include? 1,700
pages stands a lot, but you only have to go and look at our legislation table to
know that that could be one law and half a regulation. Lord Cain replied that he
couldn't say off the top of his head the precise number of laws which would be
kept and those remaining were essential for Northern Ireland's privileged access
to the single market. Labour's Lord Murphy, a former Northern Ireland Secretary,
wanted to know more about how political parties were going to be consulted.
Could he tell the House the nature of those consultations? And as he knows, the
purpose of this mechanism is to address, as he has told us, the so-called
democratic deficit in Northern Ireland because of the working of the single
market. But doesn't he agree that the greatest democratic deficit is the
continued suspension of the executive and the assembly in Northern Ireland?
Devolve government hasn't functioned in Northern Ireland for a year. Lord Cain
said the government hoped the Windsor Framework would help to allow the
institutions to be fully restored. On the consultations... My right honourable
friend intends to speak to the Northern Ireland parties directly in the coming
days. That will be followed by technical engagement at official level and
further political engagement. But we do intend to move very rapidly on this
because we recognise its importance. For the Liberal Democrats, Lady Sutty said
that, given the concerns of some of the Northern Ireland parties... Can the
minister say whether the government intend to introduce a review mechanism to
assess how the Stormont break is working in practice once it's up and running?
Lord Cain stressed that legislation was going to be needed, setting out more
detail on the Stormont break. And he said he was sure that would be part of it.
Rachel Byrne there. A shortage of car parts, such as batteries, could make it
harder for UK motor manufacturers to sell electric vehicles in the EU from next
year, according to peers. The Lib Dem Lord Fock said under the terms of the UK's
Brexit deal, cars made here will have to feature a higher proportion of
components from either the EU or the UK, or else tariffs of up to 22% will be
applied. So can the minister undertake to specifically go back to the European
Union and look at this clause, because, my Lords, we will not be able to export
vehicles, electric vehicles, from this country economically unless that clause
is put on hold at the end of this year. Many batteries for electric vehicles are
sourced from Asia, and the Trade Minister, Lord Johnson, acknowledged there were
problems. We are aware of the supply chain challenges, also caused by external
factors, including Russia's war in Ukraine. This is why our officials are in
constant dialogue with the sector to support them to access the maximum benefits
of this agreement and other assistance. And he said the government was investing
to ensure manufacturers could produce vehicles with almost entirely British
parts. But the former union leader, Lord Woodley, who is a Labour peer, said the
UK was being left behind by other countries, and he appealed to the minister to
back one major project. Jaguar Land Rover have asked the government for half a
billion pounds to produce batteries, batteries, a mega battery factory in
Somerset, as opposed to Spain. It is crucial for the long-term interest of our
industry that we do not let this investment disappear from our shores.
Otherwise, my dear friends, there will be no industry in this country in ten
years' time. A Conservative, Lord Swire, felt there was a more basic issue.
Unless we rapidly increase the backup with electric vehicle charging in this
country, there will be no electric cars going to the EU from this country, or
anywhere else for that matter. Lord Johnson said the government was very aware
of the need to put infrastructure in place, but it would take time and be very
costly. Now, MPs have pressured the government to close a loophole that allows
convicted sex offenders to change their names. With survivors looking on from
the public gallery, Labour MPs argued that the current system made a nonsense of
public protection. Alicia McCarthy reports. If one of the UK's 67,000 registered
sex offenders wants to change their name, they must tell the police within three
days or face five years in jail. But the Labour MP, Sarah Champion, said 16,000
had been charged with a breach of their notification requirements between 2015
and 2020, which she described as breathtaking. And that failure could have
devastating consequences. She told the story of Della, who'd been abused as a
child. Years later, when Della reported the abuse, her abuser was already known
to the police, and he had committed further sexual offences against many more
victims. Della was made aware that he had changed his name. He'd changed his
name at least five times, allowing him to relocate under the radar and evade
justice. Sarah Champion said Della's abuser then changed his name again in
between being charged and appearing in court, slowing down the process, causing
even more distress and making a mockery of the justice system. She argued this
was far from a unique case. Perhaps most chilling for me is that with a new
name, you can apply for a new passport and driving licence, which then means you
can apply for a clean DBS check in that new name. DBS, the Disclosure and
Barring Service, is a system used by public, private or voluntary organisations
to check if applicants are safe to work with children or vulnerable people. A
Conservative, Lucy Allen, raised the case of a child sex offender sentenced to
15 years in jail who changed their name and their gender identity. This child
sex offender is no longer Clive Bundy. This person has changed their name by
deed poll and this person has changed their gender identity. Under the law,
Clive Bundy no longer exists. Clive Bundy has chosen the name of Claire Fox.
Lucy Allen said his victim, Joanna, felt that erased him. Joanna's fear is this
new identity erases Clive Bundy, erases the terrible harm he did, erases
Joanna's experience. She feels the world can refuse to acknowledge Clive Bundy
and his terrible crimes, even if they ever existed. We could just pretend the
trauma she still suffers, the trauma Clive Bundy caused her and others, well, it
didn't happen. He doesn't exist. A Liberal Democrat, Vera Hobhouse, focused on
the lifelong consequences for children who'd been abused. Many children carry
their traumatic experience into later life and I want to acknowledge the people
who are sitting in the public gallery who have all faced these terrible traumas.
Those who experience childhood traumas are twice as likely to develop depression
and three times as likely to develop anxiety disorder. A Conservative, Mark
Fletcher, is also campaigning to stop sex offenders changing their names. He
found it baffling that MPs were even debating what he called a ludicrous
loophole. We are prioritising the rights of sexual offenders over the rights of
the general public, over the rights of people who need to know if the people
working in their schools are safe, need to know if the people working in their
care homes are safe, need to know if their partner has a past. For Labour, Jess
Phillips picked up on that suggestion that the rights of perpetrators trumped
those of victims. I think we should tell this chamber and the world that in
almost all cases that is the case. Whether it's a rape case, whether it's a
domestic abuse case, just on the very face of the fact that a perpetrator has
legal counsel and legal support, a victim of a crime is merely evidence in a
case. That is it and that is what it feels like. The Home Office Minister, Sarah
Dines, accepted there was more to do and she was looking into it. MPs Joanna
Cherry interrupted. When rights conflict we have to carry out a weighing
exercise and we're talking about sex offenders here, people with a proven track
record of abusing children and vulnerable people. There's really no competition
in that situation. Sarah Dines argued a blanket ban on sex offenders changing
their names risks legal challenge. A court could rule it discriminatory,
unreasonable or disproportionate. What is often cited is that there are good,
proper reasons for offenders to change their name. It's often also cited that
there are implications under the Equality Act 2010 or the Gender Recognition Act
2003 and also, of course, perhaps more importantly, the European Convention on
Human Rights, the right to a private life. This is where we get into the legal
complexity, why successive governments don't always grapple that problem. I'm
determined to have a go at it. But winding up the debate, Sarah Champion asked
how big the problem had to be before the government acted. Alicia McCarthy
reporting. Now, for those who like to fly abroad on holiday, visit family or
travel for business but still care about the environment, there was bad news
this week. The Scientific Royal Society concluded that there's still no single
clear alternative to traditional aircraft fuel. The hopes of climate-friendly
flying rely on the development of jet fuels that have less impact on the
environment. And indeed, greener fuels are key to the government reaching its
jet zero target by 2050. But in the Commons, Labour spokesperson Mike Cain
complained that... The Secretary of State made no commitment on the production
of sustainable aviation fuel in the UK at a recent airport conference. And the
Aviation Minister at a pilots' conference......said that airspace modernisation
was stuck in the muck. The government's Jet Zero Council has achieved exactly
what it said on the tin, zero. Labour has a plan for a cleaner, greener future.
Get your finger out, Secretary of State. The Transport Minister, Jesse Norman,
said the government had just done some detailed work on sustainable jet fuels.
We have put in £165 million of advance fuel funds to support five UK sustainable
aviation fuel plants. That builds on a green fuels, green skies strategy for
pilots that existed before, and we are planning to introduce a sustainable
aviation fuels mandate in 2025. Jesse Norman there. Now, the furor surrounding
the release of thousands of messages linked to Matt Hancock's time as Health
Secretary seemed to have unnerved one Conservative MP. Sir Christopher Chope
wondered how the Commons could continue to scrutinise what ministers were doing
in an era of government by WhatsApp. Which is secretive, irrational, and it's
denying us our opportunity to be able to hold it to account on an evidence
basis. The leader of the Commons, Penny Mordaunt, suggested the events of this
week showed how secretive WhatsApp was. It's deeply regrettable, I think, and I
would just hope that on such serious matters as the Covid inquiry, that the
Westminster bubble can rise to the challenge of dealing with this in the manner
that it deserves to be approached. Penny Mordaunt bringing us to our closing
headline from Westminster. MPs across the Commons have called on ministers to
tackle the problem of dangerous overcrowding on the railways. I'm Susan Hume,
the studio manager was Robin Schroder, the editor was Mandy Baker, and that was
Today in Parliament.