TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is Chris Aldridge. Changes to the post-Brexit
trading rules for Northern Ireland have been hailed as a new chapter in
relations between the UK and the EU. Today's agreement delivers smooth-flowing
trade within the whole United Kingdom, protects Northern Ireland's place in our
union and safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland. Opponents
of the previous arrangement, known as the Protocol, have said they'll take time
to examine the new deal. One Eurosceptic Conservative MP said he wanted to make
sure there were no nasty surprises. The Democratic Unionist Party has responded
by saying significant progress has been made, but it still has concerns. Sinn
Féin has repeated its call for the DUP to return to devolved government.
President Biden has welcomed the agreement, describing it as an essential step
in preserving peace. Also tonight, the price cap on household energy prices has
been cut, but bills will still rise in April and a national institution, the
Speaker of the Commons, leads tributes to one of his predecessors, Betty
Boothroyd, who has died at the age of 93. After years of tension, talks and
negotiations, Britain and the European Union have reached agreement on a new
post-Brexit trading arrangement for Northern Ireland. The Protocol has been
replaced by what Rishi Sunak called the Windsor Framework. Speaking at a joint
press conference in the town, the Prime Minister said the deal would allow for
the smooth flow of goods from Great Britain, improve product ranges in Northern
Ireland and provide Stormont with a veto on new EU law. The European Commission
President, Ursula von der Leyen, said what had been agreed was historic, but she
explained that the European Court of Justice would still have a role in
administering the deal. Our first report tonight comes from our political
correspondent, Ben Wright. A deal devised in secrecy over many months will take
time to digest, but the agreement tied up at Windsor is a very big moment. Since
Boris Johnson signed up to a Brexit deal that put a trade border down the Irish
Sea, the Northern Ireland Protocol has angered businesses and unionist
politicians, enraged some Tory MPs and caused bitter rows between Westminster
and Brussels. But just four months into his premiership, Rishi Sunak has
clinched an agreement with the EU that his predecessors could not. Standing
alongside the President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, Mr
Sunak said they had made a decisive breakthrough. Now these negotiations have
not always been easy, but I'd like to pay an enormous personal tribute to Ursula
for her vision in recognising the possibility of a new way forward. The United
Kingdom and European Union may have had our differences in the past, but we are
allies, trading partners and friends. The Prime Minister said the deal would
ensure smooth-flowing trade within the whole of the United Kingdom. At the
moment, customs declarations are required on all goods moving between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. Rishi Sunak said a new Green Lane at ports would
sweep away bureaucracy for supermarkets and wholesalers selling into Northern
Ireland. There will be a separate Red Lane for goods at risk of travelling on
into the Republic of Ireland and the EU. Along with changes to VAT rules, Mr
Sunak claimed the deal would remove any sense of a border in the Irish Sea.
Questions of governance dominated negotiations too. And the Prime Minister said
the Windsor Framework would ensure politicians in Northern Ireland had a bigger
say over the EU laws that apply there. The Stormont break goes further and means
that Stormont can in fact stop them from applying in Northern Ireland. This will
establish a clear process through which the democratically elected Assembly can
pull an emergency break for changes to EU goods rules that would have
significant and lasting effects on everyday lives. The new mechanism is a
striking part of the deal, but Ursula von der Leyen stressed that the European
Court of Justice would continue to have the final say on issues to do with the
single market. The two leaders have clearly struck up a rapport. At one point,
the Commission President said she and dear Rishi agreed solutions were needed.
Solutions that would make a practical difference. The same food will be
available on supermarket shelves in Northern Ireland as in the rest of the UK.
The new Windsor Framework will permanently enable all medicines, including novel
ones, to be available in Northern Ireland at the same time, under the same
conditions across the UK. We have agreed on strong safeguards that will protect
the integrity of the European Union's single market. Other changes could flow
from this thaw in relations and Ursula von der Leyen said Brussels would
immediately begin the process of readmitting the UK to the EU scientific
research programme known as Horizon. First, the Prime Minister needs to sell
this deal to politicians in Belfast and his own backbenchers at Westminster. But
with Labour promising to back the deal, it's a political hurdle Rishi Sunak may
be confident of clearing. The power-sharing executive at Stormont has not met
since February 2022. Our Ireland correspondent Chris Page assesses whether the
Windsor Framework will help lead to its return. The very name of the deal may
well be designed to appeal to unionists. To them, Windsor is synonymous with
royalty, Britishness and the union. But the DUP has indicated its response will
be determined by the substance rather than symbolism. An hour after the
agreement was published, the DUP leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson said progress had
been made but key concerns remained. He highlighted one in particular, that EU
law would still apply in some sectors of Northern Ireland's economy. We need to
look at the legal text, we need to get legal advice on that, we need to make our
own assessments and come to a considered view on this. As I have said, I hope
that we can do that within a reasonable time frame, but let's face it, it has
taken months to get to this point. A key aspect of the DUP's response will be
its assessment of the extent to which the Stormont Assembly will be able to
block additional EU regulations here. The party will decide whether Mr Sunak is
right to claim that what he calls the Stormont Break will safeguard Northern
Ireland's sovereignty. Michelle O'Neill of Sinn Féin will become First Minister
if the DUP lifts its veto on power sharing. She said the Stormont Executive
should be restored now. All political parties need to be sitting around the
Executive table taking decisions that impact on people's lives. That's where we
should be today. There shouldn't be any delays in that. Vincent, we have a
health service in crisis, we have public sector workers out on the picket line.
Where we need to be is making politics work and standing up for the people that
we represent collectively and I think that's where all energies and efforts need
to be now. Stormont hasn't been fully functioning for more than a year. Most
Assembly members want to return to devolution immediately. But under power
sharing rules, whether and when the devolved government does come back is down
to the DUP. Party strategists will be mindful there are council elections in
Northern Ireland in May, when the biggest threat is likely to come from more
hardline unionists who are opposed to power sharing with Sinn Féin at all. MPs
have been debating the framework in the House of Commons this evening. Rishi
Sunak said Parliament would get to vote on the agreement when there had been
time to examine the details. Our political correspondent Jonathan Blake was
listening. To cheers from his backbenchers, Rishi Sunak said the Windsor
framework achieved what many said couldn't be done. The Prime Minister set out
some of the details of the deal, telling MPs a green lane for goods staying in
Northern Ireland had been created by a legally binding amendment to the existing
treaty that permanently removed the border in the Irish Sea. The only checks
required would be those needed to stop people smugglers and criminals, he said.
The Labour leader, Sakir Starmer, said the protocol was a compromise that would
never be perfect, but again pledged his support. We will not snipe, we will not
seek to play political games. And when the Prime Minister puts this deal forward
for a vote, Labour will support it and vote for it. Labour MPs had jeered and
asked, where's Boris, when Rishi Sunak earlier paid tribute to the work of his
predecessors. Mr Johnson, absent from the Commons, is said to be reflecting on
the government's proposals. One former Prime Minister who was there, Theresa
May, urged all sides to back the deal. The best move now is for everybody across
this House to support this settlement, because that is what is in the best
interests of all the people of Northern Ireland. The SNP's Westminster leader,
Stephen Flynn, said he was supportive, but added the damage that he said had
been done by leaving the EU shouldn't be forgotten. Sir Ed Davey of the Liberal
Democrats urged the Tories to put country before party and back the agreement.
Conservative MPs were broadly supportive. David Davis, the former Brexit
Secretary, singled out the so-called Stormont break as a triumph. I'm unaware of
any mechanism in any international agreement like the Stormont break. It seems
to me a brilliant piece of negotiating insight and imagination. The former Tory
leader, Sir Ian Duncan Smith, was one of several seeking clarification on
exactly how that mechanism would work. Others were more circumspect still,
including the chair of the Eurosceptic European Research Group, Marc Francois.
Can he assure me and the whole House that when we go through the Red Book, or in
this instance, the detailed legal text, we won't find any nasty surprises which
would materially undermine the position of Northern Ireland and the United
Kingdom? The most criticism came from the DUP. One of their MPs, Jim Shannon,
said he hoped the Windsor framework didn't become the Windsor Knot for
unionists. Another, Sammy Wilson, said he feared the deal would not fully
restore Northern Ireland's position in the UK. Speaking in Dublin, the Irish
Prime Minister, Leo Varadkar, said he appreciated people would want some time to
scrutinise the new framework. He said he hoped it would gain support to allow
politicians in Northern Ireland to concentrate on issues that mattered in daily
lives, such as healthcare and housing. Today's agreement provides solutions,
solutions that are agreed, workable and durable. If implemented, it will bring
stability and certainty to a situation that has been in flux since the decision
of the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, the Brexit referendum, almost
seven years ago now. In a statement tonight, President Biden described the
document as an essential step towards ensuring the hard-earned peace and
progress of the Good Friday Agreement was preserved and strengthened, a point
echoed by the White House national security spokesman, John Kirby. We're
grateful that the two sides were able to come up with this agreement in keeping
with the Northern Ireland protocols. We believe that this will help improve the
prosperity of both the EU and the UK and will open up all kinds of now avenues
for trade that were somewhat at risk. The protocol covered products including
British sausages, cheese and eggs. Our Northern Ireland business and economics
editor, John Campbell, considers whether the new deal will make trading easier.
The protocol has made it more difficult and expensive for companies to move
goods into Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK. All commercial shipments
require customs declarations. There are additional processes for food products.
The main impact has not been the physical checking of goods. It's all the added
bureaucracy. Kieran Sloan runs a deli in Belfast. We've had to pick up more
local suppliers here. We're selling more local stuff than ever before. We're
still getting a lot of stuff in from across the water but it's very, very
limited and the companies are very limited. We have to do these mad things like,
you know, to get cheese across. It has to be a certain price, a certain weight.
It's just proven to be a bit of a nightmare. The new deal will create so-called
red lanes and green lanes. Goods which are moving through Northern Ireland into
the Republic of Ireland will use the red lane. They will be subject to full
checks and controls. Goods staying in Northern Ireland will use the green lane.
It will mean reduced paperwork and no routine checks. The documents which
explain the fine details of all this have only just been published. Stuart
Anderson, who speaks for Northern Ireland business groups, says they will need
to understand the practical consequences of what's been agreed. I think the
litmus test for us will be a very basic, are the products that are available on
the shelves in supermarkets in Birmingham available in Belfast as a result of
today's deal. We've seen certain products removed from the shelves over the
course of the last two years because of EU-UK divergence. So, you know, I think
the question will be, will they be returning to our shelves as a result of this
deal? The EU's price for these reduced checks is enhanced labelling of retail
goods. That will be phased in over the next two years. With her assessment of
the Windsor framework and its potential impact on relations between the UK and
the EU, here's our Europe editor, Katja Adler. This joint appearance by Rishi
Sunak and the European Commission president was warm and smiley, very different
to EU-UK Brexit negotiations of old. And it's already viewed in Brussels as a
turning point, what the EU and UK leaders today both described as a new chapter.
Brussels views Rishi Sunak, yes, as a Brexiteer, but also as an outward-looking
pragmatist, in stark contrast, EU leaders believe, to his predecessor, Boris
Johnson. Revising the Northern Ireland deal in close cooperation has been an
exercise in rebuilding broken trust. If implemented, it removes the looming
threat of a trade war, paving the way instead, as the two leaders were quick to
point out in their press conference, for further cooperation on scientific
research, but also financial services and immigration. The EU wants to work more
closely with the UK on defence and security. Russia's invasion of Ukraine and
the conundrum of how to handle China has served as a reminder of the many
priorities the two sides share. Many of the morning papers lead on the new
agreement. Brexit breakthrough, the Times headline. Inside it says the devil's
in the details of the deal designed to meet DUP demands. The Daily Mail asks,
has Rishi done the impossible? It says a feared Tory revolt melted away after
Rishi Sunak unveiled what it called the historic deal. 1,215 days late, Brexit
deal is finally done is how Metro puts it. The Sun's headline says, got Brexit
done? Again, before adding in brackets, hopefully. The Guardian reports the
choreographed agreement has been broadly welcomed but that the Prime Minister
still faces opposition from hardline Brexiteers. The Eye agrees that tensions
loom, suggesting that Boris Johnson is weighing up a public intervention. In an
editorial, the Dublin-based Irish Times sees the deal as a route to stability
and progress, but adds that the very nature of Brexit means that no agreement is
going to give everyone all that they're looking for. In his column, Sam McBride,
the Northern Ireland editor of the Belfast Telegraph, says the Windsor Framework
is more democratic and less unpalatable for unionism, but is not what Rishi
Sunak has claimed. He says the Prime Minister's spin is not backed up by the
fine detail of a phenomenally bureaucratic new system. The energy regulator
Ofgem says its price cap on gas and electricity bills will drop by nearly £1,000
from April to £3,280. Typical households in England, Scotland and Wales are
still likely to see their annual charges rise because government support is
becoming less generous. Citizens Advice says an increase in bills will spell
catastrophe for millions of people. Here's our cost of living correspondent,
Kevin Peachey. A household using a typical amount of gas and electricity
currently pays a bill of £2,500 a year, double that of a year ago. Without the
government's energy price guarantee, that annual bill would have peaked at more
than £4,000. But the mechanics of Ofgem's price cap and falling wholesale prices
paid by suppliers mean the cost to the government of providing support will be
less than it had once expected. That's also putting plans to make the guarantee
less generous this spring under intense scrutiny. Under current policy, a 20%
rise in bills is expected in April, just as a winter discount on everyone's bill
also comes to an end. Mohamed Adil is struggling to make his payments.
Opposition parties want the current plan to continue from April. The consumer
finance campaigner Martin Lewis believes the government may grant that wish.
Forecasts suggest that it would only need to be a temporary change in policy.
The cost of wholesale energy and the price cap could fall sufficiently by July
to make the government's guarantee redundant. It could even lead to competition
among suppliers for customers through new fixed deals. But, so far, bills are
still scheduled to rise before they fall, and the Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, has
said there's unlikely to be the money available for additional help for
households. The first female Speaker of the House of Commons, Betty Boothroyd,
has died at the age of 93. She was the Labour MP for West Bromwich West before
she was elected as Speaker. In the role, she became well known for her no-
nonsense style of controlling the House. The current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle,
said she was an inspirational woman who'd broken through the glass ceiling with
panache. Our political correspondent Helen Cadd looks back at her life. Betty
Boothroyd described the moment she was selected as the Speaker of the Commons in
1992 as the greatest experience of her life. She was the first woman to hold the
role and, just as importantly for her, she said, the first Speaker in more than
a century to be chosen from the opposition benches. Born in Dewsbury in
Yorkshire, Betty Boothroyd had been a professional dancer, one of the famous
Tiller Girls dance troupe, before working as a secretary to politicians
including the Labour Cabinet Minister Barbara Castle. Her steeliness, as she put
it, was on display from very early on in her political career. She became an MP
on her fifth attempt, when she was elected in 1973 as the Labour member for West
Bromwich. In the 1980s, she served on the party's ruling National Executive. As
Speaker, she ditched the traditional wig but upheld most Commons traditions,
although some younger MPs were disappointed that she opposed moves to make the
hours more family-friendly. The Labour MP Dame Margaret Beckett said Baroness
Boothroyd had been full of life. She had this tremendous personality and she had
a great sense of humour and she could just take people with her. But also there
was that formidable side of her. They didn't cross her. People didn't defy the
Speaker or if they did, it lasted about two minutes flat. The Conservative MP
Michael Mates was one of those who felt the full force of her formidable side.
He'd ignored her warning that his speech might prejudice a court case, so Madam
Speaker shut him up. If one cannot speak in this place, not about innocence or
guilt, not about trial, not about sub judice, but what has gone wrong with the
system, then Madam Speaker, then Madam Speaker, I'll be in here. It is after the
trial that the Honourable Gentleman must give this information. That is the
point. Betty Boothroyd retired after eight years in the Speaker's chair,
entering the Lords the following year as Lady Boothroyd. She took her forthright
manner with her to the Red Benches, where she fiercely opposed coalition
proposals for an elected House of Lords and was a vocal critic of Brexit and, on
occasion, Boris Johnson. The independent reviewer of terrorism legislation has
urged the government to reconsider its ban on the return of British women who
are being held in camps in Syria because they are suspected Islamic State
supporters. Jonathan Hall was speaking after the courts backed the decision to
strip the former schoolgirl Shamima Begum of her citizenship. He warned the UK
was increasingly out of step with its allies. Our Home and Legal correspondent
Dominic Cassiani reports. This speech from one of the most important voices in
the UK's counter-terrorism debate adds to diplomatic pressure on ministers to
rethink the policy of strategic distance, which means that scores of British
citizens who went to support IS won't be allowed home. Jonathan Hall said
comparable nations, backed by the United States, were repatriating women and
children and using a combination of measures to manage any risks they posed.
Delay, he warned, could see British children who were languishing in detention
camps becoming a new generation of jihadist fighters. The uncertainty over their
fate could become a dangerous propaganda win for extremists who would describe
the conditions as Britain's Guantanamo. Pressure has also come from the former
Supreme Court Justice Lord Sumption. In a letter to The Guardian newspaper, he
said it was a real scandal that Shamima Begum had been stripped of her
nationality and marooned forever thanks to the legal fiction that she could ask
Bangladesh to take her in. The budget carrier Wizz Air is to suspend all flights
to the Moldovan capital, Chisinau, because of safety concerns. Russian missiles
aimed at Ukraine have entered Moldovan airspace this month. The airline said the
safety of its passengers and crew was the number one priority. The Food Minister
Mark Spencer has met representatives of the UK's leading supermarkets to discuss
the current shortage of some fresh fruit and vegetables. Little has become the
latest to limit sales, restricting the number of peppers, cucumbers and tomatoes
customers can buy. Our business correspondent Emma Simpson reports. Mark Spencer
asked to meet supermarket bosses to find out how they were dealing with supply
chain problems. British grocers rely heavily on imports of tomatoes, cucumbers,
peppers and other salad items at this time of year. But the flow of food has
been disrupted because of bad weather. Mr Spencer also wanted to discuss if any
lessons could be learned and asked supermarkets if they could re-examine their
relationships with British farmers and work on longer term solutions so the UK
could be better prepared for unexpected incidents. The problems have been
exacerbated by farmers here planting fewer crops, with warnings of more
shortages to come. The industry trade body, the British Retail Consortium, said
although most food sold in supermarkets comes from the UK, imports played a key
role, especially outside the UK growing season, in keeping the country supplied
with affordable food. The BRC said the issue of food security required a wider
strategy involving government, farmers, manufacturers, retailers and
hospitality. Retailers told Mr Spencer that customers should start seeing an
improvement in the coming weeks. In the city, the 100 share index ended the day
up 56 points at 7,935. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones closed up 72 points at
32,889. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.206. Against the
euro, sterling is at 1.137, making a euro worth 88 pence. Thousands of British
teenagers studying for the International Baccalaureate will be allowed to use
work generated by an online chatbot in their essays. The Baccalaureate is
equivalent to A-levels and is recognised around the world. Until now, use of
these bots has been regarded as cheating, so the new stance represents a step
change, as our technology editor Zoe Kleinman explains. ChatGPT has taken the
world by storm since it launched last November. The AI chatbot answers questions
online in text form in a human-like way, and it can also write its responses in
different styles, for example that of a student writing an essay. Some teachers
are worried about how many of their pupils are using it to do their homework for
them, and have written to parents warning them about it. Others say they can
spot its pros and there are now tools being released which claim to be able to
differentiate human text from that written by artificial intelligence. But the
cat is out of the bag and now the International Baccalaureate says its students
can take advantage of the tech, just like using a calculator to work out a maths
problem, as long as they admit to it by both crediting ChatGPT in the text and
adding a reference note at the end. Here's Olli Pekka Heinonen from the
International Baccalaureate organisation. We are not getting rid of essays. The
thing is that how do we incorporate the use of chatbot in the essays in a
sustainable and ethically good way? It means that they need to be referenced.
Good news for students, but ChatGPT's knowledge database only goes up to
September 2021, so it's not very useful on topical subjects. And as it gets its
information from the internet, it can also be inaccurate. The 16-year-old
British snowboarder Mia Brooks has become the youngest world champion in the
sport's history. She won the women's Slopestyle gold in Georgia in her debut
season on the World Cup circuit. In doing so, she also became the first
snowboarder to successfully complete a tricky move, known as the cab 14-40
double grab, in a women's event. A boxing match between two celebrities widely
known for their social media status is dividing the sport after generating
extensive publicity. Tommy Fury beat Jake Paul in Saudi Arabia last night. Some
believe it'll bring a new audience to boxing, but one former world champion said
it made a mockery of the professional sport. Here's our sports correspondent,
Joe Wilson. Tommy Fury is a half-brother to the famous heavyweight Tyson. He's a
former resident of Love Island. Jake Paul of Cleveland, Ohio, influences people
on social media. They spent eight rounds throwing punches at each other in a
boxing ring in Saudi Arabia before Fury was declared the winner. Look at their
boxing records. You'll see matches in single figures. Their social media reach
extends to millions. That's apparently what counts. Boxing reporter Steve Bunce
was at the fight. If millions and millions of new eyeballs watch the sport,
they're not all going to disappear when the boxing's over. Some of them are
going to stay. So how is maybe 250,000 new potential fans, how's that going to
hurt any sport, whether it was tiddlywinks or whether it's boxing? It has to be
positive. Some accuse Saudi Arabia of sportswashing, using the bout to distract
from their human rights abuses. But the boxers earned millions. They may fight
again. Jake Paul apparently also wants to take on the former world champion Carl
Froch. Froch is not impressed. Of course I'd fight him. Of course I'd take the
money. It's not realistic. They're kind of making a mockery out of professional
boxing. It's a pantomime and you've got the influencers and the YouTubers, but
they cannot fight professional fighting. They're not professional boxers.
They're YouTubers and they're just playing at it. At the elite boxing club in
Bolton, coaches and aspiring fighters train for fitness and for careers. For
them, is the celebrity Saudi match an inspiration? You know, it's a bit of a
kick in the teeth for them sometimes, you know, because there's a lot of good
prospects out there. They never get the exposure as these guys get. As a boxer
myself, if I could be a YouTuber, I'd make multi-millions from it and I would.
Boxing exists in a broader sporting sphere, concerned about concussion and a
wider world worried about social media influence. But if two famous people fight
each other, there is an audience. Our main headline again. MPs are to scrutinise
the details of Rishi Sunak's new deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland. The agreement has won the backing of Labour and many Brexit-
supporting Conservatives. The DUP said there was clear progress, but that key
concerns remained. President Biden has called the document an essential step
towards preserving the peace of the Good Friday Agreement. With his assessment,
here's our political editor, Chris Mason. After months of negotiations and
plenty of noisy speculation, a day of very careful choreography. A lunchtime
meeting at a posh hotel near Windsor, close to where Magna Carta was sealed in
1215, which set a limit to the powers of the King and his government. This
gathering, centuries later, also about the demarcation of power between the UK
and the EU. At the news conference that followed in Windsor's Guildhall, a
notable warmth between the leaders. The European Commission President referred
to the Prime Minister as Dear Rishi. The relief in the demeanour of both leaders
was obvious in both doing a deal and attempting to reset relations between
London and Brussels. Privately, senior government figures are confident they can
win around sceptics within the Conservative Party and beyond. But that jeopardy
still hangs in the air tonight. Deals have been done before between the UK and
the EU, only to be rejected at home. The Prime Minister is emphasising progress,
whatever happens next. But the real test of this deal will be whether the
Democratic Unionist Party in time accept it and return to power-sharing devolved
government in Northern Ireland. That is the marker of true success here. Chris
Mason, BBC News. Newsreader was Chris Aldridge. And now from the BBC Weather
Centre, here's Louise Lear. Good morning. A strong solar activity brought
spectacular sightings of the Aurora Borealis to start our working week, with the
strongest aurora in Scotland. However, there were sightings as far south as
Oxfordshire. Now, high pressure that's responsible for allowing for those clear
skies, unfortunately, is dragging in quite a lot of clouds. So I suspect the
clearest of the skies over the next few hours will certainly be across Western
Scotland, underneath the centre of the high. And as we go into Tuesday, that's
where we're likely to see the best of the sunshine throughout the day. On the
whole, that north-easterly breeze, brisk at times, will continue to drive in a
lot of cloud off the North Sea and, across eastern England, a few scattered,
sharp showers. There will be some brighter spells from time to time, and
favoured spots likely to be through the Midlands and south-west England. In
terms of the feel of the weather, highs will range from seven to nine degrees,
but you need to factor in the strength of the wind, particularly on the east
coast. It will feel just that little bit cooler. Now, as we go through the early
hours of Tuesday, we'll have some clearing skies and, when we get the clear
skies, we are likely to see a touch of frost. Going into Wednesday, it will be a
similar story. There'll be a rash of sharp showers just drifting along the
Channel Coast first thing on Wednesday morning. They will ease away. Wednesday
will be another largely cloudy day, with light winds from time to time. That
means that the winds are not going to break the cloud up. But there will be a
few scattered showers once again across eastern England. In terms of the high,
once again, seven to ten degrees. Now, high pressure stays with us right into
the weekend, so there's a good deal of dry, settled weather. We are going to
close out meteorological winter and start meteorological spring on a very
similar story. Enjoy. Thanks, Louise. Now on Radio 4, we begin a new Book of the
Week, as the writer Peter Ross uncovers the stories behind Britain's graveyards.
Andy Clarke reads A Tomb With a View. I grew up in graveyards. The dead were my
quiet companions. Not silent, though. They announced themselves with great
formality. You only had to read the stones. Here lays the corpse of Mary Dickey,
who died December 18th, 1740, aged three years and nine months. Suffer the
little children to come unto me. That's when I remember from the Old Town
Cemetery in Stirling. I'd spent whole summers there, trying to catch tadpoles in
the small pond called Pithy Mary. Those graves, laid out in rows, they were
shelves full of stories. I was a shy boy, living inside myself, living in books.
Treasure Island, The Hound of the Baskervilles. Headstones were just more tales.
I would wander among them, reading the inscriptions, poking a soft finger into
the socket of a stone skull. I'd look at the names and wonder, did John Barnes,
hairdresser, who died aged 67 in January 1891, ever take comb and scissors to
Ebenezer Gentleman, who died in 1868, and whose crooked stone lies a step or two
away? That was the thing about graveyards. They felt like, feel like, treasure
houses of stories. What draws me is the extraordinary tales of ordinary folk.
Deep within the cracked stone ribs of Dundrennan Abbey, a beautiful medieval
ruin in southern Scotland, there's a graveyard. It grew up in the centuries
after the church was abandoned. This is the British Empire squashed into one
little place, said Glyn Macken, the custodian of the abbey. He pointed out the
graves of a young man who died at Gallipoli in 1915, and a young woman who died
at sea. Her stone says, with an E.M. Forster touch, on her passage from India in
1852. One grave sheltered in the northeast corner caught my eye. Within the top
curve of the headstone was a cherub. Wind and rain and time had worn away its
colours, but enough paint remained to show that its hair was blonde, its wings
white, its smiling face a boyish pink. This is the resting place of Douglas
Crosby, who died in 1789, aged seven, of a broken heart, or so the story goes.
This grave is known as The Boy and the Snake, Glyn said. He read a verse carved
into the stone. He was a manly pretty boy, his father's hope, his mother's joy,
but death did call and he must go, whether his parents would or no. Douglas
Crosby lived at Newlaw Farm, inland from Dundrennan. Every morning that summer
he'd take his bowl of porridge to eat in the garden. His mother thought little
of it until one day she overheard him say, with amused crossness, keep to your
own side of the plate. She went outside and saw the boy sitting on the grass. An
adder was coiled beside him, eating from the bowl, and as she watched, Douglas
reached out his spoon and tapped the snake on the top of the head. The creature
moved to the other side of the bowl and the pair continued to share breakfast.
Horrified, she called the boy in and shouted for her husband. The adder had
slithered off into the longer grass, but the farmer, beating around with a
stick, found it and clubbed it to death. Young Douglas grieved for his best
friend and did not live long without it. There's nothing on his stone to connect
the grave to the story, no mention at all of a snake, never mind porridge, and
yet the story clings to it like lichen, a living thing growing on the dead.
There are an estimated 14,000 cemeteries and churchyards in the UK. Many of them
are full, or close to full, with new internments no longer permitted. It's also
true that fewer and fewer people actually want to be buried in them. Three
quarters of us in the UK are cremated, and our remains are often scattered in a
favourite spot rather than being interred. Dr Julian Lytton is the UK's leading
expert on the history of funeral customs. He's been described as a man who has
sniffed the air in a hundred burial vaults, yet when we met he didn't seem
sepulchral. Perhaps it was his orange jumper, orange tie, orange and white
striped shirt, orange jumbo cords and two-tone tan brogues. He was the founder
in 1991 of the Friends of Kensal Green, the oldest of London's magnificent seven
cemeteries, those grand Victorian cemeteries which encircle the city. The others
are Abney Park, Tower Hamlets, Nunhead, West Norwood, Brompton and Highgate. Dr
Lytton's fascination with graveyards goes back to a childhood in Wolverhampton
when he would take the bus to Merrydale Cemetery. He enjoyed the solitude and
the stories on the stones. He's planned his own funeral in every detail. Not for
him a cremation. Barbaric, he called it. It will be a burial in Kensal Green, of
course. The General Cemetery of All Souls, Kensal Green, was founded in 1833 and
was such a success that it entered the wider culture. G.K. Chesterton wrote in
his 1913 poem, The Rolling English Road, there is good news yet to hear and fine
things to be seen before we go to paradise by way of Kensal Green. For my part,
I went by way of the Harrow Road, past Iranian grocers, Polish tyre dealers and
an old-fashioned caff offering a builder's breakfast. Kensal Green's reputation
as what Julian Lytton calls the Belgravia of death was established in 1843 when
the Duke of Sussex, the sixth son of George III, was laid to rest here. Where
royalty led, the establishment followed. Viscounts and vice-admirals, masters
and commanders. Kensal Green became a prestigious place to be buried. It's
England's Valhalla, Dr. Lytton had said. The list of famous names is remarkable.
You could read your way around its 72 acres. Wilkie Collins, Anthony Trollope,
William Makepeace Thackeray or curate your own science and engineering tour.
Charles Babbage, Isambard Kingdom Brunel. It's extraordinary to think that
Vanity Fair and the Great Western Railway began as visions within brains, within
skulls, within this soil. The London Garden Cemetery movement, of which Kensal
Green was the first fruit, grew out of a crisis. The city's churchyards were
full to overflowing. London's population in 1801 was approximately 960,000.
Forty years later it had grown to two million. There were a great many more
Londoners and a great many more dead. In 1843 a government report declared that
50,000 people were being buried each year in 203 acres of ground. These
statistics don't quite convey what this meant in the churchyards themselves. For
that we have Gatherings from Graveyards, a polemic written in 1839 by George
Alfred Walker, a surgeon and apothecary. He argued that London's stinking air
emanated from overcrowded churchyards. The pestiferous exhalations of the dead,
he wrote, were causing disease and death among those who lived and worked
nearby. Graveyard Walker, as he was known, argued that the government should
close the churchyards and inner city vaults of the capital and that Londoners
should be buried instead in new, large cemeteries at a safe distance from
population areas. Charles Dickens gives us a flavour, or rather whiff, of the
London burial grounds in his masterpiece Bleak House. When the law writer Nemo
dies from an opium overdose, he's buried in a shallow grave in a hemmed-in
churchyard, pestiferous and obscene. The air is so poisoned that it leaves a
slimy coating on the iron gate. Burial in shallow graves, sometimes only two
feet deep, was widespread, and space was at such a premium that it was quite
usual for bodies to be exhumed before they'd properly decomposed, in order to
make room for the next occupant. John Iles, a gravedigger for the churchyard of
St Clement's, recalled recognising his own father's head when his coffin was
broken open by workmates. I knew him by his teeth, he said. One tooth was
knocked out and the other splintered. I knew it was my father's head, and I told
them to stop, and they laughed. In the end, changes in the law did come. The
burial grounds of the inner cities of England and Wales closed, and large new
cemeteries opened in what were, at that time, areas of low population density.
Kensal Green, as the first cemetery of that type in London, was the model. It
was, according to one commentator, a beautiful garden of death. The idea was
that such places would be more than conveniences for the disposal of remains.
They would be showcases of wealth and taste, triumphs of architecture. To walk
in Kensal Green now is to sense the vanity and economic power of the nineteenth
century rendered in stone. It's Victorian Britain ossified. It's the grand
monuments which catch the eye. Like the colonialist tomb of Major General Sir
William Casement, which appears to be borne aloft by four grim figures and
turbans, or William Mulrady, the celebrated Irish painter, who lies in effigy
atop his own grave as if reclining upon a bed. The natural response to all this
faded grandeur is, they don't make them like that any more. But, just sometimes,
they still do. Mehdi Mehra is a fifty-seven-year-old Iranian businessman. He
owns a property company with his wife Mary-Anne. In 2015, their eleven-year-old
son Mehdi died in a riding accident. According to Islamic tradition, he was
buried within twenty-four hours of his death. Sitting at the graveside in the
splintered days that followed, Mr Mehra had a vision. I could see this place
completely as it is now in my mind. He built around his son's grave a memorial
on a scale the Victorians would recognise. It's a half circle, thirty metres
long by fourteen deep and eight high. The twenty-one Corinthian columns give it
a neo-classical look, but there are Islamic touches. God is great in Arabic, as
well as Christian. Angels at the corners and doorways hold torches, books and
flowers. The memorial has a crown of girders, rather than a roof. However, a
gazebo erected inside keeps the weather off those who come to sit. Mr Mehra's
parents are buried here, and he will be himself when his time comes. The
centrepiece is Mehdi's burial plot, but one could mistake it for something else.
It is essentially a flowerbed, planted with roses and pelargoniums and lilies in
whites, pinks and yellows. Butterflies glide past a life-size bronze statue of
Mehdi, sitting on a bench. The sculptor has depicted him wearing school uniform
and carrying a football. One casual arm is draped over the back of the bench.
Perhaps this is what Keats meant by easeful death. A young lad taking the air
next to his own grave. When Mehdi died, Mr Mehra visited the grave every day,
all day, for four years. I just didn't want to do anything else, he said. The
business, everything. I just couldn't deal with it. When I left this place, I
would shake and want to come back. Mehdi's mother doesn't visit here, Mr Mehra
explained. She finds it upsetting. She honoured her son's memory in a different
way, building a pipeline to bring water to 18,000 people in Ethiopia. The
enormity of what has been built was my husband's initiative, she told me. I
think the beauty eases the pain. Mr Mehra's idea for the memorial was that it
should attract others. It should be a place to work through one's problems. It's
very common, he says, to find people sitting on one of the stone benches amid
the scent of flowers. People who had no connection with the family, but who are
drawn to the place. We talked about time. I wanted something to last, he said,
long after I've gone. After his own death, it could continue to be a place where
people could come and sit and think. Those stone angels would still stand guard.
Andy Clarke was reading A Tomb With A View by Peter Ross. The book was abridged
by Anna Magnusson and the producer is Aileen McCready. The shipping forecast is
coming up next. This is BBC Radio 4. Now the shipping forecast issued by the Met
Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Tuesday the
28th of February. The general synopsis at 1800. High Feyraal 1040, expected
Hebrides 1042 by 1800 Tuesday. The area forecasts for the next twenty-four
hours. Viking, north at Sera. Northerly or north-westerly, four to six,
increasing seven for a time. Showers. Good. South at Sera. Northerly or north-
westerly, four to six, but variable three or less at first in south-east.
Showers. Good. Forties. Northerly four to six. Showers. Good. Cromarty, fourth.
North or north-east, three to five. Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. Tyne,
Dogger. North or north-east, three to five. Showers. Good, occasionally
moderate. Fisher. Northerly or north-westerly, two to four, increasing four to
six, then becoming cyclonic three to five later. Fair. Good. Germanbight. North
or north-east, becoming variable two to four. Fair. Good. Humber, Thames. North
or north-east, veering east or north-east later, four to six. Showers. Good,
occasionally moderate. Dover, White, Portland. North or north-east, four to six,
increasing seven for a time. Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. Plymouth.
North or north-east, four to six, occasionally seven later. Showers. Good,
occasionally moderate. Biskey. North or north-east, four to six. Showers. Good,
occasionally moderate. Trafalgar. North or north-east, four to six. Showers.
Good. Fitzroy. Easterly or north-easterly, four to six, occasionally seven at
first in south-east. Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. Sole. East or north-
east, four to six. Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. Lundy, Vastnet. East or
north-east, three to five, occasionally six later. Showers. Good, occasionally
moderate. Irish Sea. North or north-east, three to five. Showers. Good. Shannon.
South-east, four to six, backing east or north-east, three to five. Showers.
Good. Rockall. South-east, four to six, becoming variable, two to four. Fair.
Good. Malin. Hebrides. South or south-east, becoming variable, two to four.
Fair. Good. Bailey. South or south-west, four to six, becoming variable, two to
four later. Fair. Good. Fairisle. Variable, four or less, becoming north or
north-west, three to five. Showers. Good. Farrows. South or south-west, veering
west or south-west later, three to five. Showers. Good. South-east Iceland.
Southerly or south-westerly, veering westerly later, four to six, occasionally
seven later in north-west. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. The weather
reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree Automatic. South-south-east three.
Twenty-two miles, a thousand and thirty-nine, rising more slowly. Stornoway.
South-east by east three. Thirty miles, a thousand and thirty-nine, rising
slowly. Lerwick. North by east three. Thirty-five miles, a thousand and thirty-
nine, rising slowly. Wick Automatic. North-east two. Fourteen miles, a thousand
and thirty-nine, rising slowly. Aberdeen. North-west two. Sixteen miles, a
thousand and thirty-eight, now rising. Lookers. North two. Twenty-seven miles, a
thousand and thirty-eight, now rising. Boomer. North by west three. A thousand
and thirty-seven, steady. Bridlington. North-east two. A thousand and thirty-
four, steady. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. East six. Eleven miles, a
thousand and thirty-one. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic. Eleven miles, a
thousand and thirty-one. St Catherine's Point Automatic. East north-east three.
A thousand and thirty-one, rising slowly. Jersey. North-east by east three.
Channel Light Vessel Automatic. East by north six. A thousand and thirty-one.
Silly Automatic. North-east by east five. Twenty-four miles, a thousand and
thirty-two, rising more slowly. Milford Haven. North by east two. Twenty-two
miles, a thousand and thirty-four, rising slowly. Aberporth. North-east four.
Nineteen miles, a thousand and thirty-four, rising slowly. Valley. North-east
three. Fifteen miles, a thousand and thirty-six, rising slowly. Liverpool
Crosby. North-east by north two. Seven miles, a thousand and thirty-six, rising
slowly. Valencia. East by north three. Twenty-four miles, a thousand and thirty-
five, rising slowly. Ronaldsway. North-east three. A thousand and thirty-seven,
rising slowly. Mallinhead. South-east by east three. Twenty-seven miles, a
thousand and thirty-eight, rising slowly. Macrahanish Automatic. East by north
three. More than thirty-eight miles, a thousand and thirty-eight, rising slowly.
Here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours, issued by the Met Office at 2300 on
Monday 27th February. The general situation, a slow-moving high over northern
Scotland will slowly intensify, bringing strong north-easterly winds at times
over southern waters. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head including Orkney. Variable
three or less becoming northerly two to four, occasionally five later. Showers.
Good. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North or north-west three to five.
Showers. Good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North or north-east three to five.
Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North or north-
east three or four, occasionally five later. Showers. Good, occasionally
moderate. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Northerly or north-easterly veering
easterly or north-easterly later three to five, occasionally six and south.
Showers. Good, occasionally moderate. North Forland to Selsey Bill. Easterly or
north-easterly four to six, increasing seven for a time. Fair then showers.
Good, occasionally moderate. Selsey Bill to Lime Regis. North or north-east four
to six. Mainly fair. Good. Lime Regis to Land's End including the Isles of
Scilly. North or north-east four to six, occasionally seven later. Fair then
showers. Good. Land's End to St David's Head including the Bristol Channel. East
or north-east four to six, occasionally seven later. Showers. Good. St David's
Head to Great Orm Head including St George's Channel. North-east three to five,
occasionally six later. Fair then showers. Good. Great Orm Head to the Mull of
Galloway. North or north-east three to five. Showers. Good. Isle of Man. North
or north-east three to five. Mainly fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch.
Easterly two to four, backing northerly or north-easterly three to five. Fair
then showers. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre including the Firth of
Clyde and North Channel. Easterly two to four, backing northerly or north-
easterly three to five. Fair. Good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenhamirchen Point.
Variable three or less, becoming north or north-east two to four later. Fair.
Good. Ardenhamirchen Point to Cape Wrath. Variable becoming north or north-east
later, two to four. Fair. Good. Shetland Isles. North or north-west three to
five. Showers. Good. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. Healthy
scepticism is about asking difficult questions, not assuming what you're told is
true. The new series of Sideways with me, Matthew Syde, on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds, on Wednesdays at 4. And this week Matthew will be delving into the world
of food to examine how our dislikes are formed and how they can change over the
course of a lifetime, allowing us to find greater joy in what we eat. That's
Sideways on Wednesday afternoon at 4 o'clock. And with that we've reached the
end of our schedule for the day. If you're staying up a little longer you'll be
able to hear the latest news from the BBC World Service here on this very
frequency in just a moment after we've had the National Anthem. Or if you're in
the mood for some classic 90s drama you'll find that on our sister station in
the form of the concluding part of Nigel Baldwin's political thriller The Danger
of Exposure. Dennis Waterman stars and that's starting on Radio 4 Extra shortly.
Thank you as ever for your company and from me, Ron Brown, Chris Aldridge in the
newsroom and indeed everyone here at Broadcasting House in London, do have a
very peaceful night. Good night. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.