TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4, it's five o'clock, time for PM with Caroline Gwynn. On the
first anniversary of the war in Ukraine, fierce fighting continues on the front
line. It's difficult, people are on their feet for 20 hours, the fighting goes
on around the clock. Oleg Geron has an intimate portrait of life there. Tony
Blair tells us what it would take for Putin to end the conflict. Is it possible
to persuade him now to back down, only if he's absolutely clear that NATO is
going to hold firm? The firmer we are, the more possible it is that he will be
persuaded that he has to withdraw. Also on the programme, a message of unity
from the leaders of Northern Ireland as police designate the shooting of a
police officer as terror related. The numbers of those involved in actually
direct armed actions are believed to be in the dozens, but there's a much wider
support base around that. Who are the new IRA and what are their motives? An
expert gives us a briefing. And England's artefacts are gathering dust as museum
back rooms overflow. We'll ask if it's time for a clear out. Let's start with
the BBC News read today by Chris Aldridge. Ukraine's allies have marked the
anniversary of the Russian invasion with new promises of weapons for Kiev and
further sanctions against Moscow. Ceremonies have been held in towns and cities
across Ukraine. President Zelensky pledged to do everything to achieve victory
this year. Our international editor Jeremy Bowen reports from Kiev. On the first
anniversary of the Russian invasion, one of the biggest questions is whether the
war will be raging in another year. In Kiev, at official ceremonies marking the
anniversary, President Volodymyr Zelensky said that this will be Ukraine's year
of victory. As things stand, that is doubtful unless Ukraine gets war-winning
weapons from the US and its NATO allies or the Russian military collapses. That
hasn't happened yet despite multiple setbacks. One big potentially game-changing
development could come if China decides to send Russia weapons. Controlling any
further escalation and containing the war in Ukraine will continue to be a big
challenge for the rest of the year. Junior doctors in England are to strike for
three consecutive days in March. The walkout by members of the British Medical
Association is part of a dispute over pay. Our health correspondent Catherine
Burns has the details. The message from the British Medical Association was
clear. We are demoralised, angry and no longer willing to work for wages that
are below inflation. The union says tens of thousands of junior doctors will
stop work at 7am on Monday 13th March and won't restart until the Thursday
morning. This group ranges from recent medical school graduates to doctors with
up to 15 years experience. The strike will affect routine and emergency care,
with senior colleagues called in to fill gaps in the rotor. The government
described the decision as disappointing and said doctors have had an 8% pay rise
over four years. One of the smaller unions involved in the long-running rail
dispute has voted to accept a settlement deal with train companies. The
Transport Salarid Staffs Association, or TSSA, said its 3,000 members had
accepted an offer including a two-year, 9% pay deal. The Police Service of
Northern Ireland has said it is treating the shooting of a senior officer on
Wednesday as terrorist related. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains
critically ill in hospital. Earlier, the Chief Constable Simon Byrne met
Northern Ireland's main political leaders. He said the unity shown by
politicians was a hugely symbolic moment. I don't think we should underestimate
for one minute the symbolism and importance of standing together today to send
out, as people have said this morning, a very clear and firm message that there
was no place for these twisted beliefs and no place for attacks on people that
are going about their daily lives and work as public servants. Sir Bernard
Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's long-standing press secretary when she was Prime
Minister, has died aged 90. His family described him as a journalist to his
bones. Sir Bernard had continued to write a column for the Yorkshire Post until
last month. The publisher Puffin says it will release what it calls a classic
collection of Roald Dahl's works, after it was criticised for editing his work
to remove potentially offensive words. Puffin says the 17 titles will include
archive material and set alongside the newly rewritten books. Our correspondent
Colin Patterson reports. Augustus Gloop is fat once more. A week after it was
announced that future editions of Roald Dahl's books would change hundreds of
words with the twits no longer being ugly, Penguin Random House have performed a
U-turn of which the Great Glass Elevator would be proud. Following a complaint
from the Prime Minister and a speech by the Queen consort about the curbing of
authors' imaginations, the publishers have announced that 17 Roald Dahl books
will be republished with the original text, albeit alongside the new altered
more sensitive versions. The big friendly giant once said, don't gobble-funk
around with words, so it can be believed that he would describe today's turn of
events as scrumdiddly amptuous. Colin Patterson reporting. Chris, thank you very
much. It's five past five now. The cost in bloodshed and tears is incalculable.
Ukraine a year on remains in the depths of war. Russia shows no signs of backing
off despite the sombre messages of defiance from the Ukrainian president and his
forces. At 11am this morning, the UK stopped to mark the anniversary, a minute's
silence led by the Prime Minister in Downing Street, followed by the haunting
strains of the Ukraine national anthem. President Zelensky has been giving a
lengthy press conference this afternoon. He was asked who had disappointed him
the most since the war began. All those that went on the 24th and left the
country left Kiev, who were leaving villages and towns and they were supposed to
govern the country or to fight for the country to protect it. All those people
disappointed him. President Zelensky also projected defiance, insisting that
Ukraine could win with the help of its allies. Ukraine is now standing not
alone. Our friends are helping us. To stop this war going any further, to stop
this aggression going any further. So all of us, very importantly, needs to
focus on our own missions and to work on our missions. And then victory will be
ours. In a flurry of diplomatic activity, the Ukraine president had earlier
addressed G7 leaders in a statement released in the past few minutes. The
leaders of the UK, France, Germany and others said they were, quotes, committed
to intensifying our support for Ukraine and united in our determination to hold
President Putin and those responsible to account. In their statement, the G7
said they would reinforce diplomatic, financial and military support for the
nation. The British foreign secretary James Cleverley told diplomats at yet
another meeting that victory for Ukraine was vital for global security. Putin
cannot, must not win in Ukraine because what's at stake on the battlefields is
the international order itself. So can the war be brought to an end? If so, how?
And how much is down to the mentality of Vladimir Putin himself? Well, the
former Prime Minister Sir Tony Blair met Putin just before he took over as
president in 2000 when others at the time, including the French President
Jacques Chirac, were keeping their distance. Tony Blair told me that back then
Putin wanted to pursue democratic and economic reform in Russia. So Putin, when
I first met him, was very much wanting to be Western oriented. He would insist
we met in St Petersburg, which is the sort of symbol of that part of Russia that
looks westward. He very keen on good relations with the West. We used to invite
him to NATO meetings. People in Europe even talked about the possibility that
one day Russia might even join the European Union. I mean, there was a lot of
openness. And the truth of the matter is, as he explained to me at the time, at
least, his priorities were economic reform in Russia. But I think he found
reform too difficult. He then turned to nationalism, which is what often happens
when people can't change their countries for the better within. They try and
give them some sense that they're fighting an external enemy, that this is all
about the national spirit, and he became essentially an imperialist. And so over
the years, obviously, the relationship became much more hostile and difficult.
And is it possible to persuade him now to back down, only if he's absolutely
clear that NATO, the US, Europe, UK is going to hold firm. The firmer we are,
the more possible it is that he will be persuaded that he has to withdraw. Is he
persuadable though? If you're saying that the only way to get some sort of
negotiated solution is to prove to the Russians that they can't win, is Putin,
from your experience of having dealt with him, the kind of man who would accept
that? The Putin I knew even at the end of my time in office, yes, but you don't
know how people have changed. He's now been leader for more than two decades.
It's a complete dictatorship. Look, the very invasion of Ukraine, which anyone
sensible could have told him was going to meet fierce resistance. He didn't have
anybody around him who was prepared to challenge that decision. And that's what
happens with these dictatorships over time. And so I can't be sure what frame of
mind he's in now, but I think his strategy will be the same as it was in Syria,
which is basically to just hang on in there and hope if you do that long enough
that the West will lose heart, that we'll lose interest or we'll just lose
resolve. And that's why it's so important that we don't and I believe we won't.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, says that Russia mustn't be
humiliated in any peace deal, you know, not end up like Germany after the First
World War. Is that a valid hope? Is there a way of doing that, resolving it with
both sides coming out, feeling that they've got something? Well, it's very
difficult this because I think there's a tendency to divide people into two
different camps. And I don't think there really are two different camps. I mean,
there's not going to be an end of this like World War Two or World War One. On
the other hand, the Russian aggression has got to be defeated and seem to be
defeated. It is important to realise that the defeat of this aggression is
necessary in order to protect not just Ukraine and its right to be sovereign and
independent, but the rest of Europe. Which is why so many people are arguing
that there can't be a deal or a negotiated settlement where Ukraine cedes
territory. Yeah, for sure. But in the end, I think what most people believe in
in the West is that this is for Ukraine to decide this for the Ukrainian people
and his leadership to decide. Role of China, obviously offering support of a
kind to Russia. And you've said before that you felt the greatest threat to the
West was China. Do you think that that is changing now? No, I think long term,
the power of China is just of a different scale from the power of Russia. I
mean, the Russian economy, remember, is what, 70% the size of the UK. China is
in a completely different league. Now, my view is you have to be strong enough
to deal with whatever comes out of China, but stay engaged with it. And I think
in respect of Ukraine, I also believe it's important to stay engaged with China
over this, they will, of course, at the moment, what China is doing is trying to
present itself to the developing world and to the bits of the world that aren't
primarily engaged in this conflict as trying to be the peace negotiator. But the
type of deal that they will put forward will obviously be completely
unacceptable to Ukraine. But it's still important to keep engaged with China,
because I do believe that, for example, their strong statement that Russia must
not use nuclear weapons. I think that has been important. And therefore, I think
if anybody has any leverage over Putin in this situation, it will be Xi Jinping.
You know that the prime minister is being asked to supply jets to Ukraine, some
people very fearful, of course, of NATO involvement or getting involved in any
kind of conflict. And, of course, Iraq made many in the UK wary of getting
involved. Many people will never forgive you for Iraq, as you know, and the 20th
anniversary is coming up. You have to judge each case on its merit. People can
take their view on Iraq, and that's absolutely fine. I've realized why, of
course, I understand why people disagree profoundly with the decision. I think
it's important they go back and remember the circumstances of the time and also
the nature of the regime and the threat it posed. But even if people are
completely opposed to the intervention in Iraq and removing Saddam Hussein, you
know, you've got to be very careful. You've got to distinguish between that and
the removal of a democratically elected president in a country that has never
posed a problem to anyone and whose simple desire is to carry on with their
democracy. You know, Iraq was a very different situation. But leaving that to
one side, I don't know, I think that the anxiety is a perfectly natural one,
that people don't want to be brought into the front line of the conflict. That
is true. But you've got to give Ukraine the ability to defend itself. And that's
why the, you know, the provision of weapons is so important. What about jets?
Well, jets too, if that is what Ukraine need, they've got to be given what is
necessary for them to defend themselves. But the single biggest thing they're
going to need is munitions and artillery. And that's where there's serious gaps
in our capability of providing that. And we've got to, for our own purposes, by
the way, in respect of defence, we've got to bridge that gap. That's the former
Prime Minister, Sir Tony Blair, and we'll be hearing more from him later in the
programme. Time now, quarter past five. Here's Chris with some of the other
stories making headlines today. Three candidates will take part in the contest
to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader and Scottish First Minister. The MSPs
Kate Forbes, Ash Regan and Hamza Yousuf all met the threshold for nominations
before the deadline this lunchtime. Rishi Sunak has spoken to the European
Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, as he works to get agreement over
changes to the post Brexit Northern Ireland Protocol. The call was described as
positive. Vernon Kay is to replace Ken Bruce on Britain's Most Listen To radio
programme, the weekday mid-morning show on BBC Radio 2. Thanks, Chris. And
Downing Street is saying that Rishi Sunak's been engaging with business leaders
in Northern Ireland as part of the effort to reach a new agreement with the EU
over the implementation of post Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. We're
watching those developments on negotiations over the protocol. In the meantime,
the leaders of the five biggest Stormont parties have met Northern Ireland's
Chief Constable, Simon Byrne, to send a message of unity after the attempted
murder of a senior police officer. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in
a critical condition in hospital following Wednesday's shooting in Omer. Four
men have been arrested. Police say they're treating the incident as terrorism
related and investigations are focused on the dissident Republican group known
as the new IRA. Speaking after the meeting, Sinn Fein's Deputy Leader Michelle
O'Neill reiterated her condemnation of the attack. It is so important in moments
like this that we stand united and we do stand here united as one voice in our
condemnation against this horrific attack on a police officer, someone who's
part of our community. And I think that the most powerful message that we as
political leaders can do is to stand with the Chief Constable today, to stand
with the police service and to say this is not good enough, this is an attack on
all of us, this is an attack on our community. Who are the new IRA and what are
their motives? Marissa MacGlinchey is Assistant Professor in Political Science
at Coventry University and Vice President of the Political Studies Association
of Ireland. She's the author of Unfinished Business, The Politics of Dissident
Irish Republicanism. There's two active armed dissident Republican groups, the
new IRA is one of them and the continuity IRA is the other. But the new IRA is
believed to be the most active and that's why it's the focus of this. But the
new IRA was formed around 2012 and it's when Republicans came together from
Republican action against drugs, some sections of the real IRA and some
independent Republicans and they came under that new IRA banner because they
wanted a new structure and organisation. And what sort of support have they got?
The support for the new IRA and dissident organisations in general, it's pretty
minimal. It's a small level of support. Sinn Fein continues to command the
majority of support of Northern nationalists. But the key point for the new IRA
and in fact other dissident Republicans is that they're not at all concerned
with public support. It's really difficult to guess or gauge the number that are
involved in the new IRA or the continuity IRA but the numbers of those involved
in actually direct armed actions are believed to be in the dozens but there's a
much wider support base around that. And interestingly, CIRU, it's believed to
be the political wing of the new IRA. CIRU have actually attracted large crowds
to their commemorations in places like Derry and Dublin. So they do have pockets
of support in those areas in the north and south. So what are their motivations?
What are their aims? Their aims are they would sell you traditional Republican
ideology. They see themselves as simply the latest phase in the one long
campaign for Irish sovereignty. And the campaign by the new IRA, it's very low
level with occasional and sporadic incidents. What they're really aiming to do
is first of all disrupt the state of Northern Ireland. So to continue to
emphasize that it's not normal and also to show the fact that they're still
there and they're still capable because these groups have been highly
infiltrated by the security services. We saw with Operation Arbakia a few years
ago that nine of their members of CIRU were arrested along with a Palestinian
doctor and that was an operation by MI5. And so with an attack like this, they
really want to send a signal that they're far from finished and that they're
still there and they're still capable. And is it a signal as well about joining
the police service of Northern Ireland that that continues to carry a risk in
their view and that they will say officers are targets, which is still a really
horrific message to hear, isn't it, after all these years? Their visceral hatred
of the PSNI is very obvious. The PSNI remains a key target for the new IRA and
it's very clear that they are trying to send a message to the community in
general that if you join the PSNI you will be considered a legitimate target and
that's regardless of your background, your religion or your cultural background
even. The fact that political leaders of every hue were quick to come out and
condemn Wednesday's shooting, doesn't that send a message that this kind of
action is not going to breed any widespread support and that violence as a
method is not ever going to have the kind of support that it had in the
community before? Yes, condemnation really has been led in recent years by Sinn
Féin. They've really been to the forefront in terms of trying to turn the
community away from dissidents and asking them to reject these organisations and
in particular the armed groups. But as I said, the new IRA is not concerned at
all by the condemnation that it receives across the political spectrum or from
the political leaders. They're not concerned with wider condemnation or even
condemnation from within the dissident base. And the fact that this has happened
against a background of political instability, Stormont not sitting, attempts
being made to sort out the Northern Ireland Protocol, has that got anything to
do with the timing of this? Sometimes when these attacks happen, there's
speculation that they're in response or they're reactive to the impasse at
Stormont or other political crisis or the protocol. But in actual fact, the
campaign by the new IRA, it's continuous, it's ongoing, it is low level with
occasional incidents and they will always seek an opportunity to strike. So it's
not that it's reactive, they're more opportunistic about when they'll strike.
Marisa MacLinty. Sir Bernard Ingham has died at the age of 90. He was at
Margaret Thatcher's side as her chief press secretary throughout her time as
prime minister from 1979 to 1990 and as one of the journalists who in my early
days as a very junior member of the lobby, I sat in on a couple of his briefings
and I can say he was fearlessly plain speaking. He certainly wouldn't brook any
nonsense. He was a Fleet Street journalist with the Guardian before joining the
Thatcher team. His family said he was a journalist to his bones and he was still
filing weekly columns to express online on the Yorkshire Post until a few days
before he died. Here he is speaking to Sue Lawley on Desert Island Discs in 1995
about his admiration for Mrs Thatcher. Here I had a prime minister who had a
clear philosophy, knew what she wanted to do, had worked out the implications
and wasn't going to change her mind. And you went in there determined, you said
at the very beginning to interrupt her but you didn't manage it very often there
did you? Oh sometimes you had to interrupt and you had to keep talking when she
was trying to interrupt you. I mean her body language is absolutely impossible
for everybody. They all thought that she'd finished a point and then suddenly
when they were about to respond she came in with another one. And then you
yourself of course have a voice these days but hardly the power that you enjoyed
for those 11 years at number 10. You keep going on about this power. I didn't
feel I had a great deal of power except to put my foot in it. I mean which I did
sometimes. I think I've had a heck of a lot more responsibility than power. I
can honestly say I didn't miss it at all and don't miss it. I've acquired a
wonderful new and exciting life returning to an age of utter irresponsibility.
Well Julia Langdon was the first female political editor on a national daily
newspaper and worked in the Westminster group of journalists called the lobby
from 1974. Philip Webster joined that lobby in 1981 and reported there for the
Times. Julia started with her memories of facing Sir Bernardingham at his daily
briefings. He wasn't really grumpy. He could get cross. The most important thing
about him was that he was fair. It didn't matter what your politics were or what
the politics of your newspaper were. He dealt with everybody relatively
judiciously. He worked so closely with Margaret Thatcher all the way through her
term in office. When you spoke to him and asked him questions during those
briefings, did you feel that you were hearing what she thought? Did he even have
to ask her? Did he know what the answer would be? You quite often had the
feeling that you were hearing her voice. Sometimes they would use the same
phrases. You would hear Mrs Thatcher at Primus's Questions using a phrase in the
Commons and you would have heard the same phrase from Bernardingham before or
after. He wrote her a daily analysis of the newspapers and he picked up his
phrases and he picked up hers I think. Philip, for you, you joined the lobby in
1981. You were chief political correspondent on the Times in 1986. You must have
felt Bernardingham's fury at times as well as the information that he gave. My
very first encounter with Bernard taught me a huge amount. Peter Hennessey, then
our Whitehall correspondent, called me. I picked up the phone and he said I've
heard that what was then the old Whitehall Civil Service Department is being
wound up tomorrow, but I can't stand it up. I rang Bernardingham and I got it
totally wrong. I said we're going to write tomorrow that the Civil Service
Department is being wound up. He said you don't need me then and put the phone
down. I realised from then on that you should never approach a story like that.
I told my boss at the time that I'd messed up. He said call it back. He's
absolutely straight. Call it back. Tell him you got it wrong. I did and I rang
Bernard back and I said look I know I made a mess of that. Can I have a second
try? We've had a tip that the Civil Service Department is being wound up. Could
you give me any thoughts on it? He said I can't say a word about it but I would
never stare you off it. And there it was. It was a splash the next morning. He
told me enough in that one phrase to write it. I never ever approached a story
like that again. The words Buncombe, Balderdash, they're the sorts of things
that he would say. Robert Harris apparently once said that his eyebrows writhe
and heave like a pair of lovesick squirrels. Is that how you remember his face?
I do. I remain friends with him. I saw him most recently not long before
Christmas. He was still on terrific form. He had very recently moved into a
nursing home and I went into the room and the newspapers of the day were spread
all round the room and he was preparing to write his columns which he continued
to write until halfway through last month. He told me by the way that he wrote
the columns based on how he would have told Mrs Thatcher about what was going on
in the world today. I wonder Philip how he would have coped with social media
and Twitter and the like. He would have absolutely hated it. He would have
treated it like some alien force that had to be expunged from the world. I think
if we'd have quoted anything at him from social media he wouldn't have regarded
it as worth his time I don't think. I don't think he would have enjoyed the
whole 24 hour news cycle. It sort of came in more during the Blur years than the
Thatcher years and I don't think he would have enjoyed that. Whether he was a
Conservative honour I would never know but he was certainly a fantastic defender
of Margaret Thatcher in every way. That's Philip Webster and Julia Langdon
remembering Sir Bernard Ingham who has died at the age of 90. Now let's join
Alex Forsythe telling us all about tonight. Any questions? Hello Alex. Hello,
evening Carolyn and welcome to St Andrew's Church in Wivoliskim. That's where I
am. That's where any questions is coming from tonight. Wivoliskim is known as
Wivy to those in the know. It's a market town in West Somerset. It's the kind of
place where there's a real sense of community. It's got several volunteer
networks to support its residents including a number of Ukrainians who've made
this their home in the year since Russia's invasion of their country which of
course we mark today. And on our panel we have the Armed Forces Minister James
Heepee, the Labour MP and Chair of Parliament's Energy and Industrial Strategy
Committee Darren Jones, Mary Dijewski who's a columnist for The Independent and
a former foreign correspondent in Moscow and Isabel Oakshot, a journalist and
commentator who's currently the international editor at Talk TV. Join us all
live at 8pm here on Radio 4. Alex, thank you very much. It's coming up to half
past five now. Here's Chris back with your PM News summary. Ukraine's allies
have marked the anniversary of the Russian invasion with new promises of weapons
for Kiev and further sanctions against Moscow. The US has announced it will
provide another £1.6 billion worth of weaponry. Poland has delivered the first
leopard tanks to reach Ukraine. Ceremonies have been held in cities and towns
across Ukraine to mark the anniversary of Europe's biggest conflict since the
Second World War. In the UK there was a minute silence led by Rishi Sunak on the
steps of Downing Street to mark the anniversary. The Prime Minister said it was
important for the country to reflect on the courage and bravery demonstrated by
the Ukrainian people. Rishi Sunak has spoken to the European Commission
President D'Urzula von der Leyen as he works to get agreement over changes to
the rules governing trade with Northern Ireland after Brexit. The call was
described as positive. The BBC understands that Rishi Sunak is also holding
talks with a number of major food retailers this afternoon. Junior doctors in
England have announced the dates of their three-day strike next month. Members
of the British Medical Association will walk out from March 13 in a dispute
about pay. The walkout will affect both routine and emergency care. The
government described the strike action as disappointing. Police in Northern
Ireland have said they are now treating the shooting of a senior officer as
terror-related and their investigation is primarily focused on the dissident
group, the new IRA. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was shot on
Wednesday night while off duty in Omer. A fourth man has been arrested in
connection with the attack. Three candidates have secured enough support to join
the contest to replace Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader and Scotland's first
minister. The Health Secretary, Hamza Yousuf, the Finance Secretary Kate Forbes
and the former Minister Ash Regan are standing with the result of the ballot due
at the end of March. Sir Bernard Ingham, who served as Margaret Thatcher's Press
Secretary for 11 years, has died. He was 90. A former journalist, Sir Bernard,
worked in Downing Street from 1979 until 1990. His family described him as a
formidable operator in the political and white-hall jungle. Chris, thank you. On
the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, fierce
fighting is continuing in the east of the country with heavy losses of troops on
both sides. One of Russia's key targets is the strategic town of Vogladar. The
latest Russian attempt to take the town earlier this month ended in humiliating
defeat. Our senior international correspondent Ola Geren has been reporting from
there, from Vogladar, and joins us live from there now. Ola. Well, as a
Ukrainian colleague put it, this has been just another day of war, as usual. And
there's been some surprise over that here because there were fears, expectations
that Putin would try to mark this grim anniversary with some kind of high-
profile attack or escalation. So far, that hasn't happened. Here in the east,
the fighting grinds on, and in places it seems like the Russians have learned
nothing. When they made their last push for Vogladar earlier this month, they
sent a long column of armoured vehicles across a flat plane in full view, and
Ukraine stopped them in their tracks, much as it stopped the armoured column
outside the capital last year. But the Russians are not giving up the fight.
We're making our way now towards the front line with Ukrainian troops passing by
apartment block after apartment block that are completely destroyed. Some of
them have had the front torn away. They're blackened. One in front has a huge
hole punched through. It looks like it was hit by a missile. And this is just
one destroyed town on Ukraine's very long front line. We've just been told to
duck down here now and take cover at the wall. The troops have heard something,
possibly a Russian drone. The front line is about 500 metres away. They say
Russian troops are trying to advance, but they're holding them back. How heavy
is the fighting around the city now? It's difficult, says the commander, whose
code name is Beast. People are on their feet for 20 hours. The fighting goes on
around the clock. I can't say more. It's secret. People have gathered around
now, mainly elderly people, wrapped up in winter coats and they're queuing now
to get some bread. A jovial figure in combat gear is handing out the loaves.
He's an evangelical pastor called Oleg Tikhachenko. Twice a week he brings aid
and solace to the few hundred souls who remain in Vugladar without heat or
light. Pastor Oleg, you've been giving bread to the people. You've been hugging
some of them, talking to them. They obviously mean a lot to you. How important
is it to you to come here like this and take this risk? We help because it's a
matter of life or death, he tells me. We bring bread and water. The risk is
huge. But so is the reward, saving people's lives. Among those queuing for
bread, we meet Valentina, a small figure bent low over her walking stick. She's
73 and says she has nowhere else to go. We are frightened, of course. But what
can we do? We live with it. You can't say, don't shoot, they have their job, we
have our lives. What was life like here before the invasion? How were things
before? It was good. The town was quiet, calm and clean. People worked, we had
money. What can I say? It was a good town. But now it's a battlefield. We see a
Ukrainian mortar team dart into position and target the enemy nearby. One year
on, the Russians aren't winning here, but they aren't giving up either. And they
still hold almost a fifth of Ukraine. One of the key battlegrounds is the
eastern city of Bapmut, which has become very important symbolically as a symbol
of Ukrainian resistance. President Zelensky has called it a fortress. The latest
information we have is that the Russians are now inside the fortress that they
control about 35% of the city. A lot of Ukrainian blood has been spilled to keep
Bapmut, but it seems that Ukrainian forces may soon have to withdraw or risk
being completely surrounded. President Putin didn't claim this prize for the
anniversary. It seems he could finally have a victory here soon. Ola Garen,
thank you so much for joining us. And Ola working out there with her cameraman
colleague Gokhtay Karelton, reporting from Volodar in eastern Ukraine. Now,
what's the point of archaeologists beavering away during building and
infrastructure works trying to unearth and safeguard ancient artefacts if the
public never get to see them on display? Historic England say that museums are
running out of room for such discoveries, ranging from fine Roman metalwork to
Bronze Age pottery. Museums all over the country have vast numbers of objects in
storage. So what's the point of having them if you can't display them? Tristram
Hunt is director of the Victorian Albert Museum. Simon Jenkins is an author and
journalist and was formerly chair of the National Trust. And both join me now.
Tristram Hunt, how much is buried away in the V&A basement that you'd like to
put on display, but just can't get round to doing it? Well, Kelly, good
afternoon. And first of all, I just want to say that the V&A is flying the
Ukrainian flag today in solidarity and respect to Ukraine and what's happening
there. We have 2.8 million objects as part of the V&A's collection. And of
displayable objects that can be seen by the public, we have around 300,000 and
60,000 are on display. So we've got 20% of our displayable collection on show.
And the reason why it's not all on show is that some of it needs to be rotated
for conservation reasons. Some of it needs to be rotated so you have a new
conversation between the objects to keep people excited about coming back to the
museum. And some of this collection is a study collection. You wouldn't
necessarily want to go to a museum and see 50 teaspoons, but great scholars of
metalwork or culinary history will want to see those collections for themselves.
So collections in museums do lots of different things. And some of it's on
display as much as possible of it should be on display, which is why we're
building this new storehouse in East London where the David Bowie archive and
other items will be on display. But not all of it should be on display all the
time. Simon Jenkins, is there any point, do you think, in museums and groups
like the National Trust holding on to objects that they can't display? Would it
just be a good idea to sell them off? Well, I sympathize with Tristram's
collection. I was at the Museum of London for a while and every single time an
office block was being built, they dug up clay pipes in the basement and sent
them to the museum. And we ended up with warehouses and warehouses of this
stuff. I think there's an argument for keeping some of it for the study, for
these precious scholars. But I have to say, by and large, and it applies far
more, I say, to works of art and furniture than to archaeological remains, by
and large, there are massive stores of this stuff in these museums. And they
should not be there. They should be on display somewhere else. And they should
be, if not forced, at least pleaded with, to dispose of them. And when I was at
the National Trust, I did plead. The V&A were very helpful, actually. But I
pleaded. We got houses half empty. You've got basements half full. I just
couldn't see the point of it. I really couldn't. And they're like magpies. They
grab hold of this stuff and they keep it and keep it and think of ever more
sophisticated reasons for not giving it away or selling it. Tristram Hollings
must be really disheartening, though, for the guys working away on the building
site. They're sent there to check out archaeological finds. They find something
and then never know what happens to it after that. I can see their frustration.
We are spending more and more money on building more and more of these stores.
And I agree with Simon that this stuff needs to be on display to the public
because the level of interest in it is really profound. The problem that
Victoria and Albert Museum faces, as does the British Museum and some other
institutions, is that legally we are not allowed to dispose or deaccession any
items from the collection unless they're ruined beyond repair, unless it's a
direct imitation or unless another institution will take it. So there is this
legal impediment to us deaccessioning and that connects to these questions
around restitution and repatriation, as well as the issue of are there items in
our collection which actually no longer fit with the purpose of meaning of
museum or could be seen better elsewhere. And we work really closely with the
National Trust because lots of our collections do overlap to have as much of
this material on display as possible. Another challenge though frankly is some
of our regional museums who are facing real challenges in terms of local
authority budgets, who we would love to share more items with as well, haven't
got the resource to put it on display at the moment and that is really
disheartening. And Simon, you might know about this, historic England along with
the Arts Council England and the National Trust are said to be an early talk to
advise the government on the creation of a national archive that they say could
solve the issue of storage for the next 100 years. Can you see that happening?
Do you think the government will commit funding to that solution? It sounds like
yet another national institution which is going to bury stuff underground. I
mean they've got to snap out of it really. The museums say we aren't allowed to
get rid of things, they can lend things, they can change the bloody law. I mean
it's just all ridiculous. They are massive hoarders, there's no other word for
it. And I think that although there are perfectly good reasons for them having
some stuff in store for this, that, the other kind, by and large there ought to
be a massive dispersal out of the national collections, or their basements of
the national collections into the local authority museums and frankly into
schools and colleges. Most of this stuff isn't precious. A lot of it's
curiosity, it's old curiosity and it could perfectly well be in a display case
in a school or pub for that matter. It's all far too precious and far too pseudo
noble. It just needs to relax and disperse. Tristan, off-road. There's this
really interesting trend, whether it's the Boymans Museum in the Netherlands,
whether it's Louvans in northern France, whether it's our own V&A East
storehouse on the Olympic Park for open access storage collections. So that age
old question of where have you hidden all the other stuff, you'll now be able to
wander these collections and indeed at the V&A you'll be able to order an object
to come and see it for yourselves, which is a really exciting way of opening up
these collections to the public much more effectively. Thank you both very much.
Long live the archaeologists and the museums. Tristram Hunt, Simon Jenkins. It
is now coming up to quarter to six. Here's Chris with other headlines. UK health
officials have begun drawing up plans for a possible bird flu pandemic. It
follows the death in Cambodia of an 11-year-old girl from the H5N1 virus. The
health security agency said while very high levels of transmission in wild birds
presented a constant threat, there was no evidence that the virus was getting
better at infecting humans. A major rescue operation has been launched after a
tug cap sized off Greenock in the west of Scotland. Rescuers could be seen
climbing onto the overturned hull of the boat. It's not known how many people
are on board or if there have been any casualties. England, out of the women's
T20 Cricket World Cup South Africa, beat them by six runs to reach the final.
Chris, thanks very much. Junior doctors in England have announced three days of
strike action from the 13th to the 15th of March. The British Medical
Association announced earlier this week that members had voted overwhelmingly in
favour of taking industrial action in their pay dispute. The government called
the move disappointing. Dr Emma Ronnswick is Deputy Chair of Council at the
British Medical Association and joins us now. Dr Ronnswick, three days. It's a
long time, isn't it? What do you expect the impact will be on patients? I think
the impact will be very disruptive. Fortunately, we have senior colleagues,
consultants and specialists and GPs who will be able to cover urgent emergency
and critical care. But we can expect widespread disruption of elective activity.
And that's really unfortunate because we've given the government every
opportunity to negotiate with us over the over reversed or massive pay cuts we
faced since 2008. We've lost over a quarter of our pay since 2008, bit by bit in
real terms. And we'd like to reverse that. We call that pay restoration.
Unfortunately, the government just will not turn up to meet us. We've given even
since the ballot result on Monday, two further opportunities for Steve Barkley
to come in and meet and negotiate. He won't even show up, let alone put a real
offer on the table. So it's very sad that we've been pushed to this. But here we
are really standing up for our profession and for the retention of staff in our
service so that we can continue into the future, giving the care that patients
really deserve. I think people can hear that you are not doing this lightly or
entering this move lightly. But what exactly would you accept in terms of pay?
Because the Times journalist Sean Linton has calculated the pay rise that you're
asking for is 35.3%. Is that right? Is that feasible? So that's not calculated.
We've written that quite clearly in the calculations on our own website, because
the cuts are so steep to our pay that we faced in real terms that to reverse
that just mathematically, you have to have a large rise. Well above inflation,
way above inflation. Absolutely. But it is what we've lost against inflation
over the last decade or so. So it's only a lot to gain, because we've lost a
lot. And nobody in this country, and especially not health workers, deserve a
quarter of their pay to be lost. Nobody. And we don't think that's right. And we
are beginning to see real struggles amongst doctors, financial struggles amongst
doctors, which you don't expect. But our lowest paid colleagues are on about 14
pounds an hour. Those who have got more than a decade of experience doing
complex things like neurosurgery, brain surgery, and busting your clock when you
have a heart attack or a stroke, or looking after those people in hospital who
can't even consent to their own care because they're so warm well, mental health
care, for example, are on only 28 pounds an hour. So this is not the pay that's
commensurate with our work. And it's not what we were paid in 2008. It's a
quarter less than we were paid in 2008. We'd like to reverse those pay cuts.
It's a lot because it's been cut a lot. And just just finally, briefly, when
there was a strike before in 2016, consultants stepped in, didn't they? But that
meant a huge amount of pre-planned treatments like knee and hip replacements had
to be cancelled. Should people just brace themselves for that again?
Unfortunately, yes. And there needs to be asking Steve Barkley why he isn't
prepared to negotiate with us in order to prevent that occurring. We've got 7
million people already on the waiting lists for a whole variety of different
types of treatment. That's because we can't keep staff in the service. Why can't
we keep staff in the service? They're leaving the profession or leaving the
country to go to Australia and New Zealand, where pay is better. My colleagues
who've left are earning 70% more than I am, working in Brisbane and Melbourne
and other places similar like that. If we had better pay, better conditions, we
would keep staff in the service and we would be able to give patients the care
that they deserve. Currently we're not able to. And we need to reverse that. So
it's on Steve Barkley really now to come back and talk to us about pay. OK, Dr
Emma Runzwick, thank you. Now we heard some of my conversation with Sir Tony
Blair earlier as we discussed Ukraine. What about Northern Ireland? Rishi Sunak,
as we know, is trying to find a way through the post-Brexit trading
difficulties. Negotiations continue between the government and the EU over the
Northern Ireland Protocol. The shooting of Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell demonstrates just how fragile things are. So I asked Tony Blair as one
of the authors of the Good Friday Agreement if he feared for its longevity. I
believe the peace in Northern Ireland will be maintained. You know, there was
the horrible shooting the other day and what was interesting was the immediate
response of Sinn Féin and not just of unionist parties. So I believe that that
peace will hold, although you've always got to nurture it carefully. The problem
is you're going to create a situation of political paralysis in Northern
Ireland, which is bad for the people there. And the difficulty that Rishi Sunak
has is he's trying to conduct a sensible negotiation because, of course, there
is a practical way through. And I believe they've agreed a practical way through
this Northern Ireland Protocol problem, which is a problem that arises naturally
out of Brexit. There is a practical way through, but if it starts to become a
matter of ideology within the Conservative Party, then, you know, the interests
of the country are going to be sacrificed to that. And I think it's really
important. I am worried about the state of the country. I think we're in a very,
very difficult situation and we are losing altitude virtually every day. We need
this protocol business sorted out because otherwise there's an economic and
investment chill over the country at the moment that's got to be lifted and it
can only be lifted by leadership. Let's talk about Labour because Sir Keir
Starmer laid out his five missions for Labour yesterday. Didn't he reminisce,
perhaps, of the pledges in the run-up to 1997? Not quite so succinct. How can
Keir Starmer lose the next election? He's 20 points ahead in most of the polls.
The Conservatives are divided. He says he's tackled the anti-Semitism issues,
chopped out. Jeremy Corbyn. Well, I can tell you the one person who will not be
thinking like this is Keir Starmer. I mean, he will be a warrior against
complacency. And look, the Tory party are in. This is almost not a matter of
dispute. They're in a huge mess. You know, Rishi Sunak may be a perfectly decent
guy and capable guy, but it doesn't look to me as if he's in charge. So it's a
problem. And it's a problem for the country. And Keir has gripped the Labour
Party. What he's showing is that he's, you know, prepared to be, I mean, people
say ruthless, but I would say determined. It would be a better word to put the
Labour Party in shape where it is a sensible, serious alternative to the
Conservatives. And I think it is today. Because you were a bit wary early on in
his leadership, weren't you? Have you changed your view? Because, you know...
No, I was never, I was never wary about him. Or lukewarm, perhaps. No, I was not
lukewarm, I swear for him. I was worried about the state of the Labour Party. I
mean, this is to pay tribute to him. I wondered whether it was possible, given
the wreckage of the Corpen period, to take the Labour Party in such an
accelerated pace towards common sense. But he seems to have done it. But a huge
mountain to climb. He's got to gain about 120 seats just to get a majority of
one. Yeah, you're right. You know, when you look at the electoral arithmetic
like that, it is a big challenge. But I do think the country feels about this
Conservative government, I would say, may feel more strongly than it did about
the Conservative government that I was facing. To be fair to John Major and Ken
Clark, they were, you know, they were trying to do the right thing and were
taking difficult decisions, even if they were getting battered by their own side
for doing it. Whereas now, I think the country is in a difficult position, a
really difficult position. And without going back to Brexit or so on and
becoming obsessed by that one issue, nonetheless, I think fixing it is really
important. And I can't see at this moment in time that they're able to fix it.
Final question, then. I started as a political correspondent at the BBC at the
time that you became Labour leader. I think I was probably one of the first
people to stick a microphone in your face as you came down off the platform when
you've been elected. What would you change if you could do it all again? I don't
know. I mean, big question. Yeah, it's a reflection that would take me too long
to answer. The one thing I do think, because I think it's an interesting
reflection on politics, is I cannot tell you how much I have learnt since
leaving office. And that is interesting and troubling at the same time. And I
think part of the problem that we have with politics today is that we don't have
enough people in it with real life, real world experience. If I was back in
politics today, I would be making sure if I was in government that I was
bringing people in from the outside with real expertise. I was trying to make
sure that, for example, when you were appointing people in to do really
difficult reforms, that they were people with actual experience of the types of
institution or sector that they were trying to reform. I think this is going to
be a big challenge for any government in the future. So I'm about to stop
working full time. Do you ever think there will come a time when you want to
step back? No. No. Your face is saying no. Well, it's... I remain, fortunately,
at the moment at any rate, in reasonable health and I'm infinitely curious about
the world. So I can't really... If I were to say to you, now I fancy going and
attending a garden for the rest of my days, the entirety of my family would say
that is definitely not true. So Tony Blair, not retiring. Now let's get the
weather forecast with Chris Forgs. Thanks a lot, Caroline. And as far as the
weather goes, over the next few days, the weather is going to be dominated by an
area of high pressure. And that will be bringing largely fine and dry weather.
However, the amount of cloud we see from place to place is going to vary very
significantly. Now overnight tonight, I think most areas will eventually have
some clear spells pretty widely. And it's going to be a cold night with a fairly
widespread frost with typical temperatures getting down to between, say, around
zero to minus four degrees Celsius. But there will be some areas that keep a
little bit more in the way of cloud. And I think particularly northern and
eastern areas of Scotland and eastern areas of England, we're prone to seeing
some cloud coming in off the North Sea later in the night. And that should
actually tend to lift the temperatures back to around about two to four degrees
Celsius for these eastern areas. Tomorrow, well, expect quite a lot of cloud, I
think, for eastern Scotland, eastern areas of England. You might even find a few
lights passing showers. There will know be a lot of dry weather around through
the day. The best of any sunshine is likely across western areas of England,
Wales, Northern Ireland and western areas of Scotland too. That's the latest
Caroline. Chris, thank you. Now here's Paddy O'Connell with a preview of this
Sunday's broadcasting house. Hello, good evening. The head of Ukraine's railways
has apologized after only 90% of services ran to the timetable. After a year of
war and the arrival of President Biden aboard Rail Force One, he'll be our
guest. Back home, we look at fruit and veg rationing. The government gets very
cross if you link any of this to Brexit. So what's up on the shelves? Our
headliners will be Charles Spencer the Earl, Alva Ray the podcast queen and
Irene Tracy, the vice chancellor of Oxford University. That's all ahead on
Sunday here on Radio 4 at nine in the morning. Paddy, thank you very much. Well,
it is just about time for me to say goodbye. After 36 years on the BBC staff, I
have decided to hang up my headphones for a while. Take a break from working
full time. Wonderful as it's been. I've been lucky enough to have been a part of
the PM team in one form or another since 2001. So indulge me for a moment while
I sing the praises of the people you don't hear on air. From the editors led by
Natasha Shallis, it's Rebecca Keating and Mark Faulkner today. To the producers,
to the admin folk, Gillian Deer, are you listening? To the studio managers who
do all the amazing technical stuff on the other side of the glass, thank you
Paul and Graham today. It is they who make this programme such a joy to work on.
It's their creativity and talent that makes us, the presenters, sound our best.
Their dedication that results in top class radio day after day. So I thank them
for their skill and for their friendship. I have to say I have been really
deeply touched as well by all the nice messages I've received from you, our
Radio 4 listeners. Thank you so much for allowing me into your homes. The warmth
you've shown, the advice you've given from time to time. Sorry I've sometimes
had to be the bearer of awful news or remind you of the latest shenanigans at
Westminster. But along with that we have had some fun together, haven't we, over
the years and made memories that will last a lifetime. I shall enjoy tuning in
from the outside now, being kept fully informed, educated and entertained by
Evan and the team. Who knows, maybe our paths will cross again sometime in the
future. Bye for now. Thank you.