TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and human life should take against bird flu. You're listening to today on Radio
4 with Michelle Hussein and Martha Carney. It's eight o'clock on Saturday the
25th of February, the headlines this morning. There are signs that the UK and
the EU are close to agreeing a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Health
officials are planning how they'd cope with a bird flu pandemic after a girl in
Cambodia died from the virus. And people in Nigeria are voting in the most
competitive presidential election since military rule ended nearly a quarter of
a century ago. The BBC News is read by Vigie Alice. Here's our political
correspondent, Ione Wells. The protocol keeps Northern Ireland inside the EU's
single market so that goods can flow freely over the border into the Republic of
Ireland. But that means checks on goods entering Northern Ireland from Scotland,
England and Wales. The DUP, Northern Ireland's main unionist party, wants to see
significantly less EU oversight. There are signs that a new deal is close. Rishi
Sunak has spoken with retailers and business representatives. The Foreign
Secretary James Cleverley has pulled out of a long-planned trip to the Middle
East at the beginning of next week and the President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen, was due to be in the UK today. This visit was to include a
meeting with the King, but Downing Street and the Palace claim it has been
cancelled due to operational reasons and connected to the political talks. While
alterations to the protocol seem imminent, it may be difficult for Rishi Sunak
to get the type of wholesale change that the DUP and some in his own party are
looking for. Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up plans to deal with
the possible bird flu pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in Cambodia after
contracting the H5N1 strain of the disease. Our medical editor Fergus Walsh
reports. Not another pandemic might well be the exasperated response of many to
talk of the risk from bird flu. A new sub-strain of the H5N1 virus emerged in
recent years and has been causing record numbers of deaths among wild birds and
poultry. It has also infected mammals, raising concerns. Thankfully, it does not
spread easily from birds to humans, but when it does, H5N1 kills about half
those it infects. The death in Cambodia was the first since 2014. The health
security agency stressed there was no evidence of an imminent threat to humans,
but said it was important to remain vigilant, urging people to stay away from
sick wild birds they might encounter. Just as they did with COVID, scientists
have begun modeling scenarios of how a bird flu pandemic might have an impact in
the UK and looking at whether lateral flow devices could be used to test for
H5N1 in humans. A fifth man has been arrested in connection with the shooting of
an off-duty police officer in Oma, Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is
critically ill after the attack on Wednesday. Detectives say they are treating
the shooting as a terrorist incident and their main line of inquiry is focusing
on the dissident group, the new IRA. Tens of millions of people in Nigeria are
heading to the polls today to vote for a new president. The election is being
seen as one of the most unpredictable in recent years with three leading
candidates instead of two. Here's our West Africa correspondent, Myenny Jones.
There's nervous anticipation on the streets of Lagos, Nigeria's commercial hub.
On the eve of the elections, the city's infamous traffic evaporated as many
headed back to their home states to vote. In supermarkets, shoppers stocked up
on essentials as there's an election day curfew from midnight to 6pm with non-
essential workers only allowed out to go to the polls. There are 18 candidates
in the presidential race. The free front runners are the ruling parties, Bola
Tinubu, former Vice President Atikwa Bubakar and the surprise story of the
campaign, Peter Obie. He's offered an unprecedented third alternative for those,
especially young people, who are frustrated with the two parties who run the
country for the past 24 years. Whoever wins will have to tackle rising
insecurity and a failing economy. Finance ministers from the G20 group of
leading economies are meeting in India. Western nations see Russia's invasion of
Ukraine as the most pressing issue, but other countries are focused on different
challenges as Leila Nathu reports from Bangalore. The UK and US came to this
summit to reaffirm their support for Ukraine, to strongly condemn Russia and to
push for further economic sanctions. The Chancellor Jeremy Hunt said ending the
war was key to making progress on other global issues like climate change and
tackling poverty. But in his address to finance ministers gathered here, India's
Prime Minister Narendra Modi made no reference to Russia's invasion, only
mentioning rising geopolitical tensions. India is maintaining a neutral stance
on the war and wants to have a very different conversation here. It wants to use
its presidency of the G20 to champion the needs of developing nations who don't
have a seat at this table of major economies. So India wants discussions to
focus on food security, sustainable growth and debt burdens. India is growing in
international political and economic importance and increasingly wants to set
its own agenda. A search is resuming this morning for two people missing in the
Firth of Clyde. They were on board a tug which capsized yesterday afternoon of
Greenock. Eyewitnesses said the accident happened as the tug was escorting a
cruise ship into the harbour. The Defence Secretary Ben Wallace says the British
Army's Ajax armoured vehicle program is back on track following a series of
embarrassing setbacks. The Minister of Defence signed a contract for 589
armoured vehicles at a cost of £5.5bn more than 12 years ago. But they are yet
to enter service. Here's our Defence correspondent Jonathan Beale. Ben Wallace
has called the Ajax armoured vehicle program troubled. It's seen as a key part
of modernizing the British Army with a family of high-tech vehicles which can
conduct reconnaissance missions, identify multiple targets and fire on the move.
But trials have had to be halted twice over safety concerns with test vehicles
suffering from excessive vibration and noise causing loss of hearing. But the
Army and main contractor General Dynamics UK now believe they've resolved the
problems. A number of fixes have been made. They include remounting hand
controls to limit vibration and the redesign of seat mountings and cushions.
Noise has been reduced by dual-layer hearing protection including noise-
cancelling headphones. Mr Wallace said he was confident that Ajax had now turned
a corner. Final trials of the vehicle are expected to last another 18 months
with a hope they'll then be ready to hand over to the Army. The number of people
known to have died in the earthquake that struck Turkey and Syria nearly three
weeks ago has now surpassed 50,000. The authorities in Turkey have put the
number of dead there at 44,000. In Syria it stands at 6,000. Antony Albanese is
making history this morning by becoming the first serving Australian Prime
Minister to take part in Sydney's gay and lesbian Mardi Gras. Correspondent Phil
Mercer reports from Sydney. Antony Albanese has attended Sydney's Mardi Gras
before as an opposition MP. But as a sitting Prime Minister he's making history
by marching in one of the world's largest LGBTQI events that could attract up to
300,000 spectators. He said he was committed to removing inequality based on
sexuality or identity. But critics insist Mr Albanese is pandering to a small
minority that's hijacking Australia's social agenda. 3,000 tickets for the
Eurovision Song Contest in May are to be made available to Ukrainians living in
the UK. The event will take place in Liverpool, which will host it on behalf of
Ukraine, who won last year. The UK government has announced £10 million in
funding for the contest to cover operational costs and to ensure it truly
showcases Ukrainian culture. Hundreds of artefacts from a warship which sank off
the coast of Norfolk in the 17th century are going on display in Norwich today
for the first time. Objects from the Gloucester, which have been brought to the
surface, include the ship's bell, personal possessions such as spectacles, and
even a silk petticoat which was discovered in a chest. Among the survivors was
the Duke of York, who went on to become King James II. Professor Claire Joyt
from the Gloucester Project told us that many of the hundreds of people who died
could have been saved. There was a voidable delay for James Duke of York and
Albany at the time, abandoning ship. The ship hit at 5.30am in the morning. It's
actually underwater very quickly, but James hoped that the ship could be saved
and didn't evacuate, didn't leave immediately. And of course, nobody could leave
before royalty. And that led to a deeper tragedy than perhaps it would have been
otherwise. Cricket and England are in a dominant position at the end of the
second day of the second test against New Zealand at Wellington. The tourists
declared their first innings on 435 for eight with Joe Root on 153 and Harry
Brooke out for 186. In reply, New Zealand reached 138 for seven before rain
stopped play. Still 297 runs behind England. Vigie, thank you very much. The
time is now 10 past eight. And let's get to grips with what is afoot this
weekend on a deal on the Northern Island Protocol. The positive indications from
Downing Street, while at the same time, the visit by the European Commission
President that it seems would have happened today isn't taking place. Chris
Mason, our political editor, joins us to take us through what he's hearing and
what his sense of this is. First of all, Chris, on this talk of negotiations
intensifying over a deal, that is, we imagine between the UK and the EU. Yes.
And also conversations one can expect at some point at least between the UK and
Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionist Party. You're right, to say, Michelle,
that a lot is afoot. But I am conscious from the perspective of our listener
this morning that there's the danger of this stuff, isn't there, of the boy that
cried wolf rolling talk that it's almost there, a deal is imminent, that word
imminent turning out to be rather elastic, given that we were having similar
conversations more than a week ago. My understanding this morning is yes, it is
all but there. The discussion now is about its unveiling and its presentation.
That said, there is nervousness at a senior level in the cabinet because of a
fear that the Democratic Unionists might reject it. My understanding is that as
and when it appears, they will say that they're going to go away and take a look
at it, want to see the legal text, want to really see the detail before there is
any kind of endorsement. As you mentioned, the King was due to meet Ursula von
der Leyen, the President of the European Commission today, various sources
saying that that was cancelled for operational reasons, not political ones. But
the planned visit is significant because it strongly suggests that the unveiling
of a deal was going to happen on the same trip. It seems unlikely that she would
have come to the UK, gone back to Brussels again and then come back some days
later for some sort of choreographed moment around its presentation. There are
those on both sides of the channel who thought that there might be a deal
unveiled this weekend called the Windsor Agreement. That may have been where the
location was for the Prime Minister and the President of the Commission doing
some sort of handshake, some sort of thing in front of the cameras. That is not
going to happen yet. The Prime Minister, of course, is fully aware of the
concerns that some in his own party and the DUP have already expressed, although
they weren't shown the text of the agreement. Is it your sense that he has
subsequent to that, got some further concessions from the EU, or is he going to
go ahead and then try to persuade the DUP? I think the scope for further
concessions with the EU in these later stages, and by that I mean the last week
or so, were probably fairly limited because had the EU been totally revising
what was going to be offered to the UK, they'd have had to go back to the member
states, reopen the negotiating mandate and all the rest of it. My understanding
is that the outline of a deal has been with the Prime Minister for some time,
but there's clearly been a need to manage the domestic politics of all of this.
And yes, in the last few days, the jitters have been growing in Brussels. Was
this going to be the umpteenth example of a British Prime Minister getting a
deal with the EU and then getting eaten alive back home? And we know from the
last few days, both what was said publicly and privately, that the Democratic
Unionist Party in Northern Ireland, who have never liked the protocol, that's an
appendix to the Brexit deal that is specific to Northern Ireland and some
Brexiteer Conservative MPs simply didn't look like that number 10 was working
up. They remained very, very concerned that if Northern Ireland remained in the
EU's single market for goods and therefore subject to EU rules and ultimately
the European Court of Justice, that that would be a problem. They're
particularly concerned, to use a rather wholesome, delightful phrase at this
time on a Saturday morning, about what's known as dynamic alignment. In other
words, that as the EU changes its rules in the future, they would be changed in
Northern Ireland with a limited or next to no capacity for people in Northern
Ireland to have any say about that. And there'll be a hope from those sceptics
that the deal at least partially goes some way towards addressing that. From
number 10's perspective, they'll be conscious that there'll be some people in
this debate who are never likely to be persuaded or never likely to be joyous
with whatever deal is cooked up. But they will make an argument that says that
this can help restore relations with the EU, that it's better than the existing
protocol, that some are happy with but plenty are not, and it'll allow the Prime
Minister to move on to other tricky negotiations with the UK's European
partners. Not least, that huge question for him of small boat crossings over the
channel. He's due to be in Paris to see the French President on this very topic
and a number of others in a couple of weeks. My, oh my, diplomatically, that
would be so much more straightforward. I mean, it won't be straightforward at
all, but it would certainly be easier if this whole protocol business is sorted
before that trip. But this in itself is a big test of his authority, isn't it,
Chris? Because it may be, yeah, you know, we've done this but the usual suspects
are not happy. But equally, if he does this and the DUP do not go back into
government and his own party, big chunks of his own party in parliament really
start to kick off over it, bad for him. Yeah, absolutely. And the ultimate goal
here on all sides is an attempt to restore power sharing in Northern Ireland, to
persuade that enough has been done for the Democratic Unionist Party to be
willing to go back into devolved government ahead of that 25th anniversary of
the Good Friday Agreement coming up in a couple of months' time, which set up
the very infrastructure of power sharing in Northern Ireland, which has been
suspended for a good while now. So that's the ultimate prize. Anything short of
that, and people will be able to say that he has failed in that principled
political aim. I think we've certainly seen from Downing Street in the last few
days an emphasis on doing a deal that is better for the people of Northern
Ireland. Down their list of priorities has come the restoration of power
sharing. But absolutely, that is key to this. And then there is, as you say,
what happens amongst his conservative backbenches. Up until now, he has managed
to avoid inadvertent ruffling of public feathers amongst what we know to be a
pretty boisterous set of backbenchers. This could yet be that first moment, and
clearly, given what's happened in the last year, that's something he'd rather
avoid and could prove politically dangerous. Right. Well, let's see where we are
by Monday. Thank you very much, Chris Mason. The time now is 16 minutes past 8.
Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up contingency plans for the
possibility of bird flu causing a pandemic amongst human beings. An 11-year-old
girl in Cambodia has died from the H5N1 strain of the virus. The World Health
Organization has said that the global situation is worrying given the increasing
reports of cases in mammals, including humans. So what kind of precautions
should be taken? Well, we can talk now to Professor Andrew Pollard. You'll
remember him as director of the Oxford Vaccine Group and professor of pediatric
infection and immunity at Oxford University. Good morning. Good morning. We
don't want to be alarmist about this, of course, but just give us a sense of how
you assess the risks from this strain. Well, I think the first thing to say is
that influenza really does stay at the top of the risk register for pandemics,
as it has done over many decades. If you look back over the last 150 years,
we've had six influenza pandemics, and that's why there's been a real focus on
that over many years to make sure that we've thought through how to be well
prepared when a pandemic of influenza takes off. And of course, at this moment,
there is a pandemic of flu, but it's in birds, and it's this particular strain,
the H5N1 strain, which has caused an enormous number of infections in wild birds
and domestic birds all over the world. And perhaps the important thing that
we've become aware of, particularly recently, is the occasional incursions into
mammals. So there's the mink farm in Spain. There's been some evidence of some
infections in wild animals here in the UK. And in Peru, there's been a large
number of sea lions that have been infected with the virus. But so far, there's
been very limited transmission into humans, and there's the very sad story of
the death of a girl in Cambodia. But certainly compared with when this
particular type of bird flu virus, the H5N1 virus, was circulating over the last
20 years, the number of human infections is rather lower at the moment, which I
think is good news. We don't quite understand why that is. And no evidence of
any human-to-human transmission yet? No. I mean, at the moment, we've got no
evidence of human-to-human transmission, which makes it, I think, is very sure.
And if that does happen, that would really make us very concerned. And the
reason why the World Health Organization and the UK Health Security Agency said
we need to be vigilant is exactly to look for that, to make sure that if there
is evidence of mutations being acquired in this virus, which does allow it to
transmit in humans, that we're ready to really get going with an action plan
early to try and stop that from spreading further. So what might that action
plan involve, do you think? Well, there's quite a few things that need to be
done. The most important is the surveillance and the fact that respiratory
illnesses are being very closely monitored, perhaps more than ever before,
following the COVID-19 pandemic. I think the early warning signs of clusters of
cases occurring and being able to identify that is critical, because the first
step will be to, if those are identified, is to isolate those individuals and
try and prevent any onward transmission at source. The second thing will be,
from a preparation point of view, is exactly what we know has been happening.
The World Health Organization has been holding meetings to look at what's
happening with seasonal influenza and what strains are needed for seasonal
vaccines. We can also look at the same time at what's happening with the bird
flu virus and how that is evolving over time, so that the vaccine manufacturers
can start thinking about what strains might be used if there was a flu pandemic.
Is there any kind of immunity in the population at the moment from bird flu? In
the human population at the moment, there is no immunity against this strain of
H5N1, because we've never had an outbreak of that in humans. So there's just no
immunity. That's why it has pandemic potential, because of the lack of immunity
in human populations to the virus and why it's so important to be vigilant.
There are other bird flu viruses as well. We're focusing on this particular one
because of the large number of cases that there are on birds at the moment, and
the fact that humans, and particularly with domestic birds, have interactions.
Would it make any difference, do you think, if cats were kept indoors? I know
that's one theory about this, to stop them killing birds. Well, I'm not aware of
any evidence that so far that this particular virus has infected cats. And I
think the important measure here is about the population, if we're focusing on
this country, is not to handle dead or dying birds, that there potentially could
be infected or to take precautions when doing so. But I think the much bigger
issue is to be looking at respiratory infections, making sure that if there are
infections in humans, particularly if there's clusters of cases, that those are
monitored. And in fact, with this girl in Cambodia who's died, there's a number
of other people who are being tested, who have had her contacts to try to
establish whether there are any clusters. My understanding so far is that the
other contacts are not infected. And you stress the importance of surveillance
and other measures that presumably the health security agency are looking at
now, presumably far too soon to be even thinking about the idea of lockdowns, or
should that be part of contingency planning? Well, the really important thing
about what's going on in modelling what the right response should be, which is a
very active area at the moment, all around the world, is to think about
different scenarios. And there's always a danger that you look back at the last
pandemic, whether it's Covid or the last bad flu pandemic in 1918, and just
assume it would look like that. So it's really important that the modelling war
games different scenarios from things which are much worse than 1918 to things
which are much more akin to the milder pandemic that we had in 2009 with the
swine flu virus, so that all possible approaches are considered. The other part
that then leads from that is discussions with the vaccine manufacturers to think
about what, if there was some transmissions, what would the response be? How
quickly can vaccines be made? And of course... Are you already thinking about
that? Well, it is already... There are plans that have been around for decades
now with manufacturers, because of course there are vaccine companies that make
influenza vaccines every year. And so those vaccine companies have pandemic
plans for how they would respond if there was. And I think our big problem from
a global security point of view with that strategy at this moment is that the
vaccine manufacturers largely are making vaccines for high-income countries for
influenza. So they can switch their seasonal flu to make a pandemic flu. But of
course, there's a lot of people in other countries that are middle and low-
income countries, which have no access to seasonal flu vaccines. And so the
manufacturing capacity is in there. So I think we really need to be thinking a
bit more about how do we make sure there's global supply for influenza vaccines
if there was a pandemic. And that I think is something which, following
COVID-19, has to be a focus of the international community. Professor Sir Andrew
Pollard from Oxford University, many thanks. The time is now 25 past eight. J.K.
Rowling has mostly heard on Twitter these days rather than in interviews, but
she's given a nine-hour interview to the writer Megan Phelps-Roper for a podcast
called The Witch Trials of J.K. Rowling. Only two episodes are out so far, but
we're told she will talk about the stance that has divided her from some of the
stars she made famous through the films of the Harry Potter books and others,
her position on trans people and women. I never set out to upset anyone.
However, I was not uncomfortable with getting off my pedestal. And what has
interested me over the last 10 years and certainly in the last few years, the
last two, three years, particularly on social media, you've ruined your legacy.
Oh, you could have been beloved forever, but you chose to say this. And I think
you could not have misunderstood me more profoundly. Well, that's a snippet from
the series, which you can find on podcast platforms. I've been speaking to Megan
Phelps-Roper, who grew up in a tightly controlled Christian community that
featured in a 2007 Louis Theroux series. In the early days of Harry Potter,
Rowling faced attacks from evangelical Christian groups who didn't like the
sorcery and witchcraft in her books. Megan started with explaining how she
approached J.K. Rowling. I wrote her a letter. And in the letter, I tried to
tell her a lot about myself, but I had kind of a leg up because she had already
read my book. But basically, in the letter, I talk about my background in coming
from this extremist environment and how the importance of difficult conversation
in extracting me from that environment. I grew up in the Westboro Baptist
Church, and they're known for their extremism, for the extreme positions they
take. And I started to see elements over the last 10 years since I left the
church. I started to see elements of that kind of extremism in the mainstream,
particularly on social media. And it really concerned me. It alarmed me. And
that alarm kind of grew over the past 10 years. And so I explained all of this
to her and how, you know, social media is amplifying some of our worst impulses.
And as somebody who benefited enormously from grace and generosity, both before
and after I left Westboro, I was very sad to see the loss of that generosity in
the public conversation. And when you sat down with her, with J.K. Rowling, you
went to see her at home in Scotland. What was it like? Because in the first two
episodes, we get a sort of initial flavor of your conversation together, largely
about her own background and her troubles at the time before and during. And
indeed, some of after the books came out. What was your sense of her? I mean,
she was very warm and generous. I mean, I think before I went, I watched a lot
of interviews that she had given, many, many of them. And I because that she
rarely gives interviews, I thought, you know, this would be a lot more guarded
than she was. And she she wasn't at all. She was extremely open. You know, right
away you hear in the series, like those are the first two questions that I ask
her. She immediately dove into, you know, all these very difficult parts of her
of her past, these these dark parts of her of her story and her life. And, you
know, every question I could ask her whatever I wanted. I, you know, later in
the series, you'll hear me, you know, try to really embody the voice of her
critics, like to share the concerns that they had. And she was very open to that
as well. How did she address the trans issue? I mean, you see a version of of
her positions on Twitter, but I think what what happens on the Internet so often
is that everything gets flattened. There is a lack of context. And so you don't
really, truly understand where she's coming from. You only see this one aspect
of it. And so we really dive into that in the later episodes in the series,
truly in episodes and episode four is where it really begins. So I think we
really try to bring that context back. And I think there will be some people who
are really upset about that. I think sometimes there is a lot of conflation
between explanation and justification that that. And I just think that it's a
mistake. We have to understand where one another we have to understand where
we're coming from, if there's going to be any ability to find a productive path
forward. Where are you coming from? Make it on that issue. I'm coming from a
position of really well, originally it was coming from a position of ignorance.
When when I first saw her tweets, I had a really hard time understanding what
was happening. And so so it was ignorance. And then that became curiosity. And
then it's been almost two years now since I first had a conversation with my my
colleague Andy Mills and my other colleague Matt Bull. We were talking about
this as you know, she's been the subject of these two major backlashes from both
the left and the right. And what is going on here? We really, really wanted to
understand. And so that's what we've spent the last two years doing. But what do
you think her purpose is in talking to you at length in this way? I think you
would have to ask me that. I think it's very hard for me to to fully account for
the fact that she said yes. When I know she's said no to to so many other
people, I think it's maybe a few things. Like, I think she also recognizes that
there is that lack of context on Twitter. I think the the inability to really
dive in very deep. But I think ultimately she it was the fact that it was a
conversation. You know, I'm not a trained journalist. I again, I am somebody who
who comes to this as a very with a very deep belief in the power of
conversation. And, you know, she doesn't need a champion. So people who think
that this show is just a way of of defending her, I think they're missing
something very big because, you know, she is her own champion. But did you did
you feel that she has been bruised by the way that she's been portrayed and the
attacks on her? I think that anybody I mean, it's shocking to me the level of
the number of ways that that she has been the people have attacked her. And, you
know, even if you believe that it's that it's justifiable, it is still
breathtaking. As much time as I've spent on this, I'm still randomly seeing new
ways. So I think it's painful for anybody to go through that. She is a human
being. You know, that's, I think, what comes through extremely clearly. It came
through to me when I when I spoke with her. And I think it comes through very
clearly in the series. She is a human being just like everybody else. And I
think partly because she has this massive platform. You know, people think that
she she's, you know, untouched by the suffering of other people. And I did not
come away from those conversations with that sense at all. And I don't think
listeners will either. Megan Phelps, Roper, thank you. Thank you so much. The
time now is twenty nine minutes to nine. More sport now from Sarah Orchard. Hi,
Sarah. A very good morning once again and cricket first because after England's
women were knocked out of the twenty twenty World Cup in the semifinals
yesterday, there's different news from England's men. Day two of the second test
in New Zealand. And it was halted by rain, but the visitors were in control
after declaring on four hundred and thirty eight for eight. England then reduced
their hosts to one hundred and thirty eight for seven with a follow on now a
prospect. Now there are two matches in round three of the six nations today.
First up, it's Andy Farrell's unbeaten Ireland who have traveled to Rome to take
on winless Italy at two fifteen. Well, at four forty five p.m. on BBC One and
five live, the game is on between Wales and England after a week of turmoil for
the Welsh players. The strike threat is over and the Welsh Union and
professional game board conceded to some of the players demands surrounding
player contracts. But will the week's events leave its mark on the match? We're
joined this morning by former Wales wing Philippa Tuttiot and former England
center Jeremy Guskert. Good morning, both. Good morning. Good morning. Now, now,
Philippa, how optimistic are you that the travails of the last week won't have
taken their toll on the Welsh players? Yeah, look, every Welsh fan is always
going to be overly optimistic. We love the Welsh team, but it's not been ideal
prep. They had a training session canceled this week so the players could go to
that meeting on Wednesday where things were finally finalized. But you know
what? Sadly for the boys, they've been here before. If you remember back in
twenty nineteen, there was something called Project Reset where the W.R.U wanted
to merge two of the regional teams, which would have meant loads of job losses.
That actually happened on a Wednesday. And then on the Saturday, they went away
to Scotland as underdogs and beat them in the World Cup. Rob Howley, the attacks
coach, got sent home due to gambling. Now they got through to the semifinals. So
they've been through trials and tribulations before. And, you know, these
athletes are incredible. They can car park mentalize things and focus on the job
in hand. And I have no doubt, you know, playing against England, that's when
every team plays their best. Well, it's a good point then to bring in Germany
because you have won and lost in Cardiff as an Englishman. How wary will England
be of what's been? And is the England boss, Steve Borthwick, under pressure
already? Sorry, I'd be amazed if Borthwick was under pressure from the outside.
I think internally he will put pressure on himself. I don't think England, the
squad, will underestimate Wales by any stretch of the imagination. However, I
mean, all the changes he's got, London has made to that Welsh team, the old and
the new, the mixture, it would be amazing if that team comes together and puts
in a decent performance, considering what's happening. The first two games,
they've only scored two tries. They're struggling in attack. They're struggling
in defence. And England, in fairness, aren't a whole lot better. But I think you
can see little green shoots of improvement. And I think they'll be confident
going to Cardiff. And Philippa, just hearing Jeremy say there are nine changes
for Warrungatlands, Wales. Of course, they're winners in the tournament. But the
eye is drawn to debut for 20-year-old Mason Gradia outside centre. What can we
expect? He's a really exciting player. Now, some may remember the centre, Corey
Allen, who had to retire, sadly, after only six caps. He's actually Mason's
brother. So they've grown up and they've had a fierce competition. But this kid,
he is brilliant. He is huge. He's 6'5", he's 17 stone. He's a very physical
player, which will be a lovely contrast, but good combination with the existing
centre, who's also very young, Joe Hawkins. Now, they played quite a bit in
under 20s together, so they do know one another. But he's an exciting player.
And yes, nine changes. But some of those are very experienced players coming
back in. Allen Wynn Jones coming back in, Justin Tippert coming back in. So it
sounds quite dramatic, but actually, I think it could be a really exciting
blend. We've got to see more of these players. World Cup is around the corner.
But yeah, Mason Gradia, he's certainly going to stand his ground. Jeremy, just
lastly for England, they're going to see the return of Anthony Watson, an
opportunity for the Leicester Man who's been out for lengthy periods injured.
Yeah, Anthony, at his best, I believe, is world class. And you give that man
enough ball and enough space and here capitalise on that and score tries. The
most exciting player, I think, that ball trick is brought into the squad,
though, is Olli Chesham, the number five. To me, reminds me so much of Martin
Johnson, the young Otoji listeners. If you're going to watch the game and listen
to the game, look out for his name and look out for his ball carrying ability in
the match this afternoon. Jeremy, Philippa, thank you so much for your time this
morning. That one kicking off at 4.45. Finally, today's racing tips, both
Kempton, three o'clock, number five and Sam, then 4.10, number four, Roy
O'Mouney. Laura, thank you very much. Now we have company in the studio here.
Nicky and Richard are here because Saturday Live is coming up at nine. Morning.
Morning to you. We're going to be talking to the novelist JoJo Moyes, who's sold
over 50 million books. And also, since lockdown, has been collecting portraits
of grumpy women. We're going to be talking about that. I beg your pardon. I
wasn't looking anywhere. Just saying. We've also got Aaron Horn, the musician,
DJ, record industry guy. He's the son, of course, of music legends Trevor Horn
and Jill Sinclair. He's coming in to talk about music's capacity, not only to
delight, but heal. And, yes, because he likes gong baths, doesn't he? Yeah.
Sound baths. The former comedian and now playwright Henry Naylor. So he's
recalling his time in Afghanistan just after the Taliban left in 2001. And we
are talking to the writer Ava Glass, who used to be an official working in
counterterrorism, and she's written about spies. And what we would like from you
this morning are the stories behind the things that you own and love that nobody
else does. We're not going to tell you because we're too grumpy, Michelle, am I?
I'm in that crowd. But I will tell you the weather. Today's going to be colder,
patchy clouds and sunny spells with a few showers for eastern areas. You're
listening to Michelle Hussein and Martha Carney trying to be upbeat rather than
grumpy and vidialist with the news. Discussions between the UK and the EU on a
new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland are intensifying. Downing Street has
described the negotiations as positive, but an announcement on changes to
trading arrangements has been delayed repeatedly. Health officials in the UK are
drawing up plans to deal with the threat posed to humans by bird flu. An
11-year-old girl who contracted the H5N1 strain of the disease has died in
Cambodia. The director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, Professor Sir Andrew
Pollard, told us there had been only a limited number of cases of bird flu in
people and no evidence of human-to-human transmission. A fifth person has been
arrested in Northern Ireland in connection with the shooting of an off-duty
police officer in Omaha on Wednesday. Police say they're focusing their
investigation on the dissident Republican group, the new IRA. And Nigerians are
voting for a new president. The election with three front-runners is the most
competitive since the end of military rule in 1999. Vijay, thank you very much.
It's nearly 20 to 9 and there are reports this morning of a run on turnips. That
was the vegetable the Environment Secretary suggested we should cherish more. I
made a shortage of tomatoes, but it seems then people went out and bought rather
a lot of them. And it seems lettuce, cucumbers and peppers could be hard to get
for some time, possibly leaks next, even though they are grown here. What do we
need to think of longer term to ensure the security of our food supplies? Well,
Judith Batchelor is deputy chair of the Environment Agency. She was previously a
senior figure at Sainsbury's and Marks & Spencer. And Helen Browning is chief
executive of the Soil Association and also a farmer herself in Wiltshire.
Morning to you both. Good morning. Helen, tell us first about your experience as
a producer. What are you facing right now that makes the homegrown supply of
vegetables difficult? Well, we're very small scale suppliers of veg. We just
grow enough for our own pub and local markets around here. So we're not exposed
in the way that a lot of the bigger producers are to the energy costs, which
have delayed them planting a lot of the crops that they would otherwise have put
in the ground before Christmas. So, you know, we're doing what we can just
around here. We still have some leaks in the ground and other things too. But I
think the issues that are affecting the horticultural sector are really deep and
severe. And it's not just about this weather problem in other countries and the
energy problems here now. But we've had a number of shocks that have hit the
industry over the last few years. And there's just not confidence that actually
they're going to get the return they need if they do start to invest and grow
more of what we need. By the shocks, do you mean shortage of labour but also
climate? I know East Anglia is in drought and that's a big crop producing
region. Yes. So there's been, you know, that we've obviously got the labour
shortages coming out of Brixit. We've had COVID. We've got the climate change
impacts, which are going to get only worse. And we really need to be thinking
about planning for water management, getting our soils in good heart and the
energy issues, renewable energy to supply those high users like horticulture.
But we've also had Ukraine and the feed price increases. We've had avian flu in
the poultry sector, TB in the cattle sector as an ongoing challenge. There's
uncertainty about the future support regimes for farmers as we come out of the
EU. And of course, farmers are still really worried about if they do invest and
do all the right things, that they're going to be undercut by trade deals that
are coming from countries that don't have our standards here. So there's a whole
complex range of issues that are really undermining the confidence of producers
in this country now. It's quite a shocking combination of factors when Helen
puts it that way, Judith. Does it mean cumulatively that the era of cheap food
is well and truly over, that even the kinds of things that we could rely on as
basics, we've already seen this happen to pasta, but vegetables will just become
more expensive? I think everything that Helen has said is exactly right. There
is an unprecedented number of different factors impacting the price of our food.
And that's not just here at home in the UK, but we're part of a massive global
food system that is extremely complicated and interlinked. And I think we are
seeing or facing into what needs to be a massive transformation of the way that
we produce, distribute and retail food. Explain what you're looking for in that.
When you say transformation, what do you mean? So things like the transparency
that you would need in terms of making sure that you know where products are
coming from, the risks associated from sourcing in those regions from things
like climate change, for example. All of those things need to be mitigated and
hopefully adapted to in a way that we don't currently. So, for example, if we
know that there are climate change risks, for example, in East Africa on things
like tea and coffee, then what are the plans in place not just to mitigate those
risks, but help those growers adapt to it? And at the moment, whilst in theory
we have that transparency, in practice, we're not using that knowledge to create
more resilient, secure supply chains. But aren't exactly those factors affecting
our farmers here? The reason I mentioned leaks, it does seem that that, you
know, the very dry winter that we have had, that is what is affecting leak
production. No, absolutely. So one of the things that people don't necessarily
understand with climate change, we talk about average temperatures. But what
really is happening is the extreme weather events around those average changes
in temperature. So hotter temperatures in the summer, drier summers, warmer,
wetter winters. And that really affects what our biological system, so not just
yields dropping and productivity dropping, but crops failing altogether. And we
need to be smarter about how we manage that. And that's an opportunity for
innovation. So if you think about some of the novel growing things, things like
vertical farms, it is an opportunity. But that, of course, requires investment.
I wonder if you both think that we need to really think about how we educate
consumers and maybe really try and nudge and push people to eating different
things. I mean, it does look like there's been a bit of a run on turnips. But
how many of us eat parsnips beyond Christmas or eat sweet, you know, as much as
we eat? There are homegrown vegetables which tend not to be our favorites. And
maybe we need to think really hard about the ways that we should try and make
them our favorites. I think there's a real opportunity in more seasonal eating.
There are real advantages from a price point of view for consumers if you eat
things when they're in season. And there's a real environmental benefit too,
because refrigerating produce is very energy expensive. So from an environmental
point of view and from a dietary point of view and from a price point of view,
eating with the seasons would be quite helpful. But, you know, people have got
used to having all the things that they want at all times of the year. And if
we're going to do that, you've got to really plan that through and think about
how to do it in the most environmentally sensible way. Judith, what are the
other pressure points along the chain in particular? You've worked for some of
the big supermarkets and Helen's obviously talking from the producer and the
soil association point of view. Maybe there are lots of other links in the chain
that don't get the attention they need, but are intrinsic to the overall supply.
Oh, absolutely. So the interesting thing about the global food system, and I
take everything that Helen says, but roughly 50% of our calories are imported
and produced elsewhere in the world. Those complex food systems are both highly
dispersed. So there are something like 500 million smallholder farmers in the
world producing tea, coffee, cocoa, rice, palm oil. And then there are highly
consolidated points in the supply chain where things like commodities are
traded. And those points of consolidation are the points of interest, I think,
from a retailer and manufacturer point of view, because they are vulnerable
points. And we saw that with CO2 shortages twice actually in the last five
years, where people don't realize the interdependencies with CO2. They think
about fizzy soft drinks in the summer, but actually CO2 is used in packaging to
extend the shelf life of foods and keep them fresher for longer. CO2 is used in
abattoirs for humane stunning of animals. CO2 is used in all sorts of ways,
refrigeration. Yeah. And most of us only... When that's a shortage, the
system... Absolutely. Most of us only realized that, didn't we, when there was a
huge shortage. Thank you very much, Judith Batchelor and also Helen Browning.
And our friends at Farming Today have a half hour debate on this going into much
more detail than we have. And it is on BBC Sounds now. Time is 13 minutes to
nine. They've barely boxed before in public, but the match between Tommy Fury
and Jake Paul this weekend will earn the millions from a new generation of fight
fans. Here's a snippet from the Glitzy online trailer. February 26, his boxing
career is over. You're feeling a real professional boxer. Without the cameras,
this guy is nothing. Well, it's turning into the most hyped contest featuring
two novices in boxing history with Love Island fans cheering on Tommy Fury and
Jake Paul getting support from his 64 million followers on social media. We can
talk now to Steve Bunce, Five Live Boxing pundit, who's in Saudi Arabia to cover
this bout. Hi, Steve. Yeah, good morning to you. Well, what a match. And for
people who haven't come across the kind of the YouTube boxing phenomenon, just
explain to us what it's all about. Well, imagine you're a YouTuber, you're an
influencer, and don't ask me to fully explain what an influencer is. And you
started your life as a child on Disney, on the Disney channel. That's Jake Paul.
And suddenly you start putting out short videos which go online, go on YouTube,
and it's you driving to the beach with your friends and getting some burgers.
And it suddenly gets 16 million hits. Then you put something else out and it
gets 32 million hits. Before you know where you are, you've got four or five
billion eyes on the various films that you've made. You're a superstar. You can
do what you like. You can get endorsements. In fact, Tommy, his body, Jake Paul,
is full of endorsements. He's got a tattoo from one fast food chain, another
tattoo from a bank. All come to millions of dollars. And then you decide, you
know what, let's have a career change at 24 years of age. Let's become a
professional boxer and see if I can take this audience, take what I've learned
in the world of Disney and YouTube and influencing into the boxing business. Can
I become a superstar in boxing? The answer is, after six fights, unbelievably,
the answer is yes. So what will the actual boxing be like, do you think? Well,
it'd be like just two novices. I mean, that's what we're talking about here.
We're just talking about two novices. And tonight in Great Britain, there's
about seven or eight shows. And you'll see 50 or 60 fights between men that have
had six or seven or eight fights fighting each other. They're raw novices.
They're building up to become good, full-time, slick professionals who can in
theory make some money. That's the way the boxing business has worked. It's
worked that way for 120 years. These YouTubers, misfits as they're sometimes
called, are crossover boxing stars, as they're often called. They're sort of
gatecrashing the way we've done our business. They're gatecrashing the protocol.
They're gatecrashing all that we've done in the past. And I, for one, bizarrely,
after 40 years in this business, I think it's hilarious. You're quite like the
disruptors moving in, but I bet there are a few people in traditional boxing who
aren't that keen. The thousand or so boxers that we have in Great Britain who
make peanuts compared to the millions these two are be sharing, they're really
livid. Most of the promoters, most of the mainstream media, most of the
mainstream sports and boxing media are disgusted by it. But I can tell you one
thing, wife, and it's absolutely true. These two, they're six bouts and eight
bouts respectively. They're dreaming of the big time. They're dreaming of
fighting in Las Vegas for a world title. It is, by the way, not a dream, a
fantasy. Meanwhile, they're going to have to make do with splitting about 20
million dollars, fighting each other to a bloody standstill at an ancient center
on the outskirts of Riyadh, as the moon rises on Sunday night. It's quite an
incredible setting. It's quite an incredible fight. And it is the most bizarre,
bizarre event I've ever covered. Well, I've taken up boxing myself recently, but
do you think it's probably a little bit of a while before I'm on YouTube yet?
Not at all. Have you got a dreadful rival somewhere in TV or radio who you hate
and she hates you? No, she hates you with a passion. We can do this. As long as
you're the same way, as long as you're roughly the same age. Trust me, I've got
some friends here in South. It can arrange this. If you've got two weeks spare
in October, I'll get you here. We'll get your rival here. We'll give you a
nickname. We'll give her a nickname. Bosh will get it on. You make a nice few
quid on the side. I'm not sure if you have to declare it once you land back in
the UK. We can make it happen, Martha. We really can. OK, I think I'll have a
little bit more training first, but thanks for the offer, Steve. No problem at
all. Can I just say, I've always been a big fan of yours and I feel we are
perfectly in line and in tune with each other. It's not going to be a Michelle
Moss about, is it? Definitely not. Coming up to nine minutes to nine, let's have
a quick look at the newspapers and go back for a moment to what Chris Mason was
talking to us about. Just after the eight o'clock news, that sense that a deal
on the Northern Ireland Protocol could be announced this weekend, that's also
the expectation. In the Telegraph, after a string of positive breakthroughs
during discussions over the last week, the Telegraph understands that
arrangements are in place for the UK and EU to agree the deal as early as
tomorrow and that a legal text will then be presented to Parliament on Monday.
The Times has a similar expectation, though they put it as Brexit deal within
days. And lots of coverage of what Puffin have been doing or now not doing with
the Roald Dahl books. The Guardian front page has a picture and a caption, Big
Friendly Giant U-Turn, Roald Dahl original text to be kept in print. Big Picture
Roald Dahl again on the front page of the Daily Telegraph and they're saying
that his books are going to be reissued in their uncensored form after a
backlash forced the publisher into a retreat. Meanwhile, let's go back to
vegetables. The Mirror, Tories in a stew over turnips. It was Trey's coffee who
talked about eating turnips rather than tomatoes. And the Mirror says that shops
sold out of turnips after her comments, crates across the country, although they
just mentioned a couple of supermarket stores which had crates of turnips empty.
Although I can't say that you really see that many crates of turnips in
supermarkets. I think they don't have to be the shops anyway, that's why. So
that's one of the problems. But anyway, in terms of other homegrown veg,
apparently crops such as carrots and cauliflowers have also been hit by the
combination of factors we were talking about earlier. Well, I'm very tempted to
try your turnip dish if you've managed to find something. Yes, I haven't yet
made it myself, but yes, finding the ingredients is the best part. I'm tempted
to open up a whole new front in the root vegetable wars, which is sweet, which I
really like sweet. In Scotland, you have it with haggis, bashnips, it's
delicious. Is that basically a mash? Mashed, exactly. Mashed and bash. Well, OK,
we might do a recipe face-off maybe rather than a boxing wipe, that would be
better. The time now is six minutes to nine. The Oldham Coliseum is the biggest
theatre outside London to lose its funding grant, and there's a campaign to save
it, which has got some pretty powerful backers, including stars from Coronation
Street and the actress Maxine Peake, who talked to BBC North West at the Oldham
Coliseum last week. It feels like there's a bit of an attack in some ways on our
arts, and especially in smaller towns, smaller towns that are quite famously
working class towns. And just for me, I grew up in a town with a regional
theatre, Bolton Octagon, and it really opened my eyes, just not just becoming an
actor, but also culturally and creatively what was out there for me. It was a
real inspiration for me, and it gave me confidence, and I saw the confidence it
gave to other people who might not have gone off to be actors. Maxine Peake, we
can talk now to Laura Dyer, who's Deputy Chief Executive at the Arts Council,
London responsible for places, engagement and libraries. Good morning. Good
morning. And just a response to Maxine Peake there, you gave a very powerful
description, didn't you, to what local theatres can mean in the community. Why
cut the funding by 100%? So absolutely agree with Maxine's sentiment. You know,
I'm usually on programmes like this, Martha, justifying public spending on art.
So it's absolutely brilliant that we're recognising how important it is, how
important it is to communities. But I think the route to achieving that we might
agree, disagree on. Our view was that the proposal that Oldham Coliseum Theatre
Limited made as part of our national portfolio process just wasn't strong
enough. It was a very high risk application. And we have to assess all the
applications on the same criteria. And this one we didn't feel was a good
investment for public money. However, we recognise that the people of Oldham
deserve really great culture. And that's why we've ring-fenced 1.85 million to
ensure that activity continues and we'll work with the council to deliver that.
On the question of the Coliseum itself, though, they say, and you're saying it
was a high risk proposal, they say that they felt that they'd addressed your
concerns, but the decision not to fund us had been made already. So they did an
application process last year. You know, we assessed all of the applications.
It's been a journey that we've been on with Oldham Coliseum for a while. They've
been a high risk organisation over a number of years and we've made a number of
interventions with them to improve that. And to be honest, that hasn't been
delivered. At the point that we made the decision, those issues were still very
live. They've of course now been looking at how they can improve and change, but
that decision was already made. But when you look at the theatre, one of the
oldest in the country, clearly a lot of affection in the local community once
the decision was made public. And how does it fit in with the idea of levelling
up when you're looking at towns like Oldham, which the government is very keen
to improve? Indeed. And we've made a significant increase, 95% increase in
funding to areas of low investment and low engagement. But it's really important
that that is a sustainable offer and that it's an offer that really offers great
culture to the communities. And it's our view that there is a better route to
achieving that than funding Oldham Coliseum Theatre. It's also important to note
that actually the building, which is obviously separate to the company, the
decision that actually that building wasn't fit for purpose was made over 10
years ago by the council. And that's why their plans to develop a new space,
which is due to open in 2026, was put in train. What will there be for the
people of Oldham between the Coliseum closing and the opening of the new one? So
there are two things. We first of all, the current company has got funding first
to the end of March and then some transition funding that gives it the same
level of resource up until the end of October. So we hope that they'll be able
to make a transition. And now we're in conversation with the council who are
working with a range of partners through their own cultural partnership group
about what the plans might be for that money, which is available from the
beginning of April. I also want to ask you before we let you go about a decision
in a way the other way around, which was the decision to cut the grant of the
English national opera, ENO in London, because this week, a leading soprano
Sarah Connolly says, I get the sense there are no real funds. There are no real
friends of opera on the Arts Council. Well, that absolutely isn't true. We were
faced with a very difficult decision to move 24 million pounds worth of resource
out of London, 16 million of cash in the first instance. And that is what led to
that decision. We're in good conversations with the I know about what that
future might be in a sort of different format. And there is a very strong
commitment to opera, more than 40% of the money that we spend on music, is spent
on opera provision. She says without the you know, there's nowhere for emerging
British singers to go. Well, we're looking at a whole range of routes, including
ENO being part of that future story. Laura Dyer, Deputy Chief Executive from
Arts Council England. Thank you for joining us. By the way, you'll find all our
Ukraine war anniversary coverage in an episode of our podcast on BBC Sounds just
search under Ukraine war anniversary. That's it from our site editors Tom Smith.