TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Indigenous spirituality to fight for justice and heal from trauma. This is the
BBC World Service, the world's radio station. It's five o'clock in London. Hello
and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Riddhi Klappi and James
Cottenham. Eastern Europe seems filled with echoes of the Cold War at the
moment. US President Joe Biden has been in Kiev promising yet more weapon
deliveries as Ukraine attempts to defend itself against Russia. US leader has
now moved on to Poland, one of Ukraine's main allies. We'll hear live from
Poland's Deputy Foreign Minister. And as the one-year anniversary of the war
approaches, President Vladimir Putin is also keen to control the narrative both
at home and abroad. We'll look ahead to what we can expect from his State of the
Nation speech later today in Moscow. And another terrifying night for people in
the Turkish earthquake zone when new tremors sent people fleeing from buildings
on Monday evening. Sports and business news too. All of this after the latest
world news. This is Danielle Jaworowiecka with the BBC News. Hello. President
Volodymyr Zelensky has said a world order based on rules and humanity depends on
how events play out in Ukraine. Speaking after President Biden made an
unannounced visit to Kiev, he said Ukraine's victory over Russia depended on
resolve and he saw such determination in Mr Biden. The American president said
his country would back Ukraine for as long as it took. Jeremy Bowen reports.
President Biden arrived here by train like all the other leaders who visited
Kiev. The Americans warned the Russians at the weekend that the visit was
happening but tried to keep it secret at home. President Zelensky welcomed his
guest at a brief ceremony at his official residence. Thank you very much for
coming Mr President. It's a huge moment of support for Ukraine and what can I
say? He said President Biden was visiting at the most difficult time for
Ukraine. President Biden responded with strong words of support. Russia's aim
was to wipe Ukraine off the map. Putin's war of conquest is failing. The
president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, has ordered the formation of a new
territorial defence force, saying every man should know how to handle weapons.
His defence minister said the force should have at least 100,000 volunteers and
be in every village and town. Mr Lukashenko said his army would only fight if
Belarus is attacked. Rescue services in Turkey are again searching for people
trapped under rubble after a new tremor in the south-east, the same region where
a much larger earthquake struck two weeks ago. Officials say three people died
and 200 were injured. A spokesman for Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Authority
described the moment the tremor began. It was very shaky, we hardly stood up. It
was very difficult. But in the camp everything is fine, we checked the tents,
everybody was fine. We were expecting that, so right now we are expecting more.
So everybody should be more prepared about this. Two top Spanish transport
officials have resigned over a botched order for new commuter trains that proved
to be too wide to fit through non-standard tunnels in the mountainous northern
regions of Asturias and Cantabria. Anna Pissarro has more details. Two managers
of the railway companies in charge of the project have already been sacked since
the oversized train scandal broke earlier this month. The latest heads to roll
are the boss of Spain's state rail operator and the Secretary of State for the
sector. The Minister for Transport apologised to the regions involved and said
there would now be a delay of two or three years for the new rolling stock, 31
trains costing nearly $300 million. While the government argues diagnosing the
mistake in a design stage will avoid financial loss, costs may yet rise. World
News from the BBC. Israel's parliament has voted to push ahead with a highly
controversial overhaul of the judicial system proposed by Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu's religious nationalist government. Tens of thousands of
people gathered in the streets outside to protest against the plan. The
opposition in parliament vowed to fight for what it called the soul of the
nation after the bill was approved in a first reading. Mr Netanyahu welcomed the
news, saying it was a great day and night. The number of people killed by flash
floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Rescuers are
searching the mud and rubble for survivors after record rainfall devastated a
stretch of coast in Sao Paulo state. President Lula da Silva has visited the
worst hit area around the beach city of São Sebastião to promise government
support for reconstruction. This woman survived but fears for her relatives. It
was like a horror movie. We saw our house swept away and my nephew's house. I'm
sure they were sleeping, all three of them. And up to now we have no news.
Prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges against the
Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting with a live gun on a
film set in 2021. It means Mr Baldwin and the film's armorer will face a maximum
18-month prison sentence if convicted, rather than a minimum of five years. Mr
Baldwin insists it wasn't his job to ensure the gun that killed the
cinematographer and wounded the director was not loaded. Park keepers in New
York have captured an alligator that was spotted in a lake in Brooklyn as
children played nearby. The reptile, over a metre long, was described as
emaciated and very lethargic. It's been taken to the Bronx Zoo where it's hoped
it will recover. Officials suspect the alligator had been kept as a pet and then
abandoned when it grew too large. And that's the latest BBC World News. Thanks
for the news. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Riddhi
and James. So this half hour we're heading to Poland, Ukraine and Russia. There
have been more deadly earthquakes in Turkey. What needs to be done to help
people there? Our text number for that and anything you hear on the programme is
plus 44 double 7 86 20 50 85. We'll have sports and business too. Great to be
with you this morning. It's almost a year since Russia's invasion of Ukraine
began and as a demonstration of support for Kiev and its allies, the US
President Joe Biden is in Eastern Europe. He made a surprise trip to the
Ukrainian capital, Kiev on Monday to highlight America's long-term commitment to
backing Ukraine. This morning, he's in the Polish capital Warsaw where he will
meet President Andrzej Duda. Poland has been one of Ukraine's key allies and is
usually at the forefront in pushing for arms supplies to its neighbour. Well,
joining us now is Paweł Jablonski, Polish Deputy Foreign Minister. Welcome to
the programme. Obviously a moment of significance of Western support for
Ukraine. President Biden's visit to Kiev. It occurs to me that you will have
been involved on some level in the logistics. Of course, you won't be able to go
into specifics, but how difficult is it to organise a trip like this? Do you
inform Russia in advance, for example? Hello. Hello. Good morning. Thank you for
having me. First of all, I think we can tell you some information, some details.
Unfortunately, not all about this. We are not able to share it because we
certainly will be eager to be of service to our allies in the future of similar
kind. And the war, unfortunately, is far from being ended. The logistics in such
cases are complex, obviously. Then the key thing is to keep everything as sealed
as possible so that it's not revealed to the public until it only can be. So
Poland being a country next to the border, next to Ukraine, being in fact a
frontline country from NATO perspective, is providing these services as a
trusted and respectful ally. We have done so in the past. Also, when it went
with other partners such as UK Prime Minister and other leaders as well. And our
leaders also on numerous occasions have been travelling to Kiev, even when it
was still under siege. Prime Minister Morawiecki, together with the Prime
Minister of Czech Republic and Slovenia, did this trip in March 2022. We are
aware, obviously, of the challenges. We don't see it as fitting to ask Russia
for permission to do so. And obviously, the technical challenges and all the
things related to security is worked out together with our partners. In this
case, it was with US Secret Service. US, got it. Understood. A significant
moment then. And of course, President Biden now in Poland. What does Poland want
from the Americans? We've seen you're quite keen to give fighter jets to
Ukraine, but you need, I suppose, support from other countries. Is that going to
be high up on the agenda? From the very beginning of the Russian invasion, and
in fact, even earlier than that, Poland has been calling to establish a
coalition of the willing, coalition of the countries that are willing to stop
this threat, because this threat from Russia today has materialized in Ukraine,
but it is very real also when it comes to security of other Central European
countries. So, in fact, if we want to be safe, we need to stop Russia. And the
way to do it is to support Ukrainian defence, to help Ukraine stop Russia.
Ukraine is fighting for its own, but it's fighting for us as well. In our view,
all types of weapons should be on the table and all types of weapons should be
transferred as an allied initiative, so that obviously one or this country that
can do something on its own, Poland has done so repeatedly. We've been first to
send tanks in the summer last year already. But if we want to be effective as
NATO, we need to act together. We'll be discussing this today with President
Biden, Polish President Andrzej Duda, Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki.
They will be talking about potential options. And what is also needed very much
is a constant reassurance, constant and permanent presence of NATO troops in
Poland and in other Central European countries, because it's our countries that
are potential targets for Russia, too. So to be clear, a successful meeting for
you would see America and other countries commit to sending jets in the near
future to Ukraine? We hope that ambitious decisions will be taken soon. We
understand that sometimes it might be difficult to announce them on this very
day where the talks are taking place. But we have seen that if we continue our
diplomatic efforts, sometimes combined with public pressure, as it was in the
case of Leopard tanks, when we often have been criticized for being too harsh on
Germany's government, we believe this was necessary at the time and successfully
it ended. We believe that if we continue these efforts, we will be effective
here as well, even though it won't be announced today or tomorrow. We are
looking also forward to implement the decisions of NATO summits, the one that
was held in Warsaw in 2016, then last year in Madrid. This year in Vilnius, very
important NATO summit that should strengthen NATO constant presence in the
countries of so-called Eastern flank, that is Baltic States, Poland, Romania,
Bulgaria and a few others. Paweł Dzieblowski, Poland's Deputy Foreign Minister,
thank you so much. So more bad news for Turkey. Two weeks after the deadly
earthquake that devastated southern Turkey and northern Syria, residents of some
of those areas were sent running into the streets again as a 6.4 magnitude
tremor struck on Monday evening. The Hatay region of southern Turkey was at the
centre of the quake. The extent of the damage is not yet known, but already
there are reports of at least three deaths and a couple of hundred injuries. Tom
Coley from the UK aid organisation HelpAge International is in the city of
Gaziantep and felt the tremors yesterday. He joins us now. Welcome to the
programme. I'm glad you are safe, first of all. Tell us what you experienced
yesterday. Thank you. Yes. So around eight o'clock last night, there was a
tremor that was not too bad here in Gaziantep. We're quite far away from the
epicentre, but almost immediately after the tremor, people started going into
the streets, trying to get away from obviously buildings and falling, possible
falling kind of things from above them. And we saw a lot of people getting to
their cars and kind of driving around and trying to find open spaces to again
avoid kind of injury. And it's obvious that there was a lot of fear and worry
from people, even though it was a relatively light tremor. But people obviously
are influenced by what happened to them a few weeks ago, unfortunately. Of
course. I mean, in light of what happened two weeks ago, people must have been
terrified. Tell us about the damage that you've seen where you are and
elsewhere. So here in Gaziantep, I believe that fortunately the damage is
relatively light. I believe only a few buildings were damaged and hopefully the
impact on human life is relatively low. But we've certainly had reports from
further south in Hatay, Antakya, the city of Antakya, where there's considerable
damage because that's near the epicentre. And also in kind of adjacent areas
inside of Syria, in non-government controlled areas, one of our partner
organisations, the Syrian Expatriate Medical Association, reported having to
evacuate some of their hospitals because of structural damage. So and there was
kind of reports also of widespread kind of people on the streets and panic
inside the government controlled areas of Syria. So, yeah, again, considerable
panic and unfortunately considerable structural damage to buildings and possible
loss of life as well. And speaking of that, yesterday here on Newsday, we spoke
to Doctors Without Borders and they were talking to us about the challenges of
getting humanitarian aid to the people affected, both in Turkey and Syria. So
for you as an aid worker, this earthquake last night, although not as severe as
the one two weeks ago, it must impact your operations. Yes. So one of the most
vital things in any humanitarian aid operations is infrastructure, i.e. roads
and rail and airports and also the supply of goods. So as we've seen, the
destruction across Turkey and northern Syria has really impacted on that
infrastructure. So there's a scarcity of supplies just because of the nature of
how many people have been impacted. You know, we're seeing a lack of tents, lack
of medical supplies and these kind of logistical problems. And obviously, if we
don't have those items, then we can't distribute them and help people. So it's
been a really massive thing. And unfortunately, this this this aftershock or
nukequake, whatever you'd like to call it, has will probably add to the
difficulties in logistics. Tom Coyley from UK Aid organisation HelpAge
International. Thank you. Yes, into news today on the BBC World Service, Reedy
James and Rebecca Withersports. Thank you, James. Well, let's start with
football and the UEFA Champions League. Round of 16 continues today with two
first leg matches. Eintracht Frankfurt play Napoli and there's a repeat of last
season's final with Liverpool hosting Real Madrid. Meanwhile, Liverpool's owner
John Henry from the Fenway Sports Group insists that the club is not for sale,
but says he is looking for investment. At the Women's T20 World Cup cricket in
South Africa, India beat Ireland by five runs to qualify for the semi-finals.
Later on today, England play Pakistan, while South Africa take on Bangladesh,
with the remaining places in the semis at stake. The Australian government says
it's aligned with 34 other nations, including the UK, the US, France and
Germany, on the call for the International Olympic Committee to ban athletes
from Russia and Belarus. That's despite not being marked as a signatory to
Monday's statement. The IOC says it's looking at how the athletes can compete as
neutrals with the Paris Games in 2024. And that's the latest from sport. Rebecca
Adams, thank you. She'll be back in half an hour or so. From sports to business
now with our correspondent Katie Silva. Nice to have you with us, Katie. HSBC
has just reported its results. What can you tell us? Well, there's good news and
bad news. So good news is that its quarterly profit doubled almost in the last
almost doubled in the last three months of last year, up 92%. And the bank says,
for example, that it's on track to deliver higher earnings and returns this year
compared to last. Its before tax income was 4.3 billion pounds. That's about 5.2
billion dollars. And that's up on the year earlier, beating expectations. As I
say, almost almost 92% up on a yearly basis, though it lost. And that was
primarily due to a loss. It made selling its retail banking operation in France.
It has been trying to pivot more towards Asia and off trying to offload some of
its operations, including in France, as well as the announcement that it was
going to be closing about one hundred and fourteen banks in the UK. So part of
this is about, you know, as I say, pivoting away from Europe towards Asia. And
as a result, they had to sell this down for a fair bit less than they paid for
it. So they've had to incur a loss there. They also said, for example, that once
they sell their Canadian arm and they're expecting to make about 10 billion
dollars for that sale, they're likely to pay out a special dividend to their
shareholders. And as I say, all of this is about they're trying to pivot more
and more towards Asia. They also say as well that they're expecting to complete
the sale of its Russian business in the first six months of this year. Many
people have been watching this with anxious breath, particularly in terms of
when it comes to continuing to trade with Russia and any multinational
corporation. It's very tricky to work out what to do. HSBC, for example, last
year said that the deal was pending approval from Russia's government and
regulators. But we had heard as well from the Russian government that they may
block the sale of foreign businesses. So we're going to have to wait and see how
that pans out. Katie Silva from our business desk. Thank you very much for
talking to us. We'll connect with you in just a few minutes. This is News Day on
BBC World Service. And that's where we leave the World Service and start the day
here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning. I'm Caroline Nichols. There's news and
weather coming up. And we find out with a bit of help from David Attenborough
about the only bird in the world whose bill is bent sideways. And later this
morning, as part of our coverage marking a year since Russia invaded Ukraine, we
hear from a woman trying to work out what her future holds. I could not imagine
that I would stay here for such a long time. Olga is one of the thousands of
Ukrainians offered sanctuary in British homes after the outbreak of war. Every
day I listen to news from Ukraine and I hope to hear some good news. A year on
and facing an uncertain future here, she's going on a search for answers to the
question, where next? I am happy to be more independent now. I'm ready.
Ukrainians in Britain, where next? This morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
Now on Radio 4, here's Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thank you, Caroline. Good morning. And
now, the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime
and Coast Guard Agency at 05.05 on Tuesday 21 February 2023. There are warnings
of gales in Rockhall, Bailey, Faroes and South East Iceland. The general
synopsis at midnight. Atlantic low 955, expected South East Iceland 979 by
midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking northwards
zero southwards zero. Northwesterly four to six, becoming variable two to four,
then southerly or southeasterly five to seven later. Rain, moderate or good.
Forties, Cromarty, variable two to four, becoming south or southwest four to
six. Rain, moderate or good. Fourth, Tyne, Dogger, south or southwest three to
five. Rain, moderate or good. Fisher, German Bight, west four to six, backing
south three to five later. Drizzle, fog patches, moderate or good, occasionally
very poor. Humber, Thames, west backing south or southwest three to five.
Drizzle, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Dover, White, variable two to
four, rain later, moderate or good. Portland, Plymouth, variable two to four,
becoming northwest four to six later. Fog patches, rain later, moderate or good,
occasionally very poor. Biscay, Cyclonic, three to five, becoming west four to
six later. Thundery showers, fog patches, moderate or good, occasionally very
poor. Fitzroy, Sol, Cyclonic, three to five, becoming north or northwest four to
six later. Thundery showers, good, occasionally poor. Lundy, Fasnet, Irish Sea,
southwest three to five, veering northwest four to six later. Drizzle, moderate
or good. Shannon, Rockall, Malin, southwest four to six, veering north or
northwest five to seven later. Occasionally gale eight later in Rockall. Rain,
good, occasionally poor. Hebrides, Bailey, Cyclonic, becoming west or northwest
later, five to seven, occasionally gale eight later in Bailey. Rain, good,
occasionally poor. Fair Isle, variable two to four, becoming south or southwest
four to six. Rain, good, occasionally poor. Faroes, southeast Iceland.
Southeasterly four to six, becoming Cyclonic, then northwesterly later, six to
gale eight, occasionally severe gale nine later in southeast Iceland. Rain, snow
near Iceland, good, occasionally poor, but very poor near Iceland. And now the
weather reports from coastal stations for 0400. Tyree Automatic, southwest five,
slight rain, 1,500 metres, 1,011, falling slowly. Stornoway, south by west
three, 32 miles, 1,007, falling. Lerwick, west northwest four, 12 miles, 1,007,
rising slowly. Lucas, west southwest three, 22 miles, 1,012, falling more
slowly. Bridlington, west southwest three, 1,016, falling more slowly. Sandetty
Light Vessel Automatic, west by south three, two miles, 1,020. Greenwich Light
Vessel Automatic, 1,000 metres, 1,021. Jersey, east southeast one, fog 300
metres, 1,020, falling. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, 1,020. Scilly Automatic,
south by east two, 19 miles, 1,019, falling. Valencia, south three, slight rain,
three miles, 1,016, falling. Runnelsway, west southwest four, 1,016, falling
slowly. Mallinhead, southwest by south five, eight miles, 1,012, falling slowly.
And here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at
0500 on Tuesday the 21st of February 2023. General Situation High pressure over
France will build a ridge north over the British Isles with the winds easing off
for a time over southern coastal waters. Low pressure to the north will bring a
band of rain east or southeast over the UK through Tuesday and Wednesday with
strong winds expected over northern and western areas. Cape Wrath to Rattray
Head including Orkney. South or southeast three to five, veering south or
southwest then veering northwest later four to six. Occasional rain, good,
occasionally poor. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. South or southwest three
to five, occasionally six later. Rain at times, good, occasionally poor.
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. West or southwest backing south later three to
five. Rain later, good, occasionally moderate later. Whitby to Gibraltar Point.
South or southwest three or four. Mainly fair, mainly good. Gibraltar Point to
North Forland. Southerly or southwesterly three or four. Mainly fair, mainly
good. North Forland to Celsey Bill. Variable two to four. Rain later, good,
occasionally moderate later. Celsey Bill to Lime Regis. Variable becoming west
later two to four. Rain later, good, occasionally moderate later. Lime Regis to
Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly. Variable two to four. Becoming
northwest four to six later. Rain later, good, occasionally moderate later.
Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. South or southwest
two to four, veering north or northwest four to six later. Rain later, good,
occasionally moderate later. St David's Head to Great Orm Head, including St
George's Channel. Southwest three to five, veering north or northwest four to
six later. Occasional drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Great Orm Head to
the Mull of Galloway. South or southwest three to five, veering north or
northwest four to six later. Occasional drizzle, good, occasionally moderate.
Isle of Man. South or southwest three to five, veering north or northwest four
to six later. Occasional drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Loch Foyle to
Carlingford Loch. South or southwest three to five, veering north or northwest
four to six later. Rain or drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Mull of
Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel.
Southerly or southwesterly three to five, veering northerly or northwesterly
four to six later. Rain or drizzle, good, occasionally moderate. Mull of Kintyre
to Ardenhamirkham Point. Southwest four to six, veering northwest five to seven
later. Rain or drizzle, good, occasionally poor. Ardenhamirkham Point to Cape
Wrath. South or southwest five to seven, veering west or northwest four to six
later. Rain or drizzle, moderate or good, occasionally poor. Shetland Isles.
Variable two to four, becoming south or southwest four to six. Occasional rain,
moderate or good, occasionally poor. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin.
I'll be back with a general weather forecast in a few minutes. Thanks, Sarah.
This is BBC Radio 4. It's half past five on Tuesday 21st February. Good morning,
this is News Briefing with Caroline Nichols. Vladimir Putin is expected to give
his latest assessment of his war in Ukraine in a State of the Union speech. A
senior NHS doctor says online gambling has created a significant public health
crisis. In business, the bank HSBC says its annual profit has fallen by 7 per
cent, although revenues increased in the final quarter of last year. And in
sport, Liverpool take on Real Madrid in the Champions League. President Putin is
to set out his latest thinking about the war in Ukraine when he addresses both
houses of the Russian parliament and senior military figures this morning. The
State of the Union speech comes a day after President Biden made a surprise
visit to Kiev and promised to support Ukraine for as long as it takes. He's
spending the day in Poland, where he's expected to deliver a speech describing
the war as a battle between democracy and autocracy. The Estonian Prime
Minister, Kaya Kallis, has been calling for greater military support to Kiev.
She told the Today programme here on Radio 4 the EU should order weapons for
Ukraine in the same way it procured Covid vaccines. While the Russian military
industry is working in three shifts, the European defence industry has not
really boosted its production, although the demand is there. But the defence
industry says that we don't really have orders. So how to make this process
faster? Because Russia fires European monthly production of artillery shells per
day. You can hear the whole interview just after eight o'clock. China's Foreign
Minister Wang Yi is holding talks in Moscow days after the United States warned
that Beijing is considering supplying weapons to Russia. Both the US and the EU
have warned China of serious consequences if it does that. Southern Turkey and
northern Syria, devastated by powerful earthquakes two weeks ago, have been hit
again. The latest two earthquakes have caused some buildings damaged earlier to
collapse. At least three people have been killed and emergency teams are again
searching for survivors under the rubble. A senior NHS doctor in England is
warning that online gambling has created a significant public health crisis. The
clinical lead of the NHS Northern Gambling Clinic, Matt Gaskell, says the
industry is out of control because gambling is easily accessible and glamorised
and there's no public health messaging about the risks. Typically our service
users are gambling from the moment they wake up in the morning in their bed,
they take their phone into the bathroom with them, they take it in the car when
they're even driving to work or on public transport. They're gambling at work.
The wide availability of the products, the way the industry is advertising and
marketing to people, creates a significant public health crisis and that's what
we have. The government is expected shortly to publish its planned changes to
the gambling laws. It's thought one of the proposals will be that gambling
companies must pay a levy to fund education, research and treatment. UK
companies that took part in a big trial of a four-day week say the experiment
has been successful and they're making it permanent. 61 firms, from a fish and
chip shop and a brewery to software developers, took part in the pilot in the
second half of last year. Almost all of them say they're keeping the new working
pattern. The biggest benefits were to staff wellbeing. Sick days were down by
more than two-thirds and workers reported being less stress, less tired and
happier overall. One of the companies that's keeping the four-day week is the
environmental consultancy Tyler Grange, which have six offices around the UK.
Simon Ursell is its managing director. I'd be pretty, pretty silly to change it
now, wouldn't I? I've got a happier team, we're making more money, our clients
are happier. It's been pretty revolutionary and pretty wonderful. We are 22%
more productive. In four days we produce 2% more than we used to in five, which
is pretty remarkable, I think. A BBC investigation has found that a quarter of
grammar schools in England have fewer than 5% of children from low-income
families. Since 2016, most grammar schools have altered admission policies to
give pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds a better chance of getting a place.
The investigation suggests that in some cases the measures made little
difference. Now, Sarah Keith-Lucas is back with today's weather. Thanks,
Caroline. Well, we're looking at a fairly mild, cloudy but largely dry day ahead
today with lighter winds than we had yesterday. Best chance of seeing any
brightness will be towards the east, so let's look first at south-east England,
eastern England, the Midlands, north-east England and eastern Scotland. A mild
frost-free start to the day here. Quite a lot of cloud, but it will break up
through the day and we'll see some sunny spells coming through, particularly for
the likes of Aberdeenshire, eastern Scotland in general, where we could see
temperatures as high as 15, possibly 16 degrees, but elsewhere bright spells
breaking through and highs 12 to 14. For the south-west of England, Wales,
north-west England, south-west Scotland and northern Ireland today, again a lot
of cloud and it's low cloud, so it's bringing some mist and hill fog, drizzly
outbreaks of rain at times as well and temperatures still mild, around about 11
or 12 degrees. Lastly, today's weather for northern Scotland and we're going to
see the breeze picking up through the day, on and off outbreaks of rain, but
they should tend to ease through the middle part of the day and top temperatures
here around about 10 degrees. The outlook then for the rest of the week will
have a cold front pushing its way gradually from west to east tomorrow, so some
rain for all of us, turning a bit colder and then high pressure builds, leaving
things dry towards the weekend. Thanks Sarah. Time now for a look at the papers.
Pictures of President Biden and Zelensky on the streets of Kiev are on several
front pages. The Guardian's correspondent in the city describes Mr Biden's
surprise visit as arguably the most consequential visit made by a US President
to a European country since the end of the Cold War. The Daily Mail calls Mr
Biden's trip a daring act of defiance. For the Times, it was symbolic proof of
Russia's failure. But the former US National Security Advisor John Bolton,
writing in the Daily Telegraph, argues that NATO leaders have little reason to
pat themselves on the back. He says that the West, having failed to deter
Vladimir Putin from starting the war, now lacks a strategy for victory. Mr
Bolton says NATO should provide more aid to Ukraine instead of fearing that Mr
Putin could expand the war. The Financial Times highlights a warning from the
Dutch military intelligence that Russia might attempt to sabotage its offshore
wind farms in the North Sea. The head of the intelligence agency said a ship had
been detected trying to map energy infrastructure in recent months and was
escorted away by the Dutch Navy and Coast Guard. According to the Times, Rishi
Sunak has been told that some ministers are preparing to resign if a deal he is
trying to reach with the EU risks Northern Ireland's place within the UK. The
Prime Minister spent several hours yesterday meeting Eurosceptic Conservative
MPs trying to address their concerns about a new agreement on post-Brexit trade
arrangements for Northern Ireland. A minister said some of his colleagues in the
government would quit if Mr Sunak attempted to push through a deal that
undermined sovereignty. An editorial in The Guardian says the Prime Minister is
taking a risk by doing the right thing and seeking to normalise relations with
the EU. Resolving the situation in Northern Ireland, it argues, would grease UK-
EU trade and help the British economy recover faster. But the paper says Mr
Sunak is leaving his right wing exposed as hardline Brexiteers and his political
enemies, most notably Boris Johnson, lie in wait to pounce. The Daily Mail
likens the Prime Minister's position to that of a tightrope walker without a
safety net. The paper says with Labour's support he could push through a deal
that isn't acceptable to the Democratic Unionists and many of his own
backbenchers, but that could also be his political suicide. Photographs of
Nicola Bully are on the front pages again after police confirmed that her body
has been found. The headlines in The Sun, The Daily Express and The Daily Mail
quote her family's statement saying that she can rest now. The Times says the
Queen Consort has backed a new award scheme for the coronation to honour unsung
heroes who volunteered to help their communities. The public are being
encouraged to submit nominations in eight categories, among them supporting
older people, crisis and welfare, and sustainability and the environment. The
bank HSBC says its quarterly profit almost doubled in the final three months of
last year, but overall in 2022 it earned about 7% less than in 2021. Here's
Katie Silver with details of that and a round-up of the other business news.
With better than expected quarterly earnings, Europe's largest bank says it's on
track to deliver higher returns this year than last. The lender reported
earnings before tax of £4.3 billion last quarter, up from £2.25 billion a year
earlier and beating expectations. On a yearly basis, though, its profit dropped
£1.2 billion primarily due to a loss it made selling its retail banking
operation in France. The mining giant BHP's profits fell by almost a third in
the six months to December as China's strict zero-COVID policy dented its demand
for iron ore. The world's largest listed mining company said it also faced
higher costs because of high inflation and a tight labour market. BHP says it
now plans to sell off two more of its Australian coal mines as it moves towards
servicing the renewable energy sector. In just over an hour, we'll hear how the
UK government borrowed during January. In December, the figure was £27.4
billion, a record high driven by the cost of subsidising energy for households
and high interest payments on government debt. Continued high inflation is
likely to weigh on today's reading. On the markets, last night on Wall Street,
the Dow Jones finished up 0.4% at 33,826 and the FTSE 100 lost 10 points,
finishing at 8,014. In Japan, a little earlier, the Nikkei 225 was trading down
0.1% at 27,502. In the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20. Against
the euro, sterling is at 1.13. That makes the euro 89 pence. Liverpool take on
Real Madrid in the first leg of their last 16 tie in the Champions League this
evening. With more on that and the rest of the sport, here's Andy Barwell. The
Liverpool boss Jürgen Klopp feels this evening's Champions League round of 16
first leg clash, a term to the newly crowned FIFA Club World Cup winners Real
Madrid, has come at a good time for his team. Klopp says Liverpool need to play
super games over the two legs to reach the quarter finals. It's Eintracht
Frankfurt at home to Napoli in the night's other Champions League clash.
Liverpool FC owner John Henry from the Fenway Sports Group insists that the club
is not for sale, but they do expect some outside investment at Anfield. Watford
moved up into the Championship play-off zone with a 3-2 success at home to West
Bromwich Albion. At the four-team women's tournament in Spain, Scotland play
Wales this afternoon. England are already through to the semi-finals at the
Women's T20 World Cup cricket in South Africa, but they will secure top spot in
Group 2 and avoid defending champions Australia in the last four, so long as
they don't suffer a heavy defeat to Pakistan today. Finally, a glance back at
some of the stories that were making news on this date in the past. A year ago,
three days before the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Vladimir Putin
recognised the independence of two separatist areas of the country and ordered
Russian troops to be sent there. In the run-up to the Brexit referendum in 2016,
Boris Johnson ended weeks of speculation and announced that he would campaign to
leave the EU. The American businessman and adventurer Steve Fossett became the
first person to fly solo across the Pacific Ocean in a balloon in 1995. He
landed in Saskatchewan in Canada after taking off from South Korea. In 1972,
President Nixon arrived in China at the start of a week-long visit and claimed
it ended decades of frosty relations between the two countries. The American
civil rights leader Malcolm X was shot dead in New York in 1965. His supporters
hailed him as a courageous campaigner for the rights of African Americans, but
critics accused him of preaching racism. On this date in 1952, Winston
Churchill's government abolished identity cards in the UK. Britain's first
commercial cinema opened in Regent Street in London in 1896. A several dozen
people each paid a shilling to see short films by the Lumiere brothers. And the
world's first railway journey took place in Wales in 1804, when a self-
propelling steam locomotive built by Richard Trevethick travelled from the Pen-
y-Darren ironworks to Abercunnan. And that's the end of News Briefing. Now on
Radio 4, it's time for Prayer for the Day with Hope Lonergan. Good morning. I've
been attending Narcotics Anonymous meetings for a few years. They usually take
place in environments that are emblems of social need. Churches, council-owned
multifunction rooms and Quaker meeting houses. Which, as a practising Quaker, is
awkward for me. Stillness on Sunday, NA on Tuesday. They're rooms with scuffed
carpet and fluorescent tube lighting. In the lobby is a cubicle containing the
final working payphone in Essex. There's a serving hatch where soul-sick people
pass through austere biscuits and cups of coffee, which are almost devoured by
the attendees who are still raw, active addicts. Cup and all. These are rooms
that writer and music journalist Ian Penman might describe as Little Englander,
stodged-with-everything revivalism. I've read about rooms like these in 100
Years of NCVO and Voluntary Action, which was started by philanthropist Edward
Vivian Dearman Burchell. It's the best of democratic localism. Community spaces
where people can loosen the knots of their existence or establish a mini-
symposium to reflect on bus timetables or acrimony between two warring
neighbours. If his dog barks after midnight one more time, he's going to become
part of my crazy paving. And there's something to be said about the healing
potential of group confession. At NA there's different viewpoints, different
coping mechanisms about a shared communal malady. You can focus group your pain
with this in mind. God, thank you for keeping me clean and serene. And thank you
for underlining the moral imperative that drives us to help each other,
especially the ones disadvantaged by the greed of others. Go lightly. Amen. That
was Prayer for the Day with Hope Lonergan. And if you've been affected by
addiction, a list of organisations that can help is available at bbc.co.uk slash
action line. Or you can call free at any time to hear recorded information on
08000 155947. That's 08000 155947. Now on farming today with Anna Hill, why
peppers, tomatoes and lettuces are lacking in the supermarkets as shoppers face
a salad shortage. Good morning. Bad weather in Spain and poor returns for UK
growers mean salad shelves are now empty in many UK supermarkets. Should we stop
expecting out of season produce in our shops? We'll have more on that a little
later. First, though, all week we're talking about reintroductions from birds
and mammals to insects and plants. Juniper was once a familiar sight on the
downlands of England, but with changes to land use and agriculture, the shrub is
scarce. It's a protected species now. Conservationists are reintroducing it on
the chalklands of South Wiltshire. Matt Pitt from the charity Plant Life has
been working with volunteers to plant juniper on farmland in the Wylie Valley.
This report from Rebecca Rooney. A bit dry, so I'm just going to hang a bit of
water. And these are cuttings that were taken from junipers that are growing in
the vicinity. Hiya. Hi. Just those two trays. OK. It's about a ten-minute walk
to where we're going to be planting. And how did you decide where they're going
to be? I mean, it's a big landscape. So we use historic records to find where
juniper was growing in the past. My name's Carol Lodge, helping with the
planting. Yeah, I'm a colleague of Matt's. Watch the bob-wire. Watch the wires.
A flock of sheep here. We have to protect them from sheep and things. Yeah, most
of these junipers are being planted back out into bits of chalk downland. These
areas do get grazed, and the junipers, when they're this tiny, are quite
susceptible to being nibbled, particularly by sheep. So we are going to be
putting some protection around them. Bring them this way a bit. OK, yeah, sure.
Yeah, that'll be good. So, Carol, when you plant them, what kind of spot are you
looking for and what we have to do? Well, we're going to separate these out so
that we try and always have a male near a female. And we're going to plant these
near the scrapes. And when you say scrapes, that's literally an area of the
slope where there's no soil. The top soil's been scraped off to reveal the chalk
below. The juniper seed was actually spread on these scrapes, so we're trialling
two different methods of regeneration. Firstly, the new plants will grow from
the seed. We're also planting out some juniper around the edges. We're trying to
kind of give it a helping hand, really, here. Are those skylarks we can hear?
They are skylarks, yeah. It's a nice sound, isn't it? Let's take off a smaller
bit. And because the ground's not frozen today, it's really nice conditions for
planting. And if you need a bit more soil, Jason, there's all these lovely
molehills. So you can just grab a little bit of soil off there if you find you
haven't got quite enough. OK. Wow, they are prickly. I mean, these junipers have
been reared from cuttings, but taken away to a nursery, brought back. But what
are your concerns as a conservationist with that method? So juniper is being
affected by a plant disease. It's a phytophthora which is affecting juniper and
it's killing it. And this is across the UK. So the concern about moving plant
material is that you can also move the plant disease at the same time. So we
were obviously very careful when we were taking the cuttings and considering the
biosecurity of this. We also tested the plants before they were planted back out
into the countryside for the disease to make sure that we didn't have the
disease in the cuttings that are now being planted out again. But I think going
forward, we've kind of really thought that actually this is not a very good way
of doing things. And the main part of the project is actually creating the right
conditions for juniper to naturally regenerate, which is these big scrapes. So
that's a more kind of natural way of restoring these populations back into the
countryside. I mean, if the landscape and the way it's used is changing, why
bother reintroducing juniper if it hasn't really adapted to the modern face of
South Wiltshire? I mean, juniper is probably one of these kind of iconic species
of our southern Chalkdownlands. But the reason I suppose we're doing this is
partly because of its connection socially and culturally to these landscapes,
but also it supports a whole host of other wildlife as well. So in the region of
sort of 50 insects are supported by juniper and around another sort of 40 fungi
and various other species are directly supported by juniper as well. So it kind
of sits in this kind of wider ecosystem. Matt Pitt from Plantlife. An
international investigation by scientists to combat a new wheat disease, which
has devastated crops in South America and Bangladesh, has found part of the
answer in grains gathered by British embassy staff from around the world 150
years ago. Using brand new gene data analysis called AgRenSeq, the scientists
are now well on the way to tackling wheat blast, a fungal disease which can
cause 100% crop loss in severe cases. I joined Professor Paul Nicholson and Dr.
Sanu Arora at the John Innes Centre in Norwich. First, Paul showed me the seed
bank where millions of samples of grain and peas are kept and where he stores
the Watkins collection of wheat grains that he's been working on. Well, we've
come into a pretty cold storage centre here. These boxes that you can pull out
and these little packets inside actually contain the seeds. Why did you want to
look at the Watkins collection? What was important about that? He put out a
letter to British embassies across the world and asked that people go into the
markets and collect local grain. And that was all collated and held in
Cambridge. The disease that we're specifically targeting in this instance is a
very new disease and we wanted to be able to go back to examine all the
diversity that was available before breeders really selected. Now the new potent
disease that we're talking about is called wheat blast. It's been around since
1985 and in disease terms that is recent. They think what has happened is that
wheat formerly was protected against this disease because all of the isolates of
the pathogens on wild grasses contained little proteins that wheat could
recognise. What happened in 1985 was that Brazil appears to have imported a wild
grass, brachyaria, for forage use for its cattle. Unbeknownst to anyone, sitting
on the grass was a pathogen, a blast isolate, which could infect the brachyaria
but not the wheat. It met up with an equivalent isolate sitting on grasses in
Brazil. Unfortunately, their progeny no longer have those essential recognition
points and so wheat unfortunately could no longer defend itself. And the work
we've been doing is to try to identify what were those genes that were involved
in protecting wheat for all those centuries and have now been overcome. Well
we're now going to go to the glass house where you've been actually growing
resistant wheat. The sun shining through the roof and this very, very tall wheat
in front of us and with us is Dr. Sanu Arora. And you are the person who's been
working on the technical side of getting those genes into these plants. With the
recent reduction in the cost of DNA sequencing, you know, we can get tons of
data on our computers. So I have developed technologies to process this data
very quickly and that would help us to land into the regions in the DNA that we
are interested in. Aegylobstochii, the goat grass, is a progenitor or an
ancestor of the D genome of the wheat. So I used this diversity collection of
aegylobstochii which is collected from different countries around the Caspian
Sea area where the hybridisation of the genome has happened. We were fortunate
to actually sequence this collection and then use our genomic tools. So you were
looking at goat grass but you were finding what you wanted in there. So
basically these two genes that we have found in this study, they are located on
the D genome of the wheat and D genome is contributed by this goat grass. You
can find the same genes in the D genome as well as in the Watkins collection. So
your goat grass and your Watkins collection from years ago had the same gene.
Yeah, that's true, which is very exciting from the evolution perspective. Dr
Sanu Arora there and Professor Paul Nicholson from John Innes Centre. Social
media has been awash with pictures of empty supermarket shelves where there
should be salad, nothing but gaps. The problem seems to be countrywide and
across all stores from the discounters to the big supermarkets. Jim Monaghan is
Professor of Crop Science at Harper Adams and he's been investigating the
shortage. So the crops we're talking about would be salad crops like tomatoes,
cucumbers, peppers but also lettuce. At this time of year most of our crop will
be coming from Almeria in the south east of Spain and also over the Straits of
Gibraltar into Morocco. And the weather they had there, they had a very warm
December. It was so hot that it impacted the flowering of those crops. So you
had fewer fruit developing and then they've had freezing temperatures for the
last couple of weeks and that's just meant that crops are standing still and
haven't progressed. Now we've also seen some tweets from Lee Valley growers
saying that growers decided not to plant here in December and January as usual
because the prices offered weren't high enough. How typical is that for UK
growers? Well it's been a really difficult time. The Lee Valley growers are a
really good example of where small to medium-sized businesses can no longer make
it work. The cost of fuel is very high. If you're going to be trying to put a
crop in early you need to heat the glasshouse. I know a number of growers in the
UK who have either not planted and some have gone out of business but others
where they've just held back their plantings to try to let the weather warm up a
bit so they have to pay less to heat their structures. Now we've had some other
messages on social media. Ollie Harrison who's a farmer in Merseyside has said
paying below the cost of production is not a sustainable business model. The
National Farmers Union have also said on social media that growers costs have
risen and British fresh produce needs higher returns. No farmer can grow crops
at a loss and if their cost of production out of their control have increased
significantly they need to see that return or we won't have those crops there
for us when actually imports start to become difficult. I've just been doing
some work for DEFRA. We've been interviewing protected crop producers and this
is their number one concern. The cost of heating structures is not being
recovered in the prices that they're selling. They're quite gloomy and that's
alarming when you think that we need to be looking to supplying more food from
the UK to the UK. How is Brexit affecting all this? I haven't spoken to a
business who said Brexit's made it easier. There's a range of opinions to the
extent of the problem. Getting hold of labour has become more difficult. Moving
crop between Europe and the UK has become more difficult. But there are some
other issues which are not Brexit related. For example, there have been ferry
strikes in France in January and February and that's another thing that's
compounded these shortages on the shelves. The British Retail Consortium which
represents large retailers, they've given us a quote saying supermarkets are
adept at managing supply chain issues and are working with farmers to ensure
that customers are able to access a wide range of fresh produce. Do you share
their confidence? UK retailers have shown over many years that they're resilient
and they'll go and find product. But one day they'll go somewhere and say, well,
we're looking to buy a new product and they'll say there isn't any. And that's
an example of what we've got at the moment in southern Spain. Because if that's
your major supply area, it doesn't matter how innovative you are, it doesn't
matter if you pay double the money, the crop's still not there. And that's maybe
something we need to be considering as we look to the future with the challenges
of climate change. We can grow some of these crops in the UK and we could grow
quite a large amount of them, but we need to see more realistic seasonal pricing
reflecting availability. Professor Jim Monaghan and tomorrow we'll be reporting
from the National Farmers Union Conference, which opens this morning in
Birmingham. That's all from us today. I'm Anna Hill, the studio manager is Susie
Robbins and the producer in Bristol is Rebecca Rooney. Now on Radio 4 Tweet of
the Day, Sir David Attenborough presents the aptly named rye bill from New
Zealand. The shingle riverbeds of a few New Zealand rivers are home to an
inconspicuous yet extraordinary bird, the rye bill. Also known as the rye bill
plover, this small grey and white wader is unique. It's the only bird in the
world whose bill is bent sideways and always to the right. Rye bills lay their
eggs in sandy spots among raised shingle banks in the fast flowing rivers which
rush down through the valleys of the South Island. Here, amongst the rounded
stones, they're well camouflaged. But if a female with young is disturbed, she
distracts intruders by pretending to be injured and moving away from the nest in
what's known as a broken wing display. In its gravelly world, the rye bill's
beak is the perfect shape for finding food. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC sounds.