TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's being given to babies born too soon. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. Counting is underway in Nigeria's tightest presidential
election for years, with claims of violence and ballot snatching. There's
nothing free and free in this election. They've been telling us that they were
not able to vote. I've stayed here since past 10 and this is past 3 and I didn't
have anything. Hundreds of protesters take to the streets of Tunisia's capital
over an anti-immigrant speech by the president. We're seeing really such a
racist backlash following the president's speech against all black people to be
honest. Wild weather in the United States with snow in California and a heatwave
in Texas. In English football, a thrilling League Cup final awaits at Wembley.
It would mean everything to me to make the Newcastle supporters happy, proud.
You're playing for Manchester United and you have to create your own legacy. And
the three and a quarter kilo frog making a comeback in Cameroon. This is Alex
Ritson with the newsroom. Hello, I'm David Harper with the BBC News. Boats are
being counted in Nigeria's most competitive presidential election in decades.
The process was largely peaceful but there were several delays with some polling
stations opening hours later than scheduled. There were also reports of
violence. The election is thought to be a tight race between three front runners
trying to succeed President Muhammadu Buhari who's stepping down after serving
the maximum two terms. Our reporter Simi Jola also is in Lagos. This election
has come at a time of crisis in the country. There are several issues that are
concerning Nigerians. The one of insecurity, for example, kidnappings have been
rampant across the country. Islamist militant groups, especially in the north,
and violent separatists in the south. There's the issue of the economy.
Inflation is over 20% at the moment. And most recently, there's a cash crisis.
People have literally been struggling to get a hold of their money from the
banks. The country and the sense in the country is one of a need for change.
Tens of thousands of people have taken part in protests across Israel against
the government's planned judicial reforms for the eighth consecutive week. The
proposed changes would give ministers the power to appoint Supreme Court judges
and would end the court's ability to review or annul legislation. These
protesters took to the streets in Tel Aviv. We are demonstrating against the
government because we are afraid for us and for our children. We take care of
the justice in Israel, the democracy, the freedom of people, freedom of
minorities. The new laws that are coming from the new government, they are
aiming our democracy to become more dictatology. A senior Ukrainian general has
visited troops near Bakhmout, which has been the focus of months of intense
onslaught by the Russian military and Wagner group mercenaries. General
Alexander Tsiolsky's trip coincided with reports of advances in the area by
Moscow's forces. Grant Ferret reports. Russia began bombarding Bakhmout in the
eastern region of Donetsk last May. Since then, much of the city has been
reduced to rubble. Most of the population has fled. Wagner fighters, many of
them former prisoners, have carried out human wave attacks, leading to huge
casualties. In recent days, unconfirmed reports suggest that Russia has advanced
around to the west of Bakhmout, raising the prospect of Ukrainian soldiers
either withdrawing or being encircled. They're said to have destroyed a small
dam in the hope of slowing Russian progress. In his nightly address, President
Volodymyr Tsolensky praised the heroism of Ukrainian soldiers in Bakhmout.
Meanwhile, the European Union has announced additional sanctions against the
Russian-based Wagner group for what it says are human rights abuses in several
African countries. The mercenary organisation was already sanctioned by the EU
in 2021. World news from the BBC. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has
said that a long-delayed trade deal between the EU and a group of four South
American countries can't go ahead unless they follow European environmental
policies. Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay are all major agricultural
producers. French farmers fear competition from the Mercosur countries if they
are not subject to the same environmental standards. The UK and the European
Union are said to be on the brink of finalising a new deal on post-Brexit
trading rules for Northern Ireland. The current protocol means Northern Ireland
still follows some EU laws and goods arriving from the British mainland are
subject to checks. Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the
Berlinale, have taken the unusual step of awarding the top prize to a
documentary. The winner was on the adamant, a French film about a floating
daycare centre for people suffering from mental illness. It was directed by
Nicholas Fillybert. In this film, I tried to reverse the image that we always
have of mad people so discriminating, so stigmatising. I wanted us to be able,
if not to identify with them, at least recognise what units us beyond our
differences. Something like a common humanity. And a Russian Soyuz capsule has
docked with the International Space Station. Contact. Contact confirmed. And
capture. Docking confirmed. Sergei Jima, I am congratulations with successful
docking. The uncrewed vehicle will bring back two Russian cosmonauts and an
American colleague. They've been stranded since the capsule that was intended to
bring them back to Earth began leaking coolant, but their departure from the ISS
has been delayed until September. Live from London, that's the latest BBC News.
Hello, this is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. We start in Nigeria, where vote
counting is underway in the country's tightest presidential election since
military rule ended in 1999. The biggest democratic exercise in Africa is taking
place against a backdrop of growing insecurity, economic hardship and inflation
for more than two decades. Politics has been dominated by two parties. The
ruling APC's candidate, Bola Tinubu, is up against the PDP's Atiku Abubaka. But
this time there's a real challenge from a third party. The Labour Party's Peter
Obie, who has the support of many young people in Nigeria, nearly 90 million
people are eligible to vote for the successor to President Mohammedu Buhari. But
voting was marred by long delays in some areas as polling stations failed to
open on time because of logistical issues. There have also been incidents of
violence and ballot box snatching. Mianni Jones reports from Lagos. Frustration
and anger. Many Nigerians want to take part in this election but have been
disappointed by the lack of organisation. Gang violence and threats by militant
Islamists have made voting difficult in some regions. And in this polling
station on the mainland of Lagos, electoral officials never even showed up.
Young urbanites who want better economic opportunities have been encouraging
each other to vote on social media. And it seems to be working. In Lagos,
despite the lack of organisation, voters told us more people showed up than in
the last elections. Turnouts here in Lagos, Nigeria's most populous city, tends
to be quite low. In 2019, only 18% of the electorate showed up. But here in
Obalanday, one of the city's neighbourhoods, people tell us that the turnout is
unusually high. At 6pm, three and a half hours after polls officially closed,
some polling units were only just opening. Having a third candidate for the
first time is an encouraging sign in a region where democracy feels under
threat. But whoever wins will have to deal with a struggling economy, high youth
unemployment and widespread insecurity. Mianni Jones, also in Lagos, is EMCAT
Che Ogbona, who's been following Saturday's events. Some polling units I visited
in Lagos saw some armed people, others were marked, some groups storming these
places, snatching ballot boxes, taking away election materials, harassing
electoral officers and even voters. I met a young woman, a doctor who was
injured, had a sprained ankle because she was attacked, her husband was bruised
as well. And there have been videos as well on social media showing voters
bleeding but determined to still vote regardless of the threats that they've
experienced at their polling centres. Moving around Lagos and even other parts
of the country where all the BBC reporters have sent in reports of what they've
seen at different centres, voter turnout has been very impressive. We do not
have official figures yet, as counting is still taking place. But videos and
reports all around the country say voter turnout this year may be the most we
have witnessed in recent times. While the voting was largely peaceful across the
country, there were reports of individuals asking people to vote for a
particular candidate or being forced to leave the polling centre. Our
correspondent in Nigeria, Chris Siwaka, says there have been reports of such
cases in Edo and Rivers states in the south. In Benin City, men reportedly
invaded a polling centre and fired gunshots to disperse the voters. They
destroyed the ballot boxes and set the ballot papers on fire. There were
protests by some people in Bailsa State who said they were being denied the
chance to vote because there were no electoral officials or voting materials. In
the north-east in Maiduguri, voters complained that several names were missing
from the ballot papers. While polling centres were open late into the night, in
some areas there are indications that Nigeria's electoral commission may allow
voting to continue on Sunday for places where voting materials could not be
delivered on time on Saturday. We will have the very latest on this on our
website at bbcnews.com and we will continue to follow it here on the radio
station in the hours ahead. In Tunisia, hundreds of protesters took to the
streets of the capital Tunis on Saturday to condemn a speech made by the
President Kays Saeed who called sub-Saharan migrants illegal hordes bent on
changing Tunisia's demographic composition. The African Union has condemned what
it described as racialised hate speech aimed at fellow Africans. Gaia Ben M.
Barak works for a publication called The National News. My colleague Razi Iqbal
asked her if there had been any response from the Tunisian government. The
Foreign Affairs Ministry said that it found the statement astonishing and
surprising and was merely based on a misunderstanding regarding the Tunisian
authorities' position. I also saw that Minister of Foreign Affairs Nabilah
Martel that the statement was a surprise, especially that yesterday the ministry
had convened several sub-Saharan African countries ambassadors to assure them
regarding the status of their nationals. Of course the status of their legal
quotation mark here, nationals in Tunisia. So we're seeing that the ministry and
the authorities are only saying that there was a misunderstanding regarding the
statements of the president. However, we're seeing really such a racist backlash
following the president's speech against all black people to be honest,
including Tunisia. We're seeing people posting online testimonies of them
getting attacked verbally and physically in the street for being black. And how
widespread is that, do you think? To be honest, I'm seeing quite a lot. An
activist that I know and a friend of mine was verbally attacked yesterday in
front of the Ministry of Interior, verbally and also physically attacked for
being black. She's Tunisian. I'm seeing statements from sub-Saharan African
migrants saying that they are getting kicked out from their homes. The embassy
of Mali issued statements telling their nationals that they will be organizing
voluntary repatriation trips for those who are seeking to leave the country
during the current situation. Guyah Ben-Barrack, at this time of the year in the
US you would expect it to be getting warmer on the west coast with summer not
too far away. But this week, people in southern California have had to contend
with a rare but fierce winter storm which has dumped large amounts of rain and
snow and caused disruption. I got more details from our correspondent Peter
Bowes, who's in Santa Clarita, some 50 kilometres north of Los Angeles. This has
been a huge storm. It's passed through most of California over the last 48
hours, actually heading out of Los Angeles now towards the east. We've had a
tremendous amount of mostly rain for most people at the higher elevations, of
course a lot of snow as well. And just a sprinkling of snow in the city of Los
Angeles and famously the Hollywood sign has been covered in a little bit of snow
where I live which is about an hour's drive to the north of Los Angeles, a
slightly higher elevation here, about 600 metres. We had a sprinkling again of
snow a few hours ago, a nice winter wonderland for a little while but it has all
since melted. But there have been some extraordinary stories of rescues of
people getting caught in fast-moving water and a lot of people at one point
120,000 utility customers in California lost their electricity supplies. Those
electricity supplies are beginning to come back, I understand now, in most
regions. But for most of us living here in California this is very, very unusual
and I've got to say for a lot of people a novelty. So it sounds as though it
could have been a lot worse than it was and the forecasts were certainly
alarming but maybe it didn't play out. But these are times of weird weather
across the United States, aren't they? Well, that's the unusual thing about
this, that while here we are on the west coast and actually much of the northern
part of the country and the midwest as well, experiencing this extremely cold
weather and a lot of snow of course much further north in the northern states
over the last few days, whereas on the east coast they are experiencing record
or near record temperatures in states like Florida. And listening to what some
of the experts have been saying about this, it isn't that unusual that across
this vast country there could be these two seemingly and clearly very different
weather systems. And people always wonder these days is this linked to climate
change? And I think the strict answer to that at this stage is it's probably too
early to say, especially linking the kind of cold weather, the extreme rain and
some snow that we've experienced in Los Angeles, more directly to climate
change. I think you could talk about climate change over the long term as to how
it's affecting the weather here, but perhaps not for this very specific storm
that we've had over the last few days. Peter Bowes in California. On Friday, the
one-year anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, many countries, especially
in Europe, renewed their commitment to helping the government in Kiev. She is
one of the most vociferous supporters and has sent tanks and other military
equipment and weapons to help the Ukrainians defend themselves. But not everyone
agrees with the German government's stance. On Saturday, thousands opposed to
sending more weapons took to the streets of Berlin. Our correspondent Jenny Hill
was at the rally. They have come here in their thousands to the heart of the
city centre through some pretty nasty weather conditions, and they're here
because they want to demand the end of the delivery of weapons to Ukraine, and
they want an immediate start to peace negotiations. That is not the current
strategy of the German government, of course. All of this has been organised by
a couple of women, one of whom is actually on the stage behind me now addressing
the crowds. They have started an online petition with those demands. That's
gathered well over 600,000 signatures so far. Germany, of course, is a very
particular country when it comes to foreign policy of this kind. For so long,
this country has considered itself to have a special responsibility following
the atrocities committed in its name during World War II. Its foreign policy has
been, for decades, one focused very much around pacifism, looking for
negotiation trading links rather than any kind of active involvement in military
conflict. Just a year ago, it would have been unthinkable for this country to
send weapons into an active war zone. That is now what it's doing. And I
mentioned the demographic of the people here. They are, by and large, middle-
aged and older. These are people who, for decades, have been used to that kind
of pacifist outlook in the space of a year. All of that has been turned on its
head. Germany is now a country really profoundly considering its own role on the
world stage with a particular view to its military role on the world stage.
There's a lot of change going on, big debate going on today and a lot of people
turning out to make their views on the current situation very clear indeed.
Jenny Hill in Berlin. Time for the sports news now and I'm joined by Paul
Serras. Paul, let's start with football and the first piece of silverware of the
English season up for grabs later on Sunday. Yes, it is. That's right, Alex,
it's the final of the Football League Cup at Wembley Stadium with Manchester
United taking on Newcastle United. The League Cup doesn't quite have the same
prestige as the FA Cup, but this year, well, it's hugely important for both of
these teams and a really intriguing matchup too. Manchester United haven't won a
trophy of any kind since the 2017 Europa League. They are enjoying a renaissance
under their new manager, Eric Tenharg. They're into the last 16 of the Europa
League after they beat Barcelona earlier this week. They're third in the English
Premier League with only Manchester City and Arsenal ahead of them. They're up
against West Ham in the fifth round of the FA Cup next week too. For Newcastle,
they haven't won a domestic trophy in 67 years, but they too are enjoying a fine
season so far under Eddie Howe. And you can tell it means an awful lot to both
managers too. Alex, we can hear from both starting with Manchester United's Eric
Tenharg. It's massive, but first get the first one. So now we have the
opportunity to get that one and don't think further ahead. That doesn't make
sense. It doesn't help you. We have the opportunity Sunday. We have to put
everything we have in to get the trophy and to get them into Manchester. Yeah,
it would mean everything to me. Of course it would. It would mean everything to
me to make the Newcastle supporters happy, proud. And I'd love nothing more than
to see them celebrating on Sunday night. 67 years. Wow. And Paul. The only final
taking place on Sunday. Well, no, arguably an even bigger one. The Women's T20
World Cup Final is taking place at Newlands Cricket Ground in Cape Town. 67
years is a long time for a domestic final, but South Africa have never been in a
Cricket World Cup Final. Men's or Women's T20 or One Day International, but they
have a real task ahead of them. They take on the holders Australia, who by
contrast have been in eight of the last nine finals. And Paul, an extraordinary
sight earlier, the pole of water, Mondo Duplantis, has broken his own world
record. He has. Again, he broke the world record at the World Championships in
Oregon last year and added another centimetre to that in Clermont-Ferrand on
Saturday to reach six metres, 22 centimetres. It's the sixth time he's broken
the world record. He's the current Olympic champion and the indoor and outdoor
world champion. He's only 23 years old. Alex, a generational talent and there's
another World Championships later this year taking place in Budapest in August.
So we expect six metres, 23 at the very least. Paul, thank you very much, Paul
Serras. David Harper joins me now with some other stories we've been following
here on the BBC World Service. And David, tensions still ratcheting up on the
Korean Peninsula. Yes, specifically because a US Navy fast-attack submarine has
now docked in the South Korean naval port of Busan. This is slightly unusual
because the arrival of the craft, the nuclear-powered USS Springfield, was
announced on social media. Correspondents have said that the presence of the
submarine is probably intended to serve as a warning to North Korea, as you're
probably aware. We've seen repeated weapons tests in recent months from
Pyongyang raising tensions on the Korean Peninsula, including the test firing of
four strategic cruise missiles into the sea on Thursday. The home base of the
USS Springfield is normally on the American island of Guam in the West and
Pacific. No more comic strip Dilbert because of a race route? Yeah, I think most
people listening will probably have come across the Dilbert comic strips at some
point. They've become a bit of an American institution for American office life
and spawned in all sorts of merchandise and TV series. But the long-running
comic strip is going to be dropped by newspapers right across the US after the
creator Scott Adams described people who are black as a hate group from which
white people should get away. The remarks in an online video show have prompted
various media publishers to denounce his comments as racist, hateful and
discriminatory. Archaeology quite a find in Peru. Yeah, this is a real find.
Peruvian archaeologists say they found 30 graves at a ceremony at Macayton
Mountain, thought to date back to the Chankei era. The Chankeis are a group of
people who lived in the valleys of Peru's central coast. This is going right
back from about 1000 to 1500 AD and experts hope that the information they can
get from these graves will give them a lot more information about the culture
and lifestyle of the Chankeis. We've got some interesting news about Vladimir
Zelensky, the Ukrainian president's dress choices. Well, a man with a very
definite image, Mr Zelensky, but he's now revealed the contents of his wardrobe
and specifically why you never see him like other world leaders wearing a suit.
In a video recorded in his private flat, Mr Zelensky shows a journalist the
small bedroom where he sleeps and takes him into a wood panelled wardrobe and
it's filled mainly with the trademark olive green shirts that we're used to
seeing him wearing. But as the president pulls out a single business suit, he
explains that he won't be wearing it until Ukraine has victory. David, thank
you. The newsrooms, David Harper. Now, Ukraine's success at last year's
Eurovision Song Contest wasn't just a much needed victory for the country
following Russia's full scale invasion. It was also a clear sign that Europeans
who vote for the winner were showing solidarity with Ukrainians. This year's
entry from Ukraine's electronic geo to V orchi is a tribute to those who fought
the Russians in the city of Mariupol, Andriy Hatsulyak and Jimo Augustus
Kehinde, a Nigerian-born vocalist known as Jeffrey Kenny, make up the band.
Eurovision reporter Daniel Rosny spoke to the pair. I know another typical
Ukrainian. Near representation of what you call an Ukraine. Jeffrey and Andrew,
the electronic duo that is to V orchi. I cannot explain. Ukraine does Eurovision
really well. It's won it three times in the past 20 years. This year, a slightly
different direction from 2022's Ukrainian folk rap entry. It's no matter how bad
someone's. Ukraine is full of other types of music and genres and so on and full
of also different people. And that you're not the typical Ukrainian act. So what
was that like then to get the public vote and the support from Ukraine to say,
you two, we want you to be our representative at the world's biggest stage? We
didn't even expect to win. We just kind of went through it because we had a song
and we had a strong message. And we wait. Honestly, we had a train ticket back
home. Yeah. And then, you know, from the results, they were like, oh, first, we
went in to watch it. And we were like, oh, no. What are we going to do? To V
orchi's heart of steel is inspired by the resilience of the Azov style steel
workers in the east of the country who last spring were bombarded by Russian
forces. Jeffrey, who moved from Nigeria 10 years ago, says he didn't want to
leave when the invasion began. Instead, he stayed and he wants to lift his new
home spirit through music. We're not really pushing for the win. Last year's win
is still, you know, resonating around steel. Last year's win is still here. It's
still here. The song is still around. So we're just pushing with the message.
And, you know, we were hoping for, you know, a tough position as well. But, you
know, the most important thing is we just want to push the message. But how did
a Ukrainian and an Nigerian come together? Very random. Like I saw Jeffrey
walking in the street and I was walking. So I came like, hey, like up his
shoulder and said, you know what, let's talk. I would like to check out my
English skills and I can help you improve your Ukrainian mass if you're
interested in. So that's how our friendship started from just the top on the
shoulder. I did this once in my life and now that was one decision that I even
can explain why, what I was thinking at the time, why I came to random person.
The tap on the shoulder now means a gig in front of 160 million viewers in May.
Our Eurovision reporter, Daniel Rosny. The Goliath frog can grow up to 32
centimetres in length and weighs up to three and a quarter kilos, which makes it
a victim of hunters. But conservationists in West Africa say their efforts to
try to save the frog are finally paying off. It's returned to the Mount
Melonkako Reserve in its native Cameroon. Our science correspondent, Helen
Briggs reports. The Goliath frog lives up to its name, growing to the size of a
large cat. It can jump up to 10 feet. But the world's biggest living frog, which
is found only in Cameroon, a neighbouring equatorial Guinea, is threatened with
extinction and is classed as endangered. The amphibian has been pursued by
hunters for its meat and for the pet trade. Its habitat in the rainforest is
being fast destroyed. But five years ago, conservationists in Cameroon set out
to save the species by encouraging local people to stop hunting the frog and
report sightings of it instead. They suggested snail farming as an alternative
food source. Their scheme appears to be working and new nesting sites have been
discovered in rivers and streams. Helen Briggs, the main news this hour, votes
are being counted in Nigeria's most competitive presidential election in
decades. The process was largely peaceful, but there were severe delays and some
polling stations opened hours later than scheduled. Thanks for listening to the
newsroom. This is the BBC World Service meeting the Vietnam War veterans who
left America and retired to the country they fought in. Fifty years ago, on the
29th of March, all American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Today,
a small group of US veterans now in their 70s have returned to live there
permanently. I was expecting people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed
me like I had just left the day before. I am Nafam and I'll be finding out why
they choose to retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and what
you did. I say this is the only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. I
came back to fight the war. I kind of explained it as when you're a little kid,
you've got a monster under the bed, I had to look under the bed and the monster
wasn't there. No place like Nam in half an hour. Hello, I'm Smita Mendasid. On
this week's Health Check, we hear why more and more children are becoming short-
sighted around the world and ask whether daily eye drops could be a solution.
And we visit a human milk bank to find out why donor human milk is being given
to babies born too soon. Plus, we find out about the psychological support being
given to Ukrainian children. All that coming up on Health Check after the news.
BBC News with David Harper. Votes are being counted in Nigeria's most
competitive presidential election in decades. The process was largely peaceful,
but there were some reports of violence, including gunshots near a polling
station in Lagos. The contest is a tight race between three front-runners.
Ukrainian media say a senior general has visited troops near Bakhmut, which has
been the focus of months of intense onslaught by the Russian military and Wagner
mercenaries. General Alexander Tsiolsky's trip to the eastern city comes amid
reports of Russian advances in the area. Large crowds have been taking part in
protests in towns and cities across Israel for the eighth consecutive week
against the government's planned judicial reforms. National Security Minister
Itamar Ben Gveer described the protesters as anarchists. The European Union is
bringing more sanctions against the Russian mercenary group Wagner for serious
human rights abuses in Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic. A US Navy
submarine has docked in the South Korean port of Busan, unusually the arrival of
the nuclear ploughed USS Springfield was announced on social media.
Correspondents say the submarine is probably intended to serve as a warning to
North Korea, which has repeatedly carried out weapons tests in recent months.
The French president Emmanuel Macron has said that a long-delayed trade deal
between the EU and a group of four South American countries can't go ahead
unless they follow European environmental policies. French farmers fear
competition from the Mercosur countries if they are not subject to the same
environmental standards. The UK and the European Union appear to be close to
finalising a new deal on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland, under
the current protocol goods arriving from the British mainland are subject to
customs checks. Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the Berlinale,
have awarded the top prize to a documentary on the adamant a French film about a
floating daycare centre for people suffering from mental illness. BBC News This
is Health Check from the BBC World Service. I'm Smeeta Mendarsed and this week's
show has a theme. It's all about babies and children. We speak to a mother who
fled Ukraine a year ago while seven months pregnant. So we could hear the sound
of the shooting and then my husband gave me his bullet proof vest which he
received at his workplace. I was scaring it on me. We'll hear more from Julia
later. But first, have a listen to this. You might have heard of people donating
blood, but have you heard of people donating human milk? My name's Stephanie
Williams. So I've been donating since the end of January and so far they've
collected just under nine litres I think. I've always had a little bit of an
oversupply but it got to the point where I was literally having to pour milk
down the sink because my freezer was full and I had nowhere to store any. I just
thought if I've got it going spare then why can't somebody else benefit from
that? The milk that I donate is going to really premature neonatal babies which
is really, really nice. You know, these other mums have got so much going on in
their lives and so I can't even imagine the stress. So to know that someone's
baby out there is developing and thriving off my milk is just amazing really.
Stephanie donated her milk to a milk bank in the UK and they're gaining
popularity around the world. We visited one to have a tour and find out more
about how it all works. Oh hi Smita. Welcome to the house milk bank. Thanks for
having us. It's just this way. This is the corridor we've got. My name's Natalie
Schenker. I'm a doctor and co-founder and director of the human milk foundation.
Would you like to see the milk reception area where the tour starts? The milk
will come into this room first where it's checked and then stored safely until
we need to pasteurise. How much milk do you have in here? Gosh, it's only one
time anywhere from nothing at all to three even four hundred litres. I don't
know what's in the freezer today. This is our large chest freezer. Oh wow, which
currently is about half full and there's milk there from about ten different
donors so from this point forward this milk will be leaving the milk bank in
about a week's time. I'd better shut the freezer now but... So would you like to
see the laboratories where we defrost the milk and process? This was always a
problem for me when I was working in hospitals never finding a small set of
scrubs. Will you be okay in medium? I will absolutely be okay. So we're just
putting on some protective blue plastic shield over our shoes I guess to make
sure that we don't take anything into the pasteurisation room. That's right, we
keep it as a clean space as possible. There will be people who are very
concerned about that. Is this milk going to give my baby a virus? How confident
can you be of this process? So milk banking has evolved over a hundred years to
make sure that the safety of every process that's done in a milk bank is as high
as possible and that's because when we think about where this milk is going the
neonatal units might be using it in some of the most vulnerable babies in
hospital. Okay, I'll hand you over to Mike who can take you through the process.
Hi, I'm Mike and it's my job to pour and pasteurise the milk and then pack it
once it is passed it's microbiological testing. We combine all of the containers
which a donor has sent us. Can we see what you're doing? Yeah. So you're putting
on some gloves. So I've just opened the biosafety cabinet and turned on the fan
which takes a couple of minutes to warm up and get up to speed. Each container
which I take I lightly mix before pouring it through the sieve. We take our
samples which will be tested for microbiology and we keep a larger amount for us
to potentially do some research with later. So this milk it looks slightly
yellowish. Does the milk look slightly different from each donor and at
different times? It can do and there are differences between early milk which is
usually a darker yellow because it contains a lot more of certain proteins in
it. Sometimes if the weather's a bit warmer the milk can appear a bit more
watery because the baby needs more liquid. If the mum eats a lot of green
vegetables it can sometimes take a slightly greeny tinge. Are you just walking
the milk over now? Where are we going? So we're going over to the pasteurizer.
The milk goes into the water bath where it is heated up to 62 and a half degrees
and held for half an hour before being cooled rapidly back down to four degrees.
What happens after the milk has been pasteurized? After the milk's pasteurized
we've got a bit of a wait until the microbiology results come back. So this room
through here is the end of the process. So I'll just turn the light on so you
can see inside. Each freezer can store about 70 litres and this one is
completely full. It really is full. Each pack of this donated milk has been
through the process. It's been pasteurized and the microbiology checks have come
back and the donors completed their screening which means it's now ready to
issue. I know this is run of the mill for you. This is your workplace. You come
in, you see this every day but how does it feel to stare at this freezer and
know that the contents in it are going to these tiny babies in hospitals? Some
of whom maybe have not even been born yet. So I think if I stared and really
thought about things at this freezer I'd probably be a bit of an emotional wreck
but I can't be like that because there's a job to do. I really like your office.
I love all the pictures of the babies and all the thank you cards with little
faces on. What made you set up this service? It was a complete frustration that
donor milk wasn't always available and if it was available it could only be used
for a very short time period. Why do you call it human milk? We don't refer to
cow milk as utter milk. It's cow milk. I'd never thought of that. No, and if we
talk about breast milk it becomes much more gendered which we've found not to be
so helpful. Is donor milk beneficial to babies that are born early? The evidence
is really clear that babies who are fed with maternal milk stand a significantly
stronger chance of avoiding neck and avoiding severe neck. And by neck you mean?
And by neck, necrotizing enterocolitis which is a terrible condition and needs
to be avoided at all costs. The evidence about donor milk being protective
compared to infant formula is less clear but every study in recent years has
pointed in a certain direction. There'll be some people listening to this for
whom this will bring up quite strong feelings. Perhaps they didn't want to feed
their baby human milk, breast milk or perhaps they weren't able to. Women need
information. We need information on how our bodies work and how to prepare for
different eventualities and then I think women can deal with that and use that
information to make their own decisions. And here nobody has any judgement
whatsoever for the choices that people have to make. What we're trying to do is
to generate more knowledge, more choices. You also do research. We do. We do.
Tell me about your research and what you're doing. When I started this there was
more research published on the tomato than on human lactation. No. I'm not
joking. So our research is hugely diverse. One of the projects we're most
excited about is samples of milk from milk donors that we can then analyse to
see whether we can identify early markers of breast cancer risk in those women.
What do you mean by that? That there are cells in breast milk that might give
you a clue about whether someone's going to get breast cancer. That's right. So
at the moment we've recruited several hundred women into the study. The ambition
will be to gain funding that we can expand this to thousands of women. So what
we hope to do is to identify a signal within the cells in milk that will help to
identify women who are at a significantly greater risk of developing cancer,
really as an early detection marker. Dr Natalie Schenker, ending that report,
The Heart's Milk Bank. And in the studio listening with me is family doctor, Dr
Anne Robinson. Anne, one of the places that the milk from this milk bank goes to
is premature babies in intensive care in hospitals. Why is that? Yeah, what a
fascinating piece that was. And I especially loved hearing Stephanie's altruism
really in donating her excess milk to help other babies. That's just great.
Yeah, the evidence really points to human donor milk being helpful in premature
babies who are otherwise at risk of inflammation of the bowel, this so-called
condition of neck in its most severe form, which can cause bloody diarrhea and
their little tummies swell up and they're unable to hold down enough food and
they can become dehydrated. Happily, it's relatively rare and there does seem to
be quite good evidence, which the WHO and UNICEF are now backing the use of
human donor milk if the mother's human milk is not available for these very
premature or babies who are at risk of neck. There's a little bit of evidence as
well that very premature babies might be helped to feed more successfully and
gain weight and thrive potentially on human breast milk. But there isn't good
evidence that that milk actually helps to prevent sepsis and serious infection.
So there's just loads of work that needs to be done. And the World Health
Organization, because these milk banks are gaining in popularity around the
world, there's I think about 500 or more now, they're going to put out some
guidelines and we're expecting them in 2024 about how milk banks should be run.
We're going to keep with this theme now of babies and children because Anne,
you've got a bit of research for us now about children's eyes. Yes, me, that is
so interesting because you do see a lot of kids around wearing glasses and
they're short-sighted and sometimes I wonder is it because kids seem to be glued
to screens from such a young age. Anyway, I was quite surprised to find that
it's true that the incidence of short-sightedness, also called near-sightedness
or myopia, in which things look a bit fuzzy when you look at them in the
distance but are quite clear when you look close up, is becoming more and more
common. And there's an estimate that by 2050 fully half of all the global
population will be short-sighted, which is just mind blowing. Why is it going
up? Well it's a good question. No one's entirely sure. There's a strong genetic
component to short-sightedness. So if you have two very short-sighted parents,
chances are you're going to be short-sighted and there are probably
environmental factors, like I said, because kids do focus on near things like
screens more than they used to. They laptops their phones. Yes, and there is
some suggestion that maybe the muscles that allow the eye to accommodate to
things which are close get fatigued. And one really interesting study that's
been done already suggests that if kids are turfed outdoors more to play, they
look into the distance. They might see something in the trees like a bird or a
plane or something like that so their eyes naturally will focus at a distance.
There's also something about the intensity of light outdoors, which is very much
stronger than indoor light. And these things seem to help and seem to mitigate
some of that progression to short-sightedness. So we should all be getting our
children to go out more outside and spend more time outside. Yeah, I mean
personally, I've always thought that keeping kids chained indoors to desks was
just dreadful. And I think... I used to love my lessons outside, much better to
have lessons outside. It seems more humane, let's say, to allow kids outdoors
more. And it does seem like it has potential benefits for vision. But there's
also a really interesting study that's come out of Hong Kong this week, which
looked at the use of atropine drops. And they are... So atropine is this
substance which is found in nerves. It helps to conduct messages in many parts
of the body. In the eye, it opens up the pupil and it allows the focusing
mechanism to work. And what they did is they took nearly 500 four to nine-year-
old kids. They got the parents or carers to put in an atropine drop every night
for up to two years. Wow, that got a bit easy. No, I don't think so. What they
found was these were kids who all had at least one short-sighted parent. So they
were genetically predisposed to develop short-sightedness. But at the start of
the study, they weren't short-sighted themselves. They had normal vision. And
what happened is that over the course of the two years, the percentage of those
kids who went on to develop short-sightedness was half in those who had the
placebo drops and 25% in those who had the atropine drops. So the atropine drops
seem to work. They seem to have a really significant effect. Wow. But I guess
they must come with side effects. Well, yes, I mean, everything that works comes
with side effects. So it can cause some blurring of vision. It can make the eye
feel a bit itchy and uncomfortable. And of course, it's very difficult to put
eye drops into a wriggling child. So there was all that side of it as well. And
what we don't know, because we shouldn't jump too far too quickly, we don't know
whether this was delaying the onset of short-sightedness or was it preventing it
altogether and how this will play out in the course of those children's
lifetime. In other words, will they be spared significant visual loss in later
years? But it's a really exciting study. And I think it shines a light, if
you'll excuse the pun, on the whole subject. And as we said, we had no idea that
it was such a big problem. It's definitely going to be easier for me to take my
children outside more than to get eye drops in them every day. And you've
reminded me to do that. Thank you, Anne. This is Health Check from the BBC World
Service, and our theme this week is Babies and Children. And now we're turning
to Ukraine. It's a year since the Russian invasion of the country began, and
since then some 8 million people have fled the country, most of them women and
children. Let's hear from one woman who made that journey a year ago. So my name
is Yulia Magnik, and I'm currently staying in Prague, the capital of Ukraine.
I'm a capital of the Czech Republic. Before the war started and before the
Russian invasion, I used to work as a lawyer with a big construction company. In
September 2021, we found out that I'm pregnant, so we were very happy about it.
So obviously we were building certain plans for tomorrow. What happened once the
invasion began? So first of all, we immediately understood that it's dangerous,
and then there was no certainty whether I would be able to receive adequate
medical care, because at that moment I already was on the seventh month of my
pregnancy. And then of course we were quite scared. What did you do next? So we
were leaving our place under active shooting, so we could hear the sound of the
shooting and artillery, whatever. Then my husband gave me his bulletproof vest
which he received at his workplace, so I was carrying it on me. And we were on
the car with a friend of mine and her two little children and her mother. And we
were heading towards the border with Poland. Then we spent about 10 hours on the
Polish border to cross it, because there were huge lines at that moment. Over 48
hours we didn't sleep, we talked a lot, we contemplated a lot, we didn't know
what to do. We were all nervous and we were thinking how to escape, how to save
our lives, how to save the life of the baby. But of course I realised that I
have to be strong. A few days later, Yulia made it to the Czech Republic, and
after registering with the local hospital, she was relieved to receive the
antenatal care that she needed. I think I was quite lucky because the delivery
took maybe not more than three hours since I came to the hospital. Of course I
was happy because I was with the baby, but at the same time I was alone in a
strange country, my husband was not with me, he didn't have a chance to see the
baby. My family was far away and I was scared about the future. How is your baby
now? My son's name is Svetoslav Mjolnik, he is 10 months old now, and he is very
well. I'm looking forward to my son growing safely. With that to say, we are
looking forward to a better future. Yulia says she's being well-licked after in
the Czech Republic, and the doctors who cared for her when she was pregnant
delivered hundreds more babies than usual last year, all from Ukrainian mothers.
Most like Yulia's little boy are healthy and growing well, but medics had to put
in lots of extra monitoring and checks because of the worry that the situation
could have an impact on the health of both the mum and the child. To find out
more, we spoke to Professor Siobhan Kwenby from the University of Warwick in the
UK. Some years ago we did a thing called a systematic review, and that means we
looked at all the published papers that had looked at a pregnancy outcome of
people who had been affected by conflicts in places like Bosnia, Afghanistan,
Kosovo, Somalia, Israel. This was quite a difficult review to do because there
was lots of different conflicts involved. Some were short-term, some were long-
term and on different continents. But we did find some consistent findings in
all studies. One of the consistent findings was that people who are involved in
conflict are at increased risk of having low birth weight babies, and therefore
they should be treated as high-risk pregnancies and have extra care during
pregnancy. What kind of risks does that pose for children if they're born low
birth weight? So if you're born low birth weight, you have short and long-term
risks. You can be ill when you're first born, so problems like breathing
difficulties, having low blood sugar, getting susceptible to infection. There's
also some interesting long-term data that says if you're born low birth weight,
you're at increased risk of diseases in later life. So that's your increased
risk of obesity, gestational diabetes, things like heart disease and stroke. So
it is quite important finding. Professor Quenby said that one of the potential
reasons babies can be born low birth weight is stress hormones. So when people
are in conflict, obviously they're under stress. And when you're under stress,
you produce stress hormones. So one of the major stress hormones is adrenaline.
So what adrenaline does is it makes your heart rate go up and makes you feel
sick, and the idea is then you're better able to run. So it's a sort of very
primordial response. But this adrenaline also causes constriction in the blood
vessels that supply the uterus. So the blood vessels get narrower? That's right.
So there's less blood going to the baby. So as you can imagine, therefore, the
babies got less able to grow. Also prolonged stress, so that does long-term
stress hormones. And so those are things like cortisol and steroids. And we know
that if the mother secretes more steroids, then that has a direct effect on the
metabolism or the way the placenta metabolizes or deals with sugars. And then
that has a direct effect on the baby as well. Because the placenta is delivering
all the nutrients that the baby needs to grow. That's right. And also some of
the mother's stress hormones are able to directly cross the placenta and
directly affect the baby. So stress is really not a good thing for pregnant
women now. With the conclusions you've come to, what do you think can be done
for mothers who are in conflict situations? So I work in a hospital in Coventry,
and we do have an asylum seeker center there. And we have had people who've
arrived in the asylum seeker center who've come from conflict zones. And we do
immediately offer them high-risk antenatal care. So that means we offer them
extra scans. We offer them extra CTGs. We do as much to support them. And we go
to a lot of effort to support women in labor, because you can imagine having to
go change countries in the middle of pregnancy and then having to go through
labor. So it's as stressful enough as it is without having to be unfamiliar with
your surroundings. And so the midwives go to a special effort to be as
supportive as possible. But it's not just women and babies who need extra
support. Hundreds of thousands of children have fled Ukraine in the last year.
So we spoke to Sasha Yareva from the charity War Child to hear more about the
work her organization is doing to help some of the older children who find
themselves far from home. We have a few interventions. One of them is Cantwait
to Learn, which is an educational app. The latest figures right now we're
reaching is 47,000 children. 47,000 children. Yes. And basically a digital game-
based application that they can download on their phones and play and learn mass
and Ukrainian reading wherever they are and feel like home, because the game
itself really feels and looks like home. What other kinds of projects and
interventions is the charity doing? Another one that has a great impact on
children's well-being and mental health is TeamUp. This is a movement-based
psychosocial support intervention for children. A movement-based psychosocial
support intervention? What is that? I know. Yeah. My first days I also had to
learn that. So movement-based, meaning that children play, because children who
went through the trauma of war, conflict, they very often try to hide all of
their emotions, really just try not to move, try to be this little knot, you
know, and trying to seek some safety in as little movement as possible. It's a
proven technique that was developed by War Child and Save the Children and
UNICEF Netherlands. And we've been using it in many countries to help children,
to make new friends, to open up, to let go of the stress. Sasha, we heard that
you have some personal experience of the conflict. Can you tell me a little bit
more? I'm Ukrainian and I came from Kiev, the capital of Ukraine, about a year
ago. I have a son that was eight years old back then. He's nine now. And we have
been, yeah, we have been living in the Netherlands for almost a year now. How is
your son? My son is fine. Thank you. He has joined the local school and he's
doing well. He's learning Dutch. He knows it much better than I do right now.
And I'm very happy that I also know at least a little bit about TMAP. And I can,
you know, sometimes just use and apply this knowledge with my son. What kind of
challenges has that knowledge helped you with? TMAP helped me in a way to be
able to really talk to my child in a more playful way. I also have a ball that
we throw and ask questions and answer and it starts as a game. I'm not fishing
out for any information. We're just playing. But then I can really at some point
go and ask the questions that I want to know. And does he answer if you're
throwing the ball around? He does. He does. That was great help from TMAP for
me. Sasha Yarova there outlining some of the challenges children from Ukraine
face a year since the war began. And Anne, you were listening in. What were your
thoughts? I think it's really interesting all the different topics we've talked
about in the programme today sort of highlight how early interventions in
childhood are so critical. And there's often a very narrow window in which to
intervene to prevent problems later in life. But what also comes across to me is
how remarkably resilient children can be. And children who emerge from natural
or man-made disasters. They can come to flourish in societies which were not
their home-born societies. And they can lead the way for their parents and
grandparents and older people. And I find those stories so kind of uplifting and
they make me feel so optimistic for the future. A lovely thought, hope for the
future and a good thought to end this programme on. Thanks to you, my guest Dr.
Anne Robinson and thanks to the producers, Ilan Goodman and Jerry Holt. The
Studio Engineer with Michael Millam. I'm Smitha Mundarsid. Bye for now. This is
the BBC World Service. And on the inquiry this week... One year after the start
of the war in Ukraine, Putin seems poised to launch a new offensive. The
question is where he might attack. This week we're asking what is Putin's plan
now for Ukraine? The inquiry at bbcworldservice.com slash inquiry. In 60 minutes
from our own correspondent. My Facebook feed is like a cemetery, one Ukrainian
tells our reporter. All young men who now will never grow old. As the invasion
enters its second year, we have a special programme on life in Ukraine and the
view.