TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-08H35M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 but you can't do it? Yeah, definitely I cannot do that anymore because I do
understand that everything can happen there and I don't want to risk. It's
dangerous? Definitely, definitely from different perspectives. He shows me the
border where the odd lorry comes through the barriers. A fraction of the trade,
a fraction of the traffic that occurred before the war. Years ago, for your
parents, would they have come and gone between Russia and Estonia all the time?
Yeah, it was actually this way and it was many, many decades ago it was even a
big business here. For us, it was much more easier to buy some cigarettes and
alcohol there or gasoline. And then for them, it is much more cheaper to buy
some Tommy Hilfiger clothes here, for example, some European brands. Down by the
river, despite the bitter cold, the thick snow, some people are going for an
evening promenade. I stop a few, just underneath that friendship bridge, to ask
them how their lives have changed since the war between Russia, just over the
river, and Ukraine. I know my friends have a problem, maybe with their family,
but because they are Russian and different generation, yes. So older people who
are Russian have more sympathy with Moscow? Yes. And is that a painful division
between people who think of themselves as Estonian and people who think of
themselves as Russian? I heard, yes. Estonian Russians, because they are treated
badly, that they are Russians and all Russians are now bad people. Has it
changed your life in any way here in this city? My relatives in Russia consider
me a traitor. Ah, ok. So his family members in Russia, they said that he is a
traitor. Because I am a citizen of Estonia. Because he is a citizen of Estonia.
They say you are a traitor? Yes, yes. Is it painful to be called a traitor by
your friends, your family? How painful is it for you to be a traitor for your
friends and family? It's not very nice. It's not a very nice feeling. Would your
mother, would your father tend to see something from a Russian perspective when
it comes to this war? We were arguing quite a lot with my parents for the first
days when my mother was saying to me that this is propaganda for Ukraine, that
there is no Russian soldiers at all in Ukraine and so on. Do you see Russia as a
threat? Well, Putin has started to talk about the Narva sometimes. He talked
about this city and he went right back to Peter the Great. The rhetoric was the
same as about Crimea, that it was a land of Russia. And he mentioned Narva, and
when he is mentioning Narva in a way of the war, of what is happening right now
in Ukraine, of course everybody is starting to shake and think, OK, what will be
the next step? Will he come to Narva? Welcome aboard the express train to
Tallinn. This train stops only at... Probably the most remarkable day in my two
years here was standing on Independence Square in Tallinn during the
Independence Day parade. Colonel Dye Bevan is commander of the UK contribution
to what's called NATO's enhanced forward presence. You were standing there next
to 10,000 Estonians. And they had one eye on what was going on in the parade
with all the Allied soldiers alongside the Estonian Defence Forces marching in
front of the President. And their other eye was on their telephones, watching
the news of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It was an extraordinary moment.
Back at home, Russia can feel a very, very long way away. For you, commanding
troops here in Estonia and in Poland, do you feel like you're on the front line?
Absolutely. So Estonia is only about 300km from east to west, so we are in
weapons effects range of many of the Russian weapons. So if you speak to an
Estonian, they very much feel that they are on Europe and NATO's eastern flank.
The base in Tappa is only a couple of hours away from the Russian border, so we
are very, very much on that front line and that pervades across the entirety of
our mentality. I've come to the headquarters of the Estonian Defence Forces here
in the centre of Tallinn to meet the commander of their forces, General Veiko
Velo Palme, commander of the Estonian Defence Division. Do you feel as a country
that you are on permanent standby for the possibility at least of an attack?
Absolutely. There is no question about it. We have just one single existential
threat, and this threat is called Russia. Is that because you as an Estonian,
maybe all Estonians, still remember the history, still remember what their
mothers, fathers, grandparents went through when this country was occupied by
Russia? Yes, again, absolutely so. There are vivid memories of Soviet
occupation, and of course Soviet occupation, so to say, in the 1980s, was
nowhere similar to what happened in the 1940s and 1950s. We all understand that.
There is no desire to go back, and I think this memory is passed to younger
generation. In the Estonian capital, Tallinn, the invasion of Ukraine was not
some war in a distant country of which they knew little. It was everything
they'd warned of, everything they feared, everything they had already
experienced. It was a country that was occupied by Soviet forces for decades.
It's a country in which every family from the Prime Minister down has stories to
tell of the hardship, the persecution, often the death of their own families at
the hands of those Russian forces. And so it was that on February 24, 2022, the
day of the invasion, but also the day in which Estonia celebrates its
independence, people focused on what had been and what might still reoccur. At
this year's Estonian Independence Day celebrations, the head of NATO will be in
attendance, the head, too, of the European Commission. I'll be speaking to the
Estonian Prime Minister at ten past eight. She, everyone else in this region,
right across the world, are waiting for the words of President Putin in his
State of the Union speech in Moscow this morning. Remember that a couple of days
before the invasion of Ukraine was a major speech by President Putin. Steve
Rosenberg will be monitoring that for us. He's our Russia editor and joins us
now. What might we expect, Steve? Well, I can tell you what won't be in the
speech. I mean, based on things that President Putin has said, comments that
he's made in recent weeks, there won't be any hint of remorse or regret or any
admission that he, the President of Russia, made a mistake, a giant
miscalculation, when he launched what he still calls the Special Military
Operation. Contrition, Putin doesn't do that. Instead, what we're much more
likely to hear again, I think, is the Kremlin leader trying to justify the
invasion. It's another opportunity for Vladimir Putin to repeat the Kremlin
narrative, the false narrative, according to which it was Ukraine, it was
America, it was NATO that started this war, and that Russia is the victim,
Russia's under attack from the collective West, which is out to destroy it. And
that helps the Kremlin explain to the Russian people why, even after a year, it
has been unable to complete this special operation. Something curious going on
here, Steve, it seems to me. There's strident rhetoric by both sides. Biden here
in Warsaw going to declare that this is a battle between democracy and
autocracy, President Putin to justify his actions, and yet they talk. Did they
buy the hotline in order to say, our man's going to be in Kiev, don't bomb? Is
this a relationship like the Cold War? They both know they don't want to tread
over a line. Yes, I mean, I don't think that Vladimir Putin wants a world war.
He doesn't want to go to war directly with NATO, and therefore there was some
communication before President Biden arrived in Kiev. Interestingly, the state
media here in Russia has been very dismissive of the Biden visit. I mean, it's
been mocking in its tone. For example, this morning's Komsomolskaya Pravda
newspaper, which is very pro-Kremlin, it claims that the US president only went
to Kiev to help himself get re-elected, and it likens Biden and Zelensky to a
headmaster sitting with his pupil. And look at the headline in the government
paper, I see Skergeyev's here today, Inspector Joe, who's come to demand results
from Ukraine from all the weapons it has supplied. That's the general tone here,
and the story was buried very low down in the main Russian TV bulletins last
night. Steve Rosenberg in Moscow, thank you. Quarter to eight, let's have a look
at the papers. And here, after the discovery of Nicola Bully's body was
confirmed, her image is again on many of the front pages this morning. And
there's a piece inside The Guardian from Josh Halliday, the North of England
correspondent, that really lays bare what the people of her home village of St.
Michael's, as well as her family, went through in the 23 days before her going
missing and the body being found. He writes that even on Sunday afternoon,
ghoulish day-trippers were seen smiling and taking selfies at the Riverside
bench where the mystery began on Friday, the 27th of January. The village was
overrun with crime tourists and TikTokers posting macabre updates to their
thousands of followers, ambushing local people, filming the area with drones,
trampling over gardens, amateurs snooze, sleuths, sorry, snooping around at
night when police were less visible. The owner of the local petrol station was
asked for directions to Nicola's bench by someone who drove 80 miles from
Carlisle with her children. She no longer lets outsiders use the customer toilet
after it was smashed up last week. And there are also details about some of the
online gatherings and webchats that happened where people shared all sorts of
conspiracy theories about the disappearance, including a participant who said he
was a military veteran, hinting that he had been keeping watch on the family
home to monitor their movements. We will be talking more about this and, indeed,
about newspaper and broadcaster coverage of the story after eight o'clock.
Images of Joe Biden on the front pages of most Polish newspapers. Huge
anticipation here in Warsaw of the speech that he's going to deliver later
today, with parallels being drawn between that and the historic speech by JFK,
President Kennedy, by the Berlin Wall. In the British papers inside, there is
some scepticism about what lies beneath the symbolism. John Bolton, a friend of
Joe Biden's, of course, a former US National Security Advisor, worked for Donald
Trump and President Bush in the past, says a list of weapons systems is not a
strategy. We need an articulable strategy, he says, to deal with the NATO
publics who are growing tired of yet another endless war. Inside the Times,
Michael Binion notes the importance of the presence in Moscow of one of
President Xi's closest advisors. The headline on the piece, Biden and Xi are
treading softly to contain the conflict in Ukraine. And Binion observes that the
US is not at war with Russia, however closely it may be involved in arming and
helping Ukraine. The time is now 13 minutes to eight, time for Thought for the
Day. And our speaker this morning in the studio here is the Reverend Dr Giles
Fraser, Vicar of St Anne's Church in Kew. Good morning, Giles. Good morning to
you. Perhaps I ought to preface my remarks this morning with a trigger warning.
I'm going to be using the F word. Yes, today is Mardi Gras, which in French
means Fat Tuesday. It's the day we stock up on carbohydrates, like pancakes,
before the beginning of Lent. But fat, apparently, is a word we should no longer
be using in a public place. Sensitivity readers have edited out such words from
Roald Dahl's children's books. Augustus Gloop is no longer enormously fat, now
he is simply enormous, which may or not be any thinner. The argument, of course,
is that our moral sensitivities change, and so inevitably does what we deem
acceptable or unacceptable. But I still find it hard to appreciate the logic.
Dahl's references to wonky noses remain unexpunged, despite being an obviously
anti-Semitic trope used by a notoriously anti-Semitic writer. Where's the
consistency? Heaven knows, of course, what sensitivity readers would make of the
Bible. It's a collection of books replete with lots of nasty bits, perhaps not
so much about fat-shaming, but there is murder and incest and all kinds of
horrific violence. But I do think the nasty bits are really rather important to
include, not obviously as an encouragement to behave in such a way, but as an
acknowledgement that we live in a world in which such things exist, and
furthermore, that if God is going to be of any use to us, then he has to
manifest himself in the midst of a world in which terror is real. A sanitised
Bible is no good to anyone. The real problem, I think, is not so much about what
books say, but more about how we've learnt, or not learnt, to read them. Texts
shape our mental world, of course they do, but one of the most important aspects
of education is to develop techniques of reading that both enter into the
imaginative world of the text, but also place us at some degree of critical
distance from it. We interrogate them, just as they interrogate us. Indeed, in
my view, sensitivity readers and religious fundamentalists share an unlikely
similarity. They both imagine texts that overwhelm us, that demand our
compliance over and against which we are helpless. By contrast, serious
religious traditions have long taught people how to read, and I don't just mean
the simple phonics of the thing, but how to have a critical conversation with
the text, whether it be the rabbis continuously studying Talmud, or monks
engaging with the beauty of illustrated manuscripts. Words open up the world in
all its glory and darkness, not close it down. My question with sensitivity
readers is not so much about whether they disrespect the text, it's rather more
about whether they disrespect the reader. That was Thought for the Day with the
Rev. Dr Giles Fraser. It is now ten to eight. With the installation of
prepayment meters across Great Britain currently suspended after the Times
investigation into contractors for British Gas and their actions, the energy
regulator Ofgem is announcing details today of its investigation into the
company, British Gas, and also a review of the rules around prepayment meters.
Jonathan Braley, who is the chief executive of Ofgem, is here in the studio.
Morning, Jonathan. Morning. When you saw last year the figures on court
applications for warrants to install prepayment meters shooting up, what did you
think was going on? Look, we have been working on the issue of vulnerability,
actually, including the installation of prepayment meters, since the middle of
last year when we began to see big changes. If you look across the country and
look at what's happening to families right now, the situation is, despite huge
government support, there are many, many families who simply cannot afford to
pay their energy bill. Now, I've spoken to many of those families, and the thing
I would say to the companies is, when the family is in that situation, that is
incredibly distressing. And before we get to the rules and regulations around
what should happen, those families need to be treated with compassion and
professionalism. And what we've been concerned about... I just want to do the
figures. So there were 367,140 applications last year. Almost all of them were
approved by the courts. Did you think then, when you looked at those figures,
that all of those households were within the criteria on vulnerability? So what
we said to the companies really clearly is, you should be following the criteria
that we have. And we said to the companies, not only on prepayment meters, we
looked across the board on how they're treating vulnerable families. So we
reviewed all of the industry, and we said to them, before someone even gets
there, you need to make sure you're identifying their vulnerabilities, you're
making sure you work with them really closely to get them on an affordable
repayment plan, if that's possible. And we reiterated the rules to the companies
late last year to tell them exactly what they should be doing. You couldn't have
done that thoroughly enough, could you? Because if you had, if you had really
put sufficient pressure on the companies, what we discovered through the Times
investigation, the way that bailiffs were acting, would have come to a stop.
Well, clearly something has gone wrong in British Gas. And what we're announcing
today is a comprehensive, independent, wide-ranging review into what's happened
there. And we're also, as we announced in January of this year, before the Times
investigation, carrying out an investigation across the industry to check
whether those rules have been followed. Now, to be clear, if we find that those
rules haven't been followed, those companies will be forced to make the dress.
And that's highly likely to mean they will have to put that meter right, they
will have to pay compensation, and if it's systematic, there will be fines for
those companies. So you had concerns last year, you had concerns last year, you
asked questions. You did not, however, suspend the installation of prepayment
meters until after the Times reported what they did. So the installation of
prepayment meters is protected in law. So following the Times investigation, we
said to the industry, we simply cannot continue in the way we are now. But it's
a temporary suspension while we look at the rules and we look at the behaviour
of the suppliers involved. But the one thing I do want to say to the companies
is these processes will take time. We're a regulator. We have to base what we do
on evidence. But don't wait for the off-gen process. If you know people have had
a prepayment meter inappropriately installed, fix it now. That means going back
to that customer, asking them whether they want to continue on that meter. If
they don't, change that meter and offer them compensation if appropriate. We are
going to investigate, but companies don't need to wait for us to do that. But
left to your own devices, you wouldn't have known what we do now through the
Times, would we? Were you asking, for example, whether any of the companies had
contractors who were incentivising the instalment of these meters? So we looked
at all the systems and the processes of the companies. We also laid out the
rules really clear to the companies. And earlier this year, before the Times
investigation, we launched an investigation across the market and said to the
companies, we are going to come and look at everything. I think we've been very
clear with the industry what we expect. And we've been very clear that we are
going to follow up and find out what they've been doing. Perhaps you were slow
then, because it was only when the Times investigation came out that we had this
very significant change, which was the suspension of meters. We launched the
investigation into the industry before that. But yes, the Times investigation
uncovered behaviour that we, on the face of it, without prejudicing our
investigation, seems unacceptable. Did you consider your position? That's what
we said to the industry when we did that. Gordon Brown thinks you should have
considered your position, because you failed as a regulator. And there were
people who were, he knows from his constituency, who were turning to loan sharks
because they were so in debt over their energy bills. Well, Michelle, we are
going through the biggest energy crisis I think we've ever had in our history.
We have faced a series of challenges, including some of the challenges that
customers are facing today. Now, behind all of this, when a family is in the
situation you've described, it's incredibly distressing, but underpinning that
is the fact that many people in this country simply cannot afford to pay their
bills. So alongside all of this work around prepayment meters, we want to work
with government, the industry and consumer groups on how we resolve that. And
we've said quite publicly we should all be investigating urgently a social
tariff, which basically says for a subset of people who are struggling to pay
their bills, we ought to be offering them lower tariffs and managing what is
ultimately the root cause of the problem that Gordon Brown highlighted. But more
immediately, in April, people's bills are going to go up by 20% roughly,
correct? So, you know, we don't make predictions, but looking at the prices we
see before us, it's likely that the price cap level will remain above where the
price guarantee goes. And that does mean if nothing changes, that the price
guarantee will go up to £3,000 a year. Now, there is some good news, though. Gas
prices in the wholesale market are falling dramatically. And so if that stays
the same, and if there's one thing I've learned in the last two years, it's not
to make firm predictions. But let's say the market stays the same as it is
today. We will expect the price cap to come down significantly in summer. Now,
the other aspect I'd like to mention is we are beginning to see signs that there
may well be fixed price deals coming back into the market. And all I'd say to
customers is when those deals come into the market, please do take care. Don't
just look at the price today in the price cap. Look at how prices are changing
in the future. So, perhaps be careful not to sign on to one before the summer.
So, my advice for everyone is just do your homework. Everyone has different
preferences. Some people like to fix because they like the insurance, they like
the confidence that gives them. But make sure you're looking at not just what
the price is today, but how that price might change over time. There are
brilliant agencies out there. There are great people to give you advice on how
to do that. I'd go and engage with them before making any decisions. Jonathan
Braley of Ofgem, thank you. Thank you. Three minutes to wait. Here's the weather
with Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thanks, Nick. We've still got temperatures well above
average for late February. In fact, yesterday, we saw highs up to 17 degrees in
Suffolk. Could see something perhaps similar to that for some eastern areas
again today, particularly, I think, for eastern Scotland where we'll see the
lion's share of the sunshine. But a fair amount of cloud around for most of us,
largely dry, but there will be some drizzly rain in the north and the west. So
for south-east England, eastern England, the Midlands, north-east England and
eastern Scotland, largely dry through the day, sunny spells coming through,
particularly for the likes of Aberdeenshire, and temperatures generally 12 to
14, could be up to about 16 for the east of Scotland. But for south-west
England, Wales, north-west England, south-west Scotland and northern Ireland,
it's going to stay quite grey and drizzly through the day. Northern Scotland,
lastly, and here, outbreaks of rain on and off could be quite heavy at times
through this morning, but still mild with temperatures in the west generally
around about 10 to 12 degrees today. Sarah, thank you very much. Later this
morning, more of our series on Ukrainians who've come here because of the war. I
could not imagine that I would stay here for such a long time. Olga is one of
the thousands of Ukrainians offered sanctuary in British homes after the
outbreak of war. Every day I listen to news from Ukraine and I hope to hear some
good news. A year on and facing an uncertain future here, she's going on a
search for answers to the question, where next? I am happy to be more
independent now. I'm ready. Ukrainians in Britain, where next? This morning at
11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. And in the next hour, we'll be asking where next
for the war with Ukraine. I've been speaking to the woman dubbed Europe's new
Iron Lady, Estonia's Prime Minister. We'll be talking to one of the leading
candidates to replace Nikola Sturgeon as the first Prime Minister.