TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM, on Longwave and on BBC Sounds, this is Radio 4. Hello and welcome to the
World at One with me, Sarah Montagu. I can only say this, the Prime Minister is
on the cusp of securing a really fantastic result for everyone involved. One
arch-brexiteer is won over, Rishi Sunak is sealing a deal on the Northern
Ireland Protocol. Can he sell it to the rest of his party? We'll hear from the
former Justice Secretary, Sir Robert Buckland. Madam Speaker Dame Betty
Boothroyd, the very charismatic and the only woman to be Speaker of the House of
Commons, has died. Order! The Honourable Gentleman will resume his seat
immediately. Immediately! Immediately! I shall name the Honourable Member. Her
friend Dame Margaret Beckett pays tribute. Dangerous levels of nitrogen are
leading some hospitals to suspend the use of gas and air in delivery rooms. I
need some pain relief, I need some pain relief, I can't do this, just give me
the epidural, just anything. Everything was just happening so fast but the only
thing they gave me instead was paracetamol. We'll hear from a mother and a
midwife. And as news comes that students taking the International Baccalaureate
will be able to use artificial intelligence to write their essays, we'll ask its
Director General if that's really fair play. The BBC News is read by Caroline
Nicholls. The Prime Minister and the President of the European Commission,
Ursula von der Leyen, are due to hold talks shortly to sign off a new deal
governing post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. Ministers have been briefed on
the agreement in Downing Street this morning. Number 10 hopes the deal will lead
to the restoration of power sharing at Stormont. Here's our political
correspondent, Jonathan Blake. Arriving in London, the EU's top official said
she was looking forward to turning a page and opening a new chapter with our
partner and friend. The Prime Minister said he hoped to find shared, practical
solutions to the complex challenges around the Northern Ireland Protocol. A deal
appears to be all but done. The Northern Ireland Minister and staunch Brexit
supporter, Steve Baker, said Rishi Sunak was on the cusp of securing a fantastic
result. But the Eurosceptic backbencher, Jacob Rees-Mogg, said the devil would
be in the detail. And the DUP, whose support would be crucial to restoring
devolved government in Northern Ireland, are yet to comment. An announcement is
expected mid-afternoon and Mr Sunak will this evening give a statement to
Parliament. It's not clear yet when or if MPs will get a vote on the agreement.
Police in Northern Ireland are investigating what appears to be a claim by the
dissident Republican group, the New IRA, that it was responsible for the
shooting of an off-duty police officer. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
was attacked in County Tyrone last Wednesday. He remains critically ill in
hospital. The claim appeared in a typed message, which was attached to a wall in
Londonderry. The energy regulator Ofgem says its price cap on gas and
electricity bills will drop by nearly £1,000 from April to £3,280. But typical
households in England, Scotland and Wales are likely to see their annual charges
rise because of changes in government support. Here's our Cost of Living
correspondent, Kevin Peachey. Wholesale prices paid by suppliers are dropping.
Ofgem confirms the amount energy companies can charge consumers will also fall.
The reason domestic energy bills are going to rise in April is because
government help is set to become less generous. This will mean a typical
household's annual energy bill will go up by £900 to £3,000. The mechanics of
Ofgem's price cap means that the cost to the government of providing support
will be less than initially expected. So campaigners and opposition parties are
calling on the Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, to extend the current level of support
into the spring to stop bills rising. Despite speculation, Mr Hunt has so far
said the policy remains under review, but there's unlikely to be money for
additional help. The first female Speaker of the House of Commons, Betty
Boothroyd, has died aged 93. The current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, said she
was an inspirational woman. Our political correspondent, Helen Catt, looks back
at her life. Betty Boothroyd had been on the stage as a dancer, one of the
famous tiller girls. She worked as a secretary to politicians before becoming a
Labour MP in West Bromwich. She served on the party's ruling National Executive,
where she was a scourge of the far left. In 1992, she became the first female
Speaker, with a brisk, no-nonsense style that became internationally famous
thanks to the broadcasting of Parliament. She chose not to wear the traditional
Speaker's wig, but upheld most Commons customs. Asked how she'd like to be
addressed, she told MPs, call me Madam. After eight years, she retired as an MP
and later entered the Lords as Baroness Boothroyd, where she was a fierce
opponent of plans to elect peers and a vocal critic of Brexit and, on occasion,
Boris Johnson. There are fears that more than 100 people have died after their
boat sank in rough seas off the southern coast of Italy. The vessel broke apart
while trying to land near Cretona yesterday. At least 62 migrants are known to
have lost their lives, including a baby and several children. A survivor has
been arrested on migrant trafficking charges. Palestinians have accused Israel's
security forces of failing to protect them after a man was shot dead in violence
in the occupied West Bank. Israeli settlers attacked villages, torched buildings
and destroyed cars following the killing of two Jewish brothers yesterday. Our
Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman sent this report from the town of Hawara.
The main road that runs through this Palestinian town is strewn with rocks and
debris, alongside blackened homes and ash-covered, burned-out cars. Residents
have told the BBC that hundreds of Israeli settlers rampaged through the
streets, torching properties and attacking Palestinians, including a 37-year-old
man who was shot dead in a nearby village. Many feared for their lives and
rushed children to the safety of rooftops, saying when the attack began the army
protected the settlers. Hours earlier in the town, a Palestinian gunman shot
dead two Israeli men from a nearby settlement. The Israeli military is still
searching for the gunman, and amid the worsening security situation, has
increased its forces in the occupied West Bank by two more battalions. The
Electoral Commission in Nigeria says an opposition candidate in a tightly
contested presidential election has won the most votes in the country's biggest
city, Lagos. The Labour Party's Peter Obi naturally defeated the ruling party's
Bola Tinebu. It's the first time since 1999 that a party backed by Mr Tinebu has
not won the state. Lidl has become the latest supermarket to limit sales of some
fruit and vegetables. It's introduced a cap of three items per person on fresh
peppers, tomatoes and cucumbers to help maintain availability. Here's our
business correspondent Emma Simpson. Bad weather in southern Spain and Morocco
has disrupted supplies of fresh produce, leading to shortages on supermarket
shelves. Lidl says whilst it has good availability across most of its stores,
it's seen an increase in demand, and so it's taken the temporary decision to
join Tesco, Aldi, Asda and Morrisons in placing a limit on what shoppers can
buy. The farming minister Mark Spencer has called a meeting with the main
supermarkets this afternoon to discuss how they are handling the problems and to
learn lessons. The current shortages are expected to last another two to four
weeks. Emma Simpson reporting. Caroline, thanks. At last, after years of
problems, months of negotiating and weeks of briefing, the government is about
to set out how it will try again to resolve the troubled Northern Ireland
protocol, the arrangements that govern trade in the wake of Brexit between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. As we speak, the Prime Minister Rishi Sunak is
meeting the EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen and they're expected to
sign off a new agreement. The stakes are high for business, for security and for
the political situation in both Westminster and Belfast. One of the measures of
the success of the deal is whether any of the arch-Brexiteers in the government
are prepared to resign. One of those whose opinion has been closely watched is
the Northern Ireland Minister Steve Baker. He used to chair the European
Research Group, the group of Eurosceptic MPs who've caused so much trouble for
previous Prime Ministers. Outside Downing Street this morning, Steve Baker said
this. I can only say this, that the Prime Minister is on the cusp of securing a
really fantastic result for everyone involved. Well, we'll dive further into the
politics in a moment. But one of the other measures of success of this deal is
how it improves trade across the Irish Sea, what it means for the number of
cheques on goods travelling between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Under
current rules, a lorry load of products would need hundreds of different
certificates. Ciarán Sloan owns Saw's Deli in Belfast and I asked him how his
business had been affected since the UK left the EU. We sell food from all
around the world, all around the UK, all over Ireland and out there. And it's
just making life difficult. And just being honest with you, that's the key
thing, is just making it difficult for us, difficult for our suppliers,
difficult for the customer, in order to get stuff in. We've lost a lot of
suppliers. I'm hoping that this new deal that they're going to do, this Green
Lane here, we're going to win them back again. And we've seen, apart from all
that's going on at the minute with price raises and things like that, the price
raises because of Brexit is extortionate as well, because of us trying to get
stuff across the water. Companies that were supplying us have had to put these
huge delivery charges on to cover the paperwork, to cover the cost of the
paperwork. And then a lot of the companies there have just decided, look,
Ciarán, it's no good, we're not going to bother. So, Ciarán, have you changed
what you supply, where you get your stuff from? We've had to. We've just had to
go more down to the south of Ireland and pick up new suppliers. We've had to
pick up more local suppliers here. We're selling more local stuff than ever
before. We're still getting a lot of stuff in from across the water, but it's
very, very limited. And the companies are very limited. We have to do these mad
things like, you know, to get cheese across. It has to be a certain price, a
certain weight and all this here. It's just proven to be a bit of a nightmare.
And do I mention sausages? Sausages, yeah, are something we don't get at all
from across the water. We bring them up through the south of Ireland. So you
can't sell a British sausage. You get one from the Republic. No, no, no. Yeah,
we just get them from there. Look, you know what, you're trying to run a
business, you want life a bit easier. So now what we do is we've just got into
this whole system of just, you know, doing what we're doing at the moment. If
this deal is struck and they introduce the green lanes and the red lanes, will
you change your supplies back? Will you be back in contact with people you used
to? Yeah, 100 percent. Yeah. We've still kept in contact with them for the say.
I mean, has there been any changes in your side? We're still in contact with
them because we've been trading with these guys for maybe 20, 30 years, you
know. So, I mean, I'm not going to give them up just as easy. I just keep on
saying to them, is there another way? Is there another way? And, you know, for
example, we had a company there that we've been buying off for about 20 years
and they sent us a new brochure over. The whole product range was cut in half
because they couldn't get it over here. Do you know anything that contained milk
was all out? Anything that contained meat was out, you know. So it's all a bit
of a bit of madness now, to be honest with you. So when you're watching the, you
know, the last few weeks we've been hearing about this deal, what are you doing?
Are you sort of holding your breath? You're keeping your fingers crossed? Yeah,
I'm sort of going, I'm sort of saying to the staff in here, great, we're going
to have our English fine cheese company back. We're going to have this back.
We're going to have, we're going to be able to get Delicioso from London back
because we are renowned of having this. We're a deli that does 200 cheese. We do
all the stuff. And the thing is, you know, people love to cook, people love to
entertain and they like good food. They normally come here, you know, so and
it's a shame that we can't just have that, you know. And so you're confident it
will make that much of a difference? Oh, yeah, definitely. I think it will
anyway. For my type of company anyway, for my company, it'll make a difference.
This was something that I always sort of shouted about was that why do we have
to do all this paperwork, do all this extra manpower to do these things? And we
are, the stuff's coming from London, staying in Northern Ireland. So we aren't
breaking any laws, any rules. So it's not going any further. It's just being
sold in Northern Ireland and that's it. You're sounding so confident about it.
We don't have the detail yet, though. I know. That's the thing. I was just
reading about that there and there's no detail on it. But it's just it sounds
good. If you had a business like ours, you'd be excited because you're going,
great, we can start getting it back to normal again, some kind of normality.
Because it's nice to have a lot of different suppliers. You can play one off the
other. You can, you know, and it's selection. I love having the selection of
stuff. And it's sort of limited us to having a selection. Kieran Sloan of Saws,
Delhi. Well, let's return to the politics now, because Labour's leader, Sakir
Starmer, says that he expects to be able to back the deal. The question will be
whether the prime minister has got the strength to sell it to his backbenchers
or not. And I think many people will be frustrated that this is the loop we've
been stuck in for a very, very long time. Well, that is another of the measures
of success of Rishi Sunak's deal, whether he can keep his own party together.
And, of course, whether the Northern Ireland Unionist Party, the DUP, will
return to power sharing. They walked out of Stormont in protest over the
protocol. For the former Northern Ireland Secretary, Theresa Villiers, their
view is critical. I want to see a deal which delivers a return to power sharing
in Northern Ireland. That is crucial. It is intolerable that we have the
protocol undermining political stability in Northern Ireland. That is extremely
worrying. Well, Sir Robert Buckland is a Conservative MP and former minister who
sits on the Northern Ireland Select Committee. I asked him what he expects the
contents of the deal to include. I am confident that this will be a deal that
will cover more than just the important issue of the red and green lanes, the
trade issue. And it will also, I'm hopeful, give more of a say to the parties in
Northern Ireland as to the ongoing operation of the protocol. And I think that
sense of involvement, of participation in important decisions about Northern
Ireland and its businesses and citizens is, I think, a welcome aspect to what I
expect to emerge from this afternoon. I'm hearing that they're looking at the
joint committee arrangements. There is a joint committee that involves the EU
and the UK government, but involving the Northern Ireland parties as well, those
in the executive, hopefully when the executive comes back. Which I think gives a
real sense that this is no longer something being done to the people of Northern
Ireland. This has got to be done with them and their representatives. OK. Well,
on that same basis, should there be a vote in the House of Commons on whether it
should be approved and go through? Well, I think it's a matter of technicality
and a matter of law. I don't think a vote is necessary. However, this is
politics. And I think the reality is that the House of Commons will desperately
want to have its say. And therefore, I would hope that the government will make
time available for a full debate and indeed some sort of vote to be held to
indicate the views of members of Parliament. But, you know, we set up through
the EU Withdrawal Act of 2020 the pipeline through which these provisions, the
treaties could be enforced in domestic law. And that, I think, would apply to
any agreement. Do you think it's time for all Conservative MPs to get behind it?
I think it's reasonable for Conservative MPs to say they want to see the detail.
But I do think it's time that we put the interests of businesses and the people
of Northern Ireland absolutely at the centre of this. We put the importance of
the peace process at the heart of it as well and ask ourselves the question,
will the achievement of an agreement today enhance Britain's role in the world
and allow us to do more deals on important issues like small boats and other
aspects of bilateral cooperation? I think the answer to that is going to be a
resounding yes. And if that is so, I think that Conservative colleagues will
overwhelmingly want to support progress in this area. It doesn't sound as though
you could say that, though, about Boris Johnson, former Prime Minister. Now,
it's been written up in the Sunday Times that you challenged him in the chamber.
At least you tried to win him over to this. What did you say? What did he say?
Well, I'm not going to repeat the detail of a private conversation, but I can
tell you that it was a jocular exchange. It was a difference of opinion. I think
Boris is rightly making the point that foreign governments like the US don't
wish to intervene in the direct affairs of a sovereign nation. I take a
different view about how we approach these negotiations and in particular think
that the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill that is lying in the Lords at the moment
should be ditched. I think it's outlived its legal and political usefulness.
Boris takes a different view. I very much hope that today, as a result of an
agreement, that Bill can now be allowed to quietly disappear because I think it
has served any purpose. In fact, it now is in danger of becoming a poison pill
which could damage our ongoing relations with the EU and the wider world. OK,
but it's entirely possible he could get this deal. It might help business, but
the DUP will not be satisfied enough to go back into government. Doesn't that
matter? Well, of course it does. I think that my advice to friends in the DUP is
that it's far better to be at the table taking part in the decision-making than
not being there at all. I very much hope that as they digest the detail of this
agreement, which they want time to do so and I respect and understand that, that
they are able then to see enough in it to allow them to take the reins of
government together jointly with Sinn Féin in Stormont. We've just passed
legislation in the Commons to postpone the need for an election for another
year. I very much hope that that's not going to be used as a reason for
inactivity. It's vital for public services and for the lives of the people of
Northern Ireland that we have a functioning executive. And I take what Geoffrey
Donaldson and the leadership have said at face value. I've looked carefully at
their seven tests that they set out last year. I think that they mustn't make
the perfect the enemy of the good. I don't think any of us can achieve an
absolutely perfect deal. And if there are aspects of this that still have some
residual role for the Court of Justice in Luxembourg on a few abstruse points of
legislation that relate to the single market that affect businesses, that I
think would be an acceptable price to pay for an end to the logjam and the
concern about paperwork between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. I absolutely
agree with them and they support the need for better East-West trade and for
Northern Ireland to be much more integrated into the market of the United
Kingdom. If, as I expect, this deal will address that issue, I think that is a
very significant step forward that I would hope that my friends at the DUP would
accept and use as a basis of a change to their approach to participation in the
executive. So, for Rishi Sunak, for his prospects as Prime Minister, how
important is this? Because if he doesn't get it, it's a disaster. If he does get
it, what does that say about his position? Well, I think leadership is about
taking risks and dealing with high pressure and I think so far the Prime
Minister has really acquitted himself extremely well and I believe that not only
does he deserve to be rewarded, that he will be rewarded and that people will
recognise that through his leadership and the trust that he's built with the EU
and other member states, that this will, I think, mark a real step forward, not
just in terms of his leadership and premiership, but in the lives of the people
of Northern Ireland that he has been very much focused upon, rather than
worrying about petty agendas here at Westminster. That was Sir Robert Buckland.
Now, coming up on the programme, the Chief Constables of three of England's
biggest police forces want their officers to have the power to charge some
suspects. The Chief Constable of West Midlands Police Force will argue his case
to us. Do get in touch on social media, hashtag BBCWATO. Our email address is
worldatone at bbc.co.uk. In its 700 year history, there has only been one female
Speaker of the House of Commons, Baroness Betty Boothroyd. This morning we
learnt that she had died at the age of 93. Here's part of her pitch to become
the Speaker in 1992. I say to you, elect me for what I am and not for what I was
born. That is crucial. And here she is in action in the chamber, dealing with a
resolute Ian Paisley. The people of Northern Ireland would say to me, why do you
not stand by what you said outside the House? And I stand by what I said. It was
a falsehood, it was worse, it was a lie. Order. In accordance with the power
given me by Standing Order number 42, I have to order the Honourable Member to
withdraw immediately from the entire House for the remainder of this day's
sitting. Dr Paisley. Well, I've been speaking to Dame Margaret Beckett, who met
Betty Boothroyd when she was working in the Labour Party and asked her how she
remembered her. Always full of life, full of enthusiasm, witty, very attractive,
very charming, tremendous personality. I mean, she did have the most
extraordinary life, actually even before she tried to become an MP, because she
was what, in the Tiller Girls, the dance troupe. And then she tried to become an
MP four times before she was successful in 1973. Yes, she worked as a secretary
in the House of Commons for some years after being a Tiller Girl, and that was
when she got the idea of becoming an MP. But of course, it was much more
difficult for women then and didn't become much easier for quite a while. But
Betty persevered and made it and was an excellent MP. And of course, she became
a deputy speaker before she was the speaker. And then, I mean, the fact that she
became speaker, the only woman speaker that there has ever been in the 700 year
history of the House, I guess is testament to her. I mean, she was just
tremendously popular and also very, very highly regarded right across the House
as being a formidable person who was more than capable of occupying the
Speaker's Chair and who would defend the rights of the House. And I think that's
how people always saw her. And I remember when she decided to stand down, she
announced it and the whole house kind of went, oh. And she giggled and said,
yes, I know, but we all got to go sometime. Did you ever cross her when she was
a speaker? We always had a perfectly amicable relationship. And of course, as
time went on, and especially when she was speaker and I was leader of the House,
we became really very friendly, I think. What do you remember about that time
and what she was like? Oh, the way she just dominated the House. I mean, she had
this tremendous personality and she had a great sense of humor and she could
just take people with her. But also there was that formidable side of her. They
didn't cross her. People didn't defy the Speaker or if they did, it lasted about
two minutes flat because she had natural authority, wit, charm. She had
everything, Betty. She was a very remarkable woman. At that time, things must
have been particularly hard for women in the House because there were so few of
you. Do you think she was an obvious role model, really? Oh, yes, I think she
was for many people. And to be fair to Betty, she very much tried to encourage
other women to come forward and did everything she could to promote the cause of
women. Did she make life easier for women when she was Speaker? She tried to,
yes. I mean, she didn't always agree with some of the changes people wanted to
make. Betty didn't necessarily go along with because she was a great
traditionalist. But she was very sympathetic, I felt, to the problems. I mean, I
remember when Mo Mowlam was ill. Mo was very ill for quite some time. And Betty
was wonderful to her, providing a space where she could rest and be out of sight
and so on. Very, very supportive. If you were to tell somebody today, a young
person today who didn't remember her, wasn't aware of her time as Speaker, how
would you sum up what difference she made? I think in many ways, and this is, of
course, this is also, I suppose, true of Margaret Thatcher. One of the greatest
differences that they made was by being there, by being visibly in charge,
visibly able to cope, visibly extremely good at what she did, which made people
realise that, well, other women can do this as well. I mean, she was a
remarkable force and had an incredible presence, didn't she? Which I guess
speaks to the authority that you talk about. Yes. And as I say, she had a sense
of humour and great capacity. I mean, I have one vivid memory I have of her.
When Jiang Zemin was the Premier of China, he came on the state visit. And on
these occasions, there's always a banquet given by the Queen for the state
visitor and then a return banquet given by the embassy of the state visitor. And
when we all went to the return banquet, Jiang Zemin, who was a great singer,
actually, very operatic sort of voice, decided to serenade the assembled
ceremony and did, you know, slightly visibly suppressed, but nevertheless,
definitely there, particularly of Prince Philip. And then he sort of said, well,
now who's going to sing in return? And I don't remember how it was done, but I
do remember that somebody managed to tell Betty that, you know, this was
something that needed to be done. And so Betty did it, stood in her place and
sang very well and beautifully and everybody was very impressed. She just had a
great flair. She was a performer. Dame Margaret Beckett on Betty Boothroyd,
Baroness Betty Boothroyd and the current speaker, Celine de Hoyle, has described
her as one of a kind. He's given an interview to Evan, which you can hear on PM
this afternoon. Now, the chief constables of three of England's biggest police
forces say the guilty are walking free because the Crown Prosecution Service is
stretched too thin, leading to delays in charging suspects. They want police
officers to have the power to charge some suspects instead. Craig Guilford is
chief constable of one of those three police forces, the West Midlands Police.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon. What is the problem? What is going on at the
moment that leads you to say this? I'm not saying the guilty are walking free,
but I and everybody else would, I think, concur with the fact that we'd like to
see more guilty people actually facing the court in an expeditious time. So
what's going on is over a period of time, our CPS colleagues have been spread
very thinly and the police only have the ability to charge when somebody is in
custody in a very few limited number of lower level cases. And what we're
suggesting is that we need to get to a system whereby police custody sergeants
do the charging and police and CPS prosecutors prosecute cases and advise when
we need serious advice on lots of the complex cases, particularly some of the
complex violence against women and girls and the rape and serious sexual offence
cases. So to try and free colleagues up and also to deliver speedier justice and
confidence in the system. OK, now you push back on I said people walking free,
the guilty walking free, but you do say that in March 2015, 16% of crimes were
resolved with a charge and or summons. Now it's 5.6%. There are fewer people
being charged. That's correct. And we want to see that rise. All chief
constables would want to see that rise. And we'd also want to make sure that we
work closely with the CPS in getting that figure increased. OK, doesn't that
automatically, assuming that the earlier charging rate is correct and you want
it to be higher, doesn't that mean that there are people who should be being
charged and presumably then convicted walking free? Sometimes people are able to
walk free when a victim withdraws their consent in a particular case. And I've
always found in my experience that the longer things go on without a decision,
the more likely you are to have victim attrition. That's not good for victims
and it's not good for confidence. So it's the CPS not doing its job. The CPS
have really faced a number of challenges. They used to be in police custody
suites. Then they went to CPS direct on a telephone call and now pretty much
post-COVID we send a file electronically and wait for a decision when the person
is in custody. But we would be able to charge lots more cases within the current
director's guidelines because it's right that the guidelines are kept by the
CPS. But we feel we could increase the efficiency of the system for all
concerned, but most importantly for victims and for justice. OK, it's just that
if you identify a problem, there are obviously a number of ways to fix it. And
one is actually putting the resources into the CPS so they do their job as they
used to do, rather than giving more powers to the police at a time when trust in
the police is very low. I think that's a fair point. But the police are raising
this as an issue. As police constables, we are determined to raise confidence
and we think that when it comes to criminal prosecutions, we are able
competently to actually assist the system in its efficiency and to free up time
so that the CPS can concentrate on the prosecutions and the serious cases.
Right, but you'll know that at the moment there are lots of criticism that
police are not investigating crimes. So what happens actually if the resources
were put there, then you could provide that evidence to the CPS? Well, we quite
often are accused of not investigating crimes and each crime is treated on its
own merits. And quite often there aren't lines to physically investigate on some
crimes, but we are determined to make sure that we investigate as many as
possible. And I think that with the national uplift, we've had a nice increase
after austerity, whereby our capacity will increase. And that's good news for
the public and good news for the police. But in particular, to your point around
the police doing things and the CPS, etc. What I would say at the moment, we
currently play a game which takes weeks to achieve a charging decision, which we
could reasonably have made whilst the person in custody with no additional work
for the police officers. Chief Constable Craig Guildford, thanks very much. Now,
one of, if not the most commonly used pain relief during childbirth is gas and
air. And while there are no harmful side effects for you or your baby, it is
potentially a different story for any hospital staff in the room with you. Which
is why some hospitals have either suspended or limited its use. We asked the
Royal College of Midwives for an interview. They said no, but in a statement
they said this issue has arisen because of poor ventilation in delivery suites
and labour wards. Lee Milner is a presenter at BBC Look East. She gave birth
less than a month ago in a hospital that has suspended its use of gas and air. I
was expecting all the pain relief. I mean, epidural, morphine, gas and air at
the very least. But when I went to hospital at Harlow, we were actually told it
wasn't available, gas and air. So I was induced. So it all happened very, very
quickly. I was told by my midwife that I would have an epidural, but the baby's
heart rate was dropping, you see, so they didn't really have time. So in the
space of about half an hour, I'd gone from about two centimetres to seven
centimetres. And at this point, Sarah, I was just in so, so much pain. I was
begging for an epidural. I remember just saying to my husband, I need some pain
relief. I need some pain relief. I can't do this. Just give me the epidural,
just anything. But the only thing they gave me instead was paracetamol because
they didn't have any gas and air. Were you asking for gas and air? I mean, what
were they telling you? Did they say we've got it, you can't use it? What was
the... when you asked? I just said, just give me anything. Surely you have gas
and air. That is the one thing that I thought I'd have. And they didn't have it.
I remember actually at one point we were wheeled into theatre because I was very
close to having a C-section actually. At this point, again, I'd only had
paracetamol. I said to the nurse, can I just not have any gas and air? The nurse
asked the consultant and he said, no, she can't have any gas and air. I'm really
sorry. Paracetamol's the only thing we can give her. And do you know what the
hospital policy is on gas and air? Well, we were told in the run-up that it was
looking likely that we weren't going to get it because there'd been a leak on
the ward and the levels were too high for staff members. So they had to take gas
and air off the ward. Now, we were told though that we would have other drugs
available. But in my case, because things happen so quickly, they literally
didn't have time to give me anything else but paracetamol. So in the end, I gave
birth within a space of about an hour and 10 minutes just on paracetamol. I
don't know. Is it possible to describe the pain? No. For anybody who has been
through childbirth, you'll know. But anybody who hasn't, I cannot describe the
pain. My husband said to me, I said to him afterwards, I said, how are you
feeling about this? You know, you saw it all. You saw the pain I was in. How did
you feel? And he just said to me, look, I looked at you and just thought, how on
earth are you doing this? It's just off the scale. And I think if I'd have had
gas and air, I would have regained some sort of control because I lost control
during those contractions. Even to this day, I forget certain moments because
the pain was so much. I was in and out of kind of consciousness. I couldn't
really regain focus. And if I'd had gas and air, I would have just maybe had
something to kind of get me through that experience. Lee Milner, who gave birth
very, very successfully now as a young son a month ago. Well, the Princess
Alexandra Hospital, where she was, told us, following tests on the use of gas
and air in our maternity unit, we made the decision to suspend the use of gas
and air on a temporary basis. That was the 19th of January. We have since put in
place three temporary gas and air units and can now offer it to women and
birthing people. We also have permanent gas and air units being fitted soon.
Leah Hazard is an NHS midwife, author of Hard Push, A Midwife's Story and Womb,
which is out this week. Leah, good afternoon to you. Good afternoon. Now,
listen, anybody who has relied on gas and air would be quite terrified by this
story. From the midwife's point of view, there is a big concern, isn't there?
Well, it seems like potentially, yes, there is. And that's why, unfortunately,
this form of analgesia has been withdrawn in a number of units. So the thing
that's been discovered here is that at very high levels, the use of gas and air,
which is obviously nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen, can cause vitamin B
deficiency in people who are overly exposed. And that can have really unpleasant
and sometimes really long-term consequences. So while, of course, any staff
member would want birthing women to have access to a wide range of pain relief
options, staff also have the right to safe work and conditions. And so if
they're being exposed to hazardous amounts of a substance, then it's only right
and fair that that needs to be modified. And we should explain that when the
Sunday Times looked at this, Basildon University Hospital in Essex, when they
checked their tests in 2021, found levels at 3,000 parts per million. Safe
workplace exposure is 100 parts per million. So there was obviously a much
greater concentration in their hospital. Do you know of any midwives who have
been affected by gas and air? I mean, it's an interesting question because I do
know midwives who have vitamin B deficiency, but I don't think in their minds
they've explicitly linked it to exposure to gas and air. I mean, in retrospect,
it's a possibility because midwives who work in labour suite or other areas
where gas and air is used are often in an enclosed space with the person using
gas and air for, say, up to 12 hours at a time, often several shifts in a row.
So, you know, you could have 48 hours of exposure in a week. And although I
can't say that I know anyone who's definitely been affected in that way, it's
certainly not outwith the realm of possibility. So obviously what these
hospitals are doing from the sounds of it is checking on the ventilation in
these rooms. As a midwife, you will know how important gas and air is to the
people who are giving birth. Can you imagine what it would be like without
having that option? Well, I can because I've done it once myself, actually. So I
have two children and I use gas and air for my first birth. And for the second
one, it just happened too quickly to get any pain relief on the go. So I
absolutely feel for people who wanted to use gas and air and then have been
unable to do so, you know, on a personal and professional level, it's obviously
disappointing and distressing if that's what you had in mind and it's not there.
But putting my professional midwife hat on, you know, as midwives, especially
over the last few years with COVID, we've been exposed to such dangerous
environments at work and we've been talking about better ventilation. We've been
talking about better, safer workplace environments, you know, even before the
Entonox issue became apparent. So I think, you know, it's unfortunate that this
is having a knock on effect on women, but it really is just a basic safety at
work issue and it needs to be addressed. Lea Hazard, thank you very much. Now
then, the 1 million students in 143 countries who do the International
Baccalaureate will be allowed to use ChatGBT in their essays and work. It is the
artificial intelligence chatbot that is expected to revolutionise the way we all
work and how we run our lives. Olli-Pekka Heinonen is the Director General of
the IB, the Global Qualification Programme, and he joins us. Good afternoon.
Good afternoon. Is this decision based on the fact that you almost don't have
any alternative, because how can you check whether a student is not using
ChatGBT? It's a very deliberate decision. We have been thinking and studying
these issues for a long time and actually, in a way, there is nothing new with
the cheating perspective, because this is exactly the same thing that if you
would kind of take somebody else's ideas from the internet and use them in your
essays. So in that sense, this is something that we have been dealing for a long
time. Okay, but how do you see it working for the IB? I think that the chatbots
that we are seeing today, they are already here. They are reality and will be
everyday lives for our students. And therefore, I think now what is important is
that we integrate that kind of tools in our teaching and learning. They create
challenges. We have to be able to, for example, think about the ethical
questions that are connecting to the use of them and also think that what is the
quality of the answers that these chatbots are delivering us. Are there biases
there? What's the quality of the evidence they are having and so on? And those
are the questions that are actually very typical for IB, as we have been
emphasising very strongly about creative and critical thinking and problem
solving. So in that sense, it's nothing new. Does it mean that you will be less
reliant on essays to assess students? And perhaps the argument is, well, since
in their future, they will probably be using these AI chatbots to write the
essays, it doesn't really matter. No, I don't think that there will be room for
essays definitely in the future also. So we are not getting rid of essays. The
thing is that how do we incorporate the use of chatbot in the writing essays in
a sustainable and ethically good way? And that means that they need to be
referenced. Olli Pekka-Hänenen, we must leave it there, but thank you very much.
Well, as we reported earlier, Dame Betty Boothroyd, the first, so far the only,
female Speaker of the House of Commons has died. And we thought we'd end with
her acceptance speech from Parliament in 1992. What this House must know, that
while having a competent woman Speaker may be a good thing, having a bad woman
Speaker would be disastrous. It would be a tragedy for this House, and it would
be bad for the country, and it would be bad for the cause of women everywhere.
Now, Sir Edward, I know that on occasions such as this, the House can be
somewhat sentimental. And there's nothing wrong with sentiment in some
circumstances. But you know, when it comes down to basics, the House is
essentially hard-headed. So I don't need to urge this House today to make its
decision only on the grounds of the qualities which have been revealed by my
conduct in the Chair and by my membership of this House. I say to you, elect me
for what I am, and not for what I was born. Dame Betty Boothroyd, who has died
at the age of 93. That's it from us. I'm Sarah Montagu. That's The World at 145.
Studio direction was by Nathan Chamberlain. The editor was Tom Baker. Now
another chance to hear last year's migration adventure. Emily Knight presents
Flight of the Ospreys. This year, halfway through April, our male returned and
started building up the nest from there. And as you can see, it's now supporting
those two young chicks. Six weeks old, and only now about two weeks until they
fledge. So it's been a really good season. And hopefully, just as we're seeing
here with the male just bringing in that fish, he'll continue to do that as we
see them get older. Making sure they don't starve before their long flight,
their long migration down to West Africa or maybe Southern Europe. As summer
draws to a close, the ospreys of the Scottish Highlands begin a slow and
perilous migration south, across the Mediterranean Sea and the Sahara Desert, to
West Africa. It's a bit sad when they leave. But in the autumn of 2022, these
beautiful birds of prey didn't do the journey alone. My name is Sasha Dent. I am
the founder of Conservation Without Borders, UN ambassador for migratory
species, also known as the human swan. In Europe, the ospreys have been very
near to extinct in many countries because of human history and human activity.
But it is now making a comeback due to human activity. So it has a great story
in that with effort and collaboration, we can bring something back. So yeah, the
plan is to follow the migration of the osprey, look at the challenges along a
flyway through the eyes of one bird. Sasha is a biologist, a conservationist and
a fearless adventurer. I first met her when she was transforming herself into
the human swan. I just love it. I don't know why more people don't do it. It
just feels a bit like a superpower. She strapped an engine and a propeller to
her back and flew alongside endangered Buick swans from Siberia to the Severn
estuary, stopping off in towns and villages en route to talk to farmers, hunters
and politicians about the threats the swans faced along their migration flyways.
She was in search of a fresh challenge when she found herself being spun around
a Scottish dance floor. The essence of the idea started at the Scottish
Ornithological Conference where they asked me to go and give a talk about the
flight of the swans. And there was a caley at the end of it. And whilst Roy
Dennis was throwing me around the dance floor at this caley, when I'd never done
a caley before, he said something like, you know, could you do the same thing
for ospreys that you did for the swans? I'm Roy Dennis. I'm a field
ornithologist and I've studied ospreys since 1960. They're a big raptor, as big
as a heron, but they're tremendously distinctive in that they hover just above
water and then dive in from several hundred feet to grab fish. So they're a
specialist at catching fish at the surface of the water. Sasha accepted Roy's
challenge and immediately began planning to fly from the Cairngorms to Ghana
alongside the ospreys. Yes, the original plan was that I would fly particularly
at key locations where, for example, we could get interesting information from
above on the state of the wetland, the health of it. You can very easily from
above see point source pollution after rain, for example. However, in my current
state, yeah, there's no option of flying. On the 18th of September 2021, Sasha
was flying her paramotor over the West Highlands. She was involved in a
collision with another paramotor flown by her friend Dan Burton, who was filming
the trip for a climate change campaign. Both crashed to the ground. Dan died and
Sasha was seriously injured. There was an accident and that involved me falling
150 feet and landing on my legs in a Scottish bog in the middle of nowhere. My
lower legs were the kind of crumple zone and not only can I not fly, I still
have some metal framework in my legs, which is going to be in there for the
first month of the expedition. So talk me through your injuries a little bit. I
mean, what's this contraption that you've got on your leg now? Basically,
there's bolts that go into my lower leg, into my tibia specifically, and various
different bolts and dials all around the frame, which I was able to over a
couple of months twist to move my tibia down and fill in a gap of bone from the
accident. I mean, it's a fairly severe piece of medical equipment. I think you'd
be forgiven for just spending the amount of time that you had to wear it, you
know, sat on your bum doing absolutely nothing. But you're about to set off on a
trip halfway around the world. It is. And there were definitely thoughts about
it. But I think I've got to a point where the surgeons, I had many surgeons over
time over the last few months, you know, we realized that this metal frame would
still be on at the start of the expedition. His first reaction was, I don't see
any reason why you shouldn't go anyway. And you're never more happy and
enthusiastic than when you're talking about the expedition. So the most
important thing is that you're doing what you need to do and the frame and the
leg and the medical stuff comes second. If Sasha feels able to follow the
Ospreys, then we will too. For the next 10 episodes of Flight of the Osprey,
we'll be with Sasha, her team and the birds every step of the way. As we head
south, we'll be going through Yorkshire and Rutland, which is another key site
for reintroduction and into Wales for a site there and then through Pool
Harbour, which is the most southerly breeding site. And then down into France,
Spain, Portugal, and then crossing the Strait of Gibraltar into Morocco. And
from there, it's a reasonably coastal route all the way around West Africa and
into Ghana. And the Osprey are going to be facing a lot of challenges along the
route. What kind of things are making their journey a little bit more difficult?
A lot of the wetlands that they use are being challenged by over extraction or
extra extraction of water. So some of them we know are now much smaller than
they need to be to sustain the populations of migratory birds. Collisions and
electrocutions on power lines in some areas are a challenge. The growth of the
Sahara Desert is one of the major challenges for the birds. They've got a big
stretch they have to fly. And then for the young birds, I think they have a
particularly interesting stories as Ospreys migrate on their own as birds. So
the young, when they leave their nests in Scotland, will not be shown where to
go. So they will try and make their migration south. And according to Roy, he's
been looking at this for a long time, because the majority of birds in the UK
now have come from the Swedish population, the inbuilt migration pattern has
them naturally taking a much more westerly route than they would normally. So if
there's strong winds, many of them get blown out to sea. We've talked a little
about the kind of challenges the Osprey will face as they do this migration.
What kind of challenges are you humans going to be facing? Obviously we're going
through the same extreme environments. There'll be wet season in some of the
countries in West Africa. We are travelling through various countries that are
all skirting Mali, which has various levels of unrest and higher levels of risk.
So we're going to have to make sure that the team are all prepared for that.
It's July, and just ahead of the Ospreys departure, Sasha's support team have
gathered together at Granton on Spey in the shadow of the Cairngorm Mountains to
meet in person for the first time and get a refresher course in the kind of
survival techniques they might just need. He's not responsive. He's not
responsive. What's next? Bleeding. He saw him crash to the ground, didn't he?
Yeah. So what comes after catastrophic bleed? Airways. My name's Jackie
Wilmshurst, and I'm a psychologist. I'm also ex-military, so I've been involved
in hostile environment training for about 10 years now. So Sasha and the team
have come here to get some fairly specific training from you guys. What kind of
things are you going to be putting them through? The real goal is to make sure
that they're very well equipped for the kinds of risks that are the most
foreseeable risks, and then to sort of match first aid training for some of the
scenarios where they might not be able to get medical help. So to be able to
stop the sorts of things that can kill someone very quickly. So I'm standing
here. I'm the board soldier on the checkpoint. I've probably been here a couple
of hours. Suddenly, a car approaches. And right now behind us, I think they're
familiarising themselves with different kinds of guns. What are they doing that
for? We certainly don't want to be training people in anything to do with
weapons handling or using of weapons, but some familiarity with, for example,
the difference between a small handgun and a big assault rifle is useful because
if anyone starts using them around them, knowing how to react, sort of minimise
the chance of harm is really helpful. Just down the road from where Sasha and
the rest of the team are doing their training is RSPB Loch Garden, which is
where I am right now, which has a fairly important role in the history of
ospreys in Scotland. After the numbers dwindled in the early 20th century to
almost nothing, it was here in the 1950s that the first breeding pair was
recorded, heralding the beginning of the return of osprey to Scotland. And if
you pop inside the visitor centre, you can have a little peek through their
telescopes and see them right there on their nest. Two chicks this year, is it?
It is two chicks this year, yeah. And someone who can tell me all about the
ospreys is Gareth. Gareth, what's your role here? Yeah, I'm a visitor experience
officer here, Abernethy Nature Reserve. And why do you think the osprey here
have captured the imagination of the public? It's just the opportunity to see
nature so up close, basically. Seeing their characters, seeing them grow up,
living with them in a way. An animal that seems quite fierce is clearly a
predator. It's clearly very good at what it does. It's all beak and claws and
talons. But seeing it being tender, you know, seeing it feeding its chicks, is a
nice little insight into a different side of the animal, I think. In some ways
it's like looking at ourselves from the outside in. We all have young to care
for, we all have our own personalities. And that's what this opportunity is. It
is that opportunity to see that character and not just see them as they have
been labelled as a predator. By the 1950s, ospreys were effectively extinct as a
breeding bird in the UK and their numbers had been decimated along the southern
European migration route. When three chicks were born at Loch Garton, the RSPB
decided to mount a campaign to protect them and raise public awareness of the
birds. A young ornithologist was quick to join the team. Roy Dennis. The first
time I saw an osprey was in April 1960 when I was a young 18-year-old and I got
a job at the RSPB Loch Garton site. We helped to build that number up and now
there's about 300, 350 pairs. Ospreys aren't an endangered species worldwide. In
fact, the population in northern Europe has remained largely stable. In the UK
and southern Europe, they've long been persecuted by humans for stealing fish,
but it was the Victorians who came perilously close to wiping them out entirely.
The craze of egg collections was rife. So to shoot a pair of ospreys and have
them stuffed in your grand house along with their eggs was what people were
after. And that caused this final decline of them. But they didn't go extinct
here in Scotland, did they? What did the population get down to at its lowest?
It really got down to zero to one. There was a pair nesting in 1916. Every now
and then a bird arrived in Scotland and met one that was still here. So if you
had one pair of osprey and the female was killed on migration, that male could
come back for six to eight years hoping that a female turns up. And then one
spring, you get a bird that's been blown over from across the North Sea on its
migration to Sweden, lands in Scotland, finds that male, and they breed for a
few years. But the big difference was that when the pair nested in 1958, the
RSPB decided to really put an effort into protecting them. And that allowed the
population to rise. And these Scottish birds, they are about to set off on a
fairly epic migration, aren't they? Well, the females will leave quite soon. The
young ones are already, some of them are flying. The female will stay around
protecting them. She does no fishing. It's the male that does all the fishing.
And then really, it's a good idea if she pushes off because then all the fish go
to the young. The male will continue feeding the young until the last days of
August, early September. And then the oldest young will leave, then the middle
one, then the little one, then finally the male. And they all head off
independently with genetic knowledge and head for West Africa. And it's a
hazardous migration. If you're a young osprey leaving Scotland, your chance of
survival to come back and breed is, you know, less than half. It's the 27th of
July today. And, oh my God, it's my sister's birthday. Oh my God, thank you for
asking that question. And she's in Australia, so they're ahead of us. Damn, OK.
She'll forgive me. So it's the 27th of July today, and we are leaving on the 1st
of August. So that will be a four-month expedition ending end of November. Do
you feel ready? Are you excited? It wasn't until we were actually on the way up
here to Scotland and most pieces were in place, everybody's visa was in place,
that I realised I had this, a grin that I couldn't wipe off my face. So, yes, I
think I can say I'm excited. Flight of the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight
and Alistair Cross. We'll follow the journey again at the same time tomorrow.
Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for Front Row. You are a national
treasure. No. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you
can find us on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Instagram.