TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to unearth an epic corruption scandal in the fishing industry. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. At two hours GMT on the BBC World
Service. Putin's war conquest is failing. Young, talented Russians are fleeing
by the tens of thousands. On a top-secret trip to Kiev, Joe Biden says he'll
stand by Ukraine for as long as it takes. Also coming up on the newsroom with
me, Peter Goffin. I was getting ready to pray when I felt the floor trembling.
We're afraid of ending up under the rubble like other people. At least three
people are dead as more earthquakes hit Syria and Turkey. Protesters in Israel
say democracy is under threat. We'll hear about a potential breakthrough for
stroke patients. I actually was able to open my hand for the first time in nine
years. My family and I were in tears of joy and happiness. And the campaign to
ban Russian athletes from the Olympics. Coming up on the BBC World Service. This
is Danielle Jowowiecka with the BBC News. Hello. President Volodymyr Zelensky
has said a world order based on rules and humanity depends on how events play
out in Ukraine. Speaking after President Biden's unannounced visit to Kiev, he
said he was confident of victory against Russia. Specific steps for this are
known. Our defence needs for this are known. Our partners are also well aware of
what actions are required for this. Actions, first of all, of our soldiers at
the front. All it takes is resolve. Today I saw such resolve from President
Biden and the United States of America. Mr Biden said America would back Ukraine
in its fight for as long as it took. He's now back in Poland after making the
trip to Kiev by train in secret. The president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko,
has ordered the formation of a new territorial defence force saying every man
should know how to handle weapons. His defence minister said the force should
have at least 100,000 volunteers and be present in every village and town. Mr
Lukashenko, a close ally of Vladimir Putin, has allowed Russia to use Belarus as
a base for attacks on Ukraine. A new earthquake hit the province of Hatay in
southeastern Turkey near the border with Syria, the region devastated by a huge
quake earlier this month. Officials said it had a magnitude of 6.4. Laura Bicca
is in Hatay. There is fear, some panic and the small aftershocks keep coming. A
number of structures that were left standing after the tremor on February 6 have
now crumbled, including a bridge. The Hatay mayor has said that there are people
trapped under the rubble. Many cracks and roads have become deep scars, making
it more difficult for the emergency services to get where they may be needed.
Israel's parliament has voted to push ahead with a controversial overhaul of the
judicial system proposed by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's religious
nationalist government. The opposition in parliament vowed to fight for what it
called the soul of the nation. Mr Netanyahu has called a UN Security Council
statement denouncing Israeli West Bank settlement activity, one-sided, and
criticised the United States for supporting it. The US Ambassador to the United
Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, spoke out against settlement activity. We
strongly oppose Israel's announcement that it will advance thousands of
settlement units. And we strongly oppose Israel's announcement that it began a
process to retroactively legalise nine outposts in the West Bank that were
previously illegal under Israeli law. It's the first action Washington has
allowed the council to take against Israel in six years. World news from the
BBC. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over a botched order for
new commuter trains that proved to be too wide to fit through non-standard
tunnels in the mountainous northern regions of Asturias and Cantabria. The boss
of Spain's state rail operator and the Secretary of State for Transport are the
latest casualties. The design fault for the 31 new trains, costing nearly $300
million, was made public earlier this month. Cantabria has demanded
compensation. The number of people killed by flash floods and landslides in
southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Rescuers are searching the mud and rubble
for survivors after record rainfall devastated a stretch of coast in São Paulo
State. President Lula da Silva has visited the worst-hit area around the beach
city of São Sebastião. If each one of us works alone, we do less work. That's
why we need to stick together. That's why we need to share the good things and
the bad things, because together we'll be much stronger and we'll recover
quickly. Prosecutors have downgraded the involuntary manslaughter charges
against the Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin following a fatal shooting with a live
gun on a film set in 2021. It means Mr Baldwin and the film's armourer will face
a maximum 18-month prison sentence if convicted, rather than a minimum of five
years. New Mexico prosecutors said the decision was taken to avoid further
litigious distractions. Parkkeepers in New York have captured an alligator that
was spotted in a lake in Brooklyn as children played nearby. The 120-centimetre-
long reptile was described as emaciated and very lethargic. It's been taken to
the Bronx Zoo, where it's hoped it'll recover. Officials suspect the alligator
had been kept as a pet and then abandoned when it grew too large. American
alligators are native to southern US states like Florida, but New York winters
are much too cold for them. BBC News. You're listening to the Newsroom from the
BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin. On Monday morning, President Joe Biden
arrived in Kiev with a clear-cut message for Vladimir Zelensky and the Ukrainian
people. The US will stand by you for as long as it takes. This promise, which
includes half a billion dollars in newly announced aid, comes as Ukraine
approaches the first anniversary of its fight for freedom against the Russian
invasion. It also comes at a critical juncture for both sides. Ukraine is trying
desperately to hold on to the front line in the east until it can restart its
campaign of counterattacks, which saw success last autumn. And Russia is
launching a new offensive with Vladimir Putin due to give a rare public address
later today, outlining his vision for the future of the war. Well, against that
backdrop, Mr Zelensky welcomed his strongest ally, Mr Biden, on a secretive
visit to Kiev. Our international editor, Jeremy Bowen, filed this report from
the Ukrainian capital. The sirens wailed as the two presidents walked out into
Kiev's bright winter sun under the blue walls and golden domes of St Michael's
Church. The timing felt too precise for the alarm to be a coincidence, though
there was some Russian air activity far away in Belarus. The two men stayed in
the open air to lay wreaths at Ukraine's memorial for war dead. A point was
being made. Ukraine was still under attack and the leader of the world's most
powerful country, the United States, had come to an active war zone to show
support for his ally, President Volodymyr Zelensky. President Biden arrived here
by train like all the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans warned the
Russians at the weekend that the visit was happening but tried to keep it secret
at home. Before they were driven to St Michael's, President Zelensky welcomed
his guest at a brief ceremony at his official residence. Thank you very much for
coming, Mr President. At a huge moment of support for the Ukraine and... What
can I say? He said President Biden was visiting at the most difficult time for
Ukraine. President Biden responded with strong words of support. Russia's aim
was to wipe Ukraine off the map. Putin's war of conquest is failing. Russia's
military has lost half its territory it once occupied. Young, talented Russians
are fleeing by the tens of thousands, not wanting to come back to Russia.
They're not just fleeing from the military. They're fleeing from Russia itself.
With the spring fighting season in sight, the war is delicately balanced. Russia
has mobilized several hundred thousand new conscripts and despite heavy
casualties and huge losses of equipment, the Russian war effort grinds on. The
hard reality of Russian aggression has forced NATO leaders, especially Joe
Biden, to make some tough decisions. The biggest so far might come soon. Ukraine
is pushing the Americans and other Western allies for more powerful weapons,
including modern warplanes, as well as continuing shipments to replace the huge
amounts of shells and rockets it's expended. It wants to win, to drive Russia
out, not just hold its own in a long war of attrition. The Ukrainians want a
decisive upgrade as soon as possible. Time might not be their friend. President
Putin seems to believe that Russia can tough it out longer than the West.
President Zelensky wants to be able to act before voices in NATO calling for
negotiation and a peace deal that hands Russia territory get any louder. Jeremy
Bowen in Kiev. Well, that first anniversary of the war is a significant mark for
Russia. The invasion has not gone the way Moscow expected and the Kremlin will
want at least a symbolic victory to celebrate when it hits that one-year period
on Friday. That could be the city of Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine, which Russian
forces have been trying to capture for the past six months and where they've
been stepping up attacks over the last few days. Our senior international
correspondent Orla Gurren is in the outskirts of the city. The battle for
Bakhmut is now at close quarters inside the city and on the outskirts. Ukrainian
troops are still defending every inch. But the enemy is closing in. It's
hellish, according to President Zelensky, who says Bakhmut must be defended, but
not at any cost. The snow is coming down now. We're at a concealed position on
the outskirts of Bakhmut, just hearing some more shelling there. We're with
troops from the 28th Brigade. They're part of the defence of the city and
Bakhmut is still in Ukrainian hands. The Russians have been stepping up their
attacks. They have gained some ground. We're here. We're here. But the mortar
team we are with are fighting on, targeting enemy positions two kilometres away.
I'm with Victor, one of the troops here. He ran a shoe business before the war.
He has a wife and two children, one of them a baby, just 18 months old, and he
hasn't seen them since the war began. He's been fighting since the very start.
And are you worried the baby doesn't remember you? Yes, he doesn't remember me.
When I went to the war, he was so little. He didn't understand about nothing.
Yes, when I speak in the fibre to telephone and video conversation, I don't know
who I am. We're in the corridor of a busy hospital. We can't say where. And
military casualties are being brought in. In the space of just a few minutes, we
saw three ambulances arriving outside. The floor is covered in mud. There's been
so much traffic, so many boots coming from the battlefield. Dr. Klyaskyi, first
of all, are you happy to tell me your name? My name is Mirozlav. It's almost a
year now since the invasion happened and Ukraine came under attack. Did you
imagine it would last this long? Did you ever think the fighting would still be
like this a year on? I thought it would last a long time, he says, because the
country we are fighting wants to destroy us, using all its strength, and that
country doesn't have any way back. I've just come along the corridor here. There
are one, two, three, four wounded men on stretchers. They're covered in foil
blankets to keep them warm and to protect against shock. One still has his boots
on, they're caked in mud. Seeing the steady stream of wounded being brought in
here, you get a sense of the cost of this fight, of the grinding warfare that
Ukraine is locked in. Orla Garen, just weeks ago, two massive earthquakes killed
more than 40,000 people in Turkey and Syria, and now another quake has hit the
same region. At least three people have died, and rescue workers are once again
searching for people trapped under the rubble. Here's what we heard from one
woman in the Syrian city of Azaz. I was getting ready to pray when I felt the
floor trembling. We came out running. There are four floors above our apartment.
We're afraid of ending up under the rubble like other people. We're staying on
the street now. We only take a rug and blankets to keep the children warm. Our
correspondent Anna Foster is in the city of Adna in southern Turkey, close to
the epicenter of the earthquake. I was in a fortunately quite a sturdy building
at the time, but people's reaction, you know, as we started to feel the ground
moving under our feet and see the lighting fixtures start to swing, people got
up and they ran outside, because of course remember all of these images here
that people have seen, the experiences that people have felt over the last
couple of weeks, and to feel that all over again, you really see the fear in
people's reaction when they get straight on their phones. You know, in some
cases they are checking the magnitude, and from that you maybe start to build up
a picture of how serious it might have been. People check to see where the
epicenter was. People also check on friends and family. You know, several of my
just personal WhatsApp groups here in the Middle East had people sharing
messages as far away as Lebanon and Syria, asking if people were okay. Again, it
was felt across a really wide area. What it appears at the moment is that the
epicenter is in one of the areas that was already badly affected from the first
quakes two weeks ago around Antakia and Hatay. And at this stage, one small
positive from that would be that many of those buildings are now empty. People,
many of them, of course, don't have shelter, they don't have anywhere to live,
but they're not in those buildings. So if more of the damaged buildings
collapsed, one would hope that it will not have the same devastating loss of
life as last time, because people are now intense, or they're out on the
streets, or many people, if they've been able to, if they've had a car, the
agency, the money, the ability to move, many people have left this area as well.
Anna Foster in Turkey. Well, it is 216 GMT, and you're listening to the BBC
World Service. Our top headlines this hour, President Zelensky has reaffirmed
his confidence that Ukraine will defeat the Russian invasion after President Joe
Biden visited Kiev to demonstrate America's enduring support. And a new
earthquake has caused further damage and deaths in the border region of Turkey
and Syria. Researchers in the US say they've partially restored movement in the
arms and hands of two people who've had strokes. One patient was able to cut and
eat a steak by herself for the first time in nine years after the treatment. But
more research is still needed to develop this technology, as we heard from our
health and science correspondent James Gallagher. Strokes disrupt the blood
supply in the brain and lead to cells dying. People can still have the desire
and intent to move, but the damage means the instructions from the brain can
become so weak that nothing happens. Heather Rendeleich from Pittsburgh had a
stroke when she was still in her 20s. She learned how to walk again, but for
nine years she was unable to open or close her left hand. In the experiment she
had electrodes implanted in her neck to stimulate and excite the nerves. Now
they could respond to even the weak instructions from the brain that were still
getting through. As soon as the device was switched on, Heather noticed the
difference. So the very first day I came into the lab and they turned the
stimulation on for the first time, I actually was able to open my hand for the
first time in nine years and my family and I were in tears of just overwhelming
joy and happiness and it was an amazing experience. Heather was one of two
people to take part in the experiments which have been published in Nature
Medicine. Dr Marco Capagroso from the University of Pittsburgh says the results
show there is the potential to have a huge impact on people's lives. Our
patients recover but they don't become completely normal. So now they can
actually use their arm, even if not perfectly. That means that they can recover
a lot of independence and a lot of quality of life just because they can use
their arm and hand now, even though they probably cannot play the piano. The
team believe the field could advance quickly as they're using technologies that
are already approved for managing severe pain but for now it will take more
clinical trials to work out who benefits and how to move the equipment from the
laboratory to the home. James Gallagher. Well, Israel has been rocked by more
than a month of anti-government protests against the new right-wing government's
proposed judicial reforms. The new law would increase the government's influence
in selecting judges and limit the Supreme Court's powers. Tens of thousands of
demonstrators were gathered outside the parliament or a Knesset late into the
night as politicians debated the reform bill. And just a few hours ago we heard
this announcement from the speaker. We heard the announcement from the speaker.
We heard the announcement from the speaker. We heard the announcement from the
speaker. We heard the announcement from the speaker. Israeli lawmakers had voted
to push ahead with the changes. Since then, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
has welcomed the result but this is only the first of three votes necessary to
pass the bill. As we heard from our correspondent in Jerusalem, Tom Bateman.
It's quite a long process and all the indications are that the opposition
parties in Israel are going to do everything they can to try and drag this out,
to try and slow it down, to try and derail it. I don't think they'll be able to
do that because of the 64 seats that Mr. Netanyahu has for his parliamentary
coalition, the majority he has. They'll be able to vote this through. The issue
will be about the scale of opposition, just how vocal those protests become.
We've had seven weeks of them now from people who feel extremely angry about
this. They think it sort of cuts to the core of the identity of Israel as a
democratic country. And so they're going to fight this with everything they've
got. The other thing Mr. Netanyahu has to contend with is the international
opinion over this. It's already been clear from the Biden administration,
they're deeply unhappy about these proposed changes. And therefore there is a
push to try and get some kind of negotiation between Mr. Netanyahu's religious
and right-wing coalition and the opposition parties. So they might be able to
get some changes, they might be able to soften it a bit. But all the signs are
that I think Mr. Netanyahu will get the bulk of this through. Tom Bateman in
Jerusalem. Now let's go to Andy Barwell for the latest sports news. And the
United Kingdom, the United States, France and Germany have run 30 countries that
have pledged support to an ongoing ban on Russian and Belarusian athletes
competing in international sporting events amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine. It
follows a summit involving all 30 nations early this month. The IOC are said to
be exploring a pathway for those banned competitors to take part as neutrals in
the 2024 Paris Games. Liverpool Football Club is not up for sale. In an
interview with the Boston Sports Journal, the owner John Henry said, Are we
selling LFC? No. Are we taking on investors about LFC? Yes. Will something
happen there? I believe so, but it won't be a sale. Well, on the pitch Liverpool
have the little matter of a Champions League clash with Real Madrid in a repeat
of last season's final. The Spanish Giants came out on top then. This time it's
over two legs, the first game at Anfield in the round of 16. And with a couple
of improved performances and results in the Premier League recently, Liverpool
boss Jurgen Klopp says this has come at the right time for his team. I'm really
happy that we can play it now. Like four weeks ago, it would have been
different, but life is all about timing and maybe we found back our feet right
in time for this game. So now we have these two results and hopefully we can
build on that. But we need to. We need to play a super game. We need to be two
super games, to be honest, to get through. Well, India qualified for the women's
T20 World Cup cricket semi-finals with a five-run victory over Ireland in a
rain-cotailed match. Smitri, Mandana survived being dropped four times to hit a
career-best 87 from 56 deliveries for India. The victory means that India have
joined England in qualifying for the semi-final lineup from Group 2. And
finally, some news of motorsport Honda are considering a formal return to
Formula 1 to coincide with new engine regulations to be introduced in 2026. The
company officially pulled out of F1 at the end of 2021, although their engines
are still being used by the Red Bull teams. Thank you, Andy. Now, our
newsreader, Danielle, has some other stories from our news desk. A mission is
underway in Papua New Guinea to rescue an Australian professor and three local
researchers being held hostage by an armed group. The police chief said security
forces would use whatever means necessary up to and including lethal force to
free the group. The team were on a field study trip in remote highlands when
they were captured. Scientists say they're one step closer to creating a new
generation of light-activated cancer treatments. British researchers have
developed antibody fragments that confuse with a tumour to fight it after
they're activated by switching on LED lights. The team says the treatment is
highly targeted to stop healthy cells being damaged and more effective than
current state-of-the-art cancer immunotherapies. Federal US authorities have
recalled more than 25,000 cases of Starbucks vanilla frappuccinos after their
distributor warned the drinks could have glass in them. The bottles aren't sold
in Starbucks stores but are widely available in supermarkets, including Walmart,
Amazon and Target. Last year, the authorities recalled Starbucks vanilla
espresso triple-shot drinks after metal fragments were detected in the products.
And dozens of British companies taking part in what has been described as the
world's largest trial of the four-day work week have hailed it a success. Of the
61 companies that entered the six-month trial, 56 have decided to continue
working that way. Most firms said they were satisfied with productivity and
business performance over the trial period, while staff reported feeling happier
and healthier. Thanks, Danielle. Now, the books of Roald Dahl have been a part
of children's lives for decades. Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, Matilda and
the BFG, just to name a few. But now, more than 30 years after the author's
death, his estate and publisher are removing words like fat and ugly from some
of his stories. They say to make them more suitable for a new generation of
readers. And that sparked a heated debate about censorship in literature and the
relatively new job of sensitivity readers, people who are paid by publishers to
scour book manuscripts for potentially offensive content. Ervin Welsh is the
Scottish author of the novel Trainspotting. He told the BBC's Evan Davis about
his own experiences with these sensitivity readers. And the last book I had out
this summer, which is The Long Knives, we had a trans sensitivity reader on that
book. And also it was made into a TV show. It's just kind of being edited now.
And we had a different trans sensitivity reader on the TV show. So I've had kind
of experience with book and with television, but just very recently. And was
that experience OK? Tell us what was changed, if anything. Not a lot, really. I
mean, I think I've found that trans issues very emotive because it's new and
it's constantly in flux and we don't really have a kind of a cultural handle on
it yet. And obviously you kind of fear the worshipping and say you have a
sensitivity reader. I did have three trans characters in the book. I was kind of
concerned that this would be a censorship thing, but it wasn't anything to do
with that at all. It was basically, I found it a very positive process. It was
very, very educative for me. You don't want to be inadvertently cruel or to be
punching down on some minority group. You want to have that kind of freedom to
create a range of characters who have a range of behaviours. So, for example, in
the book, I have three very different archetypal characters or they seem to be
archetypal characters, they're probably not, but they seem to have been
characters that have come into our culture. The notes that I had from the trans
sensitivity reader were absolutely first class. It didn't end up censoring it or
something. No, it didn't. You can't say that because you changed the character
to make them more positive or... No, it definitely improved the book. One
character that the trans reader had more problems with than others, and they
said that, you know, it's like, but they actually saw why I had to have that
character in there. The great thing about books rather than television is that
there are fewer red lines. One of the characters that we were able to show in
the novel, we couldn't really show in TV. So, you know, there's a whole
different editorial process. The trans reader on TV, again, it was positive, but
it's much more of a collective responsibility. There's certain things that no
channel can show, basically. Does it go too far, though, sometimes? I mean,
removing the black colour of a costume, for example. We're in this era where
everything is socially engineered. Culture is more contested than ever. That's
the thing, isn't it? Everything in culture seems very contested. Well, because
of the technology now, everybody thinks that they can design. We can design
life, we can design culture, and it doesn't always happen that way. I think the
idea that you can redesign everything, you can make everything sort of anodyne
and safe and non-threatening, is spurious. Our whole imperial history is kind
of, you know, racist and sexist. It's to do with imperialism, basically, in the
division of labour and capitalism, but we have kings and queens and aristocrats
and public school elites and imperial statues of slave traders all over Britain.
Why are we worried about what something's written in a book? The author, Erwin
Welsh, on Sensitivity Readers in Literature. And that's it for this edition of
The Newsroom on the BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin. An update of the
latest news is next. Until next time, we will... Goodbye. You're listening to
the BBC World Service, where our series, The Invention of Russia, continues. To
understand it now... We need to unravel its past. The principal way in which
they controlled that enormous space was through fear. I think the Soviet Union
was the manifestation of the Russian Empire. There was an illusion of something
different. It's a facade that I think Putin manages to keep up. In episode two,
Russia expands and emerges as a force in Europe. In 1709, you couldn't manage
European politics without taking Russia into account. It was able to dispose of
Poland at the end of that century. Then it went on to defeat Napoleon and so on.
I mean, Russia had become a European superpower. The Invention of Russia with
me, Misha Glenny. Wednesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. What connects Iceland and
Namibia two countries 10,000 kilometres apart Turns out one answer is fish. I'm
Johannes Dell and for the BBC World Service, I'm investigating how journalists
from two very different cultures work together to unearth an epic corruption
scandal in the fishing industry and why some prominent Namibians are under
investigation along with one of Iceland's biggest companies. Clearwater's murky
dealings, Fishrod, is after the news. BBC News with Daniel Jarovjetska President
Volodymyr Zelensky has said, a world order based on rules and humanity depends
on the outcome of the conflict in Ukraine. After President Biden's highly
symbolic trip to Kiev, he said he'd seen Mr Biden's determination to maintain US
support in the fight against Russia. Rescue services in Turkey are once again
searching for people trapped under rubble by a new tremor in the southeast near
the border with Syria. This is the same region where 46,000 people were killed
two weeks ago by a much larger earthquake. Three people have died and 200 were
injured. Israel's parliament has voted to continue a highly controversial
overhaul of the judicial system proposed by Benjamin Netanyahu's religious
nationalist government. The opposition has vowed to fight against it after the
bill was approved in a first reading. The number of people killed by flash
floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40. Record rainfall
has devastated a stretch of the coast in São Paulo state. There's been an outcry
in Colombia after a former member of the National Truth Commission went into
hiding after receiving death threats. Leona Palacios played a leading role in
the commissioner's report on atrocities committed during the long internal
conflict. A United Nations torture monitoring agency has cancelled a visit to
Australian detention centres because two states have barred unhindered
inspections. New South Wales and Queensland have refused permission for the
panel to check some prisons and mental health patient facilities. Two top
Spanish transport officials have resigned over a botched order for new commuter
trains. They proved to be too wide to fit through non-standard tunnels in the
mountainous regions of Asturias and Cantabria. And Botswana says it has seen a
big jump in rhino poaching with 138 rhinos killed over the past five years. BBC
News. The coast of Namibia is truly spectacular. In front of me, the cold waters
of the South Atlantic are stretching to the horizon. The waves are rolling in.
Behind me, the famous dunes of the Namib Desert are rising into a clear blue
sky. And the water here is really special too because the Benguela Current makes
it one of the richest fishing grounds in the world. The abundance of fish should
make for a good news story. Instead, it's given rise to the biggest corruption
case in Namibia's history, widely known as fish rot. And it's a case involving
one of the largest companies in a country 10,000 kilometres north, Iceland. This
scandal is getting wall-to-wall coverage, bringing down powerful politicians and
provoking outrage. We must unite against people who are stealing from us and our
future generations. After independence in 1990, Namibia set out to reclaim the
riches of its shores, which had been exploited for decades by other nations.
Millions of tons of valuable hake and horse mackerel had been pulled from the
ocean, with foreign companies plundering the profits and depleting Namibia's
resources. The bold idea was for Namibians to claim their share of the spoils
and develop their young country. But three decades on, in fishing towns like
Walvis Bay, Namibia's main port, the reality is very different, as unemployed
fisherman Jason Ipinge can testify. Life has taken a turn for the worse. I've
lost a lot in life and my dignity has also been tainted. In the past, I'd go
home to my village, and I was able to help my parents. But now a year can pass
without me being able to send something home. I'm Jahan Stel and I've come to
Namibia to find out how the great hopes invested in its fishing industry have
been dashed. Instead, the industry is embroiled in a scandal of epic
proportions. It's a story too about how journalists here and in faraway Iceland
are working together, sometimes at personal risk. We kind of all had to look for
Namibia on a map when we started. We didn't know anything about it, so we
basically had to learn by doing. Their investigation took years of painstaking
work and challenged some very influential people. We were taking on the most
powerful political group or business group in the country. They could shut down
this newspaper. And the story is far from over, but to understand it, you have
to understand how the Namibian fishing industry works first. I'm right in the
heart of all the space industrial zone. There's a caravan of trucks plowing the
area, turning the roads here into a moonscape of potholes and craters, and just
down at the waterfront here, there's all the fishing companies, one next to the
other, and we're going to be heading to one of them to meet the management of
Princess Brand Processing. Our fishmeal plant? Oh, yes. Very strong fish smell.
It's unmistakable. Yes. And this smell you will carry with you for the rest of
the day now. That's good to hear. They say this is the smell of money. General
Manager Adolf Borger takes me around one of the largest fish processing
factories in sub-Saharan Africa. We see a fishmeal plant, huge blast freezers,
and finally a giant processing hall. You might expect it to be buzzing. Instead,
it's empty. This is slippery. The floors. So just be careful. Thank you. Wow.
That's huge. That's cathedral size. Yes, very much. Very much. When we process,
because we want to keep the fish as fresh as possible, we are on a day and a
night shift. So we've got 300 people on the day shift, 300 people on the night
shift. That is the general workers, and then there's about 50 specialized
people. In Europe, this is done with 10, 15 people. So it is possible to put up
a fully automatic factory, but the idea is to create jobs. Adolf Borger's
factory stands still because unseasonal temperatures have driven the fish too
close to shore and the company's two trawlers are docked at the quayside. But
this is a metaphor for the whole of the fisheries sector in Namibia. It's
struggling. I move in the name of our people to declare that Namibia is forever
free, sovereign and independent. I thank you. Back in 1990, the new government
run by the former liberation movement SWAPO was determined to run things
differently by Namibians for Namibians. Their plan was called Namibianization.
Namibians took control of their own resources by establishing a 200 nautical
mile exclusive economic zone off its coast, one of the new parliament's first
acts. They also established a new quota system, and that's where it gets a
little complicated. Bear with me though, I'll try to keep it simple. Each year,
the Namibian government decides how much fish can be sustainably caught, usually
just under half a million tons. That's a lot of fish, in fact over 500 million
US dollars worth in 2019. The Fisheries Ministry then shares out quotas. You may
think of these as allowances. These quotas are often held initially by small
Namibian companies and even individuals who may not have any actual boats to
catch the fish, so they sell their quotas onto operators who do. Graham Hopwood
is executive director of the Institute for Public Policy Research in Namibia.
Well, in theory it's supposed to be a Namibianization project, so the rights to
various different types of fish in our sea, whether it's horse, mackerel or hay,
or whatever, are given on extended periods of 10, 15 years and so on to
companies that are Namibian or majority Namibian owned. In practice, what's
happened is that these are mostly briefcase companies that only exist on paper
that are often owned by people who, well first of all, have no knowledge of
fishing, have no infrastructure and no real interest in fishing, but see this as
a means of making money. And secondly, it seems a lot of these people are also
politically connected. So a well-intentioned system actually became vulnerable
to abuse. Quotas, briefcase companies and Namibianization, it all might sound
very technical, but remember this is a case that caused a scandal in two
countries 10,000 kilometers apart. It also changed the lives of the journalists
who uncovered the story. It was like in the fall of 2018 I was actually going to
take a year off from work. Meet Helgi Seljan, back then a journalist for the
Icelandic state broadcaster RUV, or RUV, although like many Icelanders he too
has worked in the country's huge fishing industry. I was going to go back to my
previous job, the crew member on our fishing trawler, and a friend of mine,
Kristin Habsson, the editor of WikiLeaks, called me and told me that he just had
a short meeting with a man who had a story to tell and you have to meet this
guy, you wouldn't forgive me if I wouldn't get you this meeting. This guy was
Johannes Stefansson, a former manager of the Icelandic fishing giant Samari, a
company that had been operating off the coast of Africa for over a decade. He
was about to turn whistleblower, alleging massive corruption in the Namibian
fishing sector with Icelandic involvement. I was quite skeptical and I'm sure I
came across as being even a bit rude. And of course the first question I asked
myself was, okay, this is the story from the, pardon my friend's horse's mouth,
but what about documents? And we of course did the speech for him about that all
of our work with him depended on him being honest and truthful to us and that if
he would lie we would prove that he did, that would have consequences for him
and everything. And he had his old computer and I took it with me. And just
within a couple of hours I had basically found a lot of key documents and I knew
that we had to do this. Helge Selnjahn's fishing trip was off. Instead he and
two colleagues began to trawl through a mountain of paperwork. There was like a
four, five months period where we just sat and read and tried to get context and
shift through emails and all of the documents that came with it. It's sort of
like a puzzle, but with, as you can imagine, with thousands and thousands of
bits. Seljahn and his team began to suspect that Samari had paid bribes to get
its hands on a lot of fish at a very good price. Here's how they believed the
scheme worked. The journalists think that powerful intermediaries in Namibia
helped companies linked to Samari to get hold of those valuable Namibian fishing
quotas in two ways. Firstly, through the Namibian state fishing company
Fishcore, which is supposed to use its quotas to benefit ordinary Namibians, and
secondly by manipulating a fishing cooperation agreement between Namibia and
neighbouring Angola. This was a potentially huge story. In addition to RÜV, an
Icelandic news site and Al Jazeera were also getting involved. And in Namibia
itself, the Namibian, one of the country's leading newspapers, had been on the
trail of something fishy for years. So I've come to the Namibian offices in
Windhoek. It's eight o'clock in the morning. It's a bright, blazingly blue sky.
The new paper is out. The headline is Women Power, which refers to the
anointment of a first female presidential candidate for the next elections in
2024, the result of the big story over the weekend, the Swapo Congress. The
ruling party Swapo has desperately reshuffled its leadership, partly because of
fish rot and other damaging corruption stories. The Namibian newspaper has
played its part in publishing revelations over the years true to its motto,
still telling it like it is. My name is Sinovene Imanewel. I'm an investigative
journalist and investigations editor for the Namibian newspaper. Imanewel and
his team had been running critical reports on the state company Fishcourse since
2015. They'd also questioned legal changes that gave the fisheries minister more
power to hand out those all-important quotas. But Sinovene Imanewel says the
team often felt like lone wolves tracking the story until the summer of 2019. So
around August we started picking up now Al Jazeera and some colleagues from
Iceland and WikiLeaks with a whistleblower were working on a story about the
fishing industry. So we had a call with a reporter from Al Jazeera. We explained
to us, me and my editor, said, look, we want to be part of this project because
we feel that this is such a crucial story. But I think how they looked at this
was like we were competitors to them. When the Namibian did finally get access
to the WikiLeaks files, they had literally days before the story was due to go
out in Iceland. We only had one week to do the story, send out questions, do the
notifications and all those things. So my editor and I decided that weekend we
are not going out if you want your wine you can buy your bottle and lock
yourself there and do your stories. In fact I went to my boss's house and I set
up camp there. I wrote my story from his house. Working hand in hand with
Celjan's team was crucial. Really one of the best thing was to be able to work
with a helgi in another country because this data was just too much for us to
just analyze in two, three days. And that is really when you test somebody's
character. Because they were too, they were on a tight deadline trying to
produce their documentary. And now I'm here squeezing myself in the conversation
for them to try and help us. That was really a good experience but a show of
just good humanity from the other end. On November 12th, 2019, the story broke.
Celjan's documentary aired in Icelandic and English while WikiLeaks made over
30,000 documents available online. The Namibians headline on the day? Court in
the net, the fish rod files. The impact was immediate. Two senior Swapo
politicians resigned. The fisheries minister himself, Bernard Esau, and Justice
Minister Sakeus Shangala. Several top fishing executives followed suit,
including two from Fishcore. The numbers of Aar had links to Swapo. The wow
effect that really came when they were arrested. It was around December when
they were rounded up, all of them, on the eve of elections. Things took off from
there and shortly afterwards the businessmen had been fired. So, yeah, that was
surprising to us. The tremors were also felt in Iceland, where the boss of
Samari, Torstenmar Balthinson, stepped aside pending an internal investigation.
The probe resulted in a limited apology. Mr Balthinson was reinstated. The
company put the blame for what happened on the whistleblower, Johannes
Stefansson. Angry crowds took to the streets in both Reykjavik and Windhoek as
the scale of the alleged corruption scheme became apparent. In Namibia, one of
the world's most unequal societies, it was fueled by a deep sense of injustice.
We are in Chrisapmont Township, which is during the colonial time, it was
designated for black people. Back in Valbus Bay, Esther Mbatera, who also writes
for the Namibian, agrees to show me around town. She knows the area and its
history inside out. Our first stop, a dilapidated concrete structure that used
to house Namibian contract labourers who originally built the fishing industry
in the South African colonial era. The compound's damp and cave-like rooms have
been taken over by squatters, many of them people from Namibia's rural north,
who've come in search of fishing jobs. Inside, if we can just try and see if we
can just peep a bit, they don't have beds here, what they have is concrete
slabs, and if you're lucky, you can then organise yourself a mattress and you
can sleep on it, but during the day, you must lock everything up, because
anybody can walk in and take your stuff. Even the corrugated roof here is
completely rotten, isn't it? And all the walls are completely charred. It's from
the indoor fires and cooking. I think the air in here must be pretty unhealthy
as well. The smell of the urine is pretty strong, isn't it? There's an
improvised latte tree. It's horrendous, but not unusual. Right across Namibia,
hundreds of thousands of people are living in conditions not much better than
this. Just beyond the compound, the Yikuta market is busy. Under a baking sun,
food sellers are sweating over charcoal barbecues. Strangely, fish isn't on the
traditional menu here. Namibians are big meat-eaters when they can afford it.
Fish is more of an export crop, but we do find one trader selling glistening
silver mullets interlaced with bright green seaweed. And here's the fish lady.
I'm going to ask her a question. Can I ask you a question? Yes. Where do you
source your fish? My brother. He's catching and I'm selling. And he's going out
on a boat? He's still at sea now. OK, since it's today's catch. Yes. On a good
day, a trader like this could earn 100 Namibian dollars, or 6 US dollars. That's
an income just above the poverty line. Almost a fifth of Namibia's population
live below it. The alleged corruption in the fish rod scandal involves sums in
the tens of millions of dollars, at least. So you can see why the story made
people angry. For the journalists, it was far from over. In Iceland, Helge
Seljan had another surprise coming. What came almost immediately was that this
guy, who we knew had been working for Samhri, a former police officer, when he
started showing up at my local coffee shop, then he started whispering threats
about that he knew where the whistleblower lived and stuff like that. And while
this was happening, I was getting strained by the complaints, the texts and
messages on social media. They were saying, like, now it's time for you to get
what you deserve and something like that, and you don't know what's coming for
you. And at that point, we finally decided that this can't go on like this, so
we basically made that public. The social media campaign also attacked Helge
Seljan's professionalism and even his mental health. The harassment only stopped
when a group of Samhri employees and associates were exposed for running a self-
styled guerrilla unit aimed at discrediting the company's critics. There was an
outcry and Iceland's Prime Minister, Káprsín Jakobstóttir, called the behavior
unacceptable. Samhri issued another partial apology, maintaining the media were
targeting the company unfairly. Perhaps surprisingly, Sinevina Emanuell and his
colleagues found it much easier to do their work than the team in Iceland. By
late 2021, almost two years after the first exposies were published, Namibia's
prosecutor-general pulled the myriad of accusations together into a damning
indictment. Over 144 pages, it sets out the state's case against 28 defendants
in Namibia, 10 individuals, including those two ex-ministers, and 18 companies
linked to the suspects. The charges include racketeering, bribery, money
laundering and tax evasion. In total, the people charged, all of them on
Namibian, are accused of benefiting to the tune of almost 20 million US dollars
between them. All 10 defendants have protested their innocence. My lord, once
more, in my morale of ethical chemistry, I am not a person of kickbacks or 10%.
I am not that one. I was never that one. That's ex-fisheries minister Bernard
Esau during a bail hearing in December 2022. There's barely been a single month
without the case being in the courts. As well as bail hearings and appeals, the
defense has tried to get the acting judge removed from the case. When and if the
trial finally gets underway, it could last for years, with over 300 witnesses to
be called. The stakes are high, and not just for the defendants. With most of
them closely linked to Swapu, the government has taken a battering. For the
first time since independence, it's in trouble, according to political
commentator Ruoti Tender. If you look at the time when these fish rots are broke
out, we had the national elections 2019 as well, November 2019. The
parliamentary elections they lost there took that majority. The president came
from 87% to 56%, so he was like an A student to a D student. In Iceland, the
reputation of Samari, the fishing sector and the country's international image
are in the dog. The investigations in Reykjavik are led by Olafur Porhaukson, a
man who made his name when he sent the CEOs of Iceland's largest banks to jail
following the global financial crisis in 2008. And now the fish rod case is
widening as lawyers and NGOs try to work out how much money might have been lost
in total. It's a figure not easy to come by. Namibia's Financial Intelligence
Center has tracked 650 million US dollars worth of suspicious transactions,
potentially connected with fish rod. But we don't yet know what percentage of
those transactions might have been diverted away from ordinary Namibians. Graham
Hopwood again. So we've been working to really try and identify the funds that
were transferred, how much Namibia had lost in terms of people who lost their
jobs, the families that were affected. In the hope eventually of putting
together a case for acid recovery or some kind of reparations for this
corruption scandal. Samari has strongly denied allegations of bribery and tax
avoidance. It commissioned a Norwegian law firm to conduct an investigation when
the scandal broke. Following that report, the company apologized and conceded
that, It was necessary to pay more attention to how payments were made, who they
were made to and on what basis, who had the authority to give instructions about
them and where they should be received. It's also clear that the underlying
agreements behind the payments should have been precise and formal. Samari says
it has now put in place a comprehensive governance and compliance system to
prevent mistakes being repeated in the future. The company is continuing to
blame any criminal activity that may have occurred on the whistleblower Johannes
Stefansson. Stefansson will be the Namibian state prosecutor's key witness at
the trial. Three years after they broke the story, Helgi Celjan and Sinevini
Emmanuel are still working on Fishrot. Hi. Hello. Hi, Helgi. How are you doing?
I'm good. Yes. How are you, my friend? I'm doing well. I'm doing well. How is it
cold? Before leaving Namibia, I wanted to get the two journalists together to
reflect on their experiences. So I got Helgi on the phone at the offices of the
Namibian. I had to see, of course, as much detail as possible and hopefully
everything put in front of the eyes of the public. But I think what's even more
important there is that all of the money that has been siphoned out of Namibia
to get that money back. I think one of the biggest outcomes we want is to change
the system that is being used currently where fishing resources in Namibia are
largely given to a clique of individuals who are connected to power. Patronage
is one of the things that we are really concerned about. One final word to both
of you. How important was your personal relationship? How important was it for
you to work together? Let me put it this way. If I was to go to Iceland today,
I'll probably knock on his door for me to sleep at his backyard. It's that kind
of friendship that we have cultivated. Me working with him is one of the people
who has been under heavy attack in Iceland for just doing what I do this side.
It's an encouragement for us to say, look, we don't go through the same thing
that Helgi does, but we should always aspire to be ready to be Helgi in our
country when the landscapes change. Yeah, it's the same. I have close relatives
that I haven't spoken to as much as she has as she has known in the last couple
of three years. So yeah, I would never let you sleep in my backyard. I would
definitely do you better, Justice, if you came here. I wouldn't want to let you
sleep outside, especially not now in the cold. Thank you. Yeah, I never knew
that when I started this case that I would end up having good friends and that I
would, for lack of a better word, fall in love with this country that I barely
knew existed before, to tell you the truth. Thank you, Helgi. You just made the
cry of it, and I had the cry. I'm OK. Yeah, OK. Cheers, brother. You're
listening to the BBC World Service. Join Hazel Healy as she explores women's
role in West Africa's fishing industry. In Senegal, tens of thousands of women
work as fish processors or transformer tracers. Mostly, their work is unseen and
uncounted. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via
third-party services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
Sounds.