TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT, hello I'm Roger Hearing and this is Business Matters on the
BBC World Service. Today we're live in Washington and Delhi, coming up on the
programme. 365 days of war, reflections on the Ukraine economy after a year of
conflict and what further help the country wants from Western companies don't
deal with Russia. Please stop it, otherwise you are just on the wrong side of
the history. Please, please, please stop any trading with Russia. Plus why
Canada and the European Union are turning against TikTok and what exactly is
milk, oat and soy or cow? We've got the white stuff. That's Business Matters
here on the BBC, coming up after the latest BBC News. I'm Stuart McIntosh with
the BBC News. Hello. As Ukraine marks one year since the start of Russia's full-
scale invasion, the United Nations has overwhelmingly backed a call for Moscow's
forces to pull out immediately. More than 140 countries voted in favour of a
resolution condemning the war from UN headquarters in New York, here's Nedor
Tofik. Nearly three-quarters of the world body has consistently supported
Ukraine. The country's foreign minister, Dimitro Kuleba, said he was satisfied
with the vote and the message sent was clear. It doesn't matter what Russia
tries and how it attempts to undermine international order and the coalition in
support of Ukraine's territorial integrity, it fails one time after another.
Only a handful of countries voted against it, including Belarus, North Korea and
Syria. India and South Africa, along with Russia's most powerful ally, China,
were among those that abstained. Poland has begun putting steel and concrete
anti-tank obstacles on its border with the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. The
Polish government says there's been a rise in flights into Kaliningrad from
Turkey and the Middle East. It fears that migrants will be encouraged by Moscow
to cross into the European Union. Adam Easton reports from Warsaw. In November,
the Polish military began laying out a two-and-a-half metre high razor wire
fence along the country's 232 kilometre border with Kaliningrad. Officials said
they were concerned an increase of direct flights into the Russian exclave from
Turkey and the Middle East might herald a new migration crisis. Last year,
Poland completed a five-and-a-half metre high steel pole fence on its border
with Belarus following a huge rise in migrant crossings of people from Asia and
Africa. North Korea has test-fired four strategic cruise missiles into the sea.
The state news agency said the missiles travelled 2,000 kilometres. It added
that the drill demonstrated the readiness of what it called Pyongyang's nuclear
combat force. It's the latest in a series of weapons tests that have increased
tension on the Korean Peninsula. A court in Los Angeles has sentenced the former
Hollywood film mogul Harvey Weinstein to a further 16 years in jail for rape and
sexual assault. He's already serving a 23-year sentence after a separate
conviction in New York. Sophie Long reports. Harvey Weinstein sat in court in a
crumpled prison jumpsuit, unable to stand as he was sentenced to a further 16
years in prison. His victim cried as she told the court how his brutal attack
had stripped her of her confidence, ruined her career and left her heartbroken
and alone. She said no sentence could remove the damage but the maximum term
would restore other victims' faith in the justice system. You're listening to
the latest world news from the BBC. Police in southeast Nigeria have blamed
Biafran separatists for attacks on politicians ahead of the elections on
Saturday. A Labour party candidate for a Senate seat and two colleagues were
shot dead in Enugu State on Wednesday. An attack on a PDP party convoy killed a
driver. Nigeria faces growing insecurity and frustration at the shortage of cash
following a botched effort to change the country's banknotes. The Government of
Madagascar says a powerful storm which battered the east coast of the island is
now known to have killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie brought
torrential rain and strong winds tearing roofs off its houses. It's now heading
towards Mozambique where it's expected to make landfall in the coming hours. A
US federal judge has ordered that the disgraced singer R. Kelly must spend an
extra year in prison on top of a 30-year sentence he's already serving. Kelly
was jailed last year for sex trafficking and racketeering. He was later
convicted in a second trial in Chicago of charges including enticing minors for
sex. Speaking after the sentencing, Kelly's defence lawyer Jennifer Bongine said
the judge had struck the right balance. The sentence was largely run concurrent
19 years, one year added on in real time and that is a win in our view and it's
the right outcome. The judge was reasonable. He, I think, took into account both
sides and ultimately was fair. Bowing has temporarily suspended deliveries of
the 787 Dreamliner again in order to conduct analysis on a fuselage component.
The Federal Aviation Administration said deliveries would not resume until it
was satisfied the issue had been addressed. The aerospace giant recommended
deliveries, recommenced deliveries last August after they'd been halted for more
than a year due to previous problems. That's the BBC News. Hello and welcome to
Business Matters. I'm Roger Hereing. Coming up on the programme today it's
exactly a year since Russia launched its attempt to remove Ukraine as a separate
nation but the country has fought its huge neighbour to a standstill. But at
what cost in lives and livelihoods? We're going to hear from the former and
current Ukrainian finance ministers. Also the European Commission bans TikTok in
its offices as Canada launches a probe into the social media app over concerns
about data use and Oat or Soya or even Cow. They're all milk at least according
to the US federal authorities but should they be? I absolutely love oat milk.
Really? And it like makes me so happy. We'll be talking milk and I'll be joined
throughout the programme by two guests on opposite sides of the world. Sushma
Ramachandran, columnist for the Tribune newspaper and economic writer, who's
joining us from Delhi and also Natalie Giresko, who's chairperson of the Aspen
Institute in Kyiv and a former Ukrainian finance minister herself who joins us
from Washington. Now we're going to take the whole first half of the programme
to consider what is a very significant moment. Exactly 365 days ago the people
of Ukraine were enduring a night of horrible expectation, awaiting a Russian
invasion they hoped wouldn't come but which they knew almost certainly would and
a few hours later the war began. Reports of explosions in the Ukrainian capital
as Vladimir Putin announces a special military operation in Ukraine. Whoever
tries to interfere with us and even more so to create threats for our country,
our people should know that Russia's response will be immediate and will lead
you to such consequences that you have never experienced in your history. It's
long been threatened and now it's started. Explosions were heard in Ukraine's
capital Kyiv and here in Kharkiv. Who can stop this war? People. And these
people are amongst you, I am sure. Addressing President Putin and telling him
from the bottom of my heart stop your troops from an offensive to Ukraine, give
peace a chance. President Putin in the name of humanity bring your troops back
to Russia. The words there of the UN Secretary General Antonio Gutierrez at the
end of that combination of sounds of what was happening 365 days ago and it has
seemed a very, very long war. I'm not least a course for the people of Ukraine.
Let's bring in both my guests to talk about this to begin with and let me come
to you first Natalie because this is your country. It's a country that you
served as Minister of Finance. Looking back now at what's happened, are you
surprised that we are in the position we are where Russia has not triumphed
despite the extremely high odds initially that it would? No, thank you Roger.
I'm not surprised that they have not triumphed and I'm certain that they will
not triumph. I think the surprise lays more in the area of how incredibly
devastating and destructive this war is. I remember when the war began nine
years ago in February of 2014 and this is just so much worse, so much bigger, so
much more devastation, so much more human loss. But no, I'm not surprised that
good will win out over evil and that the Ukrainians will defend their soil to
the last day, to the last drop of blood. You make an important point of course.
It wasn't the beginning of war, it was the beginning of the latest stage of war.
The war itself has gone on for a long time and indeed the Russians have been
carrying it on often without much external opposition as we know. Let me come to
you on this Sushma because as you probably are aware in the last four or five
hours there was a vote at the UN Security Council in which the UN General
Assembly in fact overwhelmingly approved a resolution which called for a
comprehensive just and lasting peace in Ukraine, 141 countries backing that
motion. 32 abstentions, seven voting against, 32 abstentions including your
country, India. Many people, I guess certainly in parts of Europe and the United
States and other parts of the world, will be saying why would a country like
India democracy, a country that has defended its own borders of course on many
occasions, why would it take this position? Well there are a whole lot of
complex factors on this and definitely I have to say that there's a lot of you
know general sympathy for the Ukraine people and you know the travails that
they're going through. It is horrifying and there's no doubt about it that the
fact that Russia has invaded the Ukraine is not something that one can actually
support. You cannot support one country invading another country but the fact
also is as I said it's rather complex that we are, India has seen Russia as a
friend for many decades and in fact it has been kind of for many, at one stage
it was probably the only friend we felt in the world and that's a perception
that is not just government policy, that's a perception that has filtered down
to the general public. So while as I said there's a great enough sympathy for
the Ukraine, there's also a feeling that this is the time to be standing behind
a friend who was with us you know in our time of need. You know that when we had
invasions it was Russia who was standing with us, it wasn't the west, it was
Indira Gandhi trying to you know fight on our borders and we had people like you
know presidents like Nixon who were and of course his officials like this who
were very anti-india. So these kind of perceptions and the the so government
policy with the policy of abstention and the policy of trying to maintain a
balance is something that is not just, is something that is supported by the
general public and you can see that by the media comments on all these issues.
Okay well it is an interesting position and it's good to get the explanation
because I think a lot of people perhaps surprised in some ways. Let's talk
though about another aspect of all this which is what's been happening with the
Ukrainian economy because it is I suppose unquestionable that this amount of
conflict and damage have done appalling things to Ukraine and obviously killed a
lot of people, it also deprived a lot of people of their livelihoods and Ukraine
clearly wants support, more support in weapons of course but also financial
support. How much of the support they saw at the UN Security, the UN General
Assembly will actually translate into concrete assistance as the country
struggles to survive. What in fact does the government have keyed most need in
this area? Is it more sanctions on Russia or more help directly for Ukraine
itself and its finances? Well Oleg Ostenko is an economic advisor to the
president Vladimir Zelensky. He says some western companies are still operating
in Russia despite promising not to. From the very beginning when the invasion
started everybody was saying, I mean from the civilized world everybody was
saying that yes we do understand we want to make sure that the blood money are
not sent to Kremlin's regime however part of businesses just continue to do
business as usual. I would say that the first message is you guys know the
story. You know that our people are killed. We are paying our lives so any extra
help you are given to Russian businesses so please stop it. Please respect those
statements otherwise you are just on the wrong side of the history. Please
please please stop any trading with Russia. Oleg Ostenko there. Natalie let me
bring you in on this because obviously it's an issue for Ukraine the extent to
which well the west which has had very very lengthy and very strong links
economically with Russia. The extent to which it's going to get rid of them and
I mean obviously a lot have gone but there are companies as well. Philip Morris
for example headline today suggesting that it was not really able necessarily to
pull any further back than it already has. What's your take on this? I think
that companies not only have a moral responsibility like Oleg Ostenko was
talking about but they're going to find that they have legal responsibilities
that they need to focus on. You know the United Nations guiding principles on
businesses in very clearly outlines that companies that have the ability to step
away from contributing to humanitarian rights being destroyed need to do so and
if not they can expect that there will be costs later and so I think these
companies now need to start looking at those UN guidelines and they need to
start understanding that by contributing tax dollars by by Russian law being
forced to provide their employees for military conscription. When justice does
come down these companies are going to be asked could they have left could
Philip Morris or others have left yes they could they could have written off
their their investment and they could have walked away and rather than
contributing to this to this humanitarian disaster and so I think there's going
to be a cost and I think you can see the Ukrainian government is being has set
up already a list of companies that are contributing to the terrorism on that
list of companies are those that are refusing many who are refusing to walk away
to take the right off take the loss but stop contributing to the war effort.
Yeah so it's a plea but also I guess a sort of implied threat in a way but let
me I will be very blessed on this program because we have you former Ukrainian
finance minister we also have actually a recording of someone who has been
speaking to Ukraine's current finance minister my colleague Aaron Hasselhurst
he's been talking to the current finance minister Sergei Marchenko let's have a
listen. Unfortunately the damage done by Russia aggression for Ukraine is
tremendous last year we lost particularly more than 30 percent of our GDP there
was no country which comparable effect one year effect on the economy that's why
we suffered a lot we lost part of our territory but we're still capable we're
still able and we still can execute our key function as a government starting
from the first days of war we able to pay patience for our people we pay
necessary social protection expenditures as well we have done all necessary step
to increase our military budget half of our budget is a military budget and of
course it's not an easy way to run the country in the war. Your country Sergei
has had tens of billions of dollars of international support from the likes of
the US and the EU and others just to just to keep basics going such as pension
payments government salaries are you confident that that sort of help is just
going to keep coming we are confident when we see money in our accounts if not
we should keep moving we should keep negotiation of course now we see that
Ukraine's under tremendous support all democracies support Ukraine and it also
creates necessary environment for political support for Ukraine where despite
that it could be some fatigue for Ukraine's case now we haven't seen fatigue.
Much of the support you've received particularly from the EU has been in the
form of repayable loans rather than well donations I mean I'm just wondering are
you worried that Ukraine you're going to be saddled with a mountain of debt that
you're just not going to be able to pay off we're not worried about that concern
right now of course for us it's preferable to receive grand financing but MFA
finance and macro financial assistance from the EU it's the money which they can
provide for us and the money which we attracting from the EU is rather cheap
money because EU borrows from their risk as well as money with a long-term
maturity as last year it was 15 plus this year is around 30 years and it's been
a long time for us to for repayment how long is it going to take to rebuild
Ukraine's economy and get back to the size it was before the war started and
what gives you hope that it can be done hope it's good but the real step is
better so I would prefer to clear vision and clear do to bring our economy back
to 2021 what we really needs it's a very cohesion policy within the government
very wise steps towards necessary policy tools and steps to help our economy to
be in the position before the war Ukraine's finance minister Sergei Marchenko
there speaking to Aaron Hasselhurst so there's something I wanted to bring you
in on which is the disruption clearly to Ukraine's economy but also to the
global economy that's come about as a result of this conflict food prices of
course food supplies also energy prices how has all that affected a country like
India well of course it was you know a devastating blow right in the beginning
first of all oil prices went up to 130 dollars per barrel and we import over 80
percent of our requirement and you know it had been estimated that prices would
be in the range of about probably 70 to 75 dollars in 2022 and you know it's a
huge burden on the exchequer then apart from that there were so many other
products that we are exporting importing from Russia and the Ukraine like like
the rest of the world fertilizers for instance sunflower oil or edible oil
prices shut up in the country and then of course the global supply chain
disruptions stopped you know the components as well as metals prices went up so
prices of a whole lot of manufactured products went up initially that was of
course the first few months and then now of course things have settled down you
know prices have moderated but it brought about the same type of high inflation
as has occurred around the world it happened in India and and the need obviously
for that all to be sorted through and and as you say things are beginning to
settle down in some areas but clearly there is a lot more fighting that will be
going on in Ukraine and the things that you know the central bank of course
again like the rest of the world started aggressive rate hikes to curb inflation
and it has I must say it has been probably more successful than many other
countries because it's been brought down to within the tolerance band of about
two to six percent yeah and many countries around the world have been adjusting
in that way let me move the focus though also back onto another aspect of course
of this which isn't just the trouble inside Ukraine but about the fact of people
moving from Ukraine in fact eight million or so Ukrainians were forced to flee
their country as a result of the war let's hear about what happened to them
because the BBC's James Graham has been looking at some and talking to some of
the many Ukrainian business people who were forced out of their country by the
war and who are now starting from scratch elsewhere in the world hundreds of
thousands of desperate people are trying to leave chaotic scenes every news
bulletin carried the same pictures crowds of people carrying all they could
fleeing war but what happened after those first weeks of turmoil Anastasia and
her partner Alexei settled in northern England and started a cleaning business
but it's been challenging we don't have a lot of customers we don't have a lot
of orders but we need to start with small things and step by step maybe maybe
this year we will get more orders this wasn't her chosen career and it hasn't
been simple picking up where she left off I was a lawyer then when I moved to
England I tried to be a lawyer maybe here but I'm determined that it's different
on the future I need to make my qualification or I need to get my degree so I
want to try I want to continue maybe I'll open my small law company in UK and
will help Ukrainian Yulia also came to the UK a seamstress by trade she tried to
restart her wedding dress business my husband sent me sewing machines and
everything but it's not easy because system of business in England is different
it's not like in Ukraine and I start working the wedding dress factory and I
have it with this job she says worries over language and the different legal
system held her back I really scared that I do something wrong and then I can
have a problem here so I just think okay I just take this choice and work with
company and this will be more easy for me because I think I need more time not
like one year so while some seek to build new businesses others have kept things
going back in Ukraine from afar Konstantin an IT entrepreneur was caught outside
the country at the time of the invasion fortunately he had a plan for his staff
before the war we said that everyone has two thousand dollars for relocation and
we either compensate them afterwards or we give them beforehand as cash so they
just have this money set aside in case if something happens when it began the
entire team was 40 functional the first week and in the month they were back at
100% Konstantin says those wages together with his ongoing campaign to encourage
people to buy from Ukraine helps everyday livelihoods for the millions who
remain James Crayan reporting there on the impact of people who who have left
Ukraine had to leave Ukraine and Natalie let me bring you in on this because
that is a problem in itself a kind of brain drain a drain of talent out of a
country for obvious reasons but with big implications for Ukraine's future
enormous implications it's the labor force of the future and that's another
reason why this war cannot go on forever and ever the longer people are away the
more they settle down and grow roots into those communities and we want everyone
to come home and so one of the questions is why the question is always weapons
weapons weapons it's to end the war as soon as possible and then to begin
reconstruction reconstruction first and foremost of infrastructure of
communities where these people can come home they want schools for their
children and they want jobs so getting the economy back as the minister
described to full speed is extremely important not just for those who remain but
specifically for the eight million that have been forced to leave but they can
only come they will only come back if it's safe to do so i mean i what's your
situation i mean you you clearly are from Ukraine i know you have very strong
roots also in the u.s but you're not in Ukraine at the moment is that partly a
safety decision on your part now i've been abroad unfortunately working for the
last six years so i just haven't been there for the last few years which is
important which you think of going back at the moment or would you be concerned
for your safety if you did um if i had a purpose there and i had a role that i
could play that was of value to the country i would right now that role and the
value i can create is is more outside of the country than it is inside so yes
i'll go back well good i mean when you know i can imagine that you're the
exactly the sort of person who would be able to help there of course um so let
me come to you on this i mean it is a grim thing for a country when it loses
that many of its population particularly its working inspirational entrepreneur
part of the population yes yes of course it is it is and that has the migration
at the time initially was something that was covered as i said in a very
detailed way on our media and we had people going in we had reporters going into
the Ukraine and reporting so as i said there's a lot of sympathy uh for what
Ukraine has gone through at that time of course there was a huge operation from
India to get evacuate the medical students we had thousands of medical students
located in the Ukraine and getting them out was a problem the Ukraine
authorities were of course as helpful as they could be but it was wartime and uh
Russia was also helpful again once again you know come back to the fact that
Indians view Russians as you know that they're safe you know people were saying
if they can go to the eastern border then so then Russians can pick them up so
there's a there's a feeling that Russia is a long-standing friend and they will
always be good to Indians well so this operation i'm sorry to say that during
the operation there were a lot of allegations that uh there was the you know
there were racist attitudes towards the medical students which may or may not
have been true unfortunately we can't get into it right now we're going to have
to move on from this but thanks to both of you in the next part of the program
we look at some other issues most particularly TikTok and how that is a problem
potentially for data in the European Union come back in a moment this is
Business Matters This is the BBC World Service with the winner of the English as
a Second Language prize for the International Radio Playwriting Competition. My
name is Aynok Karim, I'm a writer from Kazakhstan in my play it's a funny story
about a student who finds someone else's passport and wants to give it back to
its owner. I thought I better take it to the police station myself it's on my
way wait wait wait wait show me the passport at first I felt a little bit like I
was limited in the way how I can express myself but then I like it even more
because you close your eyes and you just need to imagine. Why isn't the
nationality stated in the passport? Why do you say he's not a casser? He is a
casser, absolutely. I would be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The man
lost his passport, must give it back. What a face. The Passport Saturday at 19
and Sunday at 12 GMT You're listening to Business Matters from the BBC World
Service with me Roger Hearing. Coming up in the next half hour we're live in
Asia with a roundup of news and business headlines from across the world and
comment from our guests Natalie Giresko and Sushmarama Chandra. We're going to
be looking at the growing pushback against TikTok and asking with soy oat and
almond on offer as well as cow when is milk not milk? All coming up after the
news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. Ukraine's President Vladimir Zelensky has
welcomed a vote at the United Nations calling for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The resolution was backed by an
overwhelming majority of countries which Mr Zelensky described as a powerful
signal of global support. Friday marks exactly a year since the full-scale
invasion began. Poland is fortifying its border with the Russian exclave of
Kaliningrad. The Polish government fears that migrants from Turkey and the
Middle East are being encouraged to travel to the area where they could cross
into the European Union. North Korea has launched four cruise missiles into the
sea. It's the latest in a series of provocative weapons tests. A court in Los
Angeles has sentenced the former Hollywood film mogul Harvey Weinstein to 16
more years in prison. The rape and sexual assault charges date back to 2013.
He's already serving a long sentence for another conviction. Madagascar's
government says a powerful storm which battered the island's east coast has
killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie is now heading for Mozambique.
Peru's government has declared a state of emergency in more than a dozen areas
because of an outbreak of dengue fever. It's recorded more than 11,000 cases of
the disease this year. Boeing has temporarily suspended deliveries of the 787
Dreamliner to conduct analysis on a fuselage component. The company restarted
deliveries of the jet last August after they had been halted for more than a
year because of other problems. The Hollywood actor Alec Baldwin has pleaded not
guilty to involuntary manslaughter over a fatal shooting on a film set. The
actor was holding a gun that went off while making the movie Rust, killing the
cinematographer Helena Hutchins. BBC World News. Welcome back to Business
Matters with me, Roger Hearing, and my guests today, Natalie Giresco and Sushma
Ramachandran. Now, TikTok is the must-have social media app for anyone under 30.
The Chinese-owned platform is practically everywhere, but it's not going to be
inside the offices of the European Commission anymore. The European Commission
has told staff to remove TikTok from their phones and any devices running EU
programmes. At the same time, the Canadian government has launched a joint
federal and provincial investigation into TikTok over concerns about the use of
private information. Well, I've been speaking about all this to Shona McCallum,
who's the BBC's technology reporter. I asked her what the European Commission
had done exactly and why. Yes, so the European Commission earlier said that
cyber security was the main crux of this and that they had questions over what
TikTok might be doing with their data. Now, of course, TikTok is owned by
ByteDance, and that's the parent company founded in China. And critics have been
raising these fears that data could be passed to the Chinese state, to Beijing.
And the concern is, Roger, if you've got TikTok on your phone, is it reading
your emails? Is it looking at your photos? Is it accessing your contacts? And
ultimately, is it making that information available to the Chinese government?
And that's the concern. So the EC have really only come out and said this is a
cyber security issue, but we know that that's the context around this concern
over China. And of course, it's not just the Europeans. We know, I think the US
government, federal institutions have been looking at this as well. And now the
Canadians have put in position some kind of inquiry as well. Yeah, that's right.
You mentioned those two. Last month, the Dutch government advised public
officials to stay clear of it. Famously, India has completely banned TikTok a
couple of years ago for the geopolitical concerns. And so it's interesting to
now see various pockets of the government and institutions coming out and
telling their staff that they shouldn't be downloading this app because of these
worries. Here in the UK, the chair of the foreign affairs select committee,
Alicia Cairns, urged people to delete the app as well. So these murmurings are
kind of having this effect, I think globally. And I think it will be interesting
to see what other countries and departments kind of maybe follow suit. But two
questions arise, Shona. One is, didn't we kind of know this beforehand? And also
really with young people particularly being so keen on it, it's not going to
make much difference. Right. I mean, I don't know how much of an effect this
will have on TikTokers. Remember TikTok's available in over 150 countries, being
downloaded over three and a half billion times. It's the fastest growing social
media platform in the world. And look, if we're all continually giving away our
data all the time, you know, we're on social media platforms, if we fill in a
form online or, you know, we have other health apps, for example, on our phone,
we're continually giving the data away. So is TikTok any different from Facebook
or Instagram? I suspect people won't feel differently or sit up and listen, you
know, any more in this scenario during this case. But it will be interesting to
see if we get more of this movement almost from the top. And then maybe that
will trickle through eventually. And I suppose the point is, yes, we give our
data, but this is to China. Maybe that really is the difference. People are
concerned that China seems, if not to be an adversary, at least a questionable
presence on the international board. Yeah, that's correct. And, you know, the
Chinese and surveillance has been a concern, you know, not just on social media
companies, but also big tech companies. We've had the issues with Huawei in the
past. And so people are a bit more skeptical about what the Chinese may do with
the data. And I think that's just that unknown quantity, really. And of course,
TikTok have responded to today's news. They said they're disappointed with the
European Commission's decision. They believe it's misguided and based on
fundamental misconceptions. And what they also said was that they're trying to
establish data centers in Europe to store data locally. So they're kind of
ensuring users certainly within the EU that that data will not be going to
China. But, you know, we actually don't really know where the data goes when it
comes to TikTok. And that was Sharon McCallum, BBC's technology reporter. Now,
as she said, of course, it's banned already in India, but Natalie, it's not
clearly banned in the US, at least not widely so. Do you have TikTok? No, never
use it and urged my daughters from day one never to use it as well. Did they
respond? They claim that they don't have it on their phones and they don't use
it. Yes, I think. They're young adults. Quite. That's an issue, isn't it? But
Sushma, I mean, it is banned in India. Is there any way around people I imagine
can get around things on terms of virtual personal networks and stuff? But is
there much of that or is it just literally not there at all? No, it's not there.
It's not there at all. And the thing is, it's, it's, you know, there are other
apps which allow you to have these short reads. So, you know, I think probably
Instagram has been the biggest beneficiaries. Yeah. So, you know, Instagram has
sort of grown very rapidly as far as these short reads are concerned. Yeah. And
of course, you do get a lot of TikTok videos coming from other countries. That's
a different matter. But apparently India was the biggest market outside China,
you know, when it banned the, it's interesting 2020. Yeah. About 200 million
users were there in India. Yeah. And it clearly, well, it taps into, I think, a
particular sort of outlook that a lot of younger people do have in terms of what
they want. And Natalie, let me come to you on that because clearly the issue is
here concern about what data is going to China, what is being put back there.
And that's, that's on a lot of areas Huawei and all sorts of things, but
particularly it seems on TikTok because young people, it seems are willing to
give almost anything away in terms of TikTok. And do you see that as a major
problem? You clearly didn't want your daughters using it. I did. I do see it as
a major problem and I do urge people to educate in schools, universities, and at
home, our children to figure out, you know, that they should not be providing
that kind of information that they should be protecting their privacy. It
doesn't mean that they can't enjoy social media, but there is a limit. And I
think that so far what's happened both in the EU and the federal government, the
United States has to do with government and cybersecurity for government
secrets. But, but this is, this potentially goes much further. We need to urge
our children to start thinking about this. Yeah. And it's the same for Instagram
and Facebook and all manner of other platforms. I mean, TikTok isn't worse in
that sense, as you say, apart from, you know, state secrets, but in general
terms it isn't. It's not worse, but China doesn't allow western social media
into China. It blocks Gmail, Google, YouTube, Facebook, Instagram. So there's no
reason to believe that they don't take the same measures with regard to our
social media. So Sushma, when TikTok was banned in India, did a lot of, I mean,
Instagram, Facebook, the others, did they all jump on that and are now even more
popular as a result? Young people go for those rather than anything else. Yes,
yes, absolutely. There was, of course, but you know, the thing is it happened
after India had a clash with China on the border and there was a lot of, there
is even now a lot of suspicion of China. So the government's decision was
actually hailed in the country that, you know, this is something positive. We
should be doing things like that. We should be banning in these kinds of things.
The fact is that we have a lot of trade relations, bilateral trade relations
with China. I think there are about 700 to 800 Chinese companies which are based
in India. So there is a fear that there are security breaches as far as some of
the companies like the telecom company, Huawei is not allowed to bid for certain
telecom contracts. So TikTok, the ban, you know, was accepted and, you know,
young people just moved on to other apps. I mean, they can. There's so much
available. But not interestingly, Sushma, I mean, China, obviously, would bike
dance. Chinese company produces TikTok. But there are other Indian homegrown
social media apps as well. I mean, does this exist? Yes, they are. But the fact
is that the, I have to say, the ones which, you know, the Western ones are far
more popular as far as, you know, as I said, Instagram and Snapchat and all
these other things. I mean, I don't even know how many. There are lots and lots
of up there. But I doubt, sorry, coming back to what Natalie said about advising
a daughter, you know, I doubt I've never advised my children on this kind of a
thing. And I somehow wonder, I don't think children really listen. You could
tell them. But I think my children think they know far more about the internet
than I do. Well, and certainly my children certainly do. I mean, Natalie, how
did you feel? My girls are concerned about their privacy. Yeah. So we've lived
in a former communist country. Well, exactly. And on that point, on that point,
Natalie, I did want to bring up in relation to what we were talking about
earlier, because one thing that has been very clear from the last year has been
how much information has come out on social media from the war. I mean, you
know, videos of fighting frontline fighting, but also people who are leaving the
country. I mean, it's been an important we may have suspicions about it, but it
has an even including TikTok has been a very important source of information,
hasn't it? No question. The ability to have a telephone in every place in the
world, and to shoot, you know, live video and to take to take testimonials from
everyone means that we're all seeing it live 24 hours a day. But it also allows
people to create false narratives, false propaganda. And so I think one of the
challenges we have with all of this information coming to us from social media
is how to determine what's true and what's not. Yeah. And in the Ukraine
context, that has been a huge challenge because it is a situation where bad
actors, if you like, wanting to influence the outcome and the way people see it,
get in there. Does Ukraine have adequate means to try and deal with that? Well,
they've been extremely successful. When I was minister, we had one of the first
major cyber attacks against our electricity system and it went down and it was a
major crisis. And now there are thousands and thousands of cyber attacks daily
by the Russians on every system. And yet the banking system is holding up and
functioning quite well. It hasn't been brought down. The government systems have
not been brought down. They've been able to, as the minister said earlier,
deliver all government services. So the Ukrainian technology future is very,
very bright. It's shown itself to be adaptable. It's current. It's functional
and it's the leading advantage, the leading edge right now in the Ukrainian
economy. Yeah. I think I've certainly been impressed by the amount that has come
from semi-official sources, if you like, but on social media and Twitter, TikTok
as well, but also Instagram. The Ukrainians have kind of harnessed this for
their own purposes in a way I think somehow perhaps the Russians haven't. Is
that your impression? Absolutely. I was at a museum the other day that had the
ocular vision goggles. You could actually step into the ruins of any five
different cities in Ukraine and you were physically present in 3D in these
cities on the streets. What they've been able to do is amazing. And Sushma, I
mean, this is a way, I mean, we talked about how obviously it's used for social
comments and all kinds of things, but increasingly in India too, I mean, it is a
vehicle for giving people insights into things they might not otherwise see. I
mean, sometimes it can work badly. We know there've been killings that have come
off the back of social media suggestions about things, but do you feel it's been
a socially positive development for India as well? Oh yes, of course. Because
you know so many people who are sort of outside of the normal and that of India
come into it. I mean, even in rural areas, people have phones and they can
connect. And we talk about TikTok, but there are things there are apps which
allow farmers to find out about weather, about meteorology, about India, you
know, fertilizer and the use of fertilizer and the use of pesticides and when to
throw their crops. All these kinds of information is coming through the
telephone, through apps, special apps. And so it's a great boon, I must say. And
of course, India completely, there has more or less completely stopped laying
landlines of phones in rural areas because you can just give the mobile phone.
So it's been a great leap of technology and social apps, social media has
contributed to it, no doubt. Yeah, and in a way, coming back to you, Natalie,
maybe when in the rebuilding of Ukraine, maybe that's something that will
happen, a recognition that, you know, perhaps some of the old technology no
longer needs to be rebuilt. There are new things that would work better.
Absolutely. I mean, it's already happened in the banking system. The FinTech
sector in Ukraine is far leaps and bounds ahead of the United States or Europe.
The ability of the government to stay in touch with its citizens through a
mobile app called DIA, where they're able to both provide for documentation
through the mobile app and or subsidies to the internally displaced people
throughout the country. It's an extraordinary application that was homegrown
built in Ukraine and now, you know, is being used as an example to be rebuilt in
other European countries. And so I think, you know, Ukraine is leapfrogging on
technology. Some very few, but good things that can be sort of come out of the
last year and longer reflection on what's been going on in Ukraine. Let's turn
to something very different now. Perhaps a rather nicer thought, a nice glass of
milk. Now, doesn't that sound like something that we'd all quite like to have?
But what do you think of when I say the word milk? Is it something that we get
from cows or sheep or camels, I suppose, or or even buffalo? Is it something,
however, made perhaps from oats or soy or cashew or coconut or hemp or even
quinoa? So two small olates and an oak cabbagey now. I tend to veer away from
dairy where possible due to farting cows. We're not baby cows. We shouldn't be
drinking milk if we're not, if it was a made for us, I suppose. I absolutely
love oat milk. Really? And it like makes me so happy. I like them, but they
didn't, to me, they weren't quite the full replacement of the milk experience
that I would have looked or hoped for. I think it probably blows down to habit
and the idea that it's got calcium in it. I don't mind any of them. Sorry, is
that annoying? Yes, it is rather. Those are some views from from here in the UK,
of course, reflecting some rather varied ideas about including environmental
issues, I suppose, when it comes to milk. Even mentioned there of bovine
flatulence, just what you want. Well, up to now in the US, it's been a matter of
dispute what can call itself milk, with the dairy industry maintaining milk
should come from animals or it ain't milk. But the Food and Drug Administration
there has now made a judgment that plant-based beverages can call themselves
milk because they don't pretend to be from dairy animals. And US consumers
apparently aren't confused by the difference. Well, the rules also call for
voluntary extra nutrition labels that note when the drinks have lower levels of
nutrients than dairy milk, calcium, magnesium, or vitamin D. But essentially,
the veggie milk has won. Well, join me now to get a sense of what this means is
Indra Oi, who's a food science professor at New Zealand's University of Otago.
Professor Oi, thanks so much for being with us. Does this actually matter? I
mean, we know what milk is. We don't really care if it comes from vegetable
sauces or animal sources. It's just there and we like it. Yeah, I think this
discussion is quite interesting because normally we call milk, if it is coming
from the animal, basically the liquid is, I mean, secreted from a memory glance
of mammalian. So with the wording of milk, people have already used it quite a
different way now with the consumer. So consumer recognize almost all of the
liquid with the white color or milky color, they call it milk. However, if you
reflect back, we have already used quite a lot of plant milk in the past, for
example, like soy milk, coconut milk, almond milk, rice milk, and I think this
is the way how consumer knows. However, this is with the new FDA proposal that
it is given yesterday. There are risks and also benefits around this. But the
risks can be misleading for the consumer. But however, this discussion is quite
interesting because now the food producer has to put the label around nutrition
information. Right. So they need to actually say they need to actually say in a
clearer way what exactly it is that you're having. Exactly. And I think it is
open the choice to the consumer to know better about what they eat and they
drink. Currently, I think the problem with the wording of milk is really
misleading. However, when you have labeling, it is something the wording that
consumer needs also to understand. So that is also kind of a risk, but also the
benefits when we talk about a product, for example, like soy milk, they know
what we are talking about. But when we say milk, Professor Oi, we think, I
suppose, of one particular thing mainly, which is still animal origin. But does
it actually make, is it a different thing? I mean, do we get the same nutrients?
Do we get the same benefits in drinking soy milk or oat milk as we would from
drinking cow's milk? No, totally not, because the amount of protein that is
provided by cornmeal with the quality that they deliver coming from animal milk
compared to plant milk is different. And it is the consumer needs to know about
that. For example, like the amino acid composition, they are different. And also
the bioethicability and also the other mineral and vitamins is normally
naturally present in the corn milk, we have to fortify in the plant milk. So
basically, consumer needs to know those actually information in the ingredient
list. Yeah. And I mean, the other point, obviously, in all this, the reason that
oat milk and the others have become popular in part is a feeling that using
cows, lots and lots of cows to produce milk actually is not great for the
environment. So I mean, there's a positive side to this as well. Exactly. And I
think the discussion and about the plant milk here, it is coming now after the
propaganda and advertisement for the plant milk has been heated due to the
climate change, environment matter, you know, and that is important for us now
to line up the discussion to the consumer, hey, that is the product that
normally you know about the soy milk, however, it is the benefit around that
milk, actually, if you have an allergy towards cow milk, and you have no other
choice, or you have a problem with, you know, some digestion, because sometimes
people do not have any enzyme that can digest, but it is an option or other
nothing. So in this case, it is quite important that we communicate well with
the consumer. Yeah, as always the case, really, I think Professor, I thanks so
much for being with us. That's Indra Oi, Food Science Professor at New Zealand's
University of Otago. Right now we are, we have some some milk with us, I think,
well, I do. And I think from from the warnings I've received that Sushma, you
have something there, buffalo milk, is that right? Yes, you know, India has had
a huge population of water buffaloes, and it's used as milk cattle, especially
the northern part of the country. So about roughly half of our total milk
production comes from these water buffaloes, which are used as milk cattle.
Right. And I've got a glass of this. Is it nice? I mean, would you ever, for
example, that milk, I mean, tell us how it differs from cow's milk when you just
drink it now. Just tell us the different taste. Well, I don't think the taste is
much different at all. I mean, I don't think that it tastes different at all.
Because, of course, what you do get from the company that we get it from, which
is the government-owned Mother Dairy, it's called in northern India, that will
give you the milk with different levels of fat. Right. So buffalo milk
traditionally has a higher level of fat, but you can get skim milk and you can
get milk. So you have the other varieties of milk? Okay. And you can also get
cow milk. Yes, of course. You can opt for cow milk. You don't have to have this.
No, no, indeed. Well, I mean, India is the country of the cow in many ways. So
that's entirely reasonable. Now, Natalie, it may come to you because milk, I
don't know what milk you've managed to get, if anything, with you there. But
cow's milk obviously is a big thing in Ukraine. I mean, you have, you know, you
have herds of cows as well as your grain fields. So it's a big producer in many
ways, isn't it? It is indeed. And to drink, I've only had cow's milk all my
life. It kind of tells you my age and my culture. I've had coconut milk in Thai
food. So, you know, I've tried coconut milk, but I've never purchased or tried
soy or any... Have you got any milk there with you now at all? I do, but it's
cow milk. Right. Okay. Well, listen, I want all of us......fasterised. Now,
Sushma, I want you to pour out a little bit of your buffalo milk and then drink
it. And I'm going to pour out, I don't know if anyone here this, I've actually
got some soy milk here. Now I'm just going to pour it out. I don't know if you
can... You want me to drink it? Well, yes, I want to try it. I don't normally
drink milk, but I have it for your sake, Roger. Please. Well, it's for business
matters and it matters. And Natalie, take a little bit of yours. Now, I just
want to compare tastes. Now, I'm going to slurp my soy milk here. Ready? Oh,
sorry. That is horrible. That is vile. Oh, no. Well, now I'm not going to try
it. Oh, dear. No, that's not me. No, sorry. I mean, I'm sure it's lovely. I'm
sure it's healthy, but it's just not me. It's not milk. I've got some proper
milk here from the BBC fridge. I'll have you know. But first of all, I want
Sushma, I want you to take a slurp of your buffalo milk. Yes, I've had it. I've
had it. Can you describe, is it just ordinary milk or it has a little bit of
different flavour? I mean, what's your sense of it? Well, it's ordinary milk for
me because I've been having this all my life. And so for me, this is the normal
milk taste. And yes, of course, we have cow milk also. Yeah, as you say. And it
tastes just the same. There's no difference. But you have a lot of yogurt as
well, didn't you? Because I think I'm right in saying some Indians are not able
to easily digest nor ordinary milk and yogurt is easier. I cannot digest milk. I
mean, I was having it till a few decades ago, but then I stopped having milk.
And I come from a part of the country, the Punjab, where milk is virtually milk
and milk products are virtually sacred, because you know, you must have huge
quantities of milk and butter and third and and he you know, I mean, it's a huge
part of your diet. Absolutely. But yes, I cannot digest it. So we have, my
husband and I have a lot of yogurt. I mean, every meal we have at least one bowl
of yogurt. And of course, we have a smaller quantity. Let me come back to
Natalie. Natalie, your milk you've got is the sort of milk you get in Washington
easily enough. It's just it's just ordinary cow's milk. Right. It is indeed.
Does it taste any different to the milk you used to have in Ukraine? Yes, it
does. Because this is pasteurized. And in Ukraine, more often than not, we were
drinking UHT milk, the ones that come in the boxes that stand for a longer time.
So it does have a different taste, you have to get used to it. But it's, you
know, creamy and rich. Yes, it's nice. It's good. And how does it have you ever
tried any of the oat milks or almond milks or any of these other have not other
than coconut milk and Thai food, I have not tried any is that because you just
don't fancy I mean, you know, I say I've just demonstrated that I not really my
cup of tea, but I mean, I wouldn't even I don't even like the 2% that looks like
colored water. So I like creamy whole milk or I don't drink it at all. Water if
I'm gonna drink water. Right, right. And so you wouldn't want to try oat milk or
almond milk or anything, would you? No, I, yeah, no, I have I went through a
phase where I decided to stop very product just for three, four months. But then
I started having soy milk in my coffee when I would go out the house. And was
that good? Very nice. But I didn't have a plane I had it. I mean, it was part of
a coffee. So you didn't really notice it much that it was different than really?
No, not really. Okay, well, in this in this wonderfully scientific test, we've
all been doing, I have to say, soy milk has not come out well, I'm just actually
having a nice glass of BBC. Hang on. Oh, that's a lot better. Yes, that notes I
think I think certainly I'm not a convert. And I don't think Sushmo will be. And
I'm pretty sure Natalie won't be. I think we've demonstrated that as far as
we're concerned milk milk is one thing. And well, all the others can have what
they want in their arm and other milks. But yeah, there we are scientific test
on business matters. Anyway, thanks to Natalie. Thanks to Sushmo. I hope you
enjoy whatever I forced you to drink. And we're back same time tomorrow with
more business matters. That's business matters for today. Bye bye. This is the
BBC World Service and on the food chain this week. High end food doesn't always
come out of high end kitchens. In fact, there's a culinary world where Michelin
style meals are produced with the bare minimum of cooking facilities cobbled
together in unlikely places. I'm Marie Keyworth, uncovering the hidden world of
high end mass catering. The food chain at BBC World Service dot com slash food
chain. In 30 minutes, join Manny Jasmi for World Football. Since 2010, Haiti has
suffered natural disasters, a presidential assassination, allegations of the
sexual abuse of young female footballers. But this week Haiti qualified for the
Women's World Cup for the first time and