TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Turnip recipes won't be your listing to today on BBC Radio 4 with Lisa Doucette
in Keefe, Martha Carney in London. It's seven o'clock on Friday the 24th of
February, the headlines this morning. Ceremonies will take place across Ukraine
to mark the first anniversary of the Russian invasion. President Zelensky has
insisted that the war will end with his country's victory. A minute's silence
will be observed in the UK and Rishi Sunak will urge allies to move faster to
provide Keefe with military support. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has said
criminals who refuse to appear in court for sentencing could receive longer jail
terms. The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. People in Ukraine are marking a year
of war on the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. Ceremonies will
take place across the country remembering those killed or forced to flee from
the conflict. President Zelensky has warned that evil is still around but
insisted that the war will end with Ukraine's victory. Our correspondent James
Waterhouse reports from Keefe. On this morning last year, the thuds of
explosions and sight of 150,000 Russian troops crossing the border marked the
moment that Ukraine and the world changed forever. Despite being outnumbered
against one of the biggest armies on the planet, Ukraine would win the battle
for Keefe. It is, however, still fighting for its survival. Invading forces
occupy almost a fifth of the country and are throwing everything at trying to
take the eastern Donbass region. President Zelensky has described the situation
in the south as dangerous and the eastern front as very difficult and painful.
As the country waits for more Western hardware such as tanks to try and break
the deadlock, it's marking this anniversary with ceremonies across Ukraine. On
February 24th, millions of us made a choice, said Mr Zelensky in his overnight
address. Not a white flag, but a blue and yellow flag. Not fleeing, but facing.
As events take place to mark the anniversary, fierce fighting in Ukraine is
continuing. With his assessment of Moscow's appetite for further conflict,
here's our Russia editor Steve Rosenberg. Vladimir Putin had expected a swift
victory that would force Ukraine back into Moscow's orbit. But his so-called
special military operation did not go according to plan. Over the last 12
months, the Russian military has suffered heavy casualties. The Kremlin had to
declare mobilization to boost troop numbers, drafting hundreds of thousands of
Russians into the army. And yet, as this war enters its second year, President
Putin appears determined to push on, confident that Russia has the resources to
secure, eventually, a military victory over Ukraine and over the West.
International sanctions have hurt the Russian economy, but what they haven't
done is trigger economic collapse or a Kremlin U-turn on Ukraine. And for now,
there is little public pressure here on Mr Putin to end the fighting. Many
Russians believe what the state media is telling them, that Russia's not the
aggressor and that it's fighting for peace. Last night, the United Nations
overwhelmingly backed a call for Russia to immediately withdraw its troops from
Ukraine. The non-binding resolution was supported by 141 countries. 32
abstained, while six joined Russia in voting against. They were Belarus, North
Korea, Eritrea, Mali, Nicaragua and Syria. The US ambassador to the UN, Linda
Thomas-Greenfield, said Russia had been sent a clear message. We saw one year
after Russia's illegal, unprovoked, full-scale invasion into Ukraine, where the
countries of the world stand. We stand with Ukraine. The vote was clear. 141
countries voted for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine. Rishi
Sunak will urge allies to increase military support to Ukraine during a meeting
of G7 countries to mark today's anniversary. Rishi Sunak will also join people
across the UK observing a minute's silence, as our political correspondent David
Wallace-Lockhart reports. At 11 o'clock this morning, many people in the UK will
fall silent to mark the anniversary of Russia's invasion. The Prime Minister
then hopes to use his voice to increase support for the Ukrainian cause. At a
virtual meeting of leaders from the G7 advanced economies, Rishi Sunak will call
on countries to move faster in supplying artillery, armour and air defence
systems to Ukraine. The Prime Minister will also reiterate his offer to train
fighter pilots, though there are no immediate plans for the UK to provide
aircraft. One of his predecessors, Boris Johnson, thinks jets could provide the
boost Ukraine needs. Yesterday he said the UK should break the ice and supply
Typhoon fighter planes. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, said the UK should
double down on its support. The Justice Secretary, Dominic Raab, has said he
wants to change the law so people convicted of serious crimes can be given
longer jail terms if they refuse to appear in court for their sentencing. Mr
Raab said he would not rule out using force to get some offenders out of their
cells and into the dock. Our Home Affairs correspondent June Kelly reports.
Dominic Raab's pledge to bring in tougher rules and penalties for convicted
criminals who refuse to attend their sentencing came during a meeting with the
family of a murder victim Zahra Alina. Ms Alina's killer, Jordan McSweeney, who
was jailed for 38 years, chose not to be in the dock for his sentencing. He was
condemned as spineless by the judge. Zahra Alina's aunt, Farah Naz, described
McSweeney's refusal to appear and hear the family's statements as a slap in the
face. The family of the schoolteacher, Sabina Nessa, whose killer also wouldn't
come into court for sentencing, have been campaigning on the issue as well.
Dominic Raab said a change to the system was the very least victims deserved,
describing it as a basic principle of British justice. Detectives investigating
the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma on Wednesday have arrested a
fourth man. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective Chief Inspector
John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the attack. He remains in a
critical but stable condition in hospital. Police say the dissident Republican
group, the New IRA, is the primary focus of their investigation. Nominations for
candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as the leader of the SNP close at noon.
The winner will be announced at the end of March. The Health Secretary, Humza
Yousaf, and the Finance Secretary, Kate Forbes, both launched their campaigns on
Monday. The MSP for Edinburgh Eastern, Ash Regan, will formally enter the race
this morning. Research carried out for BBC News suggests the price of pasta has
nearly doubled in two years. Although the overall rate of inflation may have
peaked, after reaching 11.1 per cent in October, the prices of many food items
have risen more sharply and are still going up. Emma Simpson reports. With the
help of the retail research firm Associa, we've been tracking the average price
of 15 items from the standard range across Tesco, Sainsbury's, Asda and
Morrisons. They're popular items from tinned tomatoes and strawberry jam to
cheese and oven chips. And over the last two years, the price of this basket is
up by more than a third. A 500 gram bag of pasta saw the biggest jump, up from
50 pence to 95 pence. It's a snapshot of the real price rises that shoppers are
seeing in the aisles. Although the picture may get worse before it gets better,
experts say food price inflation should ease by the second half of this year.
The poet laureate Simon Armitage has written a poem to celebrate the centenary
of the Flying Scotsman. Built in Doncaster, it was the first steam locomotive to
travel non-stop from London to Edinburgh and the first in the world to record a
speed of 100 miles per hour. Here's our arts correspondent Rebecca Jones. To
mark the centenary, Flying Scotsman will make a brief appearance at Edinburgh
Waverley Station. There'll be music, dancing and Simon Armitage will read his
new poem. Straining, hissing, the rippling bodywork pouring with sweat, skirts
trimmed with petticoats of steam, the spherical venting cumulonimbus into a blue
sky, devilment glowing red in the lantern's lens. Simon Armitage said he wanted
to pay homage to a feat of British design and engineering. This beast had wings,
this creature could fly. The poem is now on display as part of an exhibition at
the National Railway Museum in York, showcasing the legacy of the famous
locomotive. And you can hear Simon Armitage on this programme after 8 o'clock.
And in cricket, centuries from Harry Brooke and Joe Root have put England in
control on the opening day of the second test against New Zealand in Wellington.
Brooke made an unbeaten 184 and Root is 101 not out, as England reached 315 for
3 before rain stopped play. As you may have heard in the news last night in New
York, the UN General Assembly took a measure of the world's view of this war, a
resolution condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine and calling on its troops to
pull out. The motion, which passed with overwhelming support, was symbolic.
Symbols do matter. But while pleas for peace grow ever louder, they're still
drowned out by the sounds of an escalating war on the ground, a war which began
this morning last year. Ukrainians will never forget that hour. Reports of
explosions in the Ukrainian capital as Vladimir Putin announces a special
military operation in Ukraine. The BBC World Service on developing events in
Ukraine. Explosions have been heard in several parts of the country. My name is
Sergei, I woke up from the sound of rocket land on our city. For me especially
this year, the year when I grew up, like one year for 10, that I realised many
many things. And for a nation that we are all together, I feel like we're more
connected. Missiles hit the capital of Ukraine as Russian troops advance. I've
been together with my family. I play with my kids. I'm a regular guy and I want
to live as I want to live with my family, as I want to smile, you know, as I
want to work. But right now everything stopped. The Russians are killing
everything. And I will think we will win, but we need the time. You say well to
get down to the lobby, follow the staff instructions to get to the shelter. I am
Tatiana Mitrofanova. I am from Kiev. I am the owner of this restaurant. On 24th
of February, I wake up around four o'clock in the morning from the bombs. I was
in a shock, maybe first 15 minutes. In two days we opened this restaurant like a
shelter. 25 people, among them it was 10 children, they are living here. Do you
feel like a different person? Have you changed? My business is not so good now
as it was before, but I'm very happy that I can pay to people who work here.
It's not a team, it's family. We live on the central street of Kiev and we
stayed at home, but we've been very afraid and we didn't believe that this can
happen and we did not believe that Russia can do this such terrible things. And
one year on, what's your feeling about this war and yourselves? It's horrible.
We don't know how to finish it, how to make our people happy because we have
many things inside of our country, so terrible things are happening. Like what?
Corruption. This is your own Ukrainian government? It's a part of government. We
are very upset about that. Ukrainian memories of that moment. Well, Joseph Burel
is High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. I spoke to him after that vote last night at the United Nations and
began by asking whether NATO countries, which keep insisting they want to
decisively turn the tide of war in Ukraine's favour this year, should now
provide it with fighter jets. Well, look, it's not my most pressing concern.
It's Ukraine's most pressing concern? No, the most pressing concern is
ammunition. Believe me, it is a concern and certainly if I wear on the shoes of
Zelensky, I will be asking for arms, more arms, any type of arms. Until now,
what has happened is that first the answer has been always no, and at the end it
has been yes. And maybe this is one of the problems, that our answer has been
too much incremental, too much following the events, discussing before agreeing
and before implementing. For the time being, more than thinking on the jets,
which is something that has still not been decided, as security and defence
responsible, what I'm trying to do is to accelerate the times in which there is
an agreement, reaches Ukraine. Because, you know, for you, sorry to say, most of
the time the news, they have agreed, yes, they have agreed, but they haven't
implemented yet. So they agreed to provide tanks, but by the time being the
tanks are still not there. So the most pressing thing is to implement what has
been decided. Do you worry that this now seems to be a war without end? When we
last met, you expressed concern that many leaders from African, from Asian
nations, even from Europe, were saying to you, stop the war, we don't care who
started it, just stop the war. Are you still hearing that? But everybody is
asking to stop the war. Don't you think that I am not asking to stop the war?
The issue is not only to stop the war, but how do you stop the war? And I
understand that some people around the world, friends of mine at home, says,
look, this war, for me it's a problem. Yes, I understand Ukraine, but they have
a problem. I cannot bear the consequences of this war, so please stop it. I have
full of empathy and understand people who say stop the war because the
consequences are very bad, not only for the Ukrainians, but also for me, which
I'm paying higher prices of electricity and I don't have fertilizers and the
interest rate has increased, and so many bad consequences of this war. Yes, but
to stop the war, you know, there is a very easy way of stopping the war. A very
easy way. I stop supplying grain. And you will see how quickly the war finishes,
or how the war finishes. How? It's out of question to do that. The people who
ask for finishing the war, my question is, don't you care about how the war will
finish? Is for you indefinite? Indefinite? No, I suppose no, huh? I suppose you
care about how to finish the war. If you care about how to finish the war, we
have to do two things. First, continue supplying arms to Ukraine to allow them
to defend, and at the same time is not something contradictory, is to open the
door to any kind of negotiation process that someone could be able to trigger.
United Nations, some countries, whoever could convince Putin to stop bombing
Ukraine and willing to negotiate, they should do it. I am not against it. I am
very much in favor. Thank you very much, Mr. Burrell. Thank you. The time now is
16 minutes past seven. Three men have been arrested in connection with the
attempted murder of a senior police officer in Oma. John Caldwell, who was shot
several times, is in a critical but stable condition in hospital in Londonderry.
The Police Service of Northern Ireland says it's looking into links to violent
dissident Republicans with a focus on the group called the New IRA. We can talk
now to the journalist and broadcaster Peter Taylor, who's covered Northern
Ireland for many decades. Good morning, Peter. Good morning, Martha. Good
morning. Now, we know that after the Provisional IRA agreed to cease fires all
this time ago, a number of Republicans, small groups, didn't agree with them,
formed other groupings, the so-called dissidents. How does the New IRA fit into
that? The New IRA is really a combination of the various dissident groups that
split from the mainstream Provisional IRA just before around the time of the
Good Friday Agreement because the Provisional IRA effectively gave up their so-
called armed struggle and concentrated on politics to the dissidents, the
dissident groupings. And there were several, but they were really quite small.
The IRA, the traditional IRA, were regarded as traitors. What then happened is
that the main dissident group, the real IRA that was responsible for the
dreadful Omar bombing, then morphed into the New IRA, and other smaller
dissident groups joined the New IRA. So one of the reasons why the New IRA, the
largest dissident group, is dangerous is that I think it probably has access to
some of the weapons that were not decommissioned as part of the Good Friday
Agreement. And they are the amalgam of these different groups. And although
they're small, they still have, as we've seen with the dreadful attempted murder
of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell, they still have the capacity to
cause death and murder. How much support do they have? They have a modicum of
support. Without a degree of support, they couldn't possibly operate. But if you
are part of a, quote, terrorist organization, you don't need a huge amount of
support to operate effectively. The operation of the attempted murder of DCI
John Caldwell would have needed a degree of planning but didn't need a huge
infrastructure. And it's interesting that in the three arrests, and I think
another recent one has been made, a number of arrests were made pretty quickly
after the attempted murder, which indicates that the intelligence on the new IRA
is pretty good. And I think one of the reasons, possibly one of the reasons for
the attack on John Caldwell was that the new IRA has suffered severe setbacks as
a result of an undercover operation run by MI5, the Garda Chicana, that's the
Irish police, and Scottish police, and of course the PSNI. And MI5 had an agent
called Dennis McFadden who infiltrated the leadership, the echelons of the new
IRA. As a result of that, MI5 were able to bug and secretly record meetings of
senior new IRA people and also even to film some of their meetings. As a result
of that, nine suspected new IRA leaders, or part of the upper ranks of the new
IRA, are now facing trial. That was a huge setback for the organization. And it
may be that the attack on DCI John Caldwell was designed to show that despite
those setbacks, those arrests and that successful MI5 operation, that they're
still in business. Peter Taylor, many thanks. The time now is 20 past seven. You
can become an apprentice for repairing cars, but not for repairing mobile
phones. And yet there are far more of those. A firm based in the Midlands which
fixes smartphones says that they can't get enough staff. So we can talk now to
Zoe Kleinman, our technology editor. Good morning, Zoe, and this is the company,
isn't it, in Newcastle-under-Lyme? Morning. That's right. They repair up to
10,000 smartphones every month. And they said an experienced phone technician
can expect to do up to 20 devices per day. Now, obviously, it depends what's
wrong with the phone. I had a go at it when I went to visit them. And it's not
difficult, but it is fiddly. I had to disassemble and then put the phone back
together. It took me 45 minutes, I'm quite ashamed to say. Maybe state of the
day job, eh, Chloe? I think their jobs are certainly safe from me up there. But
what it sort of demonstrated to me is actually it is not an easy task. You have
to have lots of patience. You have to have good hand-to-eye coordination. And of
course, you've also got to be able to diagnose what's wrong because the phone
just arrives in a packet in front of you. And you've got to figure out A, what's
wrong with it, B, how you're going to fix it. And I think it's really, really
interesting that despite the fact that we all have phones, some of us have more
than one phone, we break them all the time, the most common damage. It won't
surprise you to know is broken screens, but there are other things that go wrong
with them. And yet there's no kind of nationally recognized qualification or
industry standard for phone repair. And that's what TMT First want to happen,
don't they? But what did the Institute for Apprenticeships have to say? I spoke
to them and they said that there was a proposal that had been underway, but that
apprenticeships in England are led by industry demands and that they hadn't had
sufficient demands for them. TMT First says it was part of a group of
organizations that put a proposal together before the pandemic. And
unfortunately, obviously, during the pandemic, everything got pushed back and
that's why things haven't changed yet. But there is also, isn't there, an
environmental question here. We're being encouraged, aren't we, to repair rather
than to replace, to keep hold of our devices for longer. There's lots of
precious metals that go into phones. There's certainly an environmental issue
around replacing them every time they break. And yet, we clearly need more
people to be able to do that because if you have a go at it yourself, as I've
proved, it's really not easy. And while some people will want to do it, if you
do it yourself and you fail, you've messed up your warranty. And I think there
are lots of people who just would like to get it fixed and carry on using them
for as long as they can. So certainly the potential for more jobs there? I think
so. I mean, this one company in Newcastle-under-Lyme gets 10,000 smartphones a
month sent to it from around the country. And that's just one of them. Think
about how many phone repair shops there are in the high street, you know. And if
the average repair is costing around £150 to £200, it's not a bad business to be
in, is it? Absolutely. But not for you. Not for me. I was too slow. Zoe, thank
you very much. And the man who's never too slow. Here's Gary with the Sports
News. Don't know about that. You're spot on. It's still early for me. Morning,
top-notch performances to reflect on this morning. A great win for Manchester
United against Barcelona. And Harry Brooke, 184 not out. What a story. Joe Root,
101 not out. As England finished on 315 for 3 when rain stopped play against New
Zealand in the second test. Stefan Schemmel has all the details. This had all
the ingredients of a tough day for England after they lost a toss on a green
pitch. They had Jack Crawley, Ben Ducat and Oli Pope all out cheaply in a slip
to 21 for 3. But Harry Brooke has made one of the all-time great starts to a
test career and he launched a counter-attack that lasted for the rest of the
day. 184 not out is his fourth hundred in six tests. No player in history has
more than Brooke's 807 runs after nine innings. For Root, this was a first
hundred in eight tests, completed just before rain ended play early. His former
captain is 101. Their partnership is 294 and counting. So as you heard in
Stefan's report, it's a fourth test century and six innings for Harry Brooke and
he says this is the best one yet. Yeah, I think so. Just the position of the
game makes that decision. Obviously the ones in Pakistan were amazing and yeah,
they were good fun to be out there but they were all very flat pitches. Today I
wouldn't say it's a flat pitch. I think it's a good cricket wicket but it's not
a flat pitch where you can just smack it everywhere obviously. More on the
cricket story in an hour. What a win for Manchester United. The 2-1 victory
against Barcelona takes them through to the last 16 of the Europa League. Our
commentator Alistair Bruce-Ball was at Old Trafford. Ali, good morning to you.
Good morning, Gary. An impressive win. What was your verdict? Yeah, a great win
on the night coming from behind to do so. A great win over the two legs as well
that's going to further infuse this team with confidence. They weren't very good
actually in the first half. I think the manager Eric Ten Haag has to take a lot
of credit for turning it around at half time. He made a critical switch in
bringing his Brazilian winger Anthony on. His star man Marcus Rashford then went
through the middle. The intensity levels clearly went up. Manchester United
suddenly looked threatening. Barcelona were clearly rattled. United equalised
quickly and then never looked back. I think the atmosphere at the end of the
game was quite telling, Gary. A feeling that something pretty special is
building at Old Trafford. I think the fans recognise a lot of that is down to
Ten Haag. Yes, and mentioning him, he made interesting comments on the team's
belief now. Tell us about that. Yes, well clearly in evidence last night. It's
coming from the players. You can see that on the pitch. It's coming from the
fans as well. Eric Ten Haag basically has them believing they can beat anyone.
It's 14 wins in 18 games for Manchester United since the World Cup and just the
one defeat. Now the next test of that of course is against Newcastle United in
the League Cup final at Wembley on Sunday. If they come out on top in that one
and win a first trophy for the club in six years, I think that belief is only
going to deepen. Let's not forget there are only five points behind the leaders
Arsenal in the Premier League with 14 games still to play and they're the form
team in the country at the moment. So who knows the time. I think exciting times
if you're a Manchester United fan. Alistair, thank you very much indeed. Andy
Murray is through to the semi-final of the Qatar Open. He came from a set down
to beat Alexander Muller. Super League, Hulk AR made it two wins from two,
defeating Salford 24-10. What about the racing tips? One for Warwick at half
past two, number one. Ori the second and then we're off to Wolverhampton 7-15,
number seven, send in the clouds. The clouds, thanks very much indeed Gary. Now
let's look ahead to Saturday evening on Radio 4. Continuing our celebration of
the centenary of BBC Radio drama. The huntsman now purposefully erected his
footsteps. Analysing the most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical, this room. You can go to different places and tell the
stories from different points of view. Dramatic beats with me, Michael Simmons-
Roberts. Everything in British storytelling, film, television, owes so much to
radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, tomorrow night at eight. Time now to
look at the weather today in Britain. The patchy rain will clear southwards with
sunny spells and light showers behind it. Here in Keeve, it's zero degrees,
threatening to get even colder and the grey cloudy skies seem to be saying it
might rain and Russian attacks may trigger air raid sirens across the city.
You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Lisa Seteshu saying in Keeve and
Martha Carney in London. The time now is 28 minutes past seven. Here's a summary
of the news from Alan Smith. The people of Ukraine are marking the first
anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion. Events will be held to remember the
people who died or who were forced to flee their homes. Ukraine's President
Volodymyr Zelensky has vowed to do everything to achieve victory this year.
Rishisunak will call on world leaders to increase their military support for
Ukraine when he addresses a virtual meeting of the G7 group of advanced
economies today. The UK has introduced fresh sanctions against Russia, including
export bans on every item it's used on the battlefield. The Foreign Office said
the measures targeted aircraft parts, radio equipment and electronic components.
Across the UK, there will be a minute's silence at 11 o'clock to mark the
anniversary. Keeve has welcomed a decision by the United Nations to condemn
Moscow's invasion. The motion calling for a complete withdrawal of Russian
troops was backed by 141 nations, 32 countries abstained and seven, including
Russia, voted against. The resolution is not legally binding. A fourth man has
been arrested as part of an investigation into a gun attack on an off-duty
police officer in Ulma. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the shooting on
Wednesday. Detectives say they're focusing their investigation on dissident
Republicans. Justice Secretary Dominic Raab is examining whether longer jail
terms could be given to serious criminals who refused to appear in court for
sentencing. Mr Raab said making offenders attend the hearings was the least the
victims deserved. He made the comments after he met the family of Czar Alina,
whose killer refused to go to court for sentencing. And the poet laureate Simon
Armitage has written a poem to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Flying
Scotsman. Built in Doncaster, it was the first steam locomotive to travel non-
stop from London to Edinburgh and the first in the world to record a speed of
100 miles per hour. One year ago, friends and foes of Ukraine expected a very
short war. Russia's superior military might was expected to prevail. There were
even predictions it would all be over in three days. And in those first fateful
24 hours, the president, Volodymyr Zelensky, received repeated offers of
evacuation and exile. Instead, the former comedian turned president sees this
moment fraught with risk by recording a selfie video in the dark and danger of
Kiev streets, surrounded by his closest advisors, now in military attire. We are
here, he said. The president is here. The world held its breath, but Kiev didn't
fall. And within about a month, that ominous presence of Russian tanks and
troops on the edges of this capital ended. They retreated. And since then,
Ukraine has not just held ground, but taken it. I'm joined here in our Kiev
studio by the BBC's international editor, Jeremy Bowen. Jeremy, for Ukraine, a
year of setbacks, but also advances. Yep, that's certainly the truth of it, and
the Russians, as you said, expected things to be over very quickly when they
started. And so did NATO. And they were really surprised by the way that the
Ukrainians fought. So what do we know about things at the moment? Well, we know
that the Russians, having hoped for a quick victory, are instead caught in this
awful war of attrition, losing a lot of men, losing a lot of equipment. Having
all kinds of setbacks. But at the same time, in a sense, so are the Ukrainians,
because they are also caught in the same war of attrition. And we know how
President Zelensky views victory. He says all the Russians have to leave every
inch of Ukrainian territory, including Crimea, which they took in 2014. And
well, it's a bit less precise with the Russians, but in his State of the Union
address, Putin said the West is out to get us. This is what all this is about.
And also, Russia will never lose on the battlefield. And I think he was also
suggesting that whatever the global repercussions, and this is a global story,
then he's still going to keep on pushing forward. So while Putin's trapped,
there's a big sense as well, I'd say, in which Zelensky and the Ukrainians are
trapped as well, because the certainty is, the one certainty we really know is
that the firing, the shelling will continue. The NATO will give more support to
Ukraine. The Russians may be getting more support from China, which I think
would be a real game changer and make this into a much more of a global conflict
than it is at the moment. It's really a European one. And the killing, the
fighting will continue. Now, in the course of this last week or so, I've kept in
touch with some of the Ukrainians I've actually been talking to all year, and
you will have heard them on this program before. All the people in this piece,
in fact, have been on this program before. And so my report starts with a man of
about 30 who volunteered to fight from the very first day. So I'm back with a
volunteer soldier I met a year ago, doesn't want to use his name, in the cafe
just outside it where we met. That day you had a very large rifle in your van.
You were working in what, as a sniper? Long-range shooter, I would say. On his
phone, he's kept video from the first few weeks of the war. His unit ambushed
and wiped out around half a dozen Russian armored personnel carriers. Dead
Russian soldiers lie around their exploding, burning vehicles. When we did this
mission, and they came to my base, I was crying, because I was thinking that I
did things which I never have been done before. But I was thinking about these
dead guys, like, hey, they have families. Some of them maybe have children. But
when the Russians were forced to retreat from Kiev, leaving behind the corpses
of Ukrainian soldiers and civilians they killed in places like Bucha, his
attitude hardened. But after Bucha, when I find out information about Bucha,
what they have done in Bucha, I was thinking that I did a very small piece of
what I should do. They should suffer. They are not just like should be killed.
They should suffer about things which they've done to my country, to my people,
to their children, to a woman, to males. They have no chance to survive over
here. I'm in the graveyard in the village of Cherenevka, which is about 20 miles
west of Kiev. The Russians captured this place after the invasion. Now, just
after they were forced out, I came here, and I met really about one of the only
civilians left in the village at the time, a woman called Irina Kostenko. And
she was grief-stricken, because the Russians had killed her son, shot him dead
in the middle of the road, left his body. She had to go out there with a
wheelbarrow, bury him in the garden. She was terrified the shells would disinter
him, or maybe the dogs would get him and eat his body before he could get a
proper Christian burial. He is now buried here in this graveyard. How's it been
the last year? This year has been very challenging. My soul is traumatized. The
pain is constant. My heart aches. And the moment comes, I wish it didn't, of
that night. How long do you think the war might last for? Until Putin dies. That
might be a long time. Then we'll have to suffer until that animal dies. That's
for how long we'll be crying bitterly, sleeping dressed, jumping up from every
rustle, every car noise. So right in the center of Kiev, on the Grossi bank,
there's several thousand Ukrainian flags and a few others as well. So this is a
sign of just how many people have been killed, which is a subject that the
government here chooses not to talk about too much. War has a transformational
effect on people and on countries. And this one more than most, because it's
upended the European security order and it's having global consequences that may
well deepen. Just up from those flags, outside St. Michael's Church, where
President Joe Biden laid a wreath this week, the Ukrainians have put a line of
destroyed Russian tanks on display. Families stroll around them and children use
them as climbing frames. Here are some things that it's important to know about
the war. Peace talks right now will not happen. Both Ukrainians and Russians
believe they can win on the battlefield. Yet exactly one year in, neither side
has the combat power to win a decisive victory. So we might be here next year
having this conversation. For all Russia's losses, and the rusty hulks here are
just a tiny example, they're still fighting and they're trying to grind out a
new offensive. For all their NATO weapons, the Ukrainians still can't get the
victory as described by President Zelensky. Earlier on, back at the cafe, the
sniper who didn't want his identity revealed offered me a lift to my hotel.
You've got your gun in the back there? Yeah. Guns, ammunition, everything. It's
my souvenirs, my trophies. Lots of insignia, there's a Russian army cap, there's
a Russian newspaper, lots of souvenirs here. One of these red and white vests
that the elite troops wear under their uniforms. And you've also got your gun in
the back there. You can start your own war. A Honda estate car. The shock of the
invasion united Ukraine, but a year into the war the strain is showing. Those
doing the fighting and dying on the front lines are almost all male volunteers,
from teenagers to 60-somethings. The sniper who's seen friends killed was
furious with men he said were shirking their duty in relatively safe Kiev, safe
for now, or those who've slipped over the border. We have huge losses and of
course males are not enough right now, especially who wants to protect their
country. They're trying to cross the border, they're trying to give a bribe to
people who are sending to them papers. But right now nobody wants to die. And
our best guys right now are dying for the people who, for example, escaped
Poland. Can you win the war? We should, we have to. We have no other chance. And
by the way, the country who are supporting us, they should also understand that
it's not only our victory in the future, it's a victory of whole Europe, of
whole world, because this insane guy should be stopped by somebody. The bells of
the city. And that was our international editor, Jeremy Bowen, reporting. Time
now for a look at today's papers and news websites in Ukraine. And I'm joined
here by Marta Shokalo, she heads the BBC's Ukrainian service. Vitalyu, Marta.
Vitalyu. You were forced, sadly, last year to flee with your son. What's it like
to be back? Well, I was thinking today in the morning, last year, this day, I
woke up to the sounds of Russian bombs over the Kiev. Today I woke up to the
sounds of Ukrainian anthem from the Sofievska Square. And now we are back as
guests here for now, because we're living in Poland right now. Me and my son, we
are here. It's very emotional. I must say last year, I didn't cry on this day.
Today I did. Well, we're very glad to have you with us. So let's see what's in
the papers. The Kiev Independent marks the first anniversary of the war with a
report documenting Russia's use of missile and airstrikes against Ukraine.
According to the General Staff Deputy Chief, Alexei Hormov, the paper reports
Russia has carried out almost 5,000 missile strikes and 3,500 airstrikes since
last February. Russia also launched nearly 1,000 drone attacks. And due to a
shortage of high precision missiles, is once again using its anti-ship cruise
missiles against peaceful civilian targets. The paper also reports that
Ukrainian forces are holding onto the Bahmut despite a seven months long Russian
assault aiming to capture the city. Speaking at the press conference yesterday,
General Alexei Hromov described the battle for Bahmut as the most difficult
situation and that Russian forces were launching never-ending attempts to
capture the eastern city despite heavy losses. Logistic supply routes were
coming under increased pressure, according to General Hromov, and it was likely
that Russia had set a goal to capture Donetsk Oblast key settlements before the
summer. The paper report that Ukrainian officials are warning Russia has begun a
renewed large-scale offensive in the east of the country. Casualties are high on
both sides. According to Interfax Ukraine, Ukrainian forces are hitting targets
in Mariupol once again. Alexei Danilov, Secretary of the National Security and
Defense Council, tells the news agency that distance no longer matters to the
Ukrainian army and our soldiers are killing Russian terrorists who captured our
city of Mariupol. This is our territory and we will be hitting the occupiers
until they leave it. And finally, Ukinform carries a report from President
Zelensky on the eve of the one-year anniversary of Russia's invasion. The
president expressed his confidence that his country will defeat the invading
Russian forces. Ukraine has overcome many ordeals and we will prevail, adding
that Ukraine will hold to account all those who brought this evil, this war, to
our land. And that's the end of our press review. The time now is 17 minutes to
eight. Blue Skies, music with a message from Ukraine for the world. It's one of
so many examples of how artists from around the world have come together to try
to do good in such a bad time. In this case, the Australian soul band, the
Blueberries, worked with Australian and Ukrainian musicians, including Ukraine's
Youth Symphony Orchestra, to record Blue Skies in four cities around the world
and to raise money for the UN's refugee agency, the UNHCR. And one of the most
stirring voices you heard is Mariana Golovko. She's an opera singer and soloist
at the Nova Opera and she's sitting across from me with a big smile to hear Blue
Skies. Welcome, Mariana. Thank you. Thank you. Hello. I know it's been dark
skies for the last year on many days and just tell us first how hard it is to be
a musician in Ukraine today. It's not easy. It's true. And I believe that all
these bad circumstances usually gives some inspiration for artists to tell more
about their feelings and to express all the situation using the art instruments.
So I believe that, of course, it's not so easy to reflect all this situation.
But for us, it's very important to be a voice of this war, to talk about this
ugly war. A voice to bring different sounds to this country. Why Blue Skies?
Because all the team, when we first talk with my new friends from Australia and
a beautiful producer, Polina Velichko from Ukraine, she brought me to this
project. We talked a lot about what are we going to tell about in the song. And
it was early spring and it was only the beginning of this awful thing, so I told
that I would like to say it in Ukrainian language because we at the first time
we thought that it would be only in English. So I decided that it's very
important to tell in Ukrainian language for Ukrainian people that this is a
support. This is some kind of that we should believe in a beautiful future, in a
Blue Skies that always under us, no matter what is happening on the earth. And
you throughout this time when you were recording, there were attacks on Kiev,
there were power cuts, and yet you're sitting here still full of energy. Many
will ask who are listening to this program, how do you keep up this spirit?
That's interesting question because I think there is no exact answer because we
cannot explain it. We just live in like, you know, like Frankl said, that we
should not believe, not waiting for the ending. We just living and trying to
believe in a good future. Thank you very much for sharing your voice and your
song. Mariana Golkoa. Thank you so much. The time now is 30 minutes to eight and
it's time for Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning is the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Justin Welby. Good morning. A year ago, the long running war in the
Donbass became a general invasion of Ukraine. In the very early morning,
President Zelensky dressed, said to his wife, it's begun. And for all
Ukrainians, the thunder of war descended on an innocent country. In December, I
visited Ukraine. I went to show solidarity, to say with others, you are not
forgotten. I stood by a mass grave in Bucha and saw the pictures of civilians,
tortured and shot, of a man dead under his bicycle, his dog sitting patiently
next to him. Everywhere destruction, everywhere courageous resistance. In war,
everything becomes unpredictable. The future that had been expected disappears.
Symbols of the past are destroyed. It would be easy to be terrified, but that is
not the reality of Ukraine. As with the UK in 1940, the uncertainty and horror
of war with an apparently overwhelmingly strong adversary is matched by
leadership of skill and courage and people of endurance and resolution. They
want and need support of all kinds. Jesus was asked once, who is my neighbour?
In response, he told the story of the Good Samaritan. It is well known, a man
mugged on a lonely road and having been ignored by the eminent, is rescued by a
stranger from an ancient enemy people. The challenge from Jesus is that a
neighbour is the one who shows love in action. Will we continue to show love in
action for Ukraine? What about Russia that in living memory during the Second
World War fought our enemy alongside us at a cost of 30 million Russian lives?
What do we do when a neighbour is wickedly attacked and another neighbour is the
attacker? First we stand witness to the truth. We tell the story of devastation,
of destruction, of massacre. We tell the story of Ukrainian lives lost, of a
country destroyed. Second, we support sacrificially. The Samaritan gave what he
could for a man unjustly attacked and at the limit of his own strength.
Sacrifice means refuge for the refugee, support for those needing equipment. It
will cost us and we may be thankful that it costs us only money, not lives.
Finally, maybe hardest of all, we dare to imagine a seemingly impossible future
and we work towards it in partnership with the oppressed, truthful but not
hating the oppressor. There must be a future with a just and stable peace, a
free and secure Ukraine and the beginning of a generations-long process of
healing and reconciliation based in truth. That was Thought for the Day with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby. The time now is ten to eight. When did
you last eat a turnip? The Environment Secretary, Therese Coffey, has said that
we should cherish seasonal food like turnips given the current shortages of
tomatoes and other fresh produce. So do we need to take a new approach to what
we eat and has there been enough emphasis on food security in the UK? Well,
we're joined now by Sir Robert Goodwill, Chair of the Environment, Food and
Rural Affairs Committee, himself an arable farmer and actually his committee is
doing an inquiry at the moment into food security and we can also talk to
Rebecca Mayhew, a farmer in Norfolk. Good morning to you both. Good morning.
Good morning. Let me begin first of all with you, Rebecca. I mean, why do you
think we are facing these shortages at the moment? Oh, good morning. Well, this
is a multifaceted problem. And actually, before we start, I think without
wanting to sound too flippant, thought for the day rather puts the lack of salad
into perspective, doesn't it? At least it should do. So as I say, it's a
multifaceted problem and there is a climate crisis occurring. There's floods in
Morocco, cold weather and drought in Spain. There are huge issues that we're
facing. We've got an energy crisis as well. So as well as that, we've also got
supermarkets who won't pay the proper price to their suppliers. So I think this
is not a simple problem to solve very quickly. Well, let me bring in Sir Robert
Goodwill and I appreciate your inquiries is going on at the moment. But what are
your thoughts about the current shortages? Well, I mean, the current shortages
in terms of the tomatoes, et cetera, are weather related. And of course, we
often do have weather related problems. We had a drought last year, which
affected a number of crops, including some potato crops. But we're more
resilient compared to 1976 when there was a real shortage. We've got much more
irrigation. I think farmers are now more resilient. But we need to, I think, to
look at the political situation around the world. And certainly our report was
prompted by the invasion of Ukraine, massive increase in the price of grain, the
price of sunflower oil, for example. And what we need to do in our country to
maybe make ourselves a little bit more dependent on our own resources. So, for
example, should we be taking out large areas of arable land in this country for
rewilding? Should we put in solar farms? Should we be planting forestry on land
that could produce food? So that's what we're looking at. And we received quite
a lot of evidence to that effect. And what do you think about the impact of
Brexit? Because we had Justin King on the programme yesterday, former chief
executive of Sainsbury's. And he says this is a sector that's been significantly
disrupted by Brexit. Well, apart from the situation with Northern Ireland,
actually trade is flowing pretty well. I mean, we're big exports of lamb to
France. That's happening. We export a lot of fish abroad. That's happening. So I
don't think Brexit can be blamed for this particular situation. And indeed, as
we sign trade deals around the world, there will be opportunities for things
like Scotch whisky, which produces a lot of barley grown on farms like mine,
which uses barley to make that. So I don't think we can blame Brexit for this.
We certainly can't blame Brexit for the weather in southern Spain and Morocco.
And what do you think, going back to you, Rebecca, to look at the way farmers
are having to cope with this? I mean, I don't think you grow things in
greenhouses yourself, but there are other farmers who do a lot. Obviously, it's
very difficult for them at the moment, isn't it, with the cost of energy? It is.
But it's also very difficult trying to grow anything, whether it be an animal,
whether it's milk or whether it's a crop, not knowing what you're going to get
paid for it at the end. And I think that the luxury of being able to do that and
take a little bit of a chance is over. And do you think, Robert, goodwill at
supermarkets need to look again at their pricing strategy? Yeah, I think if you
look at eggs last year, you know, the egg producers went to the supermarket and
said, look, the price of grain has doubled. We need more for our eggs.
Otherwise, people won't refill their sheds when their hens go off to make pies
or whatever else they use to process. So you know, and the supermarkets in the
UK didn't respond to that. And therefore, our laying flock reduced from 43
million to 38. And that meant we were short of eggs in the autumn. So I think
that supermarkets are very good at screwing down the prices of farmers. But I
think they need to look long term to see that actually they can get goods on the
shelves. And that means, I think, paying farmers a fair price for their goods
and understanding, as some processors do, understanding that actually when
prices go up to farmers, they need that to reflect in the price they're given
and not just hold them to the contracted price, which didn't actually take that
into account. I also wanted to ask you where you stand on the great turnip
debate and Therese Coffey saying that we need to cherish seasonal produce. A lot
of people think that what she's saying is it is tactless and given the food
shortages. Well, I think we sort of lost, because things are available all the
year round, you know, we don't have that seasonality that we used to have. And
certainly if people are on a limited budget, you know, homegrown produce in
season is very cost effective. You know, strawberries are not available grown in
the UK at this time of year, but when they come on season, you know, they taste
much better. So would you encourage people to eat more turnips at this time of
year? Well, there's loads of good produce. I mean, you know, there's good UK
grown parsnips, there's leeks, there's all sorts of produce. You're avoiding the
turnip, aren't you? Well, I mean, turnips are great, but you can't eat them
every single meal. But you know, we have great produce grown seasonally in the
UK. You know, we store a lot, you know, potatoes are there in big quantities.
But yeah, you know, by all means, you know, treat yourself to some salad
vegetables. And if we're looking at sort of the carbon footprint of food and the
air miles involved, then actually growing, eating seasonal products is actually
a great thing to do. And actually, I mean, we grow vegetables in our garden. So
I'm sitting rather smugly with quite a few leeks and parsnips and artichokes in
my garden. So, you know, maybe we should think also maybe return to those
traditional skills that working class families had, where, you know, not just
leeks, but show class leeks were being grown in many of those gardens up here in
the northeast. That seems to be a skill we've lost, but that's a different
debate altogether. It is, I've been to a very good leek show in Suffolk. But
more seriously, Rebecca Mayhew and Therese Coffey did say she accepted that
people want supplies all year round. But do you think there needs to be a change
in what we eat? Absolutely. I mean, we have got a finite amount of energy that
we are able to have at our disposal, finite amounts of water. We don't need five
different types of lettuces on the shelves. I mean, we're really spoiled. If
we're looking at nutrient density, there's far more nutrients in a carrot than a
tomato. I mean, a tomato really is a little bit of a waste of calories. I think
we need chefs and food bloggers and all of these influencers on Instagram to
actually be sensible and say to people, if you're on a budget, which let's face
it, we all are, if you're trying to nourish yourself and nourish your family,
use what is grown closest to you. Don't go for something that is flown and then
refrigerated. You know, try and be sensible. And we don't need all of this other
fluff on the shelves. What we need is good nourishing food. Our supply chains –
I mean, we're a retailer as well as a farmer. If I wanted to put out-of-season
produce on my shelves, I could do. My supply chains are really strong because
they're short, they're not long and convoluted. I'm going to let it go because
we need to be finding out what's happening with the weather. But Rebecca Mayhew,
Sir Robert Goodwill, many thanks. Yes. Turn up time there, potato time here.
Time for the weather. Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thanks, Liz. Well, we've got quite a
chilly day ahead today. An area of cloud and drizzly rain slowly clearing to the
south and return to sunshine but a cold northerly wind from the north today. So
across the southern half of England through Wales and Northern Ireland, you're
likely to stay quite grey with a few spots of light rain and drizzle through the
course of the morning. Something a little bit brighter gradually this afternoon,
just working in from the north. But temperatures here are around about 8 to 11
degrees. The northern half of England through into Scotland, sunshine will
return by around about the middle part of the morning as the drizzly rain pushes
its way south. But it will feel quite chilly, particularly in that breeze around
the east coast. One or two wintry showers over the higher ground in the north
and east too. Top temperatures today across the UK around 7 to 11 degrees.
Thanks very much, Sarah. Now here's Alex Forsyth to tell us about this week's
Any Questions. Morning, Alex. Where are you off to? Good morning, Martha. I will
be at St Andrew's Church in Wiverliscombe, or Wivvy to those who know it, a
small town in West Somerset where the communities welcomed a number of refugees
from Ukraine. So an appropriate place for us to be as we mark a year since
Russia's invasion. And on our panel, we have the Armed Forces Minister, James
Heapy, the Labour MP and Chair of Parliament's Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy Committee, Darren Jones, Mary Dijewski, who's a columnist for The
Independent and a former foreign correspondent in Moscow, and Isabel Oakeshott,
a journalist and commentator who's currently the international editor at Talk
TV. Join us all live at 8pm here on Radio 4. And coming up in the next hour,
I've been hearing from three women leading the fight against Russia here in
Ukraine. The Defence Secretary Ben Wallace on the latest move to send fighter
jets to Kiev. And a big question. Does marriage really prevent men?