TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midnight. This is John Hammond. The UN has reached a deal with Iran
to carry out more inspections of its nuclear programme after the discovery of
uranium enriched to near weapons grade. Ukrainian officials say there's fighting
in the streets of the besieged city of Bakhmut, which Russian forces have spent
six months trying to capture. Rishi Sunak has said that migrants who come to the
UK illegally will not be allowed to stay, with new legislation expected in the
coming days. And in sport, the Premier League leaders, Arsenal, have kept their
title dreams alive with a winning goal in the 97th minute. Iran has agreed to
allow UN officials to carry out further inspections of its nuclear programme.
The announcement was made at the end of a two-day visit to the capital by the
head of International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Grossi. From Vienna, where
the organisation is based, here's our correspondent, Bethany Bell. In a joint
statement with the IAEA, Iran said it was prepared to provide more information
and access to UN inspectors. Speaking on his return to Vienna, Mr Grossi said
that included reinstalling monitoring equipment such as cameras. He said he
hoped his visit would bring about progress. My recent statements and my reports
have been saying the fact that I believe that it's high time we come to some
concrete results. So this was the spirit of the meetings we had. And I believe
we have a clear understanding in that regard so that we can start implementing a
number of very concrete measures very soon. Mr Grossi's trip followed the recent
discovery of traces of uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at the
Fordow underground nuclear site. Tehran, which says its nuclear work is
peaceful, says it restricts uranium enrichment, but acknowledged there may have
been what it called unintended fluctuations. Mr Grossi said Iran had agreed to
more inspections at the Fordow plant. The agreement is likely to head off a move
to censure Iran at the IAEA's Board of Governors next week. But Western
diplomats say Iran has made similar promises in the past that have yielded
little or nothing. Russian forces are putting strong pressure on Ukraine's
troops to withdraw from the shattered eastern city of Bahmut following months of
intense fighting. The latest analysis by British military intelligence says the
city's defenders are fortifying their positions and bringing in elite units. The
city's deputy mayor has said the remaining few thousand civilians are in
shelters without gas, electricity or water. Our diplomatic correspondent James
Landale is following developments from Kiev. For six months, Russian forces have
struggled to seize Bahmut. Thousands of their soldiers have died in the process.
But now their commanders seem growing in confidence. British military officials
said Ukrainian defenders were under increasingly severe pressure. They said
Russian soldiers and Wagner Group mercenaries were making advances in the
northern suburbs. There were reports of Ukrainian troops destroying bridges and
digging trenches in western Bahmut. The US-based think tank, the Institute for
the Study of War, said conditions were seemingly being set for what it called a
controlled fighting withdrawal from parts of the city. Oleksandr Marchenko, the
deputy mayor, told the BBC that Ukrainian forces still had control of Bahmut but
said it was cut off with no communication and there was fighting in the streets.
It is very unsafe in the city and the entire population that is staying there
right now is living in the shelters. There is no water or gas or electricity and
we have given heaters to everybody who stays in the city so that we can support
the local population. Russia said its defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, made a
flying visit to eastern Ukraine to inspect troops at what it called a forward
command post. Seizing Bahmut would be a rare victory for him and the Kremlin.
Western analysts, such as Dr Patrick Berry, senior lecturer in security at Bath
University, suggested the city had little strategic value. It doesn't really
matter in the grand scheme of things. Even in the battle in the east, it's
really been about sucking in resources on the Russian side and giving the
Ukrainians the best chance of destroying those resources in a set-piece battle.
The risk for Ukrainian forces is that in the process they become encircled and
suffer even more losses. But for now it seems that is a risk they are prepared
to take for the greater prize of killing as many Russian soldiers as they can.
Rishi Sunak has told the Mail on Sunday that migrants who come to the UK
illegally will not be allowed to stay. He was speaking ahead of the expected
announcement of new legislation to tackle the issue in the coming days. At the
same time, the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has told The Sun on Sunday that
she and the Prime Minister will do whatever it takes to stop boat crossings in
the Channel. Our political correspondent Helen Catt reports. Ms Braverman has
told the paper that she and the Prime Minister have been working flat out to
bring forward what she describes as necessary and effective laws to tackle small
boat crossings once and for all. She says that it has to be that if you come
here illegally, you will be detained and swiftly removed. It's expected the
legislation will place a duty on her to remove anyone who arrives on a small
boat to Rwanda or a safe third country as soon as reasonably practicable. It's
also expected to render the asylum claims of anyone who comes to the UK via
small boat inadmissible and to ban people from returning once they've been
removed. Some organisations have raised concerns about whether this would be
compatible with human rights laws. Others have pointed to practical
difficulties. Downing Street has said that the legislation will come in due
course. Prince Harry has compared being a member of the royal family to living
in a container. He was speaking to the author Dr Gabor Mate at a virtual event
in California, organised by the publishers of his memoir, Spare. He said the
more he was criticised for talking about trauma, the more he felt the need to
share. Our royal correspondent Daniela Ralph was listening. In California, in
front of a roaring fire, sitting opposite each other on sofas, Prince Harry
spoke to the author Dr Gabor Mate, whose books cover areas including grief and
trauma. The online conversation lasted almost 90 minutes and had the feel of a
therapy session. Prince Harry told Dr Mate that he didn't see himself as a
victim and had never looked for sympathy. They discussed Harry's childhood, the
lack of touching and cuddling within the royal family, feeling trapped within
the institution and how he wanted something different now. It leaves me in the
position now as a father of two kids of my own, making sure that I smother them
with love. I feel a huge responsibility to ensure that I don't pass on any
traumas or any negative experiences that I've had as a kid or as a man growing
up. You needed to buy a ticket to watch the online conversation. Each one came
with a copy of Harry's book spare. He said writing it had been an act of
service. Harry said taking psychedelic medication had given him clarity and
comfort. Dr Mate also diagnosed him as having attention deficit disorder. But
there was much that wasn't discussed. He didn't touch on the state of his
relationship with his father, stepmother or brother. And there was no talk of
whether he'd be at his father's coronation in May. The latest round of talks
towards an historic agreement to protect the world's oceans has overrun its two-
week deadline. Members of the United Nations are still trying to nail down a
deal to cap more than 10 years of negotiations. The High Seas Treaty aims to
safeguard marine life in 30% of areas that don't belong to any country by 2030.
There have been several delays because of disagreements on funding and fishing
rights. The actress Jane Fonda has been at the talks in New York. She gave the
UN a petition signed by more than 5 million people pleading with delegates to
come to an agreement. I think that this treaty is so important. We have to save
these creatures who basically are fighting to save us. They are our strongest
allies in the fight against the climate crisis. The ocean is one of our
strongest allies. Ocean provides us with 50% of the oxygen that we breathe. We
cannot live without a healthy ocean. Greater Manchester Police say a 15-year-old
boy has been taken to hospital with serious stab injuries. They believe he was
attacked outside a McDonald's restaurant in Salford. An order has been imposed
allowing officers to stop and search individuals in the area. A loud boom which
shook houses in parts of the East Midlands has been traced to supersonic RAF
Typhoon jets which were scrambled to intercept a civilian plane after contact
was lost with the pilot. The plane, which was flying from Iceland to Kenya via
Southend, was escorted to Stansted Airport. Etixx Police said there had been an
equipment malfunction and the two people on board had later been released to
continue their journey. As Sean Dilly reports, the sonic boom from the RAF jets
was detected in three counties. It was heard across Leicestershire,
Northamptonshire and in parts of Oxfordshire at around midday. This woman from
Daventry was calling her dogs to come back inside the house when she heard the
loud bang. Ivy, Tilly, come on. Tilly, Ivy, quick. What the hell was that?
Nothing to worry about, said Leicestershire Police. The force posted on its
Twitter account to say it had received numerous calls in relation to the loud
explosive sound. The Ministry of Defence said it scrambled Typhoon aircraft from
RAF Conningsby to escort a civilian plane heading towards London after
communications with the pilot were lost. Etixx Police said the aircraft landed
safely at Stansted Airport just before 1pm. Sport now and the Premier League
leaders, Arsenal, left it late to complete a remarkable comeback while in
athletics, Britain's Laura Muir had a record-breaking day at the European Indoor
Championships. With all that and the rest of the action, here's Shabdan Younis-
Juul. Well it couldn't have been a more dramatic day in the race for the Premier
League title. Leaders Arsenal conceded within nine seconds at home to relegation
threat and Bournemouth. They fell further behind in the second half before a
stirring fight back saw Reece Nelson win it for Arsenal in the 97th minute.
Mikel Arteta's side remained five points clear. Overall, I don't know, a lot of
emotion. It was incredible to experience that with our crowd and for sure it's a
day in the journey that is going to stick to us. Earlier, Arsenal's closest
competitors, Manchester City, beat Newcastle United 2-0. Elsewhere in the
Premier League, every home side won. That meant an easing of the pressure on
under-fired Chelsea boss Graham Potter as they beat Leeds 1-0. Southampton are
off the bottom, having beaten Leicester by the same score. There were also wins
for Aston Villa, Brighton and Wolves. In Scotland, Rangers recorded a seventh
straight Premiership win, beating Kilmarnock 3-1 to close the gap to Celtic to
six points. Dundee United remain bottom after Jim Goodwin's first game in charge
ended in a 3-1 defeat to his former club Aberdeen. Hart, Tibernian and
Motherwell also won. Britain's Laura Muir has won a record fifth European Indoor
Championship title as she claimed victory in the women's 1500m final in
Istanbul. No British athlete has more wins at the event. Muir says she went into
the Championships not fully fit but didn't want to miss out. I think as you get
older you start to appreciate these opportunities and would I rather be here not
100% fit or would I rather be at home and watching. I'd rather be here and get
my go. I'm just so chuffed with that. I'm in a really good spot. I'm not in a
bad place but I've definitely been fitter this time of year. I'm in a good place
to build on this for the summer. To come away with a win here today, I'm so
happy with that. Formula One World Champion Max Verstappen will start the season
opening Bahrain Grand Prix on pole ahead of Red Bull team-mate Sergio Perez. The
Mercedes of Britain's George Russell and Lewis Hamilton qualified sixth and
seventh respectively. And Tom Pidcock has become the first Briton to win
cycling's one-day Strad Bianche race in Italy. And now for our first look at the
Sunday papers. The Mail on Sunday puts Rishi Sunak's pledge to deport illegal
Channel migrants on its front page. The paper says he's set to introduce what it
calls hard-hitting laws this week to stop migrants resisting deportation from
the UK. The Daily Telegraph gives more details of the leaked WhatsApp messages
concerning Matt Hancock. It reports that the former health secretary wanted to
use the emergence of a new Covid variant to, as he put it, frighten the pants
off everyone so they would comply with lockdown restrictions. According to the
Sunday Times, thousands of Ukrainian children have been abducted and taken to
Russia or Crimea over the last year. It says a Yale University study estimated
more than 6,000 children between four months and 17 years old were being held.
Several front pages cover Prince Harry's virtual fireside chat to promote his
memoir. Harry's new blast at Charles is the Sunday Mirror's headline. The paper
reports that the prince said he and the royals just didn't speak the same
language. The Sun on Sunday quotes Harry as saying he was brought up in a broken
home. The architect behind the walkie-talkie skyscraper in London, which is
broader at the top than the bottom, has died. Rafael Vignoli, who was 78,
designed landmark buildings around the world. Adam Porter looks back at his
life. Rafael Vignoli was born in Uruguay and his practice was based in New York.
He was responsible for more than 600 buildings around the world, including
office and residential blocks, concert halls, stadiums and airports. His son
called him a visionary who left a legacy of distinctive and iconic structures,
while Manchester City, for whom he designed the City Football Academy, called
him a cherished friend. But not all of Vignoli's projects escaped criticism.
Some of the multi-millionaire residents of an 85-storey block in Manhattan sued
over vibrations and creaks from the building. And in 2013 it was found that
sunlight reflecting off the walkie-talkie building's curved side had melted
parts of a car parked nearby. The headlines again. Iran has agreed to give the
UN more access to its nuclear programme after uranium, enriched to near weapons
grade, was found. The Russian army is putting increasing pressure on Ukraine's
soldiers to withdraw from the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. And Rishi Sunak
has said he's determined not to let migrants who come to the UK illegally stay
in the country, with new legislation expected in the coming week. BBC News.
Which was read by John Hammond. In a moment, why is it so hard to say for when
we're older? Tim Harford explains the problem an ageing population is causing
for the state pension in Understand the Economy. But first, with a look at the
weather forecast for the next 24, 48 hours and beyond, we say good morning. Matt
Taylor. Good morning. Well it certainly does look like winter is set to bite
back through this coming week. Certainly through Monday we'll see a band of
rain, sleet and snow gradually push its way southwards across the country. And
that will open the door to some pretty cold arctic air to take us through at
least the middle part of the week. And with it we'll see some frequent snow
showers across the north and east of Scotland. And on Tuesday down across some
eastern counties of England. And there is potential for some more widespread
snow across the country as we go into the later stages of the week. But a bit of
uncertainty attached to that. The main thing is it will feel much colder. And by
Tuesday we'll see widespread wind chills of below freezing. And a widespread and
quite sharp frost will follow Tuesday night and into Wednesday. That's a short
while away though. But tonight, only Apache frost in the areas where you've seen
some clear skies to end the day and take us into the night. Lots of cloud around
for most of you. Temperatures a couple of degrees above freezing but that cloud
will be thick enough to produce the odd shower here and there. As for the
details on Sunday, we'll start quite widely across England and Wales. Another
fairly grey day for the vast majority. The greater chance of some showers though
just about anywhere throughout the day. But I'm optimistic there will be some
brighter spells developing chiefly across parts of northern England and north
Wales later into the afternoon. For Northern Ireland, after a cloudy start, we
will see one or two brighter breaks during the middle part of the morning. But
cloud will thicken again and further showers expected to take us through the
afternoon. And across Scotland, we will see some heavier showers work their way
across Orkney into the north of the mainland. Elsewhere across Scotland, plenty
of cloud around. One or two lighter showers to begin with. But we will see the
cloud break up a bit more readily through the afternoon. So there should be a
few sunnier spells, especially across central and southern Scotland.
Temperatures on Sunday, widely across the UK, 68 Celsius, just three degrees
though in Shetland. And that's where the colder air begins to push in through
Sunday night and into Monday. And across Shetland, we could see a spell of
significant snow. Get the warm coat ready. Back to you. Certainly will. Thank
you, Matt. Matt Taylor at the BBC Weather Centre. Now on BBC Radio 4, what
impact is an ageing population having on the state pension system? Why has the
state pension age for women gone up so much? Tim Harford has the answers in
Understand the Economy. Welcome to Understand the Economy, the podcast that
takes you back to basics to explain how economics affects our everyday lives. In
this episode, pensions. Don't switch me off, I promise. They're important. Very
important. But we really don't think about them enough, often until it's too
late. And maybe you think you've got your pension sorted. Even if you have,
though, you may end up paying more tax to pay for someone else's pension. So
this is really everyone's problem. A pension is money you receive when you've
retired. We've made the decision in the UK that the state will give everyone
some money once they get to a certain age. But as we'll hear, that decision was
made a long time ago when people didn't live as long as they do today. I'm
joined in the studio by Rajiv Prabhakar. He's a senior lecturer in personal
finance at the Open University and the author of Financial Inclusion, Critique
and Alternatives. Welcome, Rajiv. Thank you, Tim. So we should start at the
beginning, state pensions. At the moment, how do they work? So you build up a
national insurance record, which could be either in work or if you're caring.
And once you reach retirement age, you get something called a new state pension,
where everyone gets a flat rate. They're an example of what is called an
unfunded system. So in effect, the taxes of the current generation of people of
working age pay the guaranteed pension of the retired. And so when people who
are pensioners, when they say, I've paid in all my life, that's sort of true.
They've paid national insurance contributions, they've paid taxes, they have
paid in all their life. Yep. But in another way, it's not true, because that
money that they've paid in, that was paying for something else back in the day.
And their current pensions are being paid for by the current taxes and national
insurance contributions of the working population. Exactly. I was always told,
you get your pension when you're 65. That's your retirement age as a man. 60 if
you're a woman, that's not true anymore, is it? No. So the state pension age is
the same for men and women. So currently, in 2022, the state pension age is age
66. And it's due to rise to 67. And then by the mid, I think, in my 2040s, it's
going to rise to 68 years old. So the pension age has been going up. So why is
that? The key thing is we're talking about demography. People are living longer,
which is a great thing. But this then raises a challenge for state pension
systems, because people could be living 20, on average 20 years after
retirement. How are you going to pay for this via taxes? As it happens, women
tend to live longer than men. And so there's a rationale, first for
equalisation, but secondly, for raising the state pension age. And as I
understand it, there's two different things going on, and they're both causing a
problem. The first is that people are living longer. And the second thing is,
well, the baby boomers are retiring. So that's a very big generation born in the
20 years after the war, and they're entering retirement. And the generation
following them, poor hardworking Gen Xers like me, we're smaller. So you've got
a smaller working age population working away to fund the retirement of these
baby boomers. There's loads of them, and they live forever. This seems like it
potentially is a big problem. I mean, is the whole system unsustainable? We
could also, our government could also, encourage the population to save more
into personal or private pensions. So we've seen initiatives, for example, in
the UK, as things such as the automatic enrolment into a workplace pension,
which is now 10 years old. Yeah. Now, I want to come back and talk about these
various initiatives to get people to save for their own retirement rather than
relying on the state. But before we do, I wanted to bring in our resident
historian, Victoria Bateman from the University of Cambridge. And as she usually
does, Dr. Bateman brings us more war stories. By the 17th century, Britain had
been building its military and fighting ever more wars. And with it came a
growing number of injured servicemen, many of whom fell into poverty after their
injuries, unable to fight anymore. And so in 1681, King Charles II decided to do
something about this problem. What he did was to grant a royal warrant for the
building of the Royal Hospital in Chelsea to care for those who were, to quote,
broken by age or war. But there were many more injured and elderly servicemen
than could fit in these two hospitals. And so the military started rolling out a
pension scheme that would be to some degree recognisable to us today, that came
in the form of a weekly payment in financial terms rather than having to live in
in a hospital or an institution. In 1859, it was rolled out to everyone in the
military. And it became the precursor to the 1908 old age pension that was
introduced for pensioners right across the UK for anyone who was aged 70 or
above who was in financial need. And that pension gave the equivalent of in
today's money, £27 and was collected from the local post office. Dr Victoria
Bateman, and just to put that retirement age of 70 in context, not many people
lived to the age of 70 at that time. It was 1908. And for that generation of
pensioners, they would have entered adulthood around 1860. And life expectancy
was 58 for men, slightly more for women. So if anybody made it to 70 to claim
this pension, it was already quite an achievement. Today, the generation who are
currently getting their pension aged 66, on average, they're going to live until
they're 85 or 87. So many, many more years in retirement. And Chief Prabhakar,
we've talked about dealing with this ageing population by getting people to save
more for themselves. So are we any good at saving for our own retirements?
Actually, it can be really complicated to design a savings plan over your own
lifetime because there's lots of unexpected things, there's lots of other
factors you don't know about. The pension system is really complex. That's one
thing. But even if you manage to design a savings plan that can kind of look
into the future and give you enough income, can you stick to it? There are times
in which there's simply going to be cost of living pressures. So for example,
you may need to pay off a student debt, you may need to get a mortgage if you've
got children, you may need to pay that. So actually, people are going to be
buffeted through their whole life by these kind of things, which will put
pressure on a pension, which is in effect, it's a long term saving. Turn it down
a bit. I'm looking over at my producer, she's crying quietly in the corner of
the studio. She's a bit younger than we are. It's a hard life you're describing
here, being buffeted. Right. Second thing, there's been a school of thought
called behavioural economics, which fuses together psychology and economics. And
what some economists have said, another problem is actually, they tend to
prioritise today over tomorrow. This is sometimes called present bias. I'm
trying to save up for my pension. But then an old friend says, Oh, do you want
to go out to a restaurant? And I'm thinking, well, I don't really have the money
to do that this week, because I need that money to save towards my pension. I
made that plan. But your friend's asking if you'll go out, you can't say no to
your friend. And so you say yes, and you spend that money. And just once it
doesn't matter. But the trouble is, that's going to happen all the time, your
entire life is going to be you're going to be presented with these temptations,
it's going to be hard to say no to. Correct. And then the main kind of policy
example of which is this automatic enrolment into a workplace pension. What the
insight of economists here is saying, okay, all of us have these kind of biases
where humans were not robots. Can we design a personal pension system in a way
that harnesses the kind of biases that we all exhibit, to encourage us to save
more? So the idea here is when you join a company, and you're asked if you want
to sign up for that company's pension. And the idea would have been, well, the
company is going to contribute, the government's going to contribute, of course,
you want to do that. But very often, people actually don't, because of these
biases you described, because they're focused on their problems right now, they
don't want to think about their pension. So the automatic enrolment says,
actually, we're not going to ask you, we're just going to tell you it's
happening. You can opt out. But otherwise, it's just going to happen
automatically. Exactly. And actually, if you look at what's happened with the
automatic enrolment into a workplace pension, which was introduced from 2012, so
it's 10 years since, what's happened is that a membership of pension schemes has
increased by about tenfold. Yeah, I mean, that's amazing. It's worth holding on
that 10 times as many people enrolled now, because of automatic enrolment.
Correct. And that sounds like the problem's been solved, then. Has the problem
been solved? No. Because for automatic enrolment, people typically contribute
8%. However, for an average earner, 12% will be needed to provide enough money
in retirement. So and that maybe doesn't sound like a big gap, but they've only
got two thirds as much money as they need. And so in retirement, if that
continues, they're only going to have two thirds the pension income that they
need. I wanted to ask about pensions for men versus pensions for women. We all
know there's a gender pay gap. Women, on average, earn less than men for a whole
bunch of different reasons. Should we presume that there's a pensions gap? Do we
even know if there's a pensions gap? Actually, this is one of the key challenges
facing public pensions, because there is increasing focus on what is called a
gender pensions gap. There's a growing awareness, actually, retirement outcomes
for women are systematically worse than for men. So for example, if we look at
something like income, there's a 40% shortfall for women compared to men. Also,
the gender pension gap, if we look at, say, income, is about double the gender
pay gap. So the pension gap is twice as bad as the pay gap? Yes, roughly. Yeah.
Wow. So what's driving the gender pension gap is really to do with private
pension provision. And put very bluntly, women do a lot more unpaid caring than
men. How does that affect it? Well, it affects in a couple of ways. Number one,
they're out of the workforce, the paid workforce, and they're doing unpaid
caring. So they don't have the opportunity to build their private pensions. But
the second strand is that when they do come back into the workforce,
predominantly, they take part time work, which then feeds into their pension
contribution. And why is that important? Women live longer than men. And so they
will live a longer life, but they're going to have less money coming in. Rajiv,
I was wondering, my niece has just had twins. Oh, congratulations. Oh, they're
so cute. They're so cute. They are going to turn 78 in the year 2100. And I was
curious, do you think in the year 2100, those 78 year olds will get a state
pension? And if not, how are they going to be providing for their own
retirement? Wow, that's a hostage to fortune. No, wait, no one is going to hold
you hostage to this. We'll all be dead by then. Hopefully they won't. My
instinct is that actually, there will still be some form of public state
pension. Because one of the things that the state pension does is to stop
poverty in retirement. And actually, sometimes people can't work, sometimes
can't be in paid employment, how are they cared for? So I think that some form
of state assistance will still be there. But there will also be a growing
emphasis also on saving for retirement. And I suspect there'll be changes to the
state pension age. Rajiv Prabhakar of The Open University, thank you so much.
Thank you, Tim. So the good news is, Rajiv says that even if you live to 2100,
there will be a state pension. The bad news is, it may not be as generous as
you're hoping for. So get saving, my babies. Understand the Economy was
presented by Tim Harford and produced by Phoebe Keane. They've already explained
recessions, inflation and interest rates. You can find those episodes right now
on BBC Sounds. Next on Radio 4, it's short works and the tale of a middle-aged
man in Lycra who worries what his wife is up to when he's out riding his bike.
Daisy Daisy by Julie Maher, read by Ruth Jones. She had to be having an affair.
It was as simple as that. Gethin wanted to rage, to shout and throw bits of
crockery about, but he felt certain the barista team would disapprove,
especially that one whose pectoral muscles were barely contained inside his
company issue shirt. Instead, he sighed as he rotated the mug of coffee with his
thumbs and looked into the froth still gathered in the bottom. Phil was still
wanging on in the background, expressing every single doubt he'd ever had about
Daisy. It took a while and Gethin grudgingly respected how his old friend had
managed to keep his gob shut for the best part of 40 years. The three of them
had known each other since the days of Rara skirts, lumberjack shirts and ill-
advised poodle perms. That last one had been Phil's. He'd been channelling a
Kevin Keegan vibe at the time. Gethin stopped listening and instead glared at
the tablet of dark chocolate they always put on the saucer. He used to give it
to Daisy if she was with him and always pocketed it to hand over later if she
wasn't. Used to? Oh, surely it hadn't come to that. He unwrapped and shoved it
into his gob where it dissolved bitterly onto his tongue. His whole new world
summed up in a tiny bit of confectionery. I'm sure she was two-timing you with
that Frank Mason back in Form Four, Phil was saying. Do you remember him? The
one who always smelled to TCP on account of his zits? You told me about him
before, said Gethin. She wasn't. She was giving his sister a lend of her make-
up. It's not 1984 I'm worried about. Tell that to George Orwell. It's what
you've seen lately that bothers me. Well, there was that time she definitely
pretended not to notice me when I let her out to that junction. Not even a wave.
If your worst enemy let you out, you'd have to put a temporary hod to hostility
to do the old. Phil lifted just his index and middle fingers, careful enough not
to allow even a sliver of daylight to come between the two digits. Whichever way
you looked at it, that small gap changed the nature of the message entirely. And
I saw her getting into her car, looking all hot and sweaty last Wednesday
afternoon. She told me she was having a half day, said Gethin. And when I saw
her hugging some skinny little guy at the entrance to the clubhouse down by the
rugby pitch. Phil used his tongue to examine his teeth for loose chocolate
chips. Could be a perfectly innocent reason for that, said Gethin. You didn't
see the look on her face. She can't be having an affair, said Gethin. It's our
wedding anniversary next month. It seemed wrong to celebrate with an
extramarital affair, directly against the spirit of things. Still, she had been
different lately. Busier, out and about more, coming home and running straight
upstairs for a shower. What about those cuts and bruises on her arms and legs?
Her constant moans about aches and pains in parts of her she didn't know she
had. When he'd asked if she'd been doing anything to get them, she'd clammed up
pretty quick. He got up early the next day for a bike ride before work. You
don't normally go out in your Lycra's on a weekday, she'd said as she rolled
over in bed. How did she do it? When Gethin woke up, he had to rub the sleep
from his eyes and the trail of dried saliva from his mouth. Daisy looked like a
sleeping beauty, just kissed and not by him. Thought I'd slip some miles in now
and then we can have the weekend together. Do something you want to do? Daisy
sat up quickly. Oh, sorry, I've got something planned for Saturday morning. A
shopping trip into town with the girls? She flopped heavily back down onto the
pillows. Unless you want to come with us too. Check out the latest Charlotte
Tilbury, eat a stack of pancakes, do a touch of Pilates. Oh, well, whatever,
said Gethin as he left the room. He didn't even know you could stomp down the
stairs in just socks, no shoes. Who left that phone charger on the bottom step?
Oh, he did. Ouch. You couldn't really get up much speed on the estate, but as
soon as he hit the main road, he knew choosing cycling for his midlife crisis
had been the right decision. There'd been other options, of course, including an
affair at work. But like Paul Newman said, why would he go out for saleswoman
rep hamburger when he had Daisy steak at home? He could have got himself a
Porsche or a Jag like Phil had done until he rear ended that old lady in the
Skoda. Apparently, as soon as she noticed what he was driving, she clutched the
back of her neck and started moaning, whiplash, whiplash, over and over again.
She'd been fighting fit enough for liberal use of the F word before that. There
was hardly any traffic around as he descended the slip road out onto the empty
dual carriageway. It was just him and the highway. He relaxed, allowed his mind
to empty of anything other than keeping this machine, half man, half bike, on
the road. The fresh morning air brushed past him with only a hint of a whiff of
the farmyard about it. He had to stand on the pedals on the steepest part. This
was not a day to get off and push, even though he'd been guilty of that often
enough. This way, he knew he deserved his freewheeling reward at the top as he
tilted downhill at full pelt. Gardens, hedges on one side, the estuary blurring
past him on the other. He'd never get his private pilot's licence now, but this
was the closest thing to flying he would ever get. As he neared the Lougha
Bridge, he spotted the 605 from Carmarthen to Swansea clattering across. He
sucked in a lungful of air, pressed his feet down, felt his legs like pistons
and finally dared to turn his head to the left. He was doing it. He was keeping
up, his bicycle level with the final carriage of the train. Nobody on board
noticed. Nobody ever spent their train journey looking out the window at the sea
and sky when you could gawp at your phone or your tablet instead. Then he saw
him, a small boy whose mouth dropped open at the sight of this superman riding a
bike as fast as a speeding train. Gethin pedalled. He gasped. He wished he'd
shaved his legs, but even as the bike crossed the bridge, he knew he did not
want to see the back of that train, its end carriage disappearing towards High
Street Station while he turned right at the roundabout down towards the gower.
He would pedal to keep level with that train even if it killed him. Some things
were worth fighting for. See you this afternoon, Angie, said Daisy. She leaned
in to peck him on the cheek as he sat in his dressing gown over the Saturday
papers. Have you got anything planned for this morning? I'll have a potch about
the house, probably, said Gethin. I'll see you when I see you. Oh, said Daisy.
Righty-ho, then. As soon as he heard the car door slam, Gethin tore open his
dressing gown and stepped out of it fully dressed. He waited for the sound of
Daisy pulling out of the drive before hurrying out and getting into the car.
There was one good thing about living in the cul-de-sac, after all. It made
following your wife to her secret assignation so much easier when there was only
one way out onto the main road. Phil had advised him to start making a list of
Daisy's bad points. Scientific research proves you can drop your loving feelings
for your ex by 18% if you focus on the feelings, he'd said during one of his so-
called pep talks. It also increases your feelings of sadness by 18%, but that's
by the by. It was hard, though. Look at her now, slowing down instead of
speeding up the zebra crossing to let the brownies cross the road, indicating
for a good three seconds before turning. It made tailing her so easy. His heart
sank when he saw her indicator pipping and the car stopped to turn right down
towards the rugby club. He parked up on the side. There was a training session
on the field, men with thighs that could crack nuts doing shuttle runs while
someone shouted incomprehensible things at them through a megaphone. But there
was no sign of Daisy. A cycling club was using the concrete yard next to the
pitch. Children were wobbling up and down, around and around, on balance bikes
or scooters. There was only one cyclist who was just about good enough to ride a
bike with its pedals on, and even then the bike swayed precariously. As the kid
rode past where Gethin was standing, he could see it wasn't a child at all, but
his wife of thirty years. It was Daisy. She spotted him too, and as soon as she
did, she stopped pedalling, the bike tilted slowly to one side, and she fell
off. Gethin dashed over, so did one of the cycling coaches, one who matched
Phil's description of the skinny little guy who his wife had been seen hugging
so enthusiastically. What are you doing here? Daisy asked. I could say the same
for you, said Gethin. I might even ask, who's this? This is Claire, said Daisy,
getting up slowly. She's been giving me lessons. Lessons in what? Gethin's tones
were accusing. Hang on. Claire. Claire smiled at him, and seeing all was well,
disappeared. She was gammying, elfin, pixieish, and most definitely the person
Phil said was a skinny little guy. What are you doing here? Daisy repeated. Phil
said. Oh, I might have known Phil would be involved, said Daisy. Well, it's all
ruined now. You might as well come and see, but don't blame me when you haven't
got a surprise on the day. Daisy picked up her bike and wheeled it over to one
of the containers, Gethin scampering after her. It was Claire's idea, said Daisy
once they'd got inside. Inside the container, propped up in a bike stand all on
its own, shiny and new amidst the other battered, muddy and bruised bicycles,
was a brand new tandem. There was a red ribbon tied to its handlebars. She said
a tandem would be an even better way to do it, seeing as how I was doing so well
in the lessons. What do you mean? You can so ride a bike. Everybody can.
Couldn't they? Didn't she do that triathlon back in 2016? No, she didn't. He'd
done that while she came out and joined him for the run and the swim, but never
the cycle. That was when she sprained her ankle and kept blaming it all on
Donald Trump. Well, I never got taught, not until two months ago anyway. That's
when I found out about this place. Didn't think they'd let adult learners join
in. You don't know shame until you've fallen off your bike in front of the other
eight-year-olds in your class. But I've got there in the end. It took ages. Have
you not wondered why I didn't go with you on those cycling weekends? I thought
it was because you didn't like Phil. Well, there was that as well, but a tandem,
well, there's only ever room for two. She leaned in towards Geffen and whispered
in his ear, Happy Anniversary. Daisy Daisy by Julie Ma was read by Ruth Jones.
The producer was Philippa Swallow. Thank you, Ruth. ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ And now on BBC
Radio 4, the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the
Maritime and Coastguard Agency at 0015 on Sunday 5th March. There are warnings
of gales in Faroes and south-east Iceland. The general synopsis at 1800. Low 50
miles north-north-east of Iceland, 1023. Expected fair isle, 1009, by 1800
Sunday. High Rockall, 1032, dissipating. The area forecasts for the next 24
hours. Viking north-at-seara, south-at-seara, north-east 40s. Northerly or
north-westerly, 4-6, occasionally 7 at first, becoming cyclonic 3-5 later in
Viking. Squally snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. South-west 40s,
Cromarty. Westerly or north-westerly, veering northerly, 3-5, backing westerly
or south-westerly, 4-6 later. Showers, wintry later, good, occasionally poor
later. Forth, west or south-west, veering north-east later, 3-5, then becoming
variable 2 later. Showers, good, occasionally poor later. Tyne, Daga. North or
north-west, 3-5. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. Fisher, German Bight.
North or north-west, 4-6, occasionally 7 at first, wintry showers, squally at
first, good, occasionally poor. Humber. North or north-west, 3-5. Showers, good.
Thames, Dover. North or north-west, backing west for a time, 2-4. Showers, good.
White, Portland, Plymouth. North-east, backing north or north-west, 2-4.
Showers, good. Biscay. Easterly or north-easterly, 2-4, occasionally 5 at first
and south-west. Showers, good. Trafalgar. Cyclonic, 4-6, becoming west or south-
west, 3-5, rain or showers, thundery at first, good, occasionally poor. South
Fitzroy. Easterly, becoming cyclonic, 4-6, rain or showers, good, occasionally
poor. North Fitzroy, Sol. Easterly, 3-5, occasionally 6 at first and north-west
Fitzroy, backing north-easterly later in east. Showers, good. Lundy, Fastnet.
North-east, backing north or north-west, 2-4. Showers, good. Irish Sea. North or
north-west, 2-4. Showers, good. Shannon. East, becoming variable, 2-4. Showers,
good. Rockall, Mallon. Variable 2 at first and south Rockall, otherwise
northerly or north-westerly, 3-5. Showers, good, occasionally moderate.
Hebrides-Bailey. North-west, 3-5, veering north, 5-7 later. Showers, wintry
later in north, good, occasionally poor. Fair Isle. Cyclonic, 3-5, increasing 6
or 7 later, perhaps gale 8 later, sleet or snow showers, moderate good,
occasionally very poor. Faroes, south-east Iceland. Cyclonic, 3-5, becoming
north-easterly, 6 to gale 8, sleet, then snow showers, moderate or good,
occasionally very poor. Light icing later in south-east Iceland. And now the
weather reports from coastal stations for 2300 on the 4th of March. Tyree
Automatic. West-north-west, 2, 24 miles, 1027, falling. Stornoway. South-west,
3, recent rain, more than 38 miles, 1024, falling. Lerwick. North by west, 3,
slight rain, 22 miles, 1023, falling. Wick Automatic. West, 3, 14 miles, 1023,
falling. Aberdeen. North, 1, 16 miles, 1025, falling. Lucas. West-south-west, 2,
22 miles, 1025, falling. Boomer. West, 3, 1026, falling. Bridlington. West by
north, 2, 1025, falling slowly. Sandedy Light Vessel Automatic. North by west,
4, 11 miles, 1025. St Catherine's Point Automatic. North by west, 2, 1026,
falling slowly. Jersey. North-east, 2, 19 miles, 1026, now rising. Channel Light
Vessel Automatic. North-north-east, 3, 1027. Scilly Automatic. North-east by
north, 2, 12 miles, 1028, falling slowly. Milford Haven. North-east, 1, 32
miles, 1028, falling slowly. Aberporth. North-north-east, 2, 35 miles, 1028,
falling slowly. Valley. East, 1, 14 miles, 1028, falling slowly. Liverpool-
Crosby. East, 1, 6 miles, 1028, falling slowly. Valencia. East by north, 2, 24
miles, 1030, falling slowly. Ronald's Way. North-east, 1, 1027, falling slowly.
Mallinhead. West by north, 3, 27 miles, 1027, falling. And Macro Hanisch
Automatic. South-east, 1, 35 miles, 1027, falling. And here's the weather
forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for
the following 24 hours, issued by the Met Office at 2300 on Saturday, 4th March.
The general situation. A ridge of high pressure, currently lying over southern
and western parts of the United Kingdom, will gradually decline during Sunday.
This will leave most places in a north-westerly airflow, with showers affecting
many areas. Colder air will follow southwards during Monday, with showers in the
north becoming heavy and turning to snow. Cape Wrath to Rattrayhead, including
Orkney. West veering north-east, 3 to 5, then becoming variable 3 or less,
becoming west or south-west, 4 to 6 later, showers, good, occasionally poor.
Rattrayhead to Berwick-upon-Tweed. West or south-west, 2 to 4, veering north or
north-east, 3 to 5, becoming variable then south-west, 3 or less later, showers,
becoming wintry later in north, good, occasionally poor later in north. Berwick-
upon-Tweed to Whitby. West or north-west, 2 to 4, veering north 4 or 5 for a
time later, showers, good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North or north-west, 3 or
4, bagging west or north-west, 2 to 4, showers, good. Gibraltar Point to North
Forland. North-westerly, 3 or 4, becoming variable 2 at times later, showers,
good. North Forland to Celtsey Bill. Northerly or north-westerly, bagging
westerly for a time, 2 to 4, showers, good. Celtsey Bill to Lime Regis. North,
bagging west or north-west, 2 or 3, occasionally 4 later, fair, then showers,
good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly. North-east, 2 to
4, becoming variable 3 or less, then north or north-west, 2 to 4 later, fair,
then showers, good. Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol
Channel. Variable, but mainly north-east at first, 3 or less, becoming north-
west, 3 or 4 later, fair, then showers, good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead,
including St George's Channel. Variable, 3 or less, becoming north or north-
west, 2 to 4, showers, good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. Variable, 3
or less, becoming mainly north or north-west, 2 to 4, becoming variable again
later, showers, good. Isle of Man. Variable, becoming north-west, 2 to 4,
showers, good, occasionally moderate. Lockfoyle to Carlingford Lock. West or
north-west, 2 to 4, showers, good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre,
including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Variable, 3 or less, at first
and far north, otherwise westerly or north-westerly, 2 to 4, showers, good. Mull
of Kintyre to Ardenhamirchen Point. Variable, 3 or less, becoming north-west, 2
to 4, showers, good. Ardenhamirchen Point to Cape Wrath. Westerly or north-
westerly, but becoming variable for a time in north, 2 to 4, veering northerly
or north-westerly, 4 to 6 later, showers, good, occasionally poor later. And
Shetland Isles. North, 3 to 5, backing north-west, 3 or 4 later, then becoming
cyclonic, 5 to 7 later, sleet or snow showers, moderate or good, occasionally
very poor. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. And that's it indeed for
another day here on BBC Radio 4. In a few moments we'll be joining our
colleagues at BBC World Service and they'll guide you through the wee small
hours until we return at twenty past five later this morning. You can always
listen to comedy and drama through the night on our digital sister station, BBC
Radio 4 Extra. But on behalf of my colleague John Hammond in the newsroom, and
myself, I'll rhyme here in Broadcasting House, if you have been, thanks for
listening. Have a safe, quiet and peaceful night. Good night. Thank you for
listening to the BBC Radio 4 Extra..