TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 out. Email SaturdayLive at bbc.co.uk and we're on air tomorrow morning, just
after nine. Our health correspondent Catherine Burns says optimism the move
signals an end to disruption should be tempered for two reasons. The first is
that the unions are being very clear. If they don't think the talks are
meaningful, they will go back out on strike. The second is that junior doctors
weren't invited to the talks. They're planning a three-day walkout soon and NHS
bosses say they're worried that this could have a bigger and wider impact than
strikes we've seen so far this winter. Ambulance workers in Wales have also
called off a strike scheduled for Monday. Their unions said significant progress
had been made in talks with the Welsh government and teachers in Scotland are to
suspend their strike action in order to consider an improved pay offer. Boris
Johnson has insisted he never knowingly or recklessly misled MPs about lockdown
parties in Downing Street. In an interim report, the Privileges Committee said
it had found four occasions where the former Prime Minister may have misled the
House. Mr Johnson said he was sure he would be vindicated. Violence has broken
out in Athens during protests about railway safety following the train crash
earlier this week in which 57 people died. Petrol bombs were thrown at the
police who responded with tear gas. The Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, is expected to
extend the government's energy price guarantee scheme for another three months.
The average annual household bill had been due to rise to £3,000 from April but
the new proposals would keep it at £2,500. The winter discount of £400 will end.
And a former Royal Marine has been awarded more than £700,000 in damages after
losing his hearing. James Barry from Nottingham sued the Minister of Defence,
claiming that inadequate protection and excessive noise from gunfire had caused
his hearing loss and led to him being medically discharged. The MOD has
apologised. BBC News. In just under 50 minutes, AL Kennedy finds echoes of the
disaster movies of the 1970s in our current state of affairs in a point of view.
But now on Radio 4, it's time for Any Questions with Alex Forsyth. Hello and
welcome to the Holbeck in Leeds, a community venue run by volunteers which is
thought to be one of the UK's oldest working men's clubs. It's in a part of the
city that was at the heart of the Industrial Revolution, central in making Leeds
the thriving West Yorkshire city that it is today. On our panel we have Miriam
Cates, the Conservative MP for Penistone and Stocksbridge. Elected in December
2019, she's a member of the Commons Education Select Committee and has become a
prominent backbencher, campaigning on issues including levelling up and online
harms. Kim Ledbetter is the Labour MP for Batley and Spen and she's lived and
worked in her constituency for most of her life. She was involved heavily with
the Jo Cox Foundation which was set up following the murder of her sister, the
former MP for Kim's seat. She was awarded an MBE for services to social cohesion
and the community in Batley and Spen. Wendy Chamberlain is the Liberal Democrat
MP for North East Fife, her party's chief whip and spokesperson for work and
pensions. She has a degree in English from Edinburgh University and before
becoming a politician she worked for 12 years as a police officer. And Lee
Powell is the chief executive officer of GMI Construction Group, a large
construction company based in the Midlands and north of England. Lee grew up in
Leeds, he has qualifications in construction from Leeds College of Building and
on getting his current job he said he wanted his company to be at the heart of
plans to level up the UK. Holbeck in Leeds, please welcome your Any Questions
panel. So let's get going with our first tonight which comes from Jenny
Parkinson. Hello Jenny. Hello, what does the Windsor Framework mean for
Yorkshire? Jenny, thanks for your question. The Windsor Framework, that is the
latest iteration of the Brexit deal which deals with post-Brexit trading
arrangements with Northern Ireland, something that Rishi Sunak negotiated this
week. So Jenny's question, what does the Windsor Framework mean for Yorkshire?
Miriam Cates. Thank you Jenny, great question. I think the short answer is not a
lot for Yorkshire specifically but an awful lot for the UK as a whole. And
thinking back to 2019 when you know we were campaigning in the general election,
get Brexit done was the big slogan of course and we quickly passed the
withdrawal agreement and then had some more painful negotiations. But I think
many people in Yorkshire probably consider that Brexit has been done, whether
we've made the most of it yet is a different question. But actually the
situation in Northern Ireland has been very difficult, very sticky, perhaps
hasn't received attention across the country but has been really, really
important to get resolved. And I think you know the Prime Minister has done a
really good deal here, he's extracted some really good concessions from the EU.
Of course it's not perfect, of course not everybody's going to agree with all of
it, but I think it does allow us to move forward to be able to say that Brexit
is done and we can now focus on building our relationship with the EU and taking
advantage of those freedoms. Miriam, thank you. Wendy Chamberlain. Well I think
what's very interesting about the Windsor Framework is the fact that it's
obviously a vast improvement on what was the oven ready deal that the former
Prime Minister Boris Johnson promised to deliver in 2019. But really I think
what we have to think about is the very serious situation in Northern Ireland
and the fragile peace that we saw shattered last week by the attempted murder of
a serving police officer. It's quite clear that the protocol was not fit for
Northern Ireland and you know I am pleased that we have got a Prime Minister in
place now who has done something about it. But this is frankly a situation of
the Conservative Party's own making and it has taken until now to have somebody
who is taking the situation in Northern Ireland seriously. I think it's a much
improved deal, Liberal Democrats will be looking at it, we'll be working with
our Alliance Party colleagues in Northern Ireland as well, but I think it would
be fair to say I think it's a better position than we've been in previously. And
do you think it will do much for Yorkshire? Well in terms of Yorkshire, I think
what we want to see is we want to see across the UK, we want to actually improve
our relationships with Europe regardless of where you were previously. And so
the fact that we're actually capable of having some grown-up conversations now,
I think that you've got to expect to see some benefit for the whole of the UK as
a part of that. Wendy, thank you. Kim Labita. I think as both Miriam and Wendy
have said, I think this is a positive move, it's a positive step forward.
However in terms of day-to-day life for most people in Yorkshire, I don't think
it'll be a significant difference. I mean what is a very good thing is that now
that we've actually got some movement on this issue, the government and the
Prime Minister can start focusing on the issues that matter to people in terms
of the cost of living crisis, in terms of the NHS, in terms of education, in
terms of crime and antisocial behaviour. So it will hopefully now enable them to
move on and do other things. I mean setting aside the fact that Rishi Sunak
speaks to everyone like they're in primary school, I think there's a whole,
which I find quite amusing but also really annoying, that you know he's doing
this big thing in Parliament this week where he's telling us how fantastic this
deal is and Northern Ireland is now the world's most exciting economic zone but
actually what he's doing is undoing the damage that the Tories have done since
Brexit. Miriam. I can't say I've ever noticed that about Rishi Sunak. I
personally think he's an excellent communicator but just to come back on the
points that Kim and Wendy made, of course it's been messy, of course it's been
difficult and I think anyone who expected this to be easy was wrong and if you
just think about Northern Ireland's history, its culture, the troubles we went
through, all the different things that Northern Ireland represents, it was never
going to be simple and actually to get to this point is a real achievement. I
mean not everyone thinks that. Boris Johnson said he'd find it very difficult to
vote for this. Yes and the DUP have not yet said exactly what they think and
there will be a range of opinions, don't get me wrong, but I think it's
important to be able to have those policy disagreements whilst also hopefully
getting towards some sort of resolution. Miriam, thank you. A reminder of
Jenny's question, what does the Windsor framework mean for Yorkshire? Lee
Powell. Well I think that the Windsor framework overall I think has resolved
what looked like an impossible situation. You know everybody was looking at
Brexit and whether you vote for it or against it, you were looking at it think
how does this problem get resolved and I think Rishi's been pretty succinct and
pretty good in actually resolving the Northern Ireland protocol and getting
something in place and you know I always think that a complex situation that
when it gets resolved looks quite simple is usually a good and effective
resolution and to have the green and the red lanes etc I think it's a good
resolution. What will it do for Yorkshire? I think I'm on board with some of the
other panels saying I don't really know what it will do for Yorkshire per se but
for the country and being part of the UK I think it will finally put the Brexit
thing to bed and enable us to move forward. Lee, thank you. We got a couple of
questions on this. We got a couple of questions on this and I just want to pick
up to read another one that we were asked something actually came that you
mentioned. So Des McLernand said on Tuesday Rishi Sunak boasted that by being
inside the EU single market Northern Ireland helped create the world's most
exciting economic zone. So can he now do the same for the rest of the UK? I mean
Lee... Lee, you did support Brexit. What do you make of that? I did. I mean I
was very marginal for a long time and I looked at it long and hard at the time
and I almost put my my business head to one side because I knew that immediately
for business it wouldn't be a good thing but I looked at it for the long-term
future of me, my family, my children and I actually thought that it would be the
right thing to do and the reasons for that is because you know I looked at the
EU and I looked at places that sat outside of the EU, the likes of Norway that
had the oil, the likes of Switzerland that had the and Geneva that had the
financial sector and I thought Great Britain had both of those and I thought
Great Britain can make this work outside of the EU. Now what do you think? Well
I think we've been waiting haven't we for the for the Northern Ireland protocol
to be sorted out. I think there's a lot of infighting there's now between Boris
and Rishi. I actually think in the long term personally I think it will be a
good thing for Britain. I think Britain will become a manufacturing nation again
and will not rely upon European subsidies and European supply chains. What do
you make of that Wendy? Well I'm obviously sitting here in Leeds as a Scottish
MP and you know there's absolutely no doubt that I campaigned for remain as an
activist then rather than an MP and also you know we know that Scotland as a
whole voted to remain though I absolutely accept that it was a an overall UK
vote but I think you know what Lee has said there I think the real challenge is
how you reconcile for those areas who feel that they are going to be a
competitive disadvantage and you know there's absolutely no doubt that if you
look at what the SNP are saying for example they feel very much that Scotland is
being put at a disadvantage and so I think you know dare I say the Prime
Minister in his exuberance last earlier this week potentially got himself into a
bit of trouble because I do think it's difficult to reconcile that when Northern
Ireland are getting these different conditions what does that mean for the rest
of us. I think you have to keep at the forefront the particular political
situation in Northern Ireland. And the Lib Dems want a return to the single
market but there's no time frame on that. Well what I would say is well I'm a
Liberal Democrat I think we said bollocks to Brexit am I allowed to say that
here? I don't think there's any doubt in terms of what I stand for but I think
what's really important and this is where you know as I say and as Lee said you
know we've been chatting before we've come in here as a group of politicians and
with Lee as well and actually what's really important is that we improve our
relationships regardless of what you thought about leave or remain it's actually
about how do we rebuild those relationships with Europe no matter what the
future might have because that's actually the way to gain prosperity for
Yorkshire and beyond. Miriam on that point the question that I read from Des, is
the Rishi Sunak suggesting that Northern Ireland was in a good place because it
is in the single market? Well I think he was speaking specifically about
Northern Ireland and its specific political context so the difficulties
surrounding the Good Friday Agreement, the fact that it's the only part of the
UK with a land border with the EU, the fact that the terms of the agreement mean
that there can't be a hard border, all those factors, the fact that there is
already international involvement with Northern Ireland because of the Good
Friday Agreement. So I think he was speaking specifically about Northern Ireland
that this is the best place for Northern Ireland to be. Kim? I'll just make
three very quick points Lee as a businessman I'm surprised by your comments not
one single business in my constituency has told me that Brexit has had a
positive impact, not one single business. The second point I would make is that
when Rishi did this big thing about telling Northern Ireland how lucky they
were, did he think that England and Scotland and Wales weren't listening? Where
did he think we all were? You know was he whispering? So he thought no just you
guys have got it great don't worry about the others it doesn't matter. So would
you like to see the UK rejoin the single market because that isn't Labour's
policy? Labour's clear we respect the result of the referendum and I make no
judgment on anyone what you voted in that referendum I think there's a whole
piece of work to be done about what we were told and what the actual reality is
and I think for Miriam to say no one said it was going to be easy that's
nonsense they did say it was going to be easy they said it was going to be an
oven ready deal they said get Brexit done. I think I said that we shouldn't
think it was going to be easy because it was very complex and I think you know I
had a similar view to Lee I think over long term we will be better off out that
doesn't mean we feel like that yet but I think it's not just an economic
question a lot of people voted for Brexit with their hearts because they wanted
control of our sovereignty they didn't like the EU's model they didn't like how
remote Brussels was that is a big part of this it's not only an economic
question it's too early to tell on this this is a democratic question as well
that's why people voted for Brexit. Lee just briefly on the point that Kim made
about business yeah just a very brief one I didn't say that we've seen the
positive benefits of Brexit to date I said that I believe that it will it will
be come to fruition and have positive benefits. Okay thank you all very much I
suspect that some of you at home might have your views on this as well if you do
we'd love to hear from you the person you need to call is Anita Arnand the
number you need is 03700 100 444 and lines open at 12 30 p.m on Saturday for any
answers so we move on to our next which comes from Patrick Moran hello Patrick
hello was it wise for Keir Starmer to offer Partigate probe chief a job as his
chief of staff? Patrick thank you you're talking there about Sue Gray of course
the senior civil servant who carried out that investigation into the so-called
Partigate situation and with gatherings in Downing Street who now has left her
job in the civil service and has been offered a job as Keir Starmer's chief of
staff was that wise Kim Ledbetter? Thank you I think if and it is an if because
there is a procedure to be followed if we get Sue Gray coming over as Keir's
chief of staff I think that will be a fantastic appointment she's clearly got an
excellent reputation for being a woman of integrity she's got a very good record
within the civil service and I think what I'm finding quite bizarre about this
whole situation is that suddenly Boris Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg who said that
until 48 hours ago Sue Gray was a fantastic woman and was the you know the moral
fiber of the nation and was fantastic at her job suddenly they're now now trying
to trash her and I think that's pretty disgusting actually people are allowed to
change jobs and anything that happened with the Sue Gray report and Partigate
and all those other things that brought Boris Johnson's downfall were his fault
they were not Sue Gray's fault he did all that stuff he was involved in the Owen
Paterson affair he appointed Chris Pincher as former Conservative MPs his ethics
advisor resigned so all that kerfuffle that there was at that time Sue Gray did
her job properly the person who didn't do his job properly it was Boris Johnson
and she should be allowed to leave. Miriam Kate some of your colleagues your
Conservative colleagues have been pretty angry about this Kim says they're
trashing Sue Gray someone they've recently supported. Well I don't think it's at
all wise to trash Sue Gray I think the question was was it wise for Keir Starmer
to appoint her and as Kim said people are allowed to change jobs I think what
maybe wasn't wise is to announce it before going through the process that
decides whether senior civil. To be fair to Keir Starmer I don't think he
planned to. Oh I see it was leaked okay I didn't realise that. I think someone
found out. So I think it's really important as Kim said there is now a process
that senior civil servants have to go through to determine whether they are
allowed to take a different job and how long they may have to wait to take it so
what kind of influence they had in the role before whether it's fair to take
that to the next role so we've got to wait the outcome of that it's only fair
before we can comment but no it's not right to trash her reputation but I do
think there's a really important point about the impartiality of the civil
service they must be impartial for our democracy to work that doesn't mean they
can't have political views that they share in private of course not but there
has to be the the semblance of and the reality of impartiality in that post
that's what potentially is up for question here and that's why this process is
so important and must be allowed to go through to its conclusion. Miriam thank
you the process you're referring to is one of those wonderful Westminster
acronyms it is the advisory committee on business appointments and they're
looking at this and they will issue advice it could be that Sue Gray should wait
between three months and two years I do believe before she takes up that post
but we're waiting to see what they say. Wendy Chamberlain. Yeah and the ACOBA
process what's interesting about it is that it is an advisory process even the
Prime Minister at the end of the day can't stop this happening and the reason
why we know it's an advisory process is because there was a former foreign
secretary called Boris Johnson who completely ignored it when he left as being
foreign secretary and took up some paid employment so I think that's the first
element. Just to be clear that isn't breaking any rules as you say this is an
advisory process only. It's an advisory process. It's a sort of convention if
you like. The former police officer in me suggests that people follow the rules
and follow the advice I have to say that so I think there's that bit so it's
quite clear that whatever ACOBA says I think if I was Sue Gray and Keir Starmer
I'd make sure that I was following that process but I think we have to be clear
that what the Prime Minister or the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson is
trying to do here is to potentially undermine what was going on with the
Privileges Committee just now and there's also just this bit for me that if Keir
Starmer had secretly set up Sue Gray that kind of makes him a bit of a genius
doesn't it? So potentially therefore I think that what has happened is this
information has leaked sooner than the Labour Party and Sue Gray have intended.
It's important that process and advice and guidance is followed and we'll see
what happens with the Privileges Committee. I suspect we might get a question
about that as well. Well you don't often hear a Liberal Democrat MP calling the
Labour Party leader a genius but then anything can happen on any question. I
said he might be if that was the case. Might be a genius. The Privileges
Committee of course is the committee of MPs which is looking into the allegation
that Boris Johnson knowingly misled Parliament over the party gate situation.
Boris Johnson on Friday did say that he hadn't. Anyway back to the original
question. Lee Powell. As a non-political standpoint on this and just as a matter
of principle I don't think it's correct. You know as a company director and as a
chief exec my contract says that I can't go work for any of the competition for
a period of time and you know just like a member of Parliament there is a
certain period of time which I believe is two years before they can go into a
conflicting industry and I think that should be brought to the front as well for
civil servants. I don't think it's right that somebody that has that
intelligence and that privileged information can lead a committee and then the
next day go work for the opposition. I came on that point. Yeah but just to be
clearly that isn't what she's done. She wasn't working for the Conservative
Party. She was an independent civil servant and that's the whole idea. Now
again. Okay thank you all. If you want to have your say the number you need on
any answers 03700 100 444. Lines open 12 30 p.m. on Saturday. Now let's move on
to our third which comes from Sharon Whitten. Hello Sharon. Hello what have we
learned since lockdown? What have we learned since lockdown? Sharon do you have
any particular reason or knowledge of this area? Any reason to be asking this
question? Yeah I work with people with long Covid so I see how the issues
remain. And you think they still do remain? They do certainly. Sharon thank you
very much for your question. What have we learned since lockdown? Wendy
Chamberlain. Thank you for that question Sharon. I've got a friend suffering
from long Covid who has found out this week that she's going to lose her home.
She's going to lose her home because she's been out of work for such a period of
time. She no longer has sick pay and therefore she's having to she can no longer
pay her mortgage. So I think you know when we think about all the stuff that
we've heard this week in relation to Covid I think we think about the people
affected by long Covid and the families and loved ones of those who passed away
during Covid. I think we need to keep that at the forefront of our minds.
Interestingly one of the things that I think about is the fact that Covid or
pandemics are always on every organisation's risk register. I'm sure they were
on Leigh's prior to Covid but they're on the risk register but they're seen as
unlikely to happen and therefore we don't learn the lessons that we should. And
we know that there were planning exercises that took place before Covid and the
right actions weren't taken. I think in relation to what we've seen this week
it's quite clear that the inquiry needs to move forward as quickly as possible
and I think we need to ensure that the lessons are learned and acted upon. But I
don't think we're there yet that's quite clear. Wendy do you think there should
be perhaps a deadline for this inquiry? I'm always conscious of putting
deadlines on things but I think we haven't got a great track record of timings
for inquiries in this country. They seem to go on for too many years. I think we
were talking about infrastructure before we joined here and I think the
Edinburgh Trams inquiry is still going on. I think the inquiry has taken longer
than the construction period. So I wouldn't want to put a date on it but I think
we need to ensure that the resources are in place so that the inquiry can report
as soon as possible. That's true for the inquiry here and it's true for me in
Scotland in relation to the separate inquiry that's happening there too. Thank
you very much. Lee Powell. What have we learned since lockdown? We've all
learned how to use Microsoft Teams or Zoom that's for certain. So technology
certainly took a step forward. I have a relatively strong opinion on this. I
think that it was an overreaction to COVID and that doesn't mean that I'm
insensitive. That doesn't mean that I'm insensitive to the people that lost
their lives or are severely impacted by long COVID. I have sympathies for those
people but it was one way to ruin an economy for a long time and I do think it
should have been more of a focused solution. I do think they should have looked
at the demographics and looked at the people involved and the risk factors. But
what we did is we shut down a global economy, we shut down a national economy,
we made sure people couldn't go to work, we printed money and we're reaping the
benefits of it now or not as the case may be. So do you think it was a good
thing that we've seen those WhatsApp messages come out this week then? Well
first and foremost on WhatsApp, you know, yes we have a WhatsApp account at JMI
Construction Group and we use it but we only use it for succinct logistical
things like making meetings. I personally don't think government should be
operated through WhatsApp and on the hoof. I think it's not very good at all.
Thank you. A reminder of Sharon's question, what have we learned since lockdown?
Kim Ledbetter. I think, I mean first and foremost Sharon, thank you for the work
that you do. Like Wendy, I also have a very close friend who's got long COVID
and her life has been turned upside down and it will never be the same again. I
think there's two sides to the, well there's lots of sides to the pandemic to be
fair, but there's the people side and there's the economic side. And for me, I
was always heavily invested in the people side and how it affected people up and
down the country. That would tend to be my priority. I wasn't an MP at the time,
I was actually working for the Joe Cox Foundation and we were one of the
community anchors working with people in the community trying to get food to
people, trying to get prescriptions to people, people who were very scared,
people who were very, very frightened and many of whom actually haven't even yet
engaged with what you might call normal life because they're still very scared
and it's had a huge negative effect. I think, I mean, first and foremost, I feel
deeply sorry for the families and the friends of people who lost loved ones
during that time, for everybody who was involved. I think what we did learn from
lockdown was how hard it is to be a teacher, anybody who tried homeschooling.
Lots of my friends were in that category. And I think in that regard, the
messages that have come out, the WhatsApp messages that have come out, I find
hugely disrespectful to various different professions and groups within society
to call teaching unions absolute arsers and say that they just hate work. I
think it's deeply disrespectful to anybody in the teaching profession. And quite
unbelievable to talk about people who were travelling, as being locked up in
shoebox hotel rooms and to almost be laughing about this, to tell the police
that the plod got their marching orders shows a huge amount of arrogance and a
lack of respect. And again, Lee's point is very important, government by
WhatsApp is very, very dangerous. Any big organisation, any business would have
a proper meeting, you have proper discussions, everything is minuted, everything
is written down, actions are followed up. That's how we should be running the
country. I'm... Okay. Some of these WhatsApps, of course, we've seen some of the
people around those WhatsApp conversations have said, of course, there are
WhatsApp conversations that take place, but there are also policy meetings that
are minuted where decisions are taken. So they're suggesting this wasn't
WhatsApp by government, this was, in their words, a sort of partial bit of what
was going on at the time. Yeah, and that's absolutely right. And that's why we
need the full inquiry. I would agree with everybody. I think we probably all on
the panel agree with that. We need the full inquiry. But also what I'm
interested in is the question of judgment from Matt Hancock, who was in this
very privileged, important position. I mean, where do we start? Going on the
jungle in I'm a Celebrity, thinking that was a good call? When he's trying to be
supposed to be a member of parliament on a full salary? Outrageous. His own
personal behavior during lockdown and that of the government during lockdown,
which we've now seen... I mean, he did resign for that. He did resign his
position. Quite right too. But also how naive, arrogant or stupid was he to have
a conversation with a journalist and reveal all his deepest, darkest secrets and
then be mortified when she decides to tell people about it? Matt Hancock was
writing a book, just for a bit of context here with the journalist in question,
Isabella Oakeshott. A journalist that has form for doing this as well. Matt
Hancock isn't here. Matt Hancock isn't here. So I just want to make the point
that he says he's disappointed and sad at the betrayal and breach of trust by
this journalist. And he's also said he'll respond to the substance of these
allegations in the appropriate place during the course of the inquiry. Miriam
Cates. Well, it's easy to bash Matt Hancock, isn't it? And Boris Johnson. But I
mean, put your hand up if you'd have liked to be in their position during
lockdown, because I wouldn't. And I oppose lockdown. I oppose school closures. I
still don't think there's any clear evidence of how much difference lockdown
made, whereas there is ample evidence of the difference that lockdown made to
children's lives, to businesses' lives, to our economy. Many of our children
suffered catastrophe that they will never, ever recover from. And while I oppose
those policies, I still don't wish to be in Boris's or Matt's shoes. And I
think, yes, we can bash them as individuals. But I think the lessons we need to
learn are much broader than the personalities involved, because none of us in
this room can say how we would have acted in those positions. And I think what's
clear from the WhatsApp messages is that government by a small group of people
that don't accept challenge and don't accept alternative viewpoints does not end
well. And I think that is the biggest problem this showed. And I think what
started out as a very reasonable, laudable attempt to keep people safe in very
difficult circumstances turned into much more of an attempt to gain control,
really, rather than to listen to challenging evidence. And I think that's where
the mistakes were made. We can make all other points about whether he should
have given the WhatsApp messages away, whether it was wise, all valid points for
discussion. But I think, for me, the takeaway is this is not how you make good
decisions. That's why we have a parliamentary democracy. That's why we have free
speech in this country. And that's why we have a free scientific community.
Quick thought, Miriam. Do you think the inquiry should report, say, by the end
of the year? I don't think a time should be put on it. I think it has to be
quick enough for people's memories. But I'm concerned about the breadth of it.
For example, when the scope first came out, it didn't even mention children.
Now, for me, the biggest harm that has been caused is to children. And I visit
schools and I visited a playgroup this morning in my constituency. The harm, the
permanent harm that has been done to children by lockdown is immeasurable. That
should be top of the list at the COVID inquiry, not the bottom. OK, thank you.
That inquiry is being led by Lady Hallett. She has said there will be no
whitewash in this inquiry. It is underway, they've set out modules for elements
of this that they're going to look at one after the other. And she's made it
clear that this inquiry, she says, will not drag on for decades. If you want to
have your say on this or anything else that we're discussing during the course
of the programme, we'd love to hear from you. Give any answers a call 03700 100
444. Now, on to our next, which comes from Louise Starks. Hello, Louise. Should
the poor be expected to pay more for their gas from 2023? Louise, thank you for
your question. So we have learnt, of course, we know the current situation is
that energy bills for a typical household are going to go up to £3,000 a year in
April from about £2,500 a year, although we're told that the government is
looking at this. So Louise's question is, should the poor be expected to pay
more for their gas? Leigh Powell? I think the price guarantee and the price cap
should actually be extended as current. I really do. I think inflation is rip-
roaring through the economy. It's causing problems for everybody, not just for
business that I represent here tonight, but also for individuals, and I do feel
for people. There is a cost of living crisis, and I think that the government
should continue with their assistance until inflation does start to come down,
which I do think it will start to come down at an appropriate point in time to
then remove that guarantee. Miriam Cates, we're told that this is something that
the Treasury is keeping an open mind about. They're not committing to anything,
won't comment on any reports, but what do you think? Do you think that that
should be extended? Well, the wholesale prices are coming down, which is good
news, and I think the estimate is that from the summer onwards, that the cap
will come down to about £2,500, which is great news. So obviously the price
guarantee would be less needed in that circumstances. But yes, I think it should
be extended for at least a short time to ease that transition back to the lower
wholesale prices. I think the energy price guarantee has been phenomenally
expensive, and when wholesale prices are high, somebody pays. It's either the
individual or it's the taxpayer or both. I think what the government has done is
good, but I don't like the lack of targeting. I don't like the fact that people
who earn less than average are paying through their taxation for people who earn
a lot more than average to have their energy bills subsidised. Now, that may be
unavoidable because it's so difficult to means test, but I don't like that, and
I do think this is going to be extended for any considerable period of time. We
need to look more closely at means testing. Thank you. So as well as the energy
price guarantee, which is keeping bills at a certain level for the typical
household, the government is giving the 8 million lowest income households £900
in 2023. I mean, Wendy Chamberlain, the point that Miriam makes, this is very
expensive, isn't it? It's very expensive, but it's actually proving not to be as
expensive as the government has planned for, because we are seeing the wholesale
price of gas coming down. So actually, we've calculated as Liberal Democrats
that the government could actually reduce the energy price cap back to £1,971,
which is what the off-gem cap was last April, and actually it'd be cost neutral
because of the fact that wholesale prices are coming down. So I certainly think
they should be looking at that. I think they should be looking at the warm homes
discount and the winter fuel allowance. But there's just a couple of other items
I want to raise. I mean, maybe not such an issue in Leeds, but in other parts of
Yorkshire, alternative fuel payments, that scheme has been delayed by months and
months, and only now are people being able to apply for that. They've been
without support the whole winter. It's certainly true in a rural constituency
like mine of North East Fife. Pre-payment meters, we've all heard about the
scandals about the warrants that have been applied to people, and people on pre-
payment meters pay more for their gas. So surely we should be doing something
about that. What kind of thing? Because of course, some people say that pre-
payment meters, for some people, are something they want to keep. They can
actually be useful for some people. Absolutely. So why are the energy companies
charging more per unit of gas or electricity for those on pre-payment meters?
And then the final thing I want to say is, this might be good that the
government is planning to extend it for domestic users, but what about
businesses? I'm assuming here the Halbeck will be impacted by the fact that
support for businesses ends at the end of March, and they're going to be falling
off a cliff edge. So why are they not doing something for businesses as well?
Because that is going to, the cost of living that Lee referred to, you know,
there will be businesses that potentially have to shut their doors, schools,
leisure centres, because of the fact that there is not the right support for
businesses going forward as well. Wendy, thank you. Lee, you do run a business.
I mean, the Chancellor has said, he is, of course, they've kept prices lower for
businesses. That support is halving, I think, around in April. But the
Chancellor makes the point that there isn't a sort of bottomless pit of money
that they can keep pumping billions into this. I mean, you're a businessman.
What do you think? Well, the energy cost is critical to either going into a
recession or staying out of a recession. And when you look at the actual price
of energy and gas and electricity compared to where the price cap is, there's a
huge difference still. And I honestly believe that if they don't legislate and
extend the price cap, that we could potentially go into a recession, because
everything is fuel dependent. Okay, Lee, thank you. Kim Lepita. I mean, the
short answer to Louisa's question is no, poor people shouldn't be paying for
this situation. And I'm sure there'll be communities across Leeds, across West
Yorkshire, and indeed across the country, like my constituency, where people are
really struggling. We've got, you know, food banks busier than ever, more food
banks in my constituency than ever before. We've got people, I spoke to somebody
yesterday who said their staff, and ironically, it was a care home, are staying
at work to keep warm, because they can't afford to put the heating on when they
get home. We've got food prices going through the roof. So people are really,
really struggling, and it is the poorest in our society who are struggling the
most, and they shouldn't be expected to pay. I mean, as Wendy has already
alluded to, because this wholesale energy price has come down, the government
now has an extra, I think it's something like £15 billion on what they budgeted
for. That money should be used to support the poorest in society and make sure
that they can get through the next few months. So it should definitely be
extended. The other problem that I have with this is, I think it was Graham
Stewart was on Question Time last night, the Tory Minister on this, you know,
oh, we're having a look at it, it's under review. But every time, the government
have to be dragged kicking and screaming to do the right thing. They never just
do it automatically. Well, the government did obviously introduce the energy
price guarantee in the first place, didn't they? Yeah, they did, and fair play
to that. But again, this should be a decision that can be made quickly, because
what you've got is people, families, pensioners living in uncertainty. Am I
going to get through? How are the next few months going to be? And that's
really, really unfair. I mean, the other important point, obviously, is the fact
that we need a proper windfall tax on the energy companies. It is... Okay. So we
are waiting for the budget, of course, which is coming up pretty soon. Let's
have a look what the Chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, does. I think the words that the
Energy Minister you referred to were, were, watch this space. So we shall.
Right, let's move on. Let's move on to our next, which comes from Colin F.
Hello, Colin. Colin's got a fan. Hello, Colin. Thank you, Sally. Good evening.
What do you think the integrated rail plan and HS2 will do for Yorkshire? And do
you think they are worth the 100 billion or more that is planned to be spent
upon them? Colin, thank you. So of course, HS2, the high speed rail network,
which is going initially from London to Birmingham, I think there are plans for
the second leg up to Manchester, although I think I'm right in saying, this is
quite complex, but I think I'm right in saying the bit to lead has been scrapped
and that bit is now forming part of the integrated rail plan, which is more
about existing lines, upgrading capacity on the existing lines. So to Colin's
question, Miriam Kate. Thank you. Well, there are obviously mixed opinions in my
party about HS2, but my personal opinion about what is happening in Yorkshire,
particularly my part of Yorkshire, South Yorkshire, is that it's a great
improvement on the plan that was before. So for Sheffield station, which is
obviously my closest station, the electrification of the line and the reduction
of the time, the travel time to London by a quarter delivered rapidly for us is
a big win. It's far cheaper than what was planned before. And it's going to be
delivered before I get my senior rail card, which wasn't the case for HS2. So
personally, I think for my part of South Yorkshire, I think it's a good plan. I
think it saves an enormous amount of money and delivers it quickly. I am more
concerned about buses because I think particularly in rural areas, most people
are not near a train station and buses are far more important. And I think we've
got a problem at the moment that we've got a bus system that works okay in urban
areas, but really does not work in rural areas. We need a better model. I've got
some great ideas in my patch, but we do need our big mayoral authorities to see
the potential. There we are. There's the call from Miriam Cates. We know of
course the government is spending about £100 billion on HS2 at the moment. The
question, Lee Powell, is what's it going to do for Yorkshire? Well, the HS2 is
not going to do anything for Yorkshire because it's not coming to Leeds. I mean,
the government is looking at options, I think, to link HS2 to the Leeds
stations. They're spending about £100 million on scoping the options. Yeah. I
mean, listen, I'm a fan of the government's levelling up agenda. I'm a fan of
the Northern Powerhouse and I think there are some great initiatives and we're
seeing the fruit of that, certainly up in Teesside, which is outside Yorkshire,
or some of it is. But when it comes to HS2, I can't help but feel disappointed
with the government. You know, and I think they've actually looked at it the
wrong way around. I think it should have started in Leeds. I think it should
have then gone across to Manchester, then down to Birmingham, then to London. I
think they've done it completely the wrong way. Lee, thank you. I mean, Kim
Ledbeter, Miriam makes the point that actually sometimes upgrading the existing
facilities is a lot quicker, if nothing else, than a project like HS2, which we
already know is running over time and over budget. Yeah, I mean, the
mismanagement of the project is why it's running over time and over budget. And
I think the problem we've got is you've had 13 years of the same government in
power, and we've got a train system that is absolutely off the rails. You've got
a bus system that, sorry, dreadful, that doesn't work for anybody. And people
are struggling with the infrastructure of getting around the north of England
and elsewhere in the country. And the government have to take some
responsibility for that. Well, Labour have said that we would support HS2 and we
would reinstate the link to Leeds, which I think is really important, really
important. You know, because we always miss out. We miss out in the north, we
miss out in Yorkshire, and it's not fair. And I think you need to have MPs who
represent this area who are going to fight to get us what we deserve. So how
much would that cost? Oh, I mean, it's going to cost a lot of money, there's no
two ways about it. And we have to budget for it, and we've said we will budget
for it. But I think in terms of infrastructure across our country, there is
economic growth to be felt from that. So it's one of those things that it is
worth investing in. But we've also got to look at transport across from east to
west, which is an absolute mess, you know, trying to get a train across. Okay,
it's the wrong side of the Pennines, but trying to get a train across the
Pennines, you know, so that there's so much more that could be done. And as I
say, after 13 years in power, to have things in such a mess, the government have
got to take some responsibility for that. Okay, I just want to bring you a quick
that the Business Secretary Grant Shapps told the BBC last November when he was
talking about the integrated rail plan. So this is the bit of the government's
plans for the rail networks, which is about expanding and upgrading the existing
lines. He says the line itself deliver a 33 minute journey from Manchester to
Leeds quadruple the capacity of that line and do so without having to wait an
extra 20 years beyond the delivery of what the upgrade can do. So that's Grant
Shapps's case on it. Wendy Chamberlain? Well, the question for me is, why
wouldn't you be looking at doing all of these things? I'm very conscious of
money as an MP, but as an MP coming up and down from Scotland, I'm very
conscious sometimes that it's actually easier for me to get from Edinburgh down
to London than it is for MPs coming across the country. And indeed, I was in
Staffordshire a few weeks ago, and actually, it was most cost effective and
frankly, about the same amount of time for me to go back to London and then back
up to Scotland. So I'm very conscious of that. I think the other thing for me
is, you know, Kim's talked about mismanagement, but it feels like we've added
stuff and added stuff, and now we're cutting it right back again. And that's why
things have become more expensive in relation to the scheme. And indeed, when
you think about the south-east of England and think about some of the real
complaints that have been about HS2, they've kind of done the hard work in terms
of the development of places of- Because the net work is well underway already.
And where people potentially don't get the benefit. So why not maximise the
benefit and move forward as much as you possibly can? Where I do agree with
Miriam is around local bus services. There's no doubt COVID has a huge impact on
that, but frankly, we end up in this vicious cycle where I'm sure we've all as
MPs stood sort of, you know, please don't cut our local bus services, but we cut
the services, which means that they become impractical for people to use, they
become too expensive, then they get cut, and we just end up in this vicious
cycle. We will not get people out of their cars if we do not think about better
ways for them to travel and incentivise it accordingly. Just a quick thought
Miriam on a criticism that's been levelled by Kim and Wendy about the idea that
the government has been in power for a long time, it's been talking about HS2
for a long time, and I mean, it still isn't, there's still no trains on the
lines, are there? There's still no lines for the trains. I think it's really
tempting to think, well, why shouldn't we have HS2? London's getting HS2,
Birmingham's HS2, yeah, fair question, but it costs a heck of an enormous amount
of money. And we're paying for that. And I think the question is, yes, it'd be
great to go to London a bit quicker, but actually we are the most regionally
imbalanced economy in the Western world, and what we need is for our local
economies to be revived, to increase our productivity locally. And one way of
doing that is to help people to get from A to B more quickly locally. And I've
got people in villages in my constituency that can't get into Barnsley and
Sheffield, and that's a better use of the money. And our resources are finite,
we can't have everything. And so we've got to pick the things that are going to
be pro-growth and not necessarily the shiniest projects. Okay, thank you. Have
your say on HS2 and that integrated rail plan, if you'd like to. The number for
any answers is 03 700 100 444. And as ever, the lines open at 12 30pm on
Saturday. Now we have time for one more I am pleased to say, and that comes from
Michelle Rose. Hello, Michelle. Hello. People change their minds all the time,
for example, about Brexit. I'd like to know which major political policy or
issue have the members of the panel changed their minds about? Michelle, thank
you very much for your question. And in our final minutes, Kim Leadbeater. Oh,
thanks. So changing your mind. Well, the fact that as an MP, changing your mind
is something which you really don't seem to be allowed to do was one of the
reasons that I said I would never enter politics. The other reason was because I
swear too much. But I think... Thank you for not doing that on the programme.
Wendy's trumped me on that. But changing your mind, I mean, is one of those
things that we all do every day, day in and day out. And there is a lot of
pressure in this job that, you know, if you got something wrong, you're not
really allowed to say that you got it wrong. And I think as long as you can
explain why you did that, that's a really important thing to do. So I guess my
biggest mind change in my life, and I've only been an MP now for about 19
months, was choosing to become an MP. Because after my sister was killed, I'd
always said, this wasn't the world that I wanted to be in. This wasn't something
that I wanted to do. But actually, I remember her saying very clearly to me that
if good people don't step up and put themselves forward, you've got to be
careful what you end up with. So that was my biggest mind change. Kim, thank you
for that. Miriam Cates. Well, I think that was a brilliant answer. And I really
agree that we should be able to change our mind, particularly in response to new
evidence. And on that, I've got a long list. I voted Liberal Democrat once, I
changed my mind. I voted Remain. I now support Brexit. I'm sure I can think of
many others. I used to support HS2. This is it. We've got a whole load of the
panellists admitting to U-turns. It's what we like. Lee Palm. I'm quite a black
and white character, to be honest. And so there's not a great deal that that
changed my mind on here. It's my determination to follow things through. I
think, as I mentioned earlier, Brexit, I was very, very marginal. I was Remain,
then I was Leave, then I was Remain. So I changed my mind probably five times
before deciding that I was going to vote in the way that I did. But apart from
that, I'm quite a determined and headstrong type of person, so I don't change my
mind. Do you reckon you might change your mind back again on Brexit at some
point? I'm not as... Probably not, but I am interested and looking forward to
seeing how it's going to pan out. I'm not belligerent to the point where, if it
is incorrect and it does cause problems, I won't say that I personally got it
wrong. I'm not that way inclined, but I don't think I will. Lee, thank you.
Michelle's question, people change their minds all the time. What major
political policy or issues have you changed your mind about? Wendy Chamberlain.
Well, as a Liberal Democrat, we kind of pride ourselves on not agreeing with
everything. If you agree on every Liberal Democrat policy, frankly, are you even
a Liberal Democrat? It's sometimes the way that we work. It's interesting, the
three MPs on the panel tonight, we're all being elected either in 2019 or since
then, and actually we've not been in politics that long either. I think the only
thing for me, and maybe you would expect this as somebody who's done a lot of
voting as a Scot over the last 10, 12 years, but I have kind of gone off
referendums. It's a little bit like first pass the post, winner takes all. I
think there's much better and consensual ways in which we can make agreement on
big subjects. Lovely. Thank you for your question and thank you to our
panellists for actually providing some answers to it. It's something that we
love. Now, we're looking for venues to come along to, particularly on the coast,
the north, east or north west coast of England. If you fancy hosting us, drop us
a line. The email you need is anyquestions at bbc.co.uk. We're out of time from
here. Next week we'll be in Birmingham. The week after we'll be in East Sussex,
but from Holbeck in Leeds, thank you to my audience, thank you to my panel and
thank you at home for listening. Any questions come from the Holbeck in Leeds.
The presenter was Alex Forsyth, the producer was Camelia Sinclair and the lead
engineer was Phil Booth. In a moment, AL Kennedy finds lessons from disaster
movies in A Point of View. And now on BBC Radio 4, A Point of View, a personal
essay by a leading writer. Here's AL Kennedy. You will be unsurprised to learn I
was a nervous child. Yes, growing up in the 60s and 70s, I was marinated in
fantastic music in a stable democracy with a fair degree of social mobility, but
also I worried about the sun expanding or contracting, the existence of
arithmetic and the safety of Laurel and Hardy. I had a birthday party during
which we showed no idea why the 1923 Harold Lloyd film Safety Last, during which
he was in constant peril, having accidentally ended up on the outside of a
skyscraper. Who knew that was possible? The other kids howled with laughter. I
was bathed in horror sweats and unable to eat my cake. I had claustrophobia,
agoraphobia, coulrophobia, fear of clowns, logirophobia, fear of loud noises,
linked to globophobia, fear of balloons, and as any occasion for under fives,
not seething with balloons. And the movies of the period, Towering Inferno, A
Building Goes Wrong, Poseidon Adventure, A Ship Goes Wrong, Airport, A Plane
Goes Wrong, and I wouldn't trust the airport either, Doctor Strange Love, The
China Syndrome, both nuclear weapons and atoms for peace go wrong. Family
outings with sugary popcorn in the dark, I never got popcorn, it wasn't healthy,
did not help me relax. TV, it offered the Waltons, Dangerous Sawmill, Rural
Poverty, Accidents and Diseases, Randall and Hopkirk, 50% already dead, Captain
Scarlet, indestructible but in the most traumatising ways, and The Clangers,
they're in outer space, all knitted and vulnerable and pink. How do they
breathe? And of course, all those movies full of fatal mistakes. But I wasn't
just being trapped in a spiral of existential panic, I was learning too, being
taught multiple strategies for personal survival and even the survival of total
strangers. Obviously, I no longer fly, gravity-defying death tubes full of damp
snacks and breakable bodies do not appeal, but when I did fly, I was slightly
comforted by wearing natural fabrics and leather shoes because I know anything
else melts and acts like napalm when your polluting sky prison inevitably
catches fire. I also know how and when to don a life jacket and should my
situation worsen, what to wear in the lifeboat. And I always wore sensible
shoes. Creature movies like Jaws seemed less helpful and more scary, even the
book jacket made me uneasy in the bath. Jaws influenced lots of grown-ups too.
Author of the book, Peter Benchley, joined the movie's director Steven Spielberg
in regretting that Jaws encouraged humans to slaughter, even machine-gun, a
precious keystone species just in case it might develop malignant sentience and
eat an especially irritating regatta. The reach and efficacy of Russia's current
information war won't shock anyone who knows what emotionally affecting fiction
can do. The film, The Exorcist, didn't just make people throw up, it increased
belief in demonic possession and coincidentally interacted with revelations
about Watergate reaching the public consciousness, the real world horror of
democracy in the hands of unprincipled power. So even my exposure to dramas
about very improbable catastrophes was helpful. Peddlers of fake news spin
emotionally involving fictions because they're effective. They help suspend
critical thinking and build a faithful audience. Legal proceedings against
online propagandist Alex Jones and now Fox News, both for defamation, speak to a
need for audience retention that apparently trumps an awareness of truth. And
fantasy can make us do very real things, from buying food supplements to hating
strangers to accepting election fraud intelligence from, for example, someone
who says the wind talks to her. Jaws, like many disaster and horror movies,
contains the core lesson whenever there's a problem greedy people will ignore
it. Corporations, local authorities, politicians, contractors, people who love
money more than, well, people. Corners will be cut, regulatory loopholes kicked
wide open, and before you know it Rod Steiger is having a panic attack on a
beach or Paul Newman is horrified way too late by substandard wiring which will
lead to an inferno which will be towering. Towering Inferno was based on two
novels which wondered, as it turned out quite reasonably, whether ultra-high
rise buildings would present serious issues if they caught fire. As a kid I
assumed the film was just entertainment and that grown-ups knew homes should be
fit for human habitation just as beaches should be fit for human use, even if
they filled me with the dread of somehow flying sharks. I was sure steps would
always be taken to keep us all okay. What kind of monster would want anything
else? And yet, here we are. Forgetting the mayor in Jaws was the bad guy, not
the people who know facts and what's going wrong. The movie makers of my youth
presented me with bizarre threats. Killer bees, killer tomatoes, we wish, killer
tentacles, apparently. But would anyone greenlight a movie in which two US
states are blighted by a toxic train wreck because maybe legislation to fit
adequate braking systems wasn't just delayed but rolled back? Or a pandemic
flick where in multiple countries people with the power to help defraud
emergency funds provide ineffective protective gear? Where some American
politicians keep quiet about Covid briefings and buy shares in body bags?
Structures that are unfit for purpose are a wonderful movie staple, but in
reality they're a nightmare. Turkish President Erdogan gained power on promises
of reconstruction after a 1999 earthquake which killed almost 18,000 people. But
corners were cut, loopholes exploited, and building regulations waived. Tens of
thousands of buildings in an earthquake zone weren't up to standard. With over
41,000 dead in this year's quake, some Turks aren't just grief-stricken, they're
outraged. And would audiences believe a plot involving a London tower block
wrapped in cladding that helps it burn? Horror movies, disaster movies,
exciting, but you don't want to live there. Regular inspections of
infrastructure can prevent mass casualty events, things people don't enjoy, like
being poisoned by unsafe food, unsafe water, having storm drains haunted by
demonic clowns who do things with balloons. Transparency in business and
governance and prioritizing people over money gives more of us more chances to
live and work undisturbed. No crumbling cellar steps, no poorly maintained
zombie research labs, no undiscovered vampire lairs, so no avoidable days off
work or embarrassing new lusts for brains or blood. And in an apparently chaotic
Britain, life might be a cinematic thrill ride. It could be exciting to cut
corners on regulations that make sure food, air and water are what we expect.
Sea kayaking might be more intense if I don't know whether I'll come home with
E. coli or hepatitis. I mean, which cinematic experience am I being offered
here, Mary Poppins or House of a Thousand Corpses, because only one of those
lets me get on with my life and non-balloon-related hobbies. And even without
high-level negligence or malfeasance, life has disasters, bankruptcies,
tornadoes, shipwrecks, and sometimes we have heart attacks and sometimes we are
broken-hearted, and who can say which is worse? If we're lucky, our home isn't
engulfed by war, famine, despotism, natural disasters. Those four horsemen ride
together for a reason. Big problems do not arrive alone. Even if you avoid war,
famine, conquest, life is frail and ends sadly. So why wouldn't we want to
minimize all other threats? For teenagers now, facing climate catastrophe,
watching movie teenagers get picked off in creepy summer camps, creepy houses,
creepy games, surely art is echoing potentially doomed futures. It can get
disheartening when life seems like only the bleakest movies, where good is weak,
evil triumphs, and terrible things happen. But those films we've all watched
have more lessons. They suggest ways to survive. Don't despair. Don't panic.
Don't be selfish. Don't split up. Do be organized. Do be calm. Do help each
other. In fantasy as in reality, that's when humanity survives.