TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 begins next Wednesday evening at 8.45 BBC News at seven o'clock. Politicians
from across Northern Ireland have condemned what they call the sickening
shooting of an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell was attacked as he left a sports centre in Oma. He's in
a critical condition in hospital. Police have arrested three people on suspicion
of attempted murder. Kostas Gaitadis, who's the principal of the nearby Oma High
School, says the attack will have long-term consequences. The children nowadays
is not something that they experience, not normal. They will consider a space
like the sports complex, their enormous safe haven. They never imagined that
this will ever happen to them. Some of them are actually worried. Is it going to
happen again? Is that how we're supposed to be from now on? Scared? Experts are
examining concerns that High Street nasal decongestants could have rare but
serious side effects. One has been found to cause the brain to spasm, which
could lead to a stroke. The Labour leader Sakir Starmer has promised to go
beyond quick fixes if the party wins the next general election. In a speech in
Manchester, he set out five missions, which include fixing the problems in the
NHS and securing the highest sustained growth in the G7 group of advanced
economies. The Scottish Finance Secretary Kate Forbes says she's greatly
burdened that some of her comments during the SNP leadership contest have caused
hurt. She'd said she would have voted against gay marriage and she'd been an MSP
in 2014. EU officials have been ordered to remove the TikTok app from their
phones and from any other device which also has EU programs. TikTok is owned by
the Chinese company ByteDance. TikTok insists it operates no differently from
any other social media platforms. The former BBC football commentator John
Motsen has died at the age of 77. During his 50-year career, he covered more
than 2,000 matches, including 10 World Cups and 29 FA Cup finals. The Prince of
Wales said Motsen was the voice of football. BBC News. I've known about this
word for decades but now everybody seems to know about it but I'm not sure
exactly how. What can we learn from the evolution of the word woke? With woke it
got appropriated and then weaponized. From its first recorded use in 1938. I
advise everybody be a little careful, stay woke. Right up to the present day.
It's become utterly politicized. There's a boogeyman out there and that
boogeyman is woke. That's woke, the journey of a word. With me, Matthew Syed on
Radio 4. Listen now on BBC Sounds. Sticking with words for a moment, Clark's
World is an American magazine with a focus on science fiction and fantasy. Well
now the magazine's editor has taken the step of suspending new submissions of
articles after being swamped by stories generated by artificial intelligence.
We'll be hearing about that and why AI could pose a serious challenge to the way
we think about literature on this evening's Front Row at 7.15. First on Radio 4
it's the Archers and Brookfield is giving their B&B a test run but will Miss
Pectra Gould be the perfect guest? She'll be arriving soon. Our first official
booking. Miss Pectra Gould. Our first mock official booking aka from Mrs. Linda
Snell. We should sort out our online bookings. Let's walk before we can run
shall we? It's not too difficult. We just create a web page like we have with
the events barn. In fact it can probably be added to that. After carving. That's
warmed me up nicely. Dad! What? I hope you're gonna wash that up. I'm regretting
this already. Hardly. It's a brilliant idea. A live full test of the B&B before
it's up and running. We all need to make sure she has a brilliant experience.
Right. So is this where you roll out the red carpet? Sarcasm is the lowest form
of wit. She's not charging us for her time. She's taken a whole day and a half
out of her schedule. We're not gonna pay her for a night in a clean bed and
breakfast made for her. Dad! What? They're for the guests. There's a pile of
them. She's not gonna miss one biscuit. Honestly, you'd think we're expecting a
house full not one person. This has to go really well. She's a perfectionist. Or
just fussy. You asked her to help. Don't I know it. All rise. Behave yourself.
Oh Brian this is lovely. We weren't expecting canopies. Well truth be told Alice
and Nolotando have been looking out for me. I told them I was having you over
and they came to make sure I did Jenny proud. We brought some wine. Shall I go
and put them in the fridge? Of course. You know where you're going? Yeah. Kirsty
why don't you pour yourself a drink? Okay yeah thanks. Hello? Hi Dad. I'm just
checking in. Is everything okay? Yes yes they've just arrived. Oh good. Did I
remember to leave the instructions for the oven on the fridge? Yes yeah I've
been following them to the letter. Okay good. I'm so sorry I couldn't be there
to help tonight but I have some business to discuss with Auntie Lillian. Oh
don't worry we'll be fine. Of course you will. I take it she hasn't thawed yet.
I'm sure she will in good time. Yes and pigs might fly. Well you just enjoy your
dinner and I'll see if I can pop round later to help the clear up. There's no
need really. Love you. Bye. Bye. Everything alright? Yes yeah that was Alice.
She's she's worried I'll get the oven settings wrong. Oh she's just looking out
for her Dad. Who needs looking out for? Listen I did want to say to you both
again I'm so sorry for falling asleep in your armchair. Oh no Brian. Just don't
say another word about it. Anyway today is about giving you a thank-you dinner
like Jenny would. So I'm just gonna nip into the kitchen check the oven's hot
enough so make yourselves at home. I feel so bad. Yeah. Especially after what
you said about Hardell. I know. So he didn't say who he lost? No but it was
clearly someone very important to him. Still pretty raw I'd say. You meet new
people you never know what experiences they carry with them. So you think it's
like a family member or someone? Could be. He was quite annoyed with me. I'm not
surprised he didn't share more. I wonder who it was. Please just keep it between
you and me Kirsty. I wouldn't want him to think I was gossiping. Of course I
will. There's nothing to tell anyway. Well yeah. The takeaway from the
conversation was about Brian. I felt terrible for complaining. I mean what if
that kid in our living room is the only quality sleep he gets? Well from now on
he's welcome to settle in the chair and watch nature documentaries for as long
as he likes. I won't be stopping him. Agreed. Linda. Ms. Pectoragoul. Yeah
sorry. Actually please call me Innes. Right. Innes. Is everything okay with your
room? It's very charming. Great. But there is a problem I'm afraid. Oh what's
that? These complimentary soaps. They're scented which plays havoc with my skin.
It's very sensitive you see. I'm sorry. I was wondering if you might have
anything perfume free that I could use. Yeah of course. Let me just check with
my mum. I would have brought my own. Only this was a last-minute travel plan and
I keen forgot. I bet that's easily done. Would you like a cup of tea while
you're down here? It's freshly made. I don't drink caffeine after six o'clock.
Okay. Would you like a biscuit? No thank you. It's coming down in buckets out
there. Dad you've let Bess in. What do you expect me to do? Leave her outside to
get soaked? She's already soaked. Oh dear. Is everything all right? No. It's far
from all right. I'm allergic to dogs. Allergic to dogs? Since when? Tissue
please. Here you go. Thank you. There was nothing in the details that said you
had dogs roaming about. It's a farm. Sorry I'll take her out. There was no
mention of dogs inside the house. Come on Bess. Come on girl. She's got a dog
herself. Correction David. I gather Linda Snell has a dog. Your guest Enis.
Enis? Enis does not. Are you going to get on board with what we're doing or not?
Are you serious? I am gravely serious and a serious allergic reaction of a guest
is no laughing matter. Into the living room with you. Good girl. Sorry she's
gone now. As am I. If you could please put the replacement soaps in the bathroom
before morning. Yep I will. Thank you. It's my own fault for not double-checking
when Alice called. Honestly Brian it's not a problem. I put the oven up a bit so
it'll be cooked through any minute now. But the veg and potatoes are done and
beef wellington's still not ready. It's fine. It all looks and smells delicious.
Oh well some thank you this has turned out to be with you having to help get it
served. Oh that's a good sign isn't it. Right well you both sit and I'll get it
out of the oven. No no no Roy. Oh let him. It would have been his turn to cook
tonight anyway. Well you take it in turn see. Yeah yeah it works for us doesn't
it Roy? Yep certainly does. And this looks and smells amazing. It all looks
delicious. Thank you Brian. Jenny would always have a beef wellington in the
freezer. Her own of course. Not from a shop. So this is one of Jennifer's? Yes
yes it is. Wow. So come on who can I serve first? David! What on earth are you
doing? No sorry I just had to use the carving jack on one of the heifers. What?
So I'm a little mucky and I needed to get changed. You know have a quick wash
Linda if that's okay with you. In the kitchen? Needs must. Apparently the family
bathroom is to be kept nice for Innes. Anything I can do you for? That's a tea
towel. Well what are you doing? I thought Innes had gone up for the night. Dad?
What's going on? Absolutely nothing. I merely came down to see if you had some
herbal teas only to find your father half naked washing himself in the kitchen
sink. Dad? Hang on what am I supposed to do when you have practically banned me
from every other space in the house? My clothes are covered in afterbirth. Yes
all right too much information. Is everything okay? Yeah yeah yeah no I had to
use the carving jack for one of the first timers. I was hoping she wouldn't need
our help but turns out the calf was back to front. But they're okay? Yep yeah
well I mean we'll keep a close eye tonight but they look fine. David at least
put on a shirt or something. This is not an episode of Poldark. Give me five
minutes Linda. Innes! I have been up since forever and me and Ruth aren't going
to be getting much sleep tonight either. This is the busiest and most crucial
time of the farming calendar so excuse me if I am catching my breath in my own
kitchen. There's the dining room for guests if you're offended by my long johns.
Which have seen better days. I'll put these in the laundry dad. Thanks Ben. And
then I'll come and help. Maybe mum can have a break? No it's actually probably
better if you stay with Innes here. Make sure she's got everything she needs.
Well now you're almost dressed at least I can look you in the eye. Ben I don't
suppose you could fill a couple of flasks. Could you bring them out to me and
your mum before you go to bed? I better replenish the straw. Can't have the
calves on it if it's too damp. Sure and call me if you need me. Yeah I will.
Right there it's chamomile. It's supposed to be relaxing. Well. Innes perhaps
you could fill out the breakfast request form before you head back up. It's
going to take more than breakfast to wipe the image of your father from my mind.
Right we've got apple strudel. Or black forest gato. They're both shop-bought
I'm afraid but they come highly recommended. Oh that black forest gato takes me
back. I'm so stuffed but they do look good. Excellent. Anyway where were we? Ah
no you were saying about the architect you got working at Grey Gables Roy. Yeah
Andrea yes she's been really good. I was saying the design for the new part of
the building is really modern but somehow it complements the old part. Well it
looks like Ardill's done his homework. It's a clever use of Grey Gables.
Oliver's made a good call. It's obvious he had to. We could all see how much
business was struggling. Oh Innes. Hiya. You've just missed dinner. Oh I only
came to check in. I've eaten with Auntie Lillian. There's lots left if you want
some. Oh no honestly. Everything okay? Oh it was delicious. Your dad's been the
hostess for the most of it. Dad you've still got your apron on. Oh yes I hadn't
noticed. And neither of you have touched the pudding. Come on help yourselves.
What are they meant to eat them with? What? Or on for that matter. The pudding's
no good without plates and forks. Right of course. I was just about to get stuck
in with my fingers it looks so yummy. Don't worry I'll get them. I'm so sorry
about this. Actually we need a knife too or one of those cake slices. Oh that's
just through here. I'll get it. I might just nip to the loo. Excuse me. Oh it's
a lovely meal Brian. And desserts. It's okay Kirstie. You don't have to do that.
What? I'm afraid if Jenny could see me right now she'd be mortified. Oh that's
not true. Oh yes she was she was a perfectionist. She liked everything to be
just so. Without her I can't even serve pudding. Jennifer liked everything to be
just so because that was her thing not yours. If you could do it all for
yourself she'd have had no one to spoil the way she did. She did indeed. I
suppose you think that's terribly old-fashioned and awful. A woman looking after
a man the way she did me. I mean I'd give anything to have someone like Jennifer
waiting for me when I get in from work. Instead of Roy standing in the kitchen
making his infamous spag bol. That's a good job you take it in turns. I don't
know you haven't tasted my pasta bake. It's been lovely having you two over
Kirstie. It's been a pleasure being here. And remember Jennifer chose the life
she had because she loved you. I miss her terribly. I know. And I think if your
Jenny could see you now she'd be really proud of you Brian. Music Exclusive
performances by much-loved artists together with the BBC Concert Orchestra I
walked across an empty land From classic tracks to brand new covers This time
the girl is gonna stay For more than just a day Radio 2's Piano Room. Watch on
iPlayer, listen on BBC Sounds. In 45 minutes David Aronovich will be discussing
the Wagner Group waging war on Russia's behalf in Ukraine. Are its leader and
its soldiers becoming a problem for Putin? That's the Briefing Room at 8. First
on Radio 4 here's Front Row with Tom Sutcliffe. Hello the art has us completely
surrounded on tonight's programme. We review David Hockney's new Son et Lumiere
installation bigger and closer not smaller and further away. I think the word
immersive cannot be avoided and the artist Mike Nelson guides me through the
labyrinths and layers of his art. These are wonderful noises. How do you collect
your doors? Well these all came from the streets of East London really. So you
just pick them up when you see them? Yeah, both the coral reef and this work was
really built out of things just cobbled together found from the streets and a
lot of it actually came from the basement of Shoreditch Town Hall. The artist
Mike Nelson a big retrospective of his work has just opened at the Hayward in
London. With me in the studio are the critics Lerushka Ivanzada and Eko Eshun
who will also be giving their views on Hirokazu Kuroedo's new film Broker. How
lovable does a rogue have to be to get past the fact that the roguery involves
selling babies for cash? And what's a publisher to do when stories written by AI
begin to overwhelm their submission system? Neil Clarke, editor of the science
fiction and fantasy magazine Clarke's World is trying to work that out right now
and he talks to me later. We start though in a swimming pool in one of David
Hockney's swimming pools to be precise which projected at huge scale onto four
walls and the floor of the Lightroom, a new performance and display space in
London, bathes the audience in those distinctive blue and white ripples. His new
exhibition and we'll get on to whether that's actually the right word in a
moment is Bigger and Closer Not Smaller and Further Away. It's the most recent
instance of a trend for very high-tech slideshows using projected images
alongside music and animation to envelop the audience in an artist's vision. As
David Hockney pointed out himself when talking to the BBC about the show he has
one advantage over some fellow artists who've been shown like this. I haven't
seen the Van Gogh ones or the Monet ones but they're not alive. I'm alive. I
could adjust things, draw things specially for it. I'm usually drawing or
painting. It's all I want to do now. I mean I'm 85. How much longer do I have?
I'm a smoker but I might have five years, I don't know, and that's all I want to
do. David Hockney talking to BBC News before the opening of his show. Bigger and
Closer takes viewers for a 50-minute ramble through Hockney's world, sometimes
almost literally as in a sequence which offers a multiple camera tracking shot
down a Yorkshire lane filmed in spring, summer, autumn and winter. Elsewhere
more metaphorically as the topics move from his ideas about perspective to his
work for the stage and his use of photography. Echo Eshen, Hockney has always
embraced new technology, iPad art, Polaroid collages, all sorts of things, faxes
even. Does it work here? I thought it did, yes, and I think the real reason why,
in fact as we heard in that clip that you played, is because he is a live and
active presence. It's a bit like spending 50 minutes in the company of Hockney.
He's there, his voice is very present throughout the whole experience, he's
talking about his work but more than that he's showing you how he sees the world
around him. So we're seeing through his eyes, expanded and blown up in this very
grand scale. Yeah we'll get back to the scale later. LaRouche, I wanted to ask,
I mean I mentioned it in the introduction there, what is it do you think? They
call it a show, it's not quite an exhibition is it? Because there are no real
pictures here, only pictures of pictures. Yeah and I hadn't been, I've been
quite snobbish about the other ones, about Van Gogh and the Frida Kahlo and I
hadn't been, so I had no idea when I went in that it would actually just be one
box room, which I understand is going to be turned into a theatre later. Yes
it's a huge space and it's a huge underground space as well. That sort of feeds
into the experience a bit doesn't it? You go down a very narrow little
staircase, suddenly find yourself in this vast space. You go down a little light
corridor and you can hear his voice, so you're sort of anticipating but you
don't know what to expect and then you go into this room and you're completely
enveloped on all sides and there are various places that you can see it from as
well. So you can be on the sort of groundling level where there are all these
sort of sofas positioned at different perspectives and then a sort of middle
layer and then you can go up to the upper gallery so you can have it, you can
see the same thing on a loop and a loop from different sort of areas. But yeah I
found when I was in the space I didn't really know where to sit or how to behave
or what to look at or where to look at it from. I was going to ask you how well
that kind of 360 degree immersion worked. I sat on the floor and because I was
sitting on the floor I found myself tending to look at one wall and occasionally
turning around and getting a bit of a crick in the neck. I mean it's easier on
the seats and some people stand but then if you stand you're worried about
blocking other people's view a bit. I mean, echo. I think really Tom maybe the
answer is not to worry too much. You sort of have to go. Well that's a lifetime
process. If you choose to you can go with it which is to say that there is no
single, it's a bit like Hockney talking about perspective, there is no single
position to stand in which to get the entire experience and that's okay. You get
your version of that. You can walk a wonder through the space or you can
experience it from a single position. Either is alright because there's no
definitive take on what is. There's no definitive take and there's no real
definitive sequence. It is on a loop and you could come in at any moment because
there isn't really a start in there. You can't escape it. That's the other
thing. It is like going into a film. You're committed. You can't swipe left or
go to another room like you would in a gallery. You're, I don't want to say
stuck there because I was very diverted and enjoyed it, but if there are bits
that you don't like then that's it really. I enjoyed it because often the
experience of going to an exhibition is that, if it's a retrospective say, often
they're quite linear experiences. You start at one point, it's chronological,
you walk through one room after another, it can take a while, it gets a bit
tiring. Here the whole show comes to you. You sit in one place, you're immersed
in it and it's entertaining. There's music, it's on a different register to the
hard work, let's say, of looking at. They have commissioned kind of special
music haven't they? Nico Mouly has done a special soundtrack. I mean, and that's
very ambient. We can hear just a little snatch of that to give you a sense of
the atmosphere. Now that puts you into a chill-out room doesn't it? And that is
the mood to a degree. And then Hockney's voice coming in from, I thought rather
touchingly, all the different periods of his life. You hear young Hockney, very
old Hockney. He's narrating his own retrospective here. And I mean look, the
anxiety with shows like this is that they're a bit soft. You know, they don't
work very hard, they're just light entertainment, they're easy listening. But
this is why I suppose the emphasis with him as the guiding spirit through the
show, in fact, what you get to is something slightly different, which is I think
more to do with generosity and inquiry and curiosity and this desire to keep
looking and to encourage others to look at and to look through and to look with.
There are those, but let's not mince words, there are very sort of simple
pleasures here aren't there? As it were, quite childlike pleasures. And to a
degree, slightly naff pleasures. So there's that thing that you get online a
lot, where people show you how they are constructing their pictures and they
speed up the process of drawing a picture or painting a picture. Well, you know,
we've seen that on television haven't we? Have you guessed what it is yet? It's
a simple pleasure, but it does work. And the brochure looks like the front of a
colouring book with these sort of very simple... there's even a bit where it
goes, love life, in huge sort of colourful childlike letters across the screen.
I thought only David Hockney could possibly get away with this and we all go,
yes, that's so true, we should, we should love life. I think the more compelling
bits are when we see... in fact, look, actually in fact, I take issue with the
point that you made earlier, Tom, which you said there are no real pictures
here. Well, there are pictures on screens and some of them, in fact, were
already designed for screens anyway. And some of the most compelling parts are
actually when we see him filming things. So there's a great sequence where he's
driving in California, he's driving around this twisty road, he's in an open top
car and he talks about how he'd take friends on these rides through the roads of
LA and he'd have Wagner playing and it's just kind of grand. You go on a drive
with him. The scenery is the art. See, I felt that was a bit like a bit of a
glorified dashcam moment myself. That's how he's filmed it, essentially, isn't
it? I loved very much, there's a very effective thing where it's a huge multi
screens, lots and lots of screens, all the same rectangular shape, each showing
his hand turning over a page of his sketchbook quite rapidly. And so there's
this flutter of images of picture making which is very kind of effective and you
can look all over the place there. That's a genuinely new thing, I think. Yeah
and I kind of wanted more of those moments. I felt in a way, I mean there's a
sequence where they talk about his theatre work, the Hockney on stage bit, and I
kind of wanted it to be more theatrical in terms of effects. I felt it was sort
of actually quite traditional and that's when it does become like a slideshow.
You're just watching a big slideshow and there was one effect where it looked
like the whole screen had been wrinkled and pulled up like a curtain and that
worked but it made you go, oh I kind of want more than that. I feel that there's
animated rain at one point, isn't there, in the landscape. I felt, and that's
when I felt there are magical moments in this but there are the moments where
it's more pedestrian. Is it a work of art in itself or is it an exhibition? Did
you find one odd effect which I had, which is that because we're used to the
idea of images being projected, you don't get a sense of scale. So that very
often you think you're looking at a picture of something that's quite small,
that's big. There's one very interesting moment where you see him actually in a
piece of film painting a picture called Mulholland Drive, the road to the
studio, and you suddenly see how big that picture is in real life and it
suddenly looks bigger than it has up to that point because you get a sense of
human scale. Yeah, I think that's a really interesting point. I mean in a way
the whole thing is about these shifts of perspective, shifts of gaze, shifts of
scale. So we see him working on these photographic pieces, these Polaroid
composites which he was doing in the 70s and the 1980s. We see him shifting and
actually what I found fascinating in there is that at moments we realise we see
him make breakthroughs in his own work. I would say the whole exercise, whatever
we call it, entertainment of film, it's an exhibition, whatever, in itself it's
an experiment. It's an experiment which I suspect, you know, has to be refined
over time. You think it's a successful one, obviously. You, successful? Yeah.
Yeah, I think it's got something for everyone. I should say, the tickets for
this are £25 upwards. It's a lot of money, isn't it? It's £27.50, I noticed. And
I don't know if that makes me balk at it slightly. Is it worth that amount of
experience? Would I have liked it so much if I'd have had to pay that much to
see it? All right, well thank you LaRouche Garnieko for now. David Hockney,
bigger and closer, not smaller and further away, continues at Lightroom in
London until the 4th of June. One technology I think we can be reasonably
confident that David Hockney won't be taking up is artificial intelligence image
generation. But there are people who like the payoff of a finished work without
doing the work to get there. Here's an unnerving, maybe even dystopian story, of
unintended technological consequences for you. A highly regarded science fiction
magazine, known for its encouragement of unpublished and underrepresented
authors, and known for paying decently, suddenly finds that something odd is
happening. A huge spike in submissions which threaten to overwhelm its editorial
process completely. And this story happens to be true. Just the other day,
Clarksworld magazine closed submissions until further notice because it couldn't
cope with the amount of material it was receiving. Joining us now from New
Jersey is the publisher and editor-in-chief of Clarksworld, Neil Clark. Neil,
give us a sense of the scale of what's been happening, because this has happened
very suddenly, hasn't it? Yeah, okay. So on a normal month, we would receive
about 1,100 legitimate submissions, works from regular authors. December, we
noticed we had about 51 machine-generated stories. January, 116. And in the
first 20 days of February, 512. The morning we closed submissions, we had
received over 50. Just in the morning alone? Yes. Now you've given the game
away, machine-generated. That's your view of what's happening here, is it? These
are AI-generated? It's uncertain. Definitely. And why are you so certain?
Because presumably you have slush readers, I know. Very kind of unfair term for
the way you process these things, but they have to read the stuff. How do they
know it's artificial? I'm largely the one that's catching these. I'm doing a
first pass through. There's some tells. I haven't been stating exactly what they
are, because I don't want to reveal to the people who are being caught how
they're being caught. And you think this is happening because Chat GP and other
things like this have suddenly sort of taken off, and people have seen the
opportunity to use them to create content, send it into you on the off chance
that you will accept it and pay for it. We know that there's a community of what
they call side hustle people out there who are producing content like, use Chat
GPT to get some quick money. And then they tell them how to use it, and then
they send them to a list of websites and we're on those lists. Now you're
obviously on the list because you do have an open submissions process and you
pay. So you're in the bullseye, aren't you? Why are open submissions important
to you? That's how the new writers make their way in. We wouldn't know about
them if we were waiting to invite people. It would stagnate a lot. Same thing
over and over again. So we'd much rather bring in new voices, new blood into the
community. And they have exciting things to say and write about. So we want
that. Okay. So you absolutely didn't want to close submissions. You've been
forced to do it simply by being overwhelmed by these AI generated stories. What
potential solutions have been suggested and do any seem workable so far? A lot
of people have suggested solutions like paying for submissions, which creates a
barrier for people who have lower income or the inability to pay. International
payments are not as easy as people think. Plus a new writer can submit a story
multiple times or send many stories out before they ever actually sell one. So
they could end up in the hole quite deeply in the hole very quickly. So we don't
want to go that route. There's some people are saying, well, maybe you should
only work with the ones you know already. Well, that right there, same thing
eliminates people. We know that some of the submissions or a good chunk of these
submissions are coming from three countries. And some people are like, well,
just ban those countries. And no, we've worked with authors from there. We don't
want to kill this. What about technology? I mean, technology has caused this
problem. I know you presumably had a problem with human plagiarism and there are
kind of plagiarism detection software. What about AI detection software? The AI
detection software that exists right now is still very problematic. It generates
a large number of false positives and negatives. So there's no way we could
automate anything using those tools as they exist today. And I think there are
people already selling software to help you avoid AI detection software, aren't
they? Yeah. And one company is selling the detection software and the how to
avoid detection software. It's perhaps appropriate that a science fiction
magazine is being targeted by new technology. To what extent do you think this
is going to be a problem for the publishing industry more generally? Well, I
suspect that others are being hit by it, simply because of the lists that we
know that are driving the traffic to this. One of the reasons we're probably
noticing sooner is that we have a process that we try to respond to authors
within 24 to 48 hours. So we've been noticing this because we're right there in
the thick of it. And publishers that might be working with a three to six month
lag may not have noticed these problems quite yet, but they have them. Do you
think any have got through already? None of the submissions that we've received
from the machine written are even remotely close to publishable. So the problem
is not that you're getting things that are plagiarizing existing writers and
there is a real chance of them getting through. It's that your editorial process
is just completely clogged up with us and you can't get to the stories that you
want to get to. Yes. I mean, that was one of the reasons we closed was so that
we could address the legitimate submissions that were in the pile and regroup
and rethink how we move forward. I mean, you are a science fiction and fantasy
magazine. Are you opposed in principle to publishing a story written by a
computer if they ever get to the stage of being any good and then they're not
ripping off other writers? Well, that's the catch right there is that right now
we don't know how these are being trained and on what material. There's some
serious legal and ethical issues regarding the use of other artists and authors
work in training these AI machine generating systems. And some of them are in
the courts right now and we're just not ready to cross that line. We stand with
our authors on this and if there comes a day where we can be okay with it, then
we'll reconsider. You may not want to say this because it's a sort of cold war
this, isn't it? Where if you come up with a solution, somebody is going to come
up with a way around the solution. But do you have some ideas about how you're
going to sort it out? We have some ideas of things we're going to try, but we
know that this is going to be very much a trial and error process that we're
going to reopen again probably within a month. And then more than likely we'll
be forced to close again. But the data we learned from that will inform the next
opportunity. I've been talking with people in some tangential areas like credit
card fraud and network security against denial of service attacks. And so we're
trying to get more ideas of things we can do to live with, to make this more
manageable. Not to solve it, but just to live with it. Yes. We can't solve it.
OK, well, good luck, Neil Clark. Thank you very much for that. You can find
Clark's World Magazine online, all content certified fully human for now anyway.
Visitors going into the Hayward Gallery's big new exhibition, Extinction
Beckons, a retrospective of work by the installation artist Mike Nelson, may
feel at first that they've taken a wrong turning because they'll find themselves
in what looks like a salvage yard lit by lurid red light and filled with
architectural lumber, bits of wood, old doors and iron gates. They have gone the
right way, though, and this is an artwork, just a partial and disassembled one,
because Nelson made his name with large scale architectural installations
constructed out of found materials and always designed with a specific site in
mind. Which means that the whole idea of a retrospective is a bit tricky,
because what curators would usually do in such cases, write to galleries and
collectors and say, can we borrow your Mike Nelson for a couple of months? For
this show, they had to talk to Mike Nelson and essentially say, will you do all
the work all over again? Not surprisingly, he had a backache when he met me at
the Hayward just before the opening. There was one consolation, though. He
didn't have to start absolutely from scratch. A lot of the material still
existed. Somehow I've managed by hook or by crook, by storing it in various
places around the world, in fact, some in Europe, a lot of it in Britain, a shed
in Scotland, some containers in Leicestershire, a basement in the East End. I've
actually collated quite a lot of it, even though it's just the matter that it
was built from originally. The room we're standing in now has a huge
construction, originally built into an old brewery on the island of Giudecca in
Venice. There's a sort of satellite showing the Venice Biennale then, which me
and two others spent three months working 12, 14 hour days to construct. Let's
go and have a look at it, because the process of going through it is part of the
artwork, isn't it? These are wonderful noises. How do you collect your doors?
Well, these all came from the streets of East London, really. So you just pick
them up when you see them? Yeah. Both at Coal Reef and this work was really
built out of things just cobbled together, found from the streets. And a lot of
it actually came from the basement of Shoreditch Town Hall, which was being
demolished or refurbished at the time. You must have been thrilled when you got
the sanitary department. Yeah, that's Shoreditch Town Hall. Okay, so I don't
know whether we've come to the centre of the deliverance and the patients, but
it feels as though we're kind of halfway through the labyrinth of the rooms. And
it's quite distinctive, this room. It looks like a nautical bar. It's got
nautical prints on the wall. It's got little model boats, a placard saying,
please do not spit from the Star Ferry in Hong Kong, and a bar. How does this
relate to the work as a whole? On the bar, there's two boats. I suppose they
represent the deliverance and the patients, which is a true story that kind of
came from a book, The Many-Headed Hydra, that told the story of the wreck of the
sea venture off Bermuda back in the 17th century. At the time, Bermuda was
somehow painted as this kind of island of devils. And in fact, they were being
taken to Virginia for a new life of sorts. And they were being told that it was
going to be a better life somehow. But the truth of that in those early kind of
colonial days in Virginia was that they wouldn't last very long at all. But they
were told that Bermuda was this kind of hideous place. But being shipped right
there, somehow the structures of power somehow fell down. And the need to kind
of build some sort of community forced them to a very different sort of society.
So they were lied to about Utopia. Yes. Got there, found it was a lie, and then
actually created one. Yes. But then boats were built, with the patience, to
force them to move on to Virginia. So tell me just practically, an idea like
that, you encounter it in a book. How does this large, this huge work then start
to crystallise around it? Do you look for objects first? Do you start with one
room and then move outwards from that room? How does it work in practical terms?
It's very much the idea of a narrative structure, or sort of like a conceptual
structure, which then becomes a physical structure. So you know, as it were, the
story you want to tell. Yes. And in a way, sort of like the story is loose
enough, the narrative or the concept becomes like an arena within which sort of
like you can play or write. And if you think if the narrative is the concept,
then the formality becomes the prose. And the prose is the matter and the
material that actually kind of communicates what actually is happening. And in a
way, it also stopped me making before I'd thought. So I'd have this very strange
process, which is also, in the early days, especially economically, kind of very
viable because I had no studio, because I couldn't afford a studio. So I could
spend time thinking, reading, formulating what I was going to do, collecting.
Finding material. Exactly. On the streets. And then spend sort of like a very
concentrated period within the space, building. And do objects kind of shout out
to you? We came through a door that said sanitary department. Yes. Etched onto
the glass, which obviously feeds all sorts of ideas into your head. Presumably,
when you saw that, you thought, oh, that must be perfect. Yes. Certain objects
are so resonant with association or suggestion. Some are too strong, you can't
use them. That sort of presence of its own history comes with it. I'm always on
the lookout. Well, I always was on the lookout for things like that. The
interesting thing about this experience of moving through this space is that
it's a multiple choice narrative, isn't it? You can go into a room and leave it
by a different door. Yes. You can come out the same door. There are multiple
doors that you can choose. Yeah. As a way through. You can find yourself on one
side of the bar or the other. We're in front of a work which is called Triple
Bluff Canyon. Yeah. But this is an interesting example of how you remade pieces
and indeed overlapped pieces and collaged them together in fascinating ways.
Yeah. There's actually four works we're looking at here, but predominantly,
we're looking at the woodshed from Triple Bluff Canyon, which is a
reconstruction of a work by Robert Smithson from 1969, where he buried a
woodshed on the Kent State University campus in 20 cartloads of earth until the
roof broke. An extraordinary thing to see as you come up the stairs in the
Hayward, tons and tons of sand reaching up to the roof level, which have
engulfed this shed, which is a very exact reconstruction of that Robert Smithson
shed, isn't it? Yes. This looks like a Ballard novel, doesn't it? Yeah. Well, it
was all kind of bound up with that speculative fiction of Ballard in many ways.
You know, I came to Smithson through Ballard, but this work was built in 2003,
around the time of the last of the Iraq War. And I suppose I was interested to
somehow repoliticize it. Quite a lot of your work uses these blown out tires,
ripped and shredded. Why are they so potent for you? Well, this is, I think, the
fourth incarnation of blown out tire work. The first one was called M6 in
Birmingham. This one is M25. I did the A58 in Dusseldorf and the A7 in Lyon. And
each time I represent them in a different way, but I find them very perfect sort
of sculptural objects in many ways, but without human hand having touched them.
There's an alchemy when they blow out on a road or a motorway, and they make
these incredibly beautiful objects. And yet there's an existential sort of dread
to them at the same time. Yes, they're sort of accidental works of sculpture, I
suppose, to a degree, that you've noticed them. You had a big show at Tate
Britain in the Juvine Galleries there called The Asset Strippers, and you've got
some of those works here. What they are is very, very substantial pieces of
industrial machinery, heavy, 100 weight of cast iron. I'm standing in front of
one here, which is placed on a plinth of two toolboxes. Sets of drawers, yeah.
Sets of drawers, rather beautifully painted in orange and a very fetching green.
Accidental, I assume, that's how you found them. Yes, they're all found in sort
of like liquidation sales online, which was something I wouldn't normally have
done, but it felt very appropriate somehow to take these objects of industry
from this new era that we can live within that superseded it somehow. They look
like votive objects. They look like devotional objects, as though somebody has
come along and found these things and thought, people must have worshipped
these. Yeah, that's interesting. So we're going to set them up as objects of
devotion. Yeah, because in many ways, they were references back to those objects
that occupied the V&A and the British Museum, but they're also referenced back
to post-war sculpture, particularly post-war British sculpture. And it seemed to
me that a lot of these machines actually made those sculptures possible. Your
father worked in a kind of similar industry, didn't he, making things? He
started off as a mechanic on the big, huge knitting machines. My grandfather was
a shop floor manager. He ran the shop floor of this small factory. My dad ended
up running the factories, which he hated. Did you have any connection with those
factories? I mean, were they objects of fascination to you? Oh, yes. He used to
take me in and sort of wheel me along the conveyor belts and sort of wheel me
along in trolleys in the factory. And then he used to bring back spools and
remnants from the factory in these great big sort of fibre-coated drums, which
I'd make things out of when I was a child. The word immersive is used an
enormous amount nowadays. Do you think of your works as immersive? They clearly
are in one sense. They surround the viewer, don't they? I don't really give any
terms to my work, ultimately. I always like the review I read years ago of an Ed
Kienholz retrospective at the Whitney, and it said, I don't know what Ed
Kienholz's work actually is, or whether it's even actually art, but whatever it
is, it's kind of interesting. And I think that would be far more of an epitaph
in some ways. The artist Mike Nelson talking about his show Extinction Beckons,
which runs at the Hayward Gallery in London until the 7th of May and also
running at the moment until April the 23rd, is an installation of his called The
Book of Spells. And there are details of that on the Matt's Gallery website.
Have you seen the show, Echo? Yeah. What did you think? I saw it earlier this
week. I thought it was very interesting. Well, as he said. Yeah, exactly. And I
mean that in just that it's mesmerising and compelling. You go into these rooms
and you keep going through these rooms and there is no answer. It's the first
installation show I've seen which you need a spoiler alert. I couldn't fully
describe one work because it contains, you know, you go down a spiral corridor
and for anybody who's seen that work before, there's something completely new at
the end of it, which is really stunning. Yeah. I mean, in a way, this is the
final distinction between this and I like the Hockney, but the distinction is
that the Hockney is programmed. You know, it's scheduled for you. Everything
comes to you. Here, you're wandering, you're exploring. You have question marks.
They're not necessarily answers, but that's the beauty of it. OK. We're going to
go on to Hirokazu Kuroeda's film, Brokeout, which begins, one stormy night, as
they say, as Moon Soo-young, distressed and unable to cope, leaves her newborn
boy at a baby box, a facility at a local church. Watching Moon as she abandons
her child are two police officers on the trail of Ha Sang and Dong Soo, two
local men who have an inn at the church and have realised that abandoned babies
are a saleable commodity. And then Moon herself reappears, determined to ensure
that if her baby is going to be sold, it will go to the right kind of buyer and
she will get a cut. LaRoucheco, it's sort of so dark, this story, in terms of
its basic kind of material. It's a story about exploitation at all levels and
sadness. Does it successfully handle the tone of that, do you think? It's a very
dark story. It's a very interesting tone. I mean, yeah, this is a melodrama
about murder, prostitution, child trafficking. It should be the sort of stuff of
gritty realism or maybe even a screwball comedy. You could sort of switch it
both ways. But instead, it's this wonderfully, I don't know, delicate, tender,
compassionate, beautiful film, which will come as no surprise to people who know
the work of Kuroeda. It's very much in his vein. It's a good film to start,
actually, I think. If people haven't seen his films, it's a good entry point.
Oh, what? So you'd say start here rather than Shoplifters? Well, I mean, it's
very similar to Shoplifters. It's a film that won the Palme d'Or in 2018 and
quite similar if you've seen Shoplifters, because that was about this ramshackle
surrogate family who were sort of thrown into more chaos by the arrival of an
abandoned child, which is kind of the same thing that's happening here. Well,
and also, you know, striving to make a living and in difficulty with money. Yes,
exactly. And it should be, you know, in a way, sentimental, but also that these
people are exploiting each other. It does have these very odd moments of comedy,
doesn't it? There's a moment when the Hang Ha Sang is trying to explain to Moon
that he's not a villain. He sort of says, shall we describe it as benevolence?
I'm talking about his kidnapping of this child and selling it. And you get an
absolutely incredulous reaction shot from the baby, which is just accidentally
looking at him and saying, you know, get out of here. What did you think? Well,
yes, it was a feel good movie about child trafficking. They don't come along
very often, but in this case, it's really worth treasuring, I think, because as
Larouche was saying, it's really about, in a way, the stakes are quite high in
the ways you've been describing. The question is, can you find humanity and
heart amongst people who are, you know, amongst people who should be beyond
salvation or beyond empathy? He pushes that quite far, doesn't he, Corriada?
Because, you know, one of your instincts would be that you would feel pity for
the mother, but she's there very often in the room while the baby is crying. She
doesn't turn to it. She doesn't go to it. You know, the man is changing the
nappy and sorting things out. So you are made to kind of work to get sympathy
for her. It's so interesting. I think one of the ways it's successful, I think,
is because it's also about show, not tell. So, yeah, these are ostensibly
terrible people, but the film is beautifully shot. It's delicate. It's warm.
Watching it, experiencing the film, I think, opens us up to the idea that who we
see in front of us can be whole people. Flawed, yes, in terrible ways, but also
people with warmth and compassion. It's quite a complicated story, isn't it?
It's full of ellipses and it doesn't, as it were, explain things easily. So
you're not told. You very, very often get one end of a telephone conversation
and have to reconstruct the other. You're introduced to characters without being
told who they are and you have to sort of find a way to place them. Jump cuts in
time as well. Did you kind of find it easy to follow or did you enjoy that
process of working out? Well, I think, like the whole programme, we've been
talking about immersive and I think you have to immerse yourself in this film.
It sort of demands, even just hearing that little clip we heard there, it
demands sort of change of pace. It's got a sort of very, it's got a subtlety to
it, this film, and it's got a way of shooting things. There was a scene where
the two detectives, female detectives, are talking in the car and one of them
saying, you're being so judgmental of this woman who's giving up her baby. And
they're talking and then as they're talking, one of the detectives sort of rolls
down this rainy window and just plucks a stray blossom that's on the window very
quietly and then sort of cherishes it in her hand and then drops it on the
floor. And you're like, why is she doing that? That's so interesting. Why is she
doing that? What's it mean? One of the reasons she's doing that, I think, is to
echo a motif that runs through the picture, which is a sudden focus on
somebody's hand. There's a moment earlier when Moon puts her hand out of the
window to feel the rain falling and you just get a shot of just her hand feeling
that thing. And it bears no plot relation to anything that's going on. It is a
moment that makes you just sort of stop and contemplate for a moment and changes
what you think of what's going on either side. It's about the pleasure of
watching. It's also about the pleasure of making a film. The film is two hours
long, so it has these moments in it. And I think the joy of that, as Lariska's
saying, is immersive in that you, to really get beyond, you know, the premise is
absurd. Let's face it. The premise is absurd, but you surrender to that. And
actually you're... I mean, we should say that the baby boxes really do exist in
Korea. These places where you can leave your child and it's safe and an alarm
will go off so somebody will know and come to look after it. The initial premise
is real. Everything that happens after that becomes more and more... But the
thing is, it doesn't reach to absurdity, does it? It's quite the opposite
almost. It becomes more human as you go along because these characters... Yes,
more weirdly... I mean, the other way in which it's sort of contrived, I guess,
is that everybody has a relationship to being abandoned in some way or to being
childless or to having a child. I mean, there are complicated ways in which you
look at all of the different facets of this from different characters. Yes,
that's true. I mean, I did feel like maybe looking back on it, as you say, that
you see this mother who bears no relation to her child, I felt that the only
performance, although she was very good... She's a K-pop star, I understand, who
plays the birth mother. She was so disconnected from her child. I almost felt
like I don't really know enough about this woman. I don't know enough about her.
I felt like maybe this is too much about male abandonment rather than who is
this woman. I would say two things. One, the baby was really great. It's so
quiet. It's the quietest baby in the world. Such great reaction shots from the
baby. Two, the only issue I'd have with the film is that in fact, the ending was
a bit too neat. The ending, there were no spoilers. Don't give anything away.
But that was the only moment where I felt I wanted some uncertainty. At the end,
we got clarity. Did you feel that too? Or did you want a little bit of clarity
at the end? I wanted a bit of clarity. It's a beautiful journey to take. I
wasn't so convinced by, yes, the end point that it gets to. But yes, go on that
journey. There is this vogue now for K-drama, Korean drama. Most notably with
Squid Game, but there are lots of these K-dramas. Is this going to find the
audience it deserves? Well, it stars Song Kang-ho, who is the star of Parasite.
I think he's brilliantly cast because he would say, this is such a strange tone.
Parasite was exactly like that. It was a comedy. It was a thriller. It was a
fable. It was about social economic squeeze. I think he's brilliantly cast. He
won the best actor at Cannes for this performance and quite rightly so. Okay. We
have just a little bit of time for cultural picks. Echo Eshin, what have you
been watching outside of what we asked you to that you'd recommend to people? I
would recommend, I've been watching season two of Reservoir Dogs. Not Reservoir
Dogs, Reservation Dogs. That was certain to happen from the moment you decided
you were going to recommend Reservation Dogs. I know. Well, so not Tarantino,
Reservation Dogs. It's a TV series, Disney Plus, about setting on a Native
American reservation for young people, but it's really gorgeous. It's funny.
It's sad. Taika Waititi was involved. Yeah, yeah. He was the executive producer
of it, but it's so brilliantly composed and written and acted. It's
naturalistic, but it's also magic realist. It is present and then it goes
outward. And is it funny? Yeah, it's really funny. Oh, right. Okay. You've sold
me. LaRoucheka. Well, mine was inspired by the BAFTAs on Sunday, where Sandy
Powell became the first ever costume designer to get the prestigious BAFTA
fellowship. And it inspired me to go back and watch Caravaggio, which was her
first film, the wonderful Derek Jarman film from the 80s, just to see how it
held up. And it was obviously the screen debut of Tilda Swinton. And I just
think so beautiful, so lush, of its time, but still a work of art in its own
right. Absolutely holds up then. Absolutely holds up. You can see that on BFI
Player and Amazon Prime. Yes, yes. Go watch it. Okay. Thank you very much
indeed, LaRoucheka Ivanzada and Eka Eshenbroker is on release in cinemas from
tomorrow. Certificate 12A. That's it for tonight. Tomorrow on Add to Playlist,
Keris and Geoffrey's guests include the Ukrainian pianist, Dinara Clinton, as
well as Brian Eno. Next week on Front Row, we're live from Cardiff on Wednesday,
St David's Day, with a performance from the Barry Male Voice Choir and Tracey-
Ann Oberman on playing Shylock in The Merchant of Venice. Join Shahid Arhan
Monday at 7.15. Front Row was presented by Tom Sutcliffe, the producer was Sarah
Johnson, the studio engineer was Giles Aspen. You can literally go anywhere at
the snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC has been making groundbreaking
radio drama. Of course I'm a tired woman, but you have to ask yourself what I'm
tired of. The radio plays are voices in the dark. Join me, Michael Simmons-
Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic form. It's just a sheer amount of
possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama.
There is scope for so much more to happen on radio. Dramatic Beats on Radio 4
and BBC Sounds on Saturday night at 8.