TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's our series Nazis, the road to power, but all the episodes are now
available on BBC Sounds. BBC News at three o'clock. The inquiry into the
Manchester Arena bombing has found that it might have been prevented if MI5 had
acted on key intelligence received in the months before the attack. The final
part of the inquiry, which has been held in private, has looked at what the
intelligence services knew about the bomber Salman Abedi. He killed 22 people at
an Ariana Grande concert in 2017. The report doesn't say what the intelligence
was. The inquiry chair Sir John Saunders also said an opportunity had been
missed to refer Abedi to the government's counterterrorism programme Prevent. I
have concluded that there was at least a period during Salman Abedi's journey to
violent extremism when he should have been referred to the programme. It is very
hard to say what then might have happened. Police who found the body of a baby
in the Brighton area yesterday have said they believe the child may have been
dead for some time. A post-mortem examination has yet to be carried out and
they've not confirmed the baby's gender. The newborn's parents, Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon, who were arrested on Monday, remain in custody. The British
Medical Association's junior doctor representatives have described a meeting
with the health secretary Steve Barclay as disappointing. They said nothing new
was offered to try to settle their dispute about pay. The former health
secretary Matt Hancock has accused the journalist who leaked thousands of
WhatsApp messages he sent and received during the coronavirus pandemic of
breaching his trust. Isabelle Oakeshott, who helped Mr Hancock write his memoir,
has defended their release, saying she chose to act in the national interest.
And the M5 near Bristol has been closed for most of the day after a tipper truck
hit an overhead gantry. It's thought the tipper part of the lorry lifted while
it was travelling along. Part of the vehicle, which was wedged under the gantry,
has been removed. BBC News. Claire Balding taps into her artistic side as she
takes a walk through the Forest of Dean shortly. First to Friday. Lem Sissay is
a one-off. Are you the poet? A woman said to me in the street. Lem Sissay isn't
anyone else. Now I can say, she said, that I finally met Benjamin Zephaniah. Lem
Sissay explores uniqueness. You are a visible original, a pinnacle of miracle.
We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room. He just
said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem Sissay is the one and
only. Are you that poet? Tony Walsh. On Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and
BBC Sounds. And now on BBC Radio 4, Ramblings. Right, I'd like to welcome you on
Canopy Creative Walk at Park End this morning. Just a couple of things about
health and safety, because I'm a volunteer for Canopy and I don't really want to
have to take an ambulance out. That's the voice of Sarah Rickard and she is an
artist, a former teacher and she's also a very keen walker. I've come to the
Forest of Dean, a massive area of woodland that lies between the River Severn
and the River Wye. So it is in Gloucestershire but it is west of the River
Severn, borderland as it's known. Everyone's got a notebook in their hands. Ah,
no, I'm just a notebook and a pencil to give you. Oh, to give me, right. So here
you are. Thanks. So you can enjoy getting creative today. Great, thank you.
There's a group of about 12. I assume you're all keen walkers as well as being
artists. Yes. More walkers or more artists? Walker. So we're just going to go up
over the bridge here and I'll take you into the woods. Thank you. We've started
at Park End Station which looks like something from a 1930s film set. It's
really quaint. It's got one of those old lanterns. The signposting is a black
background with large white capital letters. We do get a steam train up here. Oh
really? Yes, absolutely. Yes, it's four and a half miles from Lydney. As we walk
up here we'll come to these gorgeous oak trees and in the summer the canopy is
so dense it's like somebody switches the lights off as you go from here into the
woods. As we walk into the forest the base colour is a pale brown biscuit and
you start immediately looking up through the branches. If you want to follow us
on a map we're on OS Explorer OL14 which is Forest of Dean and the Wye Valley
and we started at Park End Station. The grid reference for that is SO617078.
We're walking towards St Paul's Church in the forest just at the top here. So in
your sketchbooks I'd like you to find a blank page and fill it up with just
little marks, little angular lines and quite quickly so you're almost pecking at
the paper. And what's the, Sarah, what are you aiming for? We're discovering
texture and surface and thinking when we start drawing how we might respond to
some of the textures in the natural world that we're going to be looking at in a
few as we go along the walk. So your task, if you'd like to try a drawing on the
little green strip with the lovely marks we've just been exploring, but if you
would prefer, if you're more of a writer, you know, write about all these
gorgeous textures that you can see in front of you and find the words to express
how that moss is speckling over the wall, how that ivy is really encroaching at
the bottom of that hedge and growing up through the hedge. Try and find some
creative words. So I'm going to give you three minutes. Rob, can I just ask you
a bit about the Forest of Dean, its history and what it's like to live here?
It's an interesting place because it's between Wales and England. It actually,
some people think it's Welsh, to go back in history, all that sort of stuff,
back in the 17th century, 16th century, even earlier than that, it was a really
busy place for mining. You look at the genetic content of people who live here
and actually it's incredibly diverse and that's because people came here to work
from all over Europe. In terms of scale, it is I think 42 square miles? Yeah,
something like that. And the second biggest forest in England, the New Forest
being the biggest. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm pretty sure because all these forests
were, it was hunting ground for royalty. Yes, in fact, I think it was originally
preserved for warships for the navy, I think back in Henry VIII's time, even
possibly earlier than that. So for providing timber to build the boats?
Absolutely. Get it onto the River Severn, get it out. And why did you join the
group? What do you get from it? I'm an artist and during Covid, we realised that
a lot of artists, loads of artists live here. They were getting very lonely. We
set the group up, we started doing, well basically, online events and it sort of
grew from there really. We now do walks. Yeah, we meet every month or so,
sometimes every two weeks. Oh wow, so I missed this bit. Right, so this is our
gallery on the carpet. On the carpet, as it were, gallery on the floor. Within
four minutes, it's amazing what people have achieved with the rubbings of the
tombstones, fantastic patterns. Have you got any anything that you've written
that you'd like to share? Heaven above, crosses smooth, glance to furs, ivy and
the wall of life overshadowing the dead bracken of yesteryear. Mine's just
descriptive but very, very simple. Dead bracken, living moss, encompassing wall,
emerging ivy, glorious evergreen tree beneath an impressive church tower under a
graying February sky. Thank you very much. We'll push on. Keep your cranes
please. I did some words as well. Oh sorry Claire. I thought you were so busy.
Well I was, I was. Yeah, so I went for words rather than drawing. So I did the
beard of sponge-like moss on a wall of stone supporting a beach hedge or is it
the other way around? The moss of the, sorry, the roots of the hedge holding the
wall in place. Gold numbers on a blue face point to exactly 1130. Which it was
when we were there and I was so struck by that because it was almost, you know,
the exact line. So we're going to leave St Paul's now and the beautiful snow
drops and walk further into the woods. We're going to walk away from the church
and into the woods and almost as an entrance gate there is a low-lying
horizontal, what I thought was a log but it's not a log, it's covered in moss
and sitting on it until two seconds ago was the boldest little squirrel just
looking at us. What is that? Peter, do you know? Yes, it's a huge piece of iron
ore. The Forest of Dean, whilst a lot of people remember it for being steeped in
heritage in terms of coal mining, there was a lot of iron ore mining around the
Forest of Dean as well and that's a huge chunk of iron ore. I've no idea how it
got there. It must weigh tons. I've not found anybody that's told me how it
actually got there but that's what it is. A piece of iron ore. You'll see a lot
of evidence of wild boar that are rooting. There's still wild boar in the
forest? Oh, there's a lot of wild boar. Really? I knew it was the hunting ground
for wild boar back in the day but I didn't know it was a hunting ground for wild
boar. I knew it was the hunting ground for wild boar back in the day but they're
still around. But they like to come where we've got the oaks and the beech and
the sweet chestnut obviously because they will root underneath and get in the
autumn obviously those autumnal fruits and nuts. But here obviously with all
these leaves you can see where they've been turning them over. They've been
rotavating it. Sharon I'm going to grab you and walk ahead of the group. As a
working artist, I pay my mortgage through selling my art. There's a lot of
enormous amount of work that goes into it and I think that it's very easy to get
lost in that and not take time out for yourself and really capture the essence
of what you're trying to put down on the canvas. For me, walking in the forest
is that opportunity. It gives me a chance to just slow down and just really
look. Even though we're just making quick marks and doing some rubbings and we
are looking and you look so much more when you are drawing it. When you take a
photograph it's almost too much information for the brain to process. So then
when I go back into the studio I don't use anything here. I don't have this
sketchbook open but I make a painting and I can immediately be back here in the
forest because I was here and doing the drawings. So it's fantastic and I think
it's also being in nature like this it just is bigger than you and it makes you
feel very privileged to just be alive for a small part of it. With the Forest of
Dean, I'm quite new to the Forest of Dean, I've only been here for about a year
and it's very magical. You can feel how ancient it is. You can feel that sort of
you know it's quite exciting. I think there's a little bit of threat also with
being in the woods especially when you're on your own and then you realise that
actually you don't need to feel that threat. It feels very benevolent, it feels
a very kind, warm place. As long as you know where you are. As long as you know
where you are. As long as you know where you are. Yeah and I have got lost a
couple of times with the light going down and thought and of course there's no
signal. What sort of art do you create and what do you work with? So I paint in
oils and acrylics and I will paint landscape but what I'm interested in really
doing is trying to capture the emotion. So I'm interested in trying to capture
the emotion I felt on the day. I don't put people in the landscapes because I
want you to put yourself in there. I think the forest is a totally different
feeling. It creates a totally different feeling within me. That's partly why you
know this is so good because it gives me that time to explore my feelings and
how I feel about it in preparation for then what I'm going to do. I also admire
the fact that you've dressed in forest camouflage. So Sharon's wearing that
burnt orange, pale burnt orange jacket. Very like, it wasn't intentional but
very like the colour of the bracken and the leaves that we're now walking
through. We've got slightly detached from the group. Look at these trees. Yeah.
Look at this. It's quite difficult when you've left a place where you had
friends and you had easy ways of talking to people you knew and you suddenly
land somewhere where you're... Absolutely and this is a very friendly place
though but I always feel that about edge lands. So they call it, you know, it's
sort of border country. To me it's like edge lands. You know, it's those places
which almost sort of, they are on the edge. We're on the edge of England and
Wales here and it's sort of where do we really fit and it's been extraordinary,
absolutely extraordinary getting to know it. I don't want you to miss out
Sharon, you go ahead because the group are in a circle. You're listening to
Ramblings on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I'm in the Forest of Dean with a group of
walking artists or artistic walkers, whichever way you want to think of it, they
are part of a group called Canopy Creative Network and Sarah is leading them
today. They've paused ahead of me and some, someone actually, one of them has a
really high-tech camera with her and she's taking photos as well as drawing.
Others happy to work with words as well as charcoal, pencil, some kneeling down,
some rubbing on the bark. The first thing that we were doing is we were just
standing underneath the tree looking up at the beautiful structures. For anybody
who's interested in photography in particular, you know you don't often
necessarily stand right underneath the tree and then when you see the blue sky
coming through as well, it's really quite magical. But this particular tree,
there are so many trees in this patch here, you can see over there that have
gone with the winds last spring, we must have lost dozens and dozens, very very
shallow roots that these conifers have but they've all gone in the same
direction. But this one has obviously chosen to break at a different point, the
bottom of the trunk almost in defiance, you know almost like with a hand
pointing towards the sky. So what I'm going to ask you to do now, and I'll
probably limit you to about three or four minutes, it won't be very long, either
if you want to, I would just take a chunk of this, I can give you a viewfinder
if it helps, just to look at the bottom, you know, towards the right end of this
lower trunk. Or obviously if you want to think about the story of how this tree
got broken or the poem of the power of the trees, I just think it's such a
lovely powerful image. Has anybody written anything? Yes, Bill? How lies the
fallen trunk, eaten by hostile fungi, devoured by wind, yet still aiming its
final hurrah to the sky. Fallen trees, they seem dead, crash-landed, feathers
and wings held up by a damaged spine. Fallen trees, lines across land, botching
paths, denting grass and memory. Fallen trees, roots now in the air, gasping to
survive, maybe they just sink into history. Okay, thank you very much. Tanya,
when did you become part of the group? I joined Canopy just after the pandemic
was starting to settle down. I had a huge amount of social anxiety and coming
along on the walks was a great opportunity for me to socialise with people
without the pressure being on me to actually socialise too much, but I can focus
on the walking and the creativity. And it was coming out to be with like-minded
people and it's been a real great way to improve my well-being in general. So
it's made a big difference, has it? It's made a huge difference to me. Yes, that
connection with the natural world and your surroundings and because I moved to
the forest in 2019, so just before pandemic hit, I didn't have that chance to
meet people so I felt very disconnected, like I was sort of free floating and
having this opportunity to come and learn about the forest and really get sort
of in depth connection through creativity, it's allowed me to feel like I belong
and to be able to see the seasons change as you go on different walks. If you're
in this forest on your own and you haven't been on a route with someone before,
it's very easy to get lost so having that guide, someone who can take you
through, it's really helpful as well. Charlotte, tell me about your artistic
canopy. Well, I work in art marketing for canopy doing digital marketing but I'm
actually a fashion designer by trade and I started painting about four years ago
in abstract art, so that is what I spend my time doing now. DeRosa, what about
you? I'm a sculptor so I can't really sculpt the nature but the nature feeds me.
Did you grow up near forest at all? Have you lived in woodland before? I lived
in a countryside and I was from the farming family so in this sense I think you
encounter nature in a different way as the feeder, as the land which you depend
on and I think that's actually magical, that is an amazing, great experience to
grow up in and so this is more as a leisure experience for me. So the forest is
the contemplative place to escape, to rest, to recharge and maybe to gather your
thoughts for the next project. When did you start sculpting? I was in art
college and then studied sculpture. And where was the art college? That was in
Poland where I'm from, in Warsaw I studied sculpture there. And this Forest of
Dean, how would you characterise it? What does it feel like? How does it speak
to you? The main thing is the feeling of freedom. There is something specific
about England and the footpaths, the designated paths and the forest has got
this uniqueness of being free, of wandering and going wherever you want,
choosing the path, getting lost. I remember my first walks and they were not
that far from the house but I kind of feared because I didn't know the area so
it was this pumping heart, you know, getting lost and then finding, oh now I
understand and now I know it by heart, it's just joy really. When I first moved
to the forest about 12 years ago, we moved over from Bristol and I wanted
somewhere to bring the children up, you know, somewhere different, somewhere
nice in nature so it's 25 miles from Bristol so we moved out here and the first
thing when I was walking the baby in the pram around the forest and I spoke to
the Forestry Commission and I said, you know, how safe is it for me to be
walking in the forest? She's like, well what do you mean? You mean the wild
boar? I was like, no no, I was thinking, you know, more axe murderers or being a
lone woman walking in the forest and I was like, no no, you're fine. This place
we've come to now is called Oakenhill Nature Reserve. What I'd like you to do is
maybe count 20 to 30 paces and see where you end up and respond to what you
find, whether that be through taking a photograph or doing a sketch or writing
some words or some notes but I'm only going to give you three minutes. Okay,
thank you, off you go. I'm going to go towards the sunlight because the sun just
came out through the clouds. I'm desperately looking for a wild boar but I have
not seen one yet. But there's signs of the boar everywhere in this path in
particular, although it's been trodden through the middle. The sides of it look
like a plough has been through and it is a porcine plough. What's done it? I'd
like you to breathe in deeply and smell and I'd like you to listen, so that
means no chatting please. And I'm quite strict about that, yes mindful walking
would be the phrase. I'm going to break the rules by talking but Sarah I'm
interested to know what you get out of these classes because obviously you're in
a position of responsibility and you do have to keep moving people along but do
you enjoy it? Absolutely, yes, it's changing my own work which is good. I'm not
a very good walker, I'm not a very good walker, but I'm enjoying it. I'm
enjoying my work which is good and I want to be outside and record all colours
and surfaces and textures. I work in embroidery in textiles and it informs the
work that I'm doing so my drawing has changed and my references will very much
reflect the forest in my work. Just being in the forest is such a privilege and
to show other people what I enjoy and to share is, I think as an artist we're
all quite isolated so the opportunity to bring people together is very special
and to be able to get outside and to share is again very special. Hello, what's
that then? Is there a lone musician in the forest? Well, there could be. I do
get surprised. So it's Cara. Do you often come and play your flute in the
forest? For Sarah's creative walks, yes, but it is actually quite inspiring,
it's lovely and that piece, I mean I was going to try and write a piece and I
wanted to get all the wind and the trees and the squirrel coming down the tree
but that actual piece that's written by a Japanese composer said it all really,
I thought. So yes, when Sarah asked me I thought, oh a bit strange at first but
I like it, I love it. And how do you generally share your music? Are you part of
a... I do belong to the Forest Flute Choir and there's usually about 12 of us
and we meet in park and church to rehearse every other Sunday and I couldn't
believe it when I first moved here I didn't know there was anything like a flute
choir and I heard about it and it's in my village and I walked down from my
house with my flute on my back, there were three deer just walked in front of me
and then a bit further down the path a little a mummy and her baby humbugs they
called, a boar just walked across my path as well and I thought I think I'm in
heaven here. It's just amazing. We've been out for about oh just over two hours
and come back now to the station, um to Park End station. Well thank you, thanks
for including me, I hope I didn't ruin it for you. I put my mind to things and I
wrote a bit and I drew a bit and I you know and entered into the spirit of it,
put you literally on the map with a grid reference. But no I really enjoyed it.
Thank you so much. Ramblings is presented by Claire Balding and produced by
Maggie Eyre. And now the broadcaster Gemma Kearney makes the Radio 4 appeal on
behalf of Raising Futures Kenya. In primary school Lynette was bright and
dreamed of becoming a successful Kenyan fashion designer when she grew up. The
future was exciting until she was 11 when her parents died within six months of
each other. Lynette went to live with relatives in Nairobi where she thought she
would be cared for but she was sexually abused and became pregnant. She was
thrown out onto the street with nothing. A young girl alone and scared. She was
selling coffee on the street to survive when she heard about Raising Futures
Kenya. The charity runs free vocational and business skills training for young
people including young mothers. Lynette joined the fashion and dressmaking
course. Alongside the training she got the counselling she desperately needed to
cope with the grief of being orphaned and then raped by someone she thought she
could trust. She received practical support like cooked lunches and period pads
so nothing stood in the way of her learning. And she had individual care from
her teachers that gave her the self-belief to thrive. After finishing her
training Lynette worked at a local clothing shop. She earned enough to rent a
room and save time and saved up for a sewing machine to make and sell her own
clothes. Three years on Lynette runs her own successful business. She has a home
for her twins and she's able to pay for their school fees and for her siblings
too. And she mentors current students to become strong independent business
people too. I recently spoke with Lynette and reflecting on her experience with
Raising Futures Kenya she said something profound. She said I've never known a
love like it. I've travelled to Kenya and seen the challenges young people
especially girls like Lynette face every day. The sharply rising cost of living,
unemployment and severe drought have forced people into extreme poverty making
them vulnerable to abuse and exploitation. Raising Futures Kenya trains and
supports 900 young people every year who've experienced poverty and abuse.
Equipping them with skills to find employment or start their own business. £25
can fund a month of training, counselling and support for a young person in
Kenya to have the chance of a different future today. You can give now. Just
search online for BBC Radio 4 Appeal or call 0800 404 8144. Or you can write a
cheque to Raising Futures Kenya and send it to free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal.
That's free post BBC Radio 4 Appeal. Please mark the back of your envelope
Raising Futures Kenya. Thank you. Gemma Kearney. Calls are free from landlines
and mobiles and you can find all the things you need to know about giving online
if you search for BBC Radio 4 Appeal. And remember that if you're a UK taxpayer
and if you want Raising Futures Kenya to collect the gift aid on your donation,
include an email or postal address so that they can send you a gift aid
declaration. This year as part of Red Nose Day you could win an iconic BBC
treasure. How about Pat Butcher's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you
might think? Maybe a House of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's
ten score paddle from Strictly? Not that he uses it much. These are just some of
the BBC items that could be yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the
microphone! To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief go to bbc.co.uk
forward slash rednoseday. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy
notice. You must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on
Saturday 18th of March 2023. Good luck. BBC Radio 4, now here's Open Book with
Jonny Pitts. Today I'll be exploring two books which invoke the universal
through the personal. One, a love letter to the history and landscape of Wales,
revealing the urgency of the climate emergency. And the other, a long-lost novel
by the seminal American poet, novelist and essayist Richard Wright, which merges
black spirituality with a culture of fear as World War II looms large. And later
we'll be hearing about a hotly-tipped novel likely to be on everyone's to-be-
read pile this spring. But first, my guest Tom Buller grew up on a Welsh hill
farm and in his most recent novel, Adelands, told the story of 70 years of one
farming family as the winds of modernity brought disruption to their rural life.
Adelands intimately explored the relationship between people and the landscape
they inhabit. And now in his latest work, A Non-Fiction, that same relationship
is explicitly explored. This new book, Sarn Helen, is named after a Roman road
which runs like a spine through Wales from north to south. And Tom Buller walked
this ancient path's length and is with me now from his home in Breconshire. Tom,
welcome to Open Book. I wanted to begin by asking you what prompted you to put
on your walking boots and take on this journey through a kind of ghost road? As
you mentioned, there isn't much of a trace of this Roman Empire on it anymore.
Well, in the first case, really, it was lockdown in 2020. I mean, like everybody
else, we've been confined to this very small space for months on end and just
felt this desperation to see a different landscape, a contrasting landscape. So
I took the bus down to Neath on the south coast of Wales, or close to the south
coast of Wales, just with a view to walking back a couple of days over the
mountains to where we live. But very soon after leaving Neath, I was struck by a
contrast between two different ideas, essentially. One of these was to do with
the climate and ecological emergency. This was a heat wave at the time, but it
was also passing through communities which had suffered unprecedented flooding
during that spring and were still struggling to recover from it, as they were
struggling to recover from COVID-19, as zoonotic disease, of course, another
aspect of the emergency. And passing across this magnificent landscape, but a
landscape in many ways bereft of life, it's stripped of its biodiversity. At the
same time, and with kind of equal frequency, I was passing reminders of the Age
of Saints, which is the, if you like, the roots of Wales, the earliest days of
Wales. The fifth and sixth centuries when the natural world was held in
reverence, when it was a source of divine awe. And so in a sense, there was a
music that began to develop out of that tension. Tom, at the centre of this book
is, of course, the environmental crisis. And I wondered if we could listen to a
passage where you talk about nature's vulnerability. Could you set this up for
us? So yeah, this is just a short passage from September 2020, when I was a few
miles north of Llandudri. And, you know, this is a book which is in many ways is
about crisis, ecological crisis, and in many ways, a sort of national crisis.
But I hope it's to give something of a tone of the book, of the writing. Slowly,
slowly the land begins to gather, the heat to subside with the afternoon. The
fields grow pinched and angular. The lane is strewn for periods with beachmast,
the first falling leaves of the oaks, the red-yellow leaves of a few horse
chestnuts, which, as ever, are weeks ahead. Ahead, where it seems that the hills
converge, scratched by screes and cut by cliffs, the paraglider hangs entirely
motionless. It appears to have been nailed to the sky. It remains in its place
for an hour and more, while a microlight closes, circles to check, then buzzes
away over Cardiganshire, while the tight lane climbs past a final farm of
elderly tractor and rusting roofs, into an openness where stone walls crumple,
where a rank of beaches remembers the winds, where a second paraglider launches
from a crag. Look down and you look across whirling crows and ravens, which
pass, then roll on their backs and give out their cough-like call. In the
valley, the farms and the cottages are huddled among trees in the angling light.
They seem suddenly vulnerable, with the hills around so hard and bare. Suddenly,
all is vulnerability. Whales, you could just blot it out with your thumb. It
feels that small, that threatened. It's so painstaking. I think that passage
does exemplify your careful writing of both the landscape and your emotional
connections to it. I suppose it's an overused word in many ways, but was there a
kind of, you know, a kind of, you know, a kind of, you know, a kind of catharsis
in being able to express all of these kind of symbiotic threads in one piece of
writing? Yes, and I think that that was particularly because this is non-
fiction. I feel in some ways as if this is a novel inside out. It's a novel with
the working shown. It's a novel in which, it's a novel but with everything
implicit made explicit, if you sort of mean. So that connection, which perhaps
would otherwise be experienced by a character, this is experienced by me. And it
was vital, I think, that that personal connection was made clear such that as a
reader, you're able to experience what is at stake. Absolutely, because, you
know, another obviously important ingredient of this book are your interviews
with scientists from Welsh universities about their predictions for the future.
And I wanted to ask if it was a conscious decision to pitch the hard, factual
information against these passages of deeply crafted creative writing, what did
you hope that the impact of that would be for the reader? Yeah, those interviews
were also part of my first thought for the book. They were part of that initial
vision, if you like. And one of the joys of walking the length of the country is
that you pass through all of these different landscapes. And so you pass all of
these different queues. So for example, at a certain point, descending
Caderidrus, the mountain, you're passing Fairbourn, which is a village on the
coast of Gwynedd, which is the first village in the UK to have been... the word
that's often used is decommissioned. It's an unkind and unfortunate word, but
it's the first community in the UK, where the council has accepted that it can't
be saved from sea level rise. And so you're able to set against the descriptions
of the landscape and the descriptions of the place, an interview with, in this
case, Dr. Clare Early from Swansea University, who's an expert on coastal
processes and on sea level rise, and is able to explain exactly why that
community and others like it around the coast of Wales are facing, in some
cases, radical change or even total disappearance, as in that case. It's
amazing. I mean, you're even talking about how under threat a place like
Llandudno is. I mean, you've said that you see Sawnhellen as part of a bigger
community of writing about climate emergency. I wondered if you could just
unpack that for us a bit more. In order to write effectively, you have to zoom
in, you have to find a point of focus, in this case, Wales, because it's the
place that I'm from and the place that I love. But I think you can only really
do that with conviction in the knowledge that there are other writers who are
attending to so many other of the aspects of this crisis. I tend to think of it
as, now, as something like a murmuration. I've got a bit of a weakness for
starlings. Of course, the individual participants are essential to it, but the
point of it is the overall shape. The point of it is the overall movement. And
there's a liberation in that. I've never experienced anything like it before.
And it's a source of wonder, really. I love that. A movement as a murmuration.
Are there any particular writers that you see yourself in as part of a kind of
constellation? They would tend, first and foremost, to be those who are friends
of mine and collaborators. So Jay Griffiths, who I work with for a spell during
the book for a couple of days. Jackie Morris as well, of course. But then
looking back historically, I've thought a lot about Ursula K. Le Guin recently.
So what she's talking about is giving voice to the non-human, expanding our
field of reference to encompass the whole of the earth, if you like, as opposed
to just the human perspective. And I feel that that is absolutely fundamental to
the way that writing needs to go. That's a key part of the change that we need
to make as writers. You mentioned your collaboration with Jackie Morris, and the
book is filled with these beautiful illustrations of 15 species which are
threatened with extinction, including the kestrel, puffin, cuckoo, and the
beautiful turtle dove, which is now considered actually extinct. What do you
think that the visual images brought to this book, Tom? Well, right from the
start, I felt that these images needed to be in here, and it was a source of
increasing apprehension. When was I going to ask her? Was she going to be able
to do it? Was she going to be willing to do it? And the most tremendous relief
when she said that she would. I can only say that it was necessary to the
balance that those images be in there. It was necessary to the balance of the
book, the balance of its elements, and that she's done it so beautifully is a
great source of joy to me, I have to say. Tom Buller, thank you. Sarn Helen is
out now, published by Granta. And next week, the author of 2021's Welsh Book of
the Year, Nadeema Mohamed, will be James Nochty's guest on Book Club. When they
discuss The Fortune Men, a novel about a miscarriage of justice for a Somali
seaman in Cardiff in 1952. But for now, you're listening to Open Book with me,
Johnny Pitts, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Richard Wright was one of the most
influential American writers of the 20th century, in particular, his novel
Native Son, with its unforgettable portrait of Bigger Thomas, a 20-year-old
African-American man living in a Chicago slum. Both this and the memoir Black
Boy exposed racism through poverty, injustice and violence in groundbreaking and
often devastating ways. But despite his celebrated candor, one of Wright's
novels, written at the peak of his creativity in the 1940s, was rejected and
instead published as a short story. But now it's finally been restored to its
original length, and after being published in the US last year, it arrives in UK
bookshops next month. The person responsible for getting it into print is the
author of the book, Richard Wright's daughter, the poet and essayist Julia
Wright, who joins me now on the line. Julia, I want to begin by quoting your
father, who wrote, I've never written anything in my life that stemmed more from
sheer inspiration or executed any piece of writing in a deeper feeling of
imaginative freedom or express myself in a way that flowed from my own
background and feelings than the man who lived underground. And I wondered why
it's taken so long to reach an audience in its original length. And I'm going to
ask you to explain why it's taken so long to reach an audience in its original
form. Well, originally in 1942, two small excerpts were published because there
was pushback. The pushback was against the first 50 pages. The first 50 pages
were about the police brutality leveled against Fred Daniels, the hero, who, as
my father writes, is a nice Christian boy going home one Saturday night with his
pay in his pocket. He's honest. He's innocent. He's not done anything wrong. The
police frame him up. And the first 50 pages are his torture at the hands of the
police. And they are graphic. And so in 1942, and later in 1944, the work was
truncated. I even say dismembered, because I like to be strong about it, because
censorship is a dismemberment. Because publishers back then, and I don't know
about today, I won't venture about today, but certainly about back then, did not
want to make their audience feel, quote, uncomfortable. Richard says something
so shocking in this book. He says we're all guilty. Yeah, I mean, that's a very
powerful moment. And it's very interesting how the character learns so much in
the depths of his despair, because of course, he's wrongly accused of murdering
a white couple. And then after being forced to sign a false confession, he
manages to escape the police and literally goes underground into the sewer
system. And this is where the novel does expand into something else. What else
do you think Fred experiences there? And what impact does it have on him, Julia?
I think that he escapes the laws above, of the world above, for a time. And
there's a great element of time there. Loss of time and reinvention, reimagining
of his own time, of his own needs, of his own imagination. He repossesses his
dreams. We get into his unconscious mind. He repossesses himself, and he likes
what he sees. He repossesses the freedom of his mind, and he finds his first
person singular. That's really eloquently put. And I wondered if actually we
could hear a passage which speaks to this experience in the underworld of the
sewer. As he gripped the iron pipe and stared in horror at the proceedings, he
wanted to scream to Murphy that the man was innocent, that the man did not know
anything, that no one knew anything, that no man could explain his innocent
guilt. He wanted to yell, He's innocent. I'm innocent. We're all innocent. The
thoughts came to him so hard that he thought he had actually yelled them out,
but he had not spoken. His teeth were clenched. The words had screamed inside of
him, hot words trying to burst through a tight wall. And again he was
overwhelmed with that inescapable emotion that always cut down to the
foundations of life here in the underground. That emotion that told him that,
though he were innocent, he was guilty. Though blameless, he was accused. Though
living, he must die. Though possessing faculties of dignity, he must live a life
of shame. Though existing in a seemingly reasonable world, he must die a
certainly reasonless death. As Daniel is underground, he finds these secret
passages into various entrances into basements. And there's one place where
there are diamonds and watches. There's another place where there's money, which
he's not interested in ever spending the money, but he wallpapers his
underground cave. And there is a real surrealist element to his writing of the
underworld. In the beautiful essay at the end of the book, he talks about how
the prose was influenced by improvisational Black American music like jazz and
blues. But do you think that he was influenced by European writers like Kafka or
Camus? How did he go about bringing this confluence of influences together?
Camus. Camus he loved. They had met. He had deep admiration for him. When he
wrote The Man Who Lived Underground, Camus had not yet written L'Etranger,
surprisingly enough. So that's interesting. And do you think Camus would have
been familiar with your father's work before then? That's an open question. That
would have to be researched. I would be very interested in that question. And
when I was there in Paris with him, when the news of Camus' sudden tragic death
came, accident, and my father was devastated, as if he'd lost a brother. Can we
talk about Paris a little bit, because it looms large in so many, especially
Black writers, that African-American expat community in France, in Paris. And of
course, you'd want to bring up people like James Baldwin and also somebody like
Ralph Ellison. And I was thinking about this notion of Fred's invisibility and
how it's been described actually as being a founding premise of Ralph Ellison's
Invisible Man. Do you agree with that? Because I know the rumors that this was
the source of their subsequent fallout. You know, I have to be very careful here
because there's still a lot of research being done. But what I know or feel I
can say at this point is my father was slightly older than Ralph Ellison. My
father was a mentor. They had quite a correspondence, and they would send each
other their manuscripts to comment on. So I am sure, but I would like to be able
to prove it, that my father sent the manuscript of the man who lived underground
to Ralph Ellison. And therefore, Ralph Ellison would have read the whole
manuscript. Take it from there. Yeah, no, well, let's take it from there because
what also comes with this novel, and we've mentioned it a lot throughout this
interview, actually, is the essay that comes along with the novel. And I mean,
he explicitly talks about his fascination with the notion of the Invisible Man
and how that kind of applies to black culture in that essay. It made me, as soon
as I read the essay at the end of the book, I wanted to go back to the first
page and start reading the novel again with new eyes. Where did that essay come
from? And why is it included with the book? That's a very good question. My
impression is that my father was so hurt that this book of his kept getting
rejected or subjected to dismemberment that is not being published in totality,
that he wrote this piece afterwards to justify its existence. If you would
allow, Johnny, I would like to say why I felt it was so timely to publish this
book in 2010. It was because I felt there was more and more body cam around
deaths in the street in the U.S. and elsewhere in the world. And there was
something so amazing about the fact that here were 50 pages that were like body
cam. They were so graphic. And we think of Tyree Nichols or when the book came
out in the States, it was George Floyd, you know, and those 50 pages have the
graininess, the presence of body cam. I just think there is a timeliness of
those pages that give weight to the book, that anchors the book in our 21st
century. Julia Wright, thank you so much for joining us. Richard Wright's The
Man Who Lived Underground will be published by Vintage Classics. And just
finally today, our editor's tip comes from Emma Herdman at Bloomsbury, who's
picked out one of the most hotly anticipated debuts of the spring. The book that
I've chosen is In Memoriam by Alice Wynne. It's set between 1914 and 1919, and
it's this heart-wrenching story between two English boarding school classmates.
There's the repressed Henry Gaunt and the beautiful, charmed poet, Sidney
Elwood. Sidney has spent the first few months of the war totally romanticising
it. But Gaunt is a little more serious. He has German blood. He's quiet and he's
respected. And he's handed a white feather when he's in town. And not just
because of this, but for a few other reasons. He decides to sign up young and
he's sent to the front. But before he goes, the boys share a kiss. But there is
so much left unsaid between them. And the reader really understands that these
two boys can't communicate with each other about the fact that they are in love
with one another, but they simply cannot admit it. It gives the novel this
intensity. And I think beyond just wanting the boys to survive, and they really
are boys, you really get that sense in the book. You really care about it and
you want them to be together. But of course, you know, so many lives were lost.
And as the book goes on, you get to know all of these boys that they are friends
with. And the book's interspersed with their school paper. And you get to see
how many names that we become familiar with, are just on a list of dead, of
injured, of missing. I bid on this book at auction. It was an incredibly
exciting auction. I love doing auctions where you get to talk to the author and
hear about why they wrote it and how they wrote it. And Alice speaks incredibly
engagingly about it. But sadly, I didn't win this one. And I think the end
product of this book, rereading it, it still has all of that magic of the first
time that I read it. It's incredibly gripping. It's page turning, but it's also
got so much emotion, so much heart. I've chosen to read from a section near the
beginning of the book, which is where Gaunt is at the front, and Elwood is still
at school, still romanticising the war. Elwood is distraught because a book of
his poetry has been burnt in the fire by some of the other boys at school. So
this is a letter from Gaunt to Elwood. He's talking about censoring his men's
letters. Mostly, the men talk about the mud and the rats and God. We have to
censor the mud and the rats, but God is allowed to remain, which strikes me as
ironic. It is a dull job, but less odious than the other, writing condolences
over and over again about men I know or men I don't, about men who died
valiantly or men who died in ways I refuse to describe, men I liked and men I
didn't, men too old to go to war and boys too young. One runs out of ways to say
your son died painlessly and was a credit to the empire. The worst is when you
realise you are addressing the same poor woman twice, two letters to thank her
for her two sons. I don't think they should allow brothers to join regiments
together. I'm sorry, this is not what I intended to say. What I meant to say is
this, you'll write more poems. They are not lost. You are the poetry. Yours,
Gaunt." The reason that I chose that passage is because I think it really shows
you that there is this beating heart throughout the novel, their love for each
other. You can see that it is his love for Elwood that sustains Gaunt when he's
at the front and dealing with these atrocities. I think it's very rare that a
book comes along that you read on submission as an editor, where it might have
had an edit or two with its agent, it may not have had an edit with its agent,
but you read it and you are so convinced that this is somebody who is a writer.
It's not that they found a good story or that they're good at writing plot or
character. It's somebody who has everything and somebody who I think will become
a really big writer of the future. And to have that in their debut novel is
amazing. I think that this book crosses genres. I think it's literary. I think
it's commercial. You can't beat a good love story when you are rooting for two
people so ardently. Yes, incredibly moving. Emma Herdman was talking about In
Memoriam by Alice Wynne, a novel that seems destined to make a massive stir this
year. Well, that's all from me today. Next time I'll be talking to that giant of
literary fiction, Margaret Atwood, about her latest collection of short stories,
Old Babes in the Wood, which features the return of Nell and Tig from a book,
Moral Disorder. How difficult is it for a novelist to resurrect old characters?
Find out next time. We will. Open Book was presented by Jonny Pitts and produced
by Kirsten Locke. The reader was Ethan Harisi. There's a crisis in UK music
education. In today's climate, there's a lot less funding available to support
many young musicians who would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch,
a musician myself, and in a new three-part series, I'll be finding out why the
future of British music is under threat. If you don't have adequate provision in
our schools, that is going to have an impact on the talent pipeline, and it is
going to have an impact in terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it
in danger of becoming an elitist occupation? Rethinking music.