TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 who says he can help. The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. At least 29 people have been killed in a late-night train
crash in Greece. There was panic, cables everywhere. The fire was immediate. As
we were turning over, we were being burned. Fire was right and left. Nigeria's
electoral authorities declare the governing party's candidate the winner of the
disputed presidential election. Timbul Bola Ahmed of the APC is hereby declared
the winner and is returned elected. Rupert Murdoch admits presenters on his Fox
News channel endorsed the false idea that Donald Trump won the 2020 US election,
reports Russian forces are on the brink of capturing Bakhmut, and they call it
mummy love. I take care of her. I maintain her. She's like my spiritual
girlfriend. At home, she's in my room. She sleeps with me. Caught drinking in a
park with an 800-year-old corpse in Peru. This is Alex Ritson with the newsroom.
Hello, Ramniel Nunes with the BBC News. At least 29 people have been killed in a
late-night train crash in Greece. Fire officials said 85 more were injured.
Rescue workers are still scouring the severely damaged carriages of a passenger
train. It collided with a cargo train, derailed, and initially went up in
flames. This passenger managed to escape and described what happened. All of
them are asleep. Suddenly, a loud bang starts. The passengers were all relaxed.
Some were asleep. And suddenly, there was a sudden boom. Suitcases started
falling. Many windows broke. But we in carriage number five were lucky because
somehow the doors opened and we managed to get out. We could see in the other
carriage that passengers were breaking the windows to escape. Conditions for the
rescuers are described as very difficult. The army has been mobilized to help,
and dozens of fire and ambulance staff are at the scene. In the past hour,
Nigeria's governing party candidate, Bolotinibu, has been announced as the
winner of Saturday's disputed presidential election. He won with almost nine
million votes, ahead of his main rival, Etiku Abubakar, who had nearly seven
million. The announcement was made by the head of the Nigerian Electoral
Commission, Mahamudu Mahmud Yakubu. Bolotinibu of the APC, having satisfied the
requirements of the law, is hereby declared the winner and is returned elected.
Our correspondent in Nigeria, Mayeni Jones, has more details about the country's
new president-elect. This is the moment Bolotinibu has been waiting for his
whole political career. Known as the Godfather of Lagos, he's a trained
accountant. During his time as governor of Lagos, he was credited with reshaping
Nigeria's commercial hub. While campaigning, he popularized the Yoruba phrase,
emi lohan, meaning, it's my turn. His supporters say his skills as a political
operator and businessman are exactly what Nigeria's ailing economy needs. But
his detractors believe he lacks transparency and isn't in good enough health to
handle this nation's complex challenges. He takes office amidst rising
insecurity and unemployment. Nigeria's two main opposition parties said the vote
was a sham and have called for new elections. The Electoral Commission has
denied this. Ukraine's President Zelensky has said that the International
Criminal Court has a historic role to play in bringing about justice for crimes
committed in Ukraine since Russia's invasion. He was speaking after meeting the
ICC's top prosecutor, Karim Khan. Mr. Khan's been visiting Ukraine to
investigate Russia's attacks on energy infrastructure, which have killed
hundreds of civilians. This is the World News from the BBC. Three journalists
from one of Egypt's last remaining independent media outlets are to be put on
trial. The three women work for the liberal online newspaper, Mada Masar. They
are charged with offending legislators from the nation's Future Party, which
strongly supports President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. If convicted, the journalists
could face prison sentences of up to two years. The coffins of 65 victims of a
migrant shipwreck in southern Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in
Crotone in the Calabria region. They died when the overloaded boat that set sail
from Turkey broke up in a storm on Sunday. About 80 people survived. Others are
still missing. Researchers in Russia say they've discovered the earliest known
insects covered in pollen, dating from about 280 million years ago. They found
the fossils of earwig-like insects at the bottom of a lake near the Ural
Mountains. The researchers say the discovery sheds light on the early evolution
of insect pollination, tens of millions of years before flowering plants became
more common. Peruvian police have discovered a mummy, believed to be at least
600 years old, inside the cooler bag of a delivery worker. He denied trying to
sell the mummy, saying it had been in his family for decades. Will Leonardo has
more on this story. Officers in the southeastern Peruvian city of Buenos Aires
said they'd approached a group of apparently drunk men before opening one of
their food delivery bags. Inside, they found a pre-Hispanic mummy squeezed into
the square container in a foetal position. One man then explained he'd been
sharing a room with the bandaged mummy, which he'd named Juanita. He said he
considered Juanita to be his spiritual girlfriend and had taken her out to show
his mates. Experts have since said the mummy is believed to be a 45-year-old
male. Peru's Ministry of Culture has now taken charge of the remains and the
delivery worker has been arrested. That's the latest BBC World News. Hello, this
is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. A train crash in Greece has left nearly 30
people dead and more than 80 injured. This passenger did manage to get out. We
heard a big bang. It was ten nightmarish seconds. We were turning over in the
wagon until we fell on our sides and until the commotion stopped. Then there was
panic. Cables everywhere. The fire was immediate. As we were turning over, we
were being burned. Fire was right and left. Rescue workers are on the scene. I
got the latest from our reporter, Meta Sykrike. We know that there was this
train which left Thessalonika and when it reached the area of Thessaly, after
Larissa, which is in the centre of Thessaly, it derailed after a collision with
a cargo train. Now, in the passenger train, we know that there were 350
passengers, so quite a big number. A lot of people, students, coming, studying
in Thessalonika and going to Athens, 350 passengers and they describe, I mean
the ones who were rescued, they describe a very strong boom after which they
could feel suitcases falling, they realised something was very serious. And the
problem was that the first two carriages caught fire and what is left from these
carriages is an amorphous mass of metal. The scene is really very devastating.
In the other carriages, the passengers managed to get out, some smashed windows
and got out. We have a passenger in carriage number five and he says they were
very lucky on that one, there were 40 in this carriage and they were very lucky
because suddenly the doors opened so they just got out and they went to help
other passengers. They saw them smashing windows, trying to get out of this very
devastating scene. It's obviously too early to know what caused this accident,
but are the Greek railways normally a pretty safe place? They are pretty safe,
yes. The most likely scenario is that one of the carriages, probably the first
carriage of the passenger train, somehow derailed and met the other cargo train
coming from the opposite direction. This is an easy to believe scenario because
can you imagine if actually the whole passenger train derailing and going to the
same track with the cargo? Nobody wants to believe that, but they say it is the
most serious accident that happened in the Greek rails. MetaSicRica. It's taken
four days to announce a winner, but in the past hour, Bola Tinubu has been
declared the victor in Nigeria's presidential election. The election is Africa's
biggest democratic test. Almost 90 million Nigerians were eligible to cast their
ballots on Saturday. Supporters of Mr Tinubu, the candidate of the governing
party, were jubilant. But even before the result was declared, opposition
parties were calling for a fresh election, claiming that millions of votes had
been tampered with. International observers have said there were major
logistical problems and a lack of transparency from the electoral commission.
And many Nigerians have been asking why it took so long for a winner to be
declared. A question for our correspondent in Lagos, Mayeni Jones. There was a
new electronic voting system which was meant to help agents at polling stations
send their results out on Saturday, and so they should have started being
available to the public from Saturday evening, but a lot of polling stations
opened late and there seems to have been lots of technical issues with this
voting system. So the first results didn't start trickling in until 24 hours
after polls closed and then they've been gradually coming out since. Now the
commission says there's been no foul play, it's just because of technical
issues, but the main opposition parties have come out now and said that they are
not happy with how it's all gone and they want the election to be re-run. And
are they going to get their wish granted? At the moment it doesn't seem likely.
The commission says they should go through the proper channels, so they should
go through the courts and present any evidence of wrongdoing that they have. So
for now the commission says it stands by its results and the results that it's
read out today are the official ones. What's the mood in the country? Do people
believe what they're being told? Obviously these announcements come quite late
at night here in Nigeria, so many people are not quite aware. Those who are
aware I think are sceptical. There's already natural distrust in Nigeria in the
electoral system because the country has a history of vote buying and rigging.
Walking through the streets of Lagos and talking to people, I think everyone
feels very confused as to why the results have come out this late and that's led
to a lot of mistrust definitely. Myoni Jones. The repercussions from the 2020
presidential election are continuing to echo around US politics. This week the
media magnate Rupert Murdoch admitted that some of his news anchors at Fox News
were endorsing the idea that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from
Donald Trump and said they were wrong to do so. The admission has caused
widespread astonishment. I spoke to our North America correspondent Peter Bowes.
You know, given the scale of the controversy surrounding Donald Trump's false
claims following the election, it's certainly very surprising that Rupert
Murdoch, the chairman of the media empire that owns Fox News, the conservative
leaning news network, that he now acknowledges that some of the station's
presenters endorsed the idea that the election had been stolen from the former
president even though they at Fox News and Mr. Murdoch himself understood it not
to be true. And perhaps even more surprising is that Mr. Murdoch is
acknowledging in this sworn deposition that he's given that at the time he could
have attempted to rein in those TV hosts, but he failed to do it. He said with
hindsight he would have liked the station to have been stronger in denouncing
false claims. And this emerged as part of a defamation case brought by Dominion,
the company that ran the electronic voting machines. Yes, Dominion Voting
Systems, they say Fox News, maligned its reputation during the coverage of the
2020 election. This is a voting technology firm that says those false and
malicious rumors about voter fraud were detrimental to its business and it is
holding Fox News accountable to the tune of a whopping $1.6 billion. Now Fox
News has argued that the comments are protected under the constitutional right
to free speech and that it was only reporting on Mr. Trump's allegations and not
supporting them. Fox has also argued that the lawsuit mischaracterizes the facts
by cherry-picking soundbites, omitting key context and mischaracterizing the
record. So where's this going to go? What will it mean? Well, there is a long
way to go with this. It's a complicated legal case and in order to prove
defamation, the company would successfully have to argue that Fox presented this
false information and did so knowing that it was untrue. And it's a delicate
legal question. Can Fox be held liable for airing false claims? For their part,
Fox's lawyers have said that Dominion has produced zero evidentiary support for
what they call its dubious theory that high-level executives at Fox chose to
publish and broadcast or played a direct role in the creation and publication of
false election lies. So it is going to be quite a trial. It's due to begin in
the state of Delaware in April. Peter Bowes. President Biden's special envoy on
climate, John Kerry, is in Brazil to help find a way to preserve the Amazon
rainforest. In recent years, during the presidency of Jair Bolsonaro,
deforestation rose sharply as the then president promoted development over
preservation. But Brazil now has a new president, Lula da Silva, who's been a
vocal supporter of protecting the rainforests. Mr. Kerry has been speaking to
the BBC about how the US could help Brazil. My colleague James Reynolds began by
asking him why the US was offering so much less money than some other donor
countries. We're not offering so little. That's only one piece of the mosaic of
what we're going to be contributing to this effort. We will be mobilizing. We
are mobilizing right now. Philanthropies, companies, countries, private sector
sources. The 50 million is just a down payment on our commitment to be part of
the Amazon fund. But in our system of government, the president has to, for
public money, get the Congress to agree to an allocation. There is legislation
in the Senate, Republican and Democrat sponsored alike, for about $4 billion.
There's $9 billion in a House piece of legislation. But that has to be passed,
and there's no guarantee that it will be. So we're proceeding to do a number of
things for a multilateral development bank, reform efforts to be able to provide
more concessionary funding, using the voluntary carbon market as a source of
funding. And the president is going to be fighting for money from the Congress.
So there are many different sources that are going to be cobbled together here,
including, obviously, other nations in the world. Mr. Secretary, is the future
of climate change policy where you are in Brazil? Or is it actually here in the
United States, in the state of Florida, where Bolsonaro, Trump and DeSantis are
all making degrees of effort to take national office? They would have very
different climate policies from yours. Well, we already saw the climate policies
of President Bolsonaro and certainly of President Trump, who pulled out of the
Paris agreement. But I believe the world has made a decision now. This is not
something that one person in one country in politics or otherwise is going to be
able to turn around. Now, Ford Motor Company and General Motors are not going to
spend billions as they have to transform their factories. And then all of a
sudden, because someone else is elected, they're going to turn around and say,
oh, we have a different view of the economic future. That's not happening, not
in the United States, not anywhere in the world. Are people going to suddenly
turn away from the science and the facts that are dictating that we have to deal
with this crisis? John Kerry, you're listening to the BBC World Service. Our
main news rescue workers are scouring the wrecked carriages of a passenger train
in Greece, which collided with a cargo train killing at least 29 people.
President Zelensky has issued a stark warning about the weeks long Russian drive
to encircle and capture the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut. In his nightly
address, he said President Putin's forces were shattering anything that could be
used to shield the city's defenders from the onslaught. The most vulnerable
front line is around the city of Bakhmut. This morning, our main general
reported that in the last few days, about 800 enemy fighters have been killed in
his region alone. Russia doesn't count the cost, simply sending more and more
people in constant assaults on our positions. The intensity of the fighting is
only increasing. I asked our reporter, Pierre Vickery, how close the Russians
were to taking control of the city. Well, it's very difficult to be absolutely
certain. But what is certain is that slowly, slowly, the Russians are making
progress. I think you can get an idea of how difficult the situation is for the
Ukrainians by the vehemence of President Zelensky. A few weeks ago, he was
saying it was difficult, it was manageable. Now he's saying that it's only a
town. I think all of that indicates that the period of Ukrainian resistance in
Bakhmut may be coming to an end. Why are the Russians so determined to capture
Bakhmut? They're desperate for victory. They haven't had one on the battlefield
since July. And that was long before the Ukrainian counteroffensive that took
back places like Khariv, Kherson, and some of the other towns that were being
contested. Putin needs something. They have poured so much treasure, have lost.
We're getting reports of up to 800 to 1,000 Russian dead a day. It's just almost
like a First World War situation. Russia desperately needs a victory. And even
if it's just the ruins of a town, I've seen pictures of Bakhmut. There's hardly
anything left there. That will still go down as a win. So where does the war go
from here? Well, at the moment, the Ukrainians are in a defensive mode. They're
trying to absorb a Russian offensive that doesn't seem to have a huge amount of
energy. Success is being measured by advances of a few metres a day. What we
expect to come is a Ukrainian counteroffensive. But that can't really start
until they start getting the weapons that they have been promised, the tanks,
the longer distance artillery pieces. And then one expects Ukraine to try and
cut a line across from Melitopol, Kherson, attack Crimea or put Crimea under a
defensive position. And then the chemistry of the war might start to change. So
that's what we expect within the next four weeks. Pierre Vickery. Sydney has a
famously vibrant gay scene, and this year's Pride is coinciding with a big
conference on human rights for LGBTQ people. Organisers say it will highlight
the horrific abuse of people in 70 countries where being gay is illegal. The
conference brings together dozens of Australian and international experts. Phil
Mercer sent this report from Sydney. Sydney World Pride! Half a million people
are expected to attend Sydney World Pride. There has been significant social
change in Australia over the years. Marriage equality laws were passed in 2017,
and the age of consent for homosexual and heterosexual sex is the same. But in
dozens of other countries, being gay is illegal. Discrimination and abuse are
the focus of a three-day human rights conference that's one of the centrepieces
of the festival in Sydney. Anna Brown, the chief executive of Equality
Australia, an advocacy organisation, says homophobia is rife. Around the world,
we see LGBTIQ plus people criminalised because of who they are or who they love.
There's still 70 countries that criminalise same-sex sexual acts. And we need to
make sure that as a community we move forward together. So ending conversion
practices that try and tell LGBTIQ people that we're somehow disordered or
broken, protecting LGBTIQ people seeking safety and asylum, First Nations
justice, and responding to these increasing threats to trans and gender diverse
inclusion, including in places like Australia, the US and the UK. World Pride
promotes LGBTQ rights around the world. It was first staged in Rome in 2000 and
has also been held in Jerusalem, London and Madrid. The next festival will be in
Washington DC in two years' time. Phil Mercer. Before we come to the sports
news, new analysis suggests that a brisk 11-minute walk a day could lower the
risk of diseases or early death. That's half the amount of daily exercise
recommended by some health agencies, including the NHS here in Britain. A
detailed re-examination of previous research led by Cambridge University
concluded that one in ten premature deaths could be prevented. Our health
reporter, Philippa Roxby, has more details. Current NHS advice is to do at least
150 minutes of moderate physical activity a week, such as riding a bike, walking
fast or playing tennis. But the analysis suggests only one out of three people
manage this. Looking at hundreds of previous studies, the researchers discovered
there were significant health benefits if people exercised for even half the
recommended time. They calculated that being active for 75 minutes a week could
help prevent one in 20 cases of cardiovascular disease and one in 30 cases of
cancer, and lower the chances of dying early. Philippa Roxby. Now, as promised,
Richard Newman is here with the sport. Thank you, Alex. We'll start our round-up
in England with the FA Cup. And the Championship side, Blackburn, knocked out
the 2021 winners, Leicester, 2-1 to reach the quarter-finals. Leicester manager
Brendan Rodgers took the blame for the result and says it was a competition that
they wanted to go far in. This was a great opportunity for us. Playing at home,
even though it was a good side, Blackburn, and doing very well in the league.
You're a Premier League team. You should have the qualities to get through the
night like this here. So, really disappointing for our supporters and for
ourselves. Well, the Manchester City head coach Pep Guardiola praised Phil
Foden's work ethic after the England midfielder scored twice in a 3-0 win at
Bristol City. Foden's only recently returned to the first XI, having been out of
form since the World Cup. In the last two games, I've been back to myself,
looking a lot sharper than I did. It feels good when you score. It gives you the
confidence. I'm just here to try and help the team as much as possible and just
trying to work hard. Fulham are into the quarter-finals for the first time since
2010, after beating Leeds 2-0. While Brighton moved a step closer to the semis
by winning 1-0 at Stoke. In Italy, Paul Pogba made his first appearance for
Juventus since returning to the club last summer during a 4-2 derby win over
Torino in Syria. Cremonese got their first league victory of the whole season,
beating Roma 2-1 to move off the bottom of the table. Jose Mourinho was sent off
for Roma. In cricket, India won the toss and they're batting first in the third
test with Australia in indoor. A short while ago, they were 27 without loss.
India are 2-0 up in the four-game series. So a win would wrap up an overall
victory with a match to spare. South Africa resume on 314 for 8 on day 2 of
their test with the West Indies. While England, without their players who've
been on the test tour of New Zealand, start a one-day international series in
Bangladesh in a couple of hours. And the Milwaukee Bucks have extended their
winning run in the NBA to 15 matches after Yanis Antetokounmpo scored 33 points
in a 118-104 win over the Brooklyn Nets. Richard, thank you. Now, how safe is it
to have TikTok on your phone? That's a question many people are asking after a
growing list of governments and other official bodies have told their staff to
remove the app from their work phones. That list currently includes parts of the
European Union, the Canadian government and the White House. The reason? TikTok
is owned by a Chinese company. Here's our security correspondent, Gordon
Carrera. It's been a wildly successful app spreading around the world. And one
of the reasons it's been so successful is because of the way in which it
understands its users. It knows what they're interested in and knows how to feed
them more videos to match those interests. And it's precisely that strength,
it's understanding, it's reach, which worries some security officials. Now, one
concern is that it could be used to collect sensitive data to track and
understand people. And that's why what we've seen in the last few days is
governments asking their officials not to use it on official devices. So that's
the concern, basically, of a kind of espionage. Now, it's worth saying other
social media apps also collect large amounts of information. But, of course,
they're not owned by a Chinese company. And as well as the fear of the Chinese
state somehow extracting data from devices, there's also the fear that it could
somehow influence what's going into those devices to shape the information going
in, to somehow influence the way people think. Now, it's worth saying these are
hypothetical risks. There's not really evidence that they've actually come to
pass so far. And the company itself says it hasn't happened and it won't happen,
that these bans are political theatre. Gordon Carrera. Finally, police in Peru
have made a macabre discovery. Officers were on patrol in a park in the southern
city of Puno when they saw a man with a mummy, which is believed to be between
600 and 800 years old. With more, here's the newsroom's Daniel Mann. Julio Cesar
Bermejo, who was with his friends, had been carrying the pre-Hispanic mummy in a
cool bag, which he used to keep food to take to people's homes when he was a
delivery driver. The mummified human was wrapped in bandages. Mr Bermejo, who is
26, even has a name, Juanita. I take care of her. I maintain her. She's like my
spiritual girlfriend. He adds, at home she's in my room. She sleeps with me.
However, a specialist at Peru's Ministry of Culture says, it's not a Juanita,
it's a Juan, as the mummy was a man who was at least 45 years old when he died.
The ministry has now taken possession of the remains, with the aim of protecting
and preserving, it says, this heritage. Mr Bermejo claims that his father
brought the mummy home almost 30 years ago and denied that he was trying to sell
it. Rather, he took it to the park last Saturday because his friends wanted to
see it. An official said that Mr Bermejo will remain in custody while the case
is being investigated. And that is a wrap for this edition of the Newsroom, with
me, Alex Ritson. I'll be hearing from scientists trying to unravel a condition
with around 200 symptoms. Long Covid is a health crisis. And finding out what
the latest research on some sufferers is showing. When we exercise participants
and we walk them up and down just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the
end, their blood looks like they've run the London Marathon. Depression,
psychosis, sleep disturbances are mostly reported by women. The Long Haul of
Long Covid. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. This is the BBC World Service. My name's
Hannah Ajala and I'm investigating online romance scams around the world. I'm on
a quest to find a woman whose stolen photos are the bait in catfishing schemes
used to trick victims into relationships. Where is Janessa Brazil? Does anybody
know? In Episode 5, I meet Baba, a shock jock radio host who says he can help.
Join me for Love Janessa after the news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. A late night
collision between a passenger train and a cargo train in central Greece has
killed at least 29 people and injured more than 80 others. Rescue workers have
been combing through the derailed wreckage to find survivors. Fire officials
said the first two carriages on the passenger train had completely disintegrated
in the crash, which also caused a large fire. Nigeria's governing party
candidate, Bolotinibu, has been declared the winner of Saturday's disputed
presidential election. He won with almost 9 million votes ahead of his main
rival, Atiku Abubakar. Two opposition parties said the vote was a sham and have
called for new elections. Ukraine's President Zelensky says the International
Criminal Court has a historic role in bringing about justice for crimes
committed by invading Russian troops. He was speaking after meeting the ICC's
top prosecutor. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last remaining independent
media outlets, Mademassa, are to be tried. They're charged with offending
legislators from a party supporting the president. President Putin has banned
the use of non-Russian words in official situations and in government
publications. Words much used include blogger, meeting and talk show. The US
Supreme Court has had arguments over the legitimacy of President Biden's plan to
give loan relief to millions of students. Six Republican-controlled states argue
Mr. Biden is exceeding his powers. Researchers in Russia say they've discovered
the earliest known insects covered in pollen, dating from about 280 million
years ago. They found the fossils of erie-like creatures in a lagoon. And police
in southeast Peru have discovered a mummy, believed to be at least 600 years
old, inside of the cool bag of a food delivery worker he denied trying to sell
the mummy. BBC News. Hello, I'm Hannah Ajala. And before we start, please note
this series contains adult themes. Behind every romance scam, there's the bait.
In Love, Janessa, from the BBC World Service and CBC podcasts, I investigate the
murky and surprising world of online romance cons, also known as catfishing, and
embark on a search for the woman whose stolen images are being used to lure in
countless victims around the globe. I'm an offensive person, so you have to know
that going into this, please. I tell people, don't Google me. My name is Bubba
the Love Sponge and don't Google me because it's not good. I've been trying to
reach Bubba the Love Sponge for weeks, and yes, I have searched him online.
We've called dozens of numbers, sent emails and messages to every account we
could find, and spent hours watching episodes of Bubba's controversial talk show
online. And now here he is, on a video call with my producers and me. Hi
everybody, how are you? There's a lot riding on this interview with Bubba. How's
it going? It's going great. I had the day off today, so I kind of slept in, so I
probably sound a little groggy. We really appreciate your time, because this has
been something that I've been working on since last year, and what a story. And
you guys don't even know half of it. Like, I live with Janessa, the Janessa
Brazil. I have hundreds of these stories. He lived through some of the scammer
drama with her, and tried to explain it to me. And tried to expose the fake
relationships live on air, one scorned lover at a time. While Janessa seems to
have left Morning Radio behind, given their history, I'm pretty sure Bubba will
know where she's landed. The radio host, known for his provocative content, has
a wide smile. He's holding his phone close to his face, so his flat-brimmed cap
takes up most of the screen. I hope I can add some insight for you guys. Bubba
was in the news a lot a few years ago because of his association with Hulk
Hogan, a retired professional wrestler. Bubba considered Hogan his best friend.
But then came a sex tape featuring Hogan and Bubba's now ex-wife. The tape was
recorded at Bubba's home, stolen from his office, and made public by Gawker, a
wildly popular gossip site. Hogan ended up winning a multi-million dollar
defamation lawsuit. Gawker Media was bankrupted. And while the lawsuit was going
on, Bubba lost his job. So if anyone knows what it's like to have personal
images get away from you, it might be Bubba. He holds the key to unlocking the
mystery of Janessa Brazil. At least for me. Bubba and Janessa were roommates a
few years back when she lived in Florida and co-hosted his daily radio show. It
was one of those episodes that reignited my search for Janessa and led me here
today. From the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts, this is Love Janessa. The
story of my wild quest to find the woman whose face and body is the bait used in
catfishing schemes around the world. Episode 5. Bubba. I'm not sure where Bubba
has taken the call. The room is dark with a bank of red lights behind him. But
that question can wait. I want to dive right in. I start to ask myself a few
questions. I want to dive right in. I start to ask myself a few questions. But
he's gone. Bubba's just dropped. After a few tense moments, Bubba's back and
hasn't missed a beat. OK, there I am. OK. I love your accent, by the way. Are
you from UK? Yes, born and raised in East London. When I hear a British accent,
I love it. It's refreshing from the standard stupid American accent I have to
hear all the time. Yours has lots of character. I tuned into your show,
actually, over the weekend. The subject area was really fascinating. It was
about doing a number two. Yeah, so I say a lot of crazy stuff. And sometimes
that gets him in trouble. Over the years, Bubba's been fined by the Federal
Communications Commission in the US. Several times for airing indecent material.
Could you give us an intro about what you do in your career? Well, I'll kind of
give you an abbreviated version of it because I've been doing radio for 35
years. So, you know, I started radio as just a little radio guy in 1986 in a
little town in Indiana. And, you know, when you first start out, it's kind of
like the minor league baseball system where you go from one small city to
another small city. You eventually get a bigger city and that's where you can
kind of make bigger money and have a bigger audience. And then comes syndication
and all that kind of stuff. And I eventually ended up in Tampa, Florida in 92.
And I was kind of the anchor of being the wildest guy on the radio. I had things
like Redneck Mondays where I made fun of rednecks. I had Lesbian Tuesdays. And I
caught a lot of crap for that. But my argument back was, so you're mad at me
because I am paying homage to lesbians. And that shut them all down. By now, you
probably understand why Bubba warned me at the start of our interview. He likes
to push boundaries. That's his brand, really. It's not hard to understand why
Bubba attracts all kinds of attention. Over the decades, he's received many
complaints. But he's also gained legions of fans who form the Bubba Army. Oh,
the Bubba Army is like a religious cult. They do anything for me. My show is
funded by my listeners, oddly enough. So, yes, I've been so fortunate to be able
to establish somewhat of a global thumbprint, enough to be able to make a living
on doing what I still love, which is radio. I'm going to get to my questions
about Janessa in a minute. But first, I want to know how Bubba the Love Sponge
got his name. He was born Todd Allen Clem in Warsaw, Indiana. Growing up, I've
always kind of been a bigger kid. I played football and stuff, and I was always
Bubba, Bubba Clem. When he started working in radio, a colleague noticed how
much Bubba appreciated the attention of his female fans. So we were on the radio
the next day, and this radio guy was like, coming up next, Bubba Clem. But I saw
him at a party a few nights ago, and he was soaking up love like a love sponge.
Well, it eventually stuck, and I used it all my career. And then I changed it
legally because I ran politically. I ran for sheriff here in Tampa. But I wanted
my name to appear as Bubba the Love Sponge on the ballot. Sheriff Love Sponge.
He didn't win, but that would have been an interesting chapter. My driver's
license and my passport and everything says Bubba the Love Sponge Clem. And
people think I'm being a real smartass. And when I got married, my wife was Mrs.
Bubba the Love Sponge Clem. I guess the love sponge is actually my middle name.
But I just tell everybody I'm Bubba Clem. Partway through our interview, he
suggests we take a tour of his studio. I can now see the lights in the
background are part of a soundstage. Can you see the stage back there? Oh, yes,
I can. I actually have a shower in my studio. Hold on, let me show you. Oh, wow.
OK, it's actually huge. Yeah, it's a very big space. We have bands and stuff on
the stage. You can't do some of the stuff I used to, you know. I decide not to
ask him to elaborate about some of that stuff they used to do. I'm also keen to
get to the reason for this call to find out more about Janessa. Let's just go
back to the beginning. How did you meet Janessa Brazil? I met Janessa in New
York at Howard Stern Studios. I just thought, oh, my God, she's so stunning. She
was not really a porn star. She had her own website, her members-only website.
She was married at the time, but I found out that they lived in the Tampa area.
So we got her information. As soon as we got back to Tampa, we had her on the
show. Then she ended up kind of being a regular. We'd have her on every few
weeks. I have been friends with her since then. And there was a period of like,
I think 2019, she actually lived with me. She was also a co-host on my show for
about a year. Baba's affectionate nickname for her during that time was J-Dog.
And he confirmed that Janessa is in fact a stage name. But her real name is
Vanessa. And that's out. That's not like a secret or nothing. At this point, I'm
reminded of both Simon and Roberto, the men we've talked to who believe they had
been in contact with the real Janessa Brazil. Both of them said the real
Janessa's name was Vanessa. But I knew her as Vanessa privately. You know, when
she was on the air, she would be Janessa. And I'd always slip up. I'd either say
one or the other. If we were in public, I would say, hey, Janessa, when I was
supposed to say Vanessa and then vice versa on the air. To someone that's never
met her, like me, for example, how would you describe her personality? I would
say beautifully sassy. But, you know, the expression that beautiful women have
insecurities and issues, you know, certainly is appropriate and not weird or bad
ones. It's just that sometimes she would get down on herself a little bit just
because I don't think that she necessarily, as she as Janessa gets older, really
wants to be in this space anymore. You know, I think she just turned 40. So I
think she would like to distance herself from that life, so to speak. Maybe this
explains why Janessa seemingly vanished a few years ago. Her digital footprint
had become an archive of old posts and images. But according to Bubba, she was
taking stock, preparing to shed her cam girl skin and start over. I think her
being on my show for a year was kind of a segue out of porn, but yet still in
entertainment. She was literally just a co-host, a woman's perspective on a man-
skewing show, which was refreshing. So it was a very sad day when she left. And,
you know, I wish she was still here. So where did she go? And will Bubba be able
to help me find her? You're listening to Love Janessa from the BBC World Service
and CBC podcasts. The more Bubba talks, the more I want to understand who
Janessa is and what her connection to the murky world of catfishing might be.
She's got a pretty smile, but she's tough. I now know she's a woman in the
process of creating a new life. A woman with a complicated past. A woman with a
dynamic personality and big ambitions. Both Roberto and Simon thought they'd
connected with a woman who'd lost her sense of self. But the more I learn, the
less that sounds like the real Janessa. There are still pages missing in her
story. Like why did she end up living with Bubba and co-hosting his radio show?
She was having issues with this boyfriend, and her and her husband got a divorce
years ago. And so she was kind of on her own. In Florida, Florida has always
been Janessa's security blanket. She has established a ton of great friends down
here. She lived here for, I think, well over 10 years. So Florida's kind of
always been her bounce back. So she called me, and I obviously had some space
and wasn't dating anybody at the time. And so I'm like, yeah, why don't you come
live with me? We'll hang out, and I'll try to incorporate you, if I can, on the
show. So that's kind of how it went down. What kind of friends was she to you?
She was a very close friend that I could have any type of conversation. And we
spent many a dinner talking about spirituality and her parents and her mother
and her trials and tribulations. And I knew a lot of her back story. We became
very, very close. I wondered if any of these dinner table conversations ever got
onto the topic of the romance scammers using her image. From the day that I met
her and started hanging out with her and her husband, you know, her husband
would be like, oh my God. I spent half my day answering emails from men who sent
$600 to a person who is describing themselves as Janessa. And I have to assure
them that, one, I'm not liable for that, and two, it's not us. I quickly found
out that people would take her image and then just start portraying themselves
as her for men to send her money. God, I just don't understand how gullible some
of these men are. Baba says he often receives letters and messages from men who
have been scammed. She has to be one of the most catfished images, just because
I get catfishing things weekly from men that think that her and I are still, you
know, hanging out, trying to say that I've been scammed. By your friend and what
are you going to do about it? He says victims and their lawyers come to him for
answers, information and sometimes for restitution. The one that I just got last
week was an attorney from, is it Ghana? And it said, I know that you have
connections to Janessa and she has scammed my client out of like 180,000 euro or
whatever. Ghana enters the narrative again, only this time, according to Baba,
it's a Ghanaian lawyer reaching out to get more information about Janessa. His
client has allegedly been scammed by people using her images too. Sakawa boys
are not part of this conversation. Just another angry letter asking for answers
that won't be found. But many of the writers are convinced Janessa is benefiting
somehow. It reminds me of the woman who called into Baba's radio show asking for
help. Her husband had been reeled in by a fake Janessa. We had one guy from
Canada call in and he thought that he was talking to a woman that was Janessa.
And Janessa's like, well, you're talking to me now. Like, this is me. And
they're like, oh, no, this isn't the woman I'm talking to you. And they were
telling me and Janessa that our Janessa was fake and that indeed we were being
catfished. But meanwhile, I had the real one here with me. This whole catfishing
world, I don't even think people can really wrap their head around it. Janessa
was just like, see, this is what I go through on a daily basis, because at the
end of the day, whether it's the disgruntled wife or the guy that is, you know,
sent three thousand dollars. If by chance they happen to get a hold of the real
Janessa, they really are not happy with her. And in a lot of instances, they
want their money back. She feels horrible about it. She hates it. She wishes
that these images weren't out there and stuff. But, you know, the expression
they say when you put something on the Internet, it's up forever. You know, even
if you delete it, it's there. Despite all of the stress and negative attention,
Bubba says Janessa knows how to shield herself from drama. He thinks her
resilience comes from experience. She had a very tough life growing up in
Brazil. And, you know, I guess after the first hundred of these catfishing
things, she kind of is very resilient. And for the people that do contact her,
she's always super apologetic and stuff, but she's learned how to kind of
compartmentalize. And she knows that that world is going to always exist. You
know, even when she's 70, there'll be people using that image to shake down
younger people. If it wasn't so depressing, it would be funny to think of
scammers using pictures of Janessa in her 20s years from now, when she's a
senior citizen. Considering how close you were to her as well, would you say
that you genuinely see her as the victim? Well, you know, I do see her as a
victim. But, you know, she did take those pictures. She did have a very public
website that leaned, you know, sexually. And she takes a little responsibility
for those images being out there. If she was happy Susie homemaker and didn't
participate in the industry that she did, perhaps this wouldn't be happening. I
mean, I think she's like 90 percent the victim. I've had some victims blame
Vanessa for putting her images out there in the first place. Others speculate
she's the one pulling the strings in the Janessa scam universe, bringing in
boatloads of money. But to hear Bubba say that Vanessa is only 90 percent the
victim surprises me. If, as he says, her pictures were stolen without her
knowledge, how could she be at fault? Then Bubba comes to her defense, drawing a
line between Janessa, the woman we see online, and Vanessa, the real woman
living a real life. Vanessa is a very conventional girl. So I've known about all
of her relationships and none of them involved, you know, trying to scam money
out of anybody. She's never participated in any of this. And if she needed to
ever make money or, you know, she always had a modeling opportunity or a web
show or, you know, she didn't need to to do that. Because let's not forget, it's
illegal as well. It sure is. But we know the legal system isn't great at
cracking down on romance scammers. Our call is winding down, so it's time to ask
Bubba one final question. The most important question of our conversation. Will
he help us get in touch with Vanessa? We hope that she is happy to speak with
us. Oh, I'll get it done. Her and I are so very close. I'll make that contact
today. Music to my ears. It makes sense to me that Bubba and Janessa seem to
understand each other in a way most people wouldn't. Each of them exists in an
ecosystem that's strange, even disturbing to some outsiders. The shock radio
world. The world of adult entertainment. They both gave themselves new names.
They both trade in unorthodox behaviours. In exposure. But don't many of us seek
out attention and exposure in some way? There are so many layers to this story
and I finally start to let myself believe that I'm getting closer to Janessa.
Especially when Bubba shares her email address. We quickly dash off a message to
Vanessa. A minute later, a ping. Has she already replied? No, it's a bounce back
message. The recipient's mailbox is full and can't accept messages now. We try
again the next day. No bounce back this time. And a few hours later, a response.
Sure, happy to chat. Janessa, at last! We set up a video call for later in the
week. But I should have known there would be more bumps in the road. So a 402
was when I responded to her email saying she was 15 minutes late. And then 420
was the email that I sent suggesting Zoom. Should we wait until 5? Yeah, yeah. I
was going to say give it 10 more minutes. Three video call invites. Three no-
shows. But then Vanessa responds to a text message and agrees to meet in person.
She invites us to her hometown in the eastern US. I'm in Nigeria at the time, so
my two producers travel from Toronto for the interview. Vanessa suggests a
trendy midtown Spanish restaurant at 8 o'clock. They have a waitlist, so my
producers take a seat at the bar. At 8.10, my producer Laura gets a text. I'll
be there in a minute. I'm wearing a pink hat. Two minutes later, a man comes
through the door and, you guessed it, he's wearing a pink baseball hat. Is it a
coincidence? Are pink hats having a fashion moment? Or maybe we're being taken
for a ride. I can't help but think of all the times Roberto was supposed to
speak with his Janessa. To see her on video, to meet her at the airport. All the
excuses she made. We're starting to understand how he felt. After weeks of
messaging, I've never seen or spoken to her. Yet here we are, in a Spanish bar
such a long way from home, operating entirely on faith. Faith that we've been in
contact with the real Janessa. So is this guy in the pink baseball hat a scammer
getting the last laugh? And then... A huge pink bolero hat comes through the
door. It's not an exaggeration to say that everyone looks up. All eyes are on
the striking woman in the tight white jeans and stiletto heels. When she raises
her face from under that pink hat and smiles, we've seen that face before. It's
her. Without a doubt. It's Janessa. Good morning! Hi! Wow! Hi! You brought
Hannah with us! Hi! And the surround, there we go. Hi, nice to see you! How are
you? How are you? Let me set the scene. I'm in Nigeria and that second voice is
my producer Laura in Vanessa's apartment in the US. I'm being carried around on
a laptop, getting the full 360 tour via video chat. I'm really good, thanks.
It's so good to see you. We're trying to figure out what we're going to do, like
the sound, but I think my bedroom's better. She looks relaxed. Black summer
dress, a cascade of thick black hair. He's coming up. I buzzed him in. Yeah, so
he should be coming up in a minute. Donuts and coffee are being delivered.
Great, so then... Yay, coffee! It's kind of fitting that even though we're
finally together, we're talking to each other digitally and yet it still feels
like a reunion, which is ridiculous, right? I mean, I don't know Vanessa at all.
All I know are the images of her alter ego, Janessa Brazil. I want to find out
exactly where Janessa ends and Vanessa begins. That's next time on Love,
Janessa. Love, Janessa is produced by Antica Productions and Telltale Industries
for the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts. I'm Hannah Ajela. Thanks for
listening. And on the Food Chain this week... Humans have been feeding verbs for
millennia, dropping scraps for our opportunistic feathered friends. More
recently, buying food for them, spending billions of dollars on seed mixes. So
why do we do it? I'm Ruth Alexander and I'll be exploring what it is about the
act of feeding that gives us so much pleasure. The Food Chain, Thursday at 11.30
and 23.30 GMT.