TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Femme, 198 Longwave, Digital Radio and on BBC Sounds. Hello, good evening. It's
10 o'clock. Welcome to The World Tonight. I'm Razia Iqbal. The US says it's
extremely concerned by rising levels of violence between the state of Israel and
the Palestinians. There is a local organisation of young people who cannot take
it anymore, who have very little to lose and above all, who are ready to die.
And those are obviously the most devoted people and also the most dangerous
people. We'll be live in Jerusalem. The UN General Assembly has voted
overwhelmingly for Russia to withdraw immediately from Ukraine. But not every
nation is joining what appears to be a united front. The war in Ukraine is a
very tragic event, but it's certainly not the only war in the world. And what
countries in the global south reject is the effort to make this into a global
war and make them pay something that Europeans should take care of. Also in the
programme. Turnip, coconut and pistachio puree. Grated turnip with turnip
leaves. Corn feed and pickled baby turnip. The Environment Secretary says people
could be eating homegrown turnips instead of Spanish salad. But the biggest
turnip farmer in the UK tells us why he's stopped growing them. That's all after
the BBC News read tonight by Tina Ritchie. The United Nations General Assembly
has voted overwhelmingly to demand that Russia immediately and unconditionally
withdraw its troops from Ukraine, a day before the first anniversary of Moscow's
invasion. 141 countries backed the motion, which has no legal weight, while
seven opposed it and 32 abstained, including one of Russia's staunchest allies,
China. Our correspondent Neda Taufik reports from New York. Nearly one year on,
positions on the war remain largely unchanged. This outcome is in line with the
voting records of past General Assembly resolutions on Ukraine. Nearly three
quarters of the world body has demanded Russia withdraw its troops immediately
and has called for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. With no end in sight
to the war, Ukraine and its supporters urged nations to stand up for the
principles enshrined in the UN Charter. Only a handful of Russia's staunchest
allies voted against it, including Belarus, North Korea and Syria. Those who
chose to abstain, including China, India and South Africa, all expressed their
view that the resolution would not help bring the parties closer to peace. They
said only dialogue and diplomacy would lead to a sustainable resolution of the
conflict. BBC News understands that an off-duty police officer seriously injured
in County Tyrone got up during the attack and warned children to run away.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell had been coaching a football practice
session shortly before he was targeted at a sports centre in Oma last night. He
remains in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Assistant Chief
Constable Mark McEwen described what happened to his colleague. John was
finishing up, he was accompanied by his young son, putting footballs into the
boot of his car. When two gunmen appeared, fired multiple shots, John ran a
short distance and as he fell to the ground the gunmen continued to fire shots
at him. At this time there were many other young people, children, awaiting
pickup by their parents and those children ran for cover in sheer terror. The
attack is being treated as attempted murder. Three men remain in custody.
Investigators are keeping an open mind about the motive but say the distant
Republican group, the new IRA, is the primary focus of the inquiry. The UN's
Middle East envoy has held meetings in Gaza as part of efforts to calm
escalating tensions between the Palestinians and the Israelis. A general strike
was held today by Palestinians after yesterday's Israeli raid in the occupied
West Bank left 11 people dead and more than 80 injured. From Jerusalem, here's
our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman. The raid in Nablus was the deadliest
by Israeli forces in the occupied West Bank for nearly two decades. Palestinian
leaders have demanded international protection given the number of civilians
among the dead and wounded. But the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
today praised Israeli forces and vowed, in his words, to hit terrorism hard. It
has raised further fears of spiralling violence, especially with the return of
Palestinian rocket fire and Israeli air strikes on the Gaza Strip during last
night. The United Nations envoy to the region, Tor Wennesland, travelled to Gaza
and met leaders from the Palestinian militant group Hamas, while the UN's
Secretary General, Antonio Guterres, said preventing further escalation must be
an immediate priority. Zakir Starmer has promised to shake up the way the
government works to boost economic growth. In a speech in Manchester, he set out
five missions Labour would prioritise were it to win power at the next general
election, including a pledge to make the UK the fastest growing economy among
the G7. What we need has become crystal clear. Growth. Economic growth is the
oxygen for our ambitions. So let me announce the economic mission of the next
Labour government. By the end of Labour's first term, we will deliver the
highest sustained growth in the G7. The disgraced Hollywood film producer Harvey
Weinstein has been sentenced to another 16 years in prison for raping and
sexually assaulting a woman in 2013. He'd already been serving 23 years after
being found guilty of rape almost three years ago. Our correspondent Sophie Long
reports from outside the court in Los Angeles. Harvey Weinstein's victim
tearfully told the court how she'd carried the trauma of what he did to her for
years, that she'd been a happy, confident woman who valued herself before he
brutally assaulted her in 2013. She said no prison sentence could erase the
damage, but the maximum term would restore faith in the justice system among
victims. Harvey Weinstein responded and said, I maintain my innocence. I do not
know her. She does not know me. Judge Lisa Lench handed down a 16-year prison
sentence to be served consecutively with the 23-year term he received for his
convictions in New York. At 70 and in ill health, the man who lived life in the
luxury Beverly Hills hotels where he committed some of his crimes will likely
die in prison. The Football Association has led tributes to John Watson, one of
the sport's most recognisable commentators, following his death at the age of
77. In a 50-year career with the BBC, he covered 10 World Cups and nearly 2,500
matches, many of them on Match of the Day. The FA said his iconic voice would
always be synonymous with the game. Barry Davis was the corporation's other main
voice of football in the 1970s, 80s and 90s. We agreed many times that our
longevity on the programme of Match of the Day was helped by the fact that we
had two very different styles. And I think you'd agree if you were a regular
watcher that that was the case. And it worked well for the programme and it
worked well for the two of us too. Barry Davis reflecting on John Watson, who's
died. Tina, thank you. You're listening to The World Tonight with Razia Iqbal.
There appears to be both a grim outlook and dangerous developments between
Israelis and Palestinians. Just yesterday, there was a fierce battle following a
raid in the West Bank city of Nablus, the Palestinian commercial centre by the
Israeli army, in which 11 Palestinians were killed and dozens more wounded.
Today, there have been efforts to calm the situation. The UN's Middle East envoy
has been meeting Hamas leaders in Gaza, where Israel carried out airstrikes
after Palestinian militants fired rockets at southern Israel. All of this is
happening in a particular context, the most right-wing nationalist ultra-
religious government in Israel, and a generation of young Palestinians who
continue to struggle living under both Israeli occupation and a Palestinian
leadership that many feel don't represent them. Some of them are turning
increasingly to violence. Let's begin with our Middle East correspondent, Tom
Bateman, who joins us from Jerusalem. Tom, paint the picture for us, given what
happened in Nablus yesterday, and also those rockets that were fired into
southern Israel and the Israeli response. Well, I headed up to Nablus in the
hours after the raid, in the hours after the Israeli troops had withdrawn. The
first place we went was one of the hospitals. Now, the most striking thing about
this, in terms of what we witnessed on the wards, was simply the number of
people wounded with injuries from live ammunition, from bullets. And that was, I
think, a result of the fact that this took place in the middle of the morning.
Now, often the Israelis will carry out these raids before dawn, or at least very
early in the morning, because, you know, it makes operationally for them, it's
far more straightforward, because more people are asleep, and there are fewer
people to come out, basically, you know, throw stones and rocks, and other
things at the Israeli jeeps, which is, you know, a frequent event, the
Palestinians trying to resist these raids. And to Israelis, they see this effect
as a form of terrorism, and they can and do actually shoot at the stone throes.
So, but in this case, they went in when the place was extremely busy, in the
middle of the morning, in the centre of the old city there. And I think that's
why we saw so many people wounded. I mean, it's several of the dead are
civilians, and many of those wounded are as well. And I spoke today to a
paramedic, Elias Ashkar, whose father, a 61 year old man, was among the dead.
Now, he was shot out, he'd been leaving a mosque, he was on his way to work as a
driving instructor. And there is footage filmed from across the road that shows
him simply among a group of people now appears the Israelis would potentially
try to shoot at stone throwers. That's according to one eyewitness. The 61 year
old man was among those killed. His son is a paramedic in one of the major
hospitals there. They've been doing resuscitation on two people who they
couldn't save who died. And when he pulled back the curtain to see the second
person was he saw it was his own father. So he discovered that his own father,
you know, was among the dead that he was potentially about to try to save with
resuscitation. So the mood among people in Nablus is extremely, you know,
depressed and concerned and worried about what this all means. And in the
meantime, further fears of a violent escalation. Tom, you've covered spikes and
escalations of conflict between Israelis and Palestinians. For some time now,
where would you place what's happened most recently in that? Well, if you look
at the, you know, purely in terms of numbers, we're at a situation, and this was
already the case towards the end of last year, where these Israeli raids, which
the Israelis say are to stem a rising tide of Palestinian armed attacks against
Israelis, but have taken many, many Palestinian lives, gunmen and civilians. If
you look at the sheer numbers, I mean, there hasn't been this kind of death toll
among Palestinians in the occupied West Bank since the days of the second
intifada or second Palestinian uprising from 2000 to 2005. The Israeli death
toll from Palestinian armed attacks hasn't been this bad in nearly a decade. So
things are in an extremely bad place. Now, what had happened earlier this week
is that the Americans, there seemed to be some signs that after one of the worst
attacks on Israelis earlier this last month, that the Americans, the United
Nations were trying to get some kind of understanding between the Palestinian
leadership, the official Palestinian leadership, and the Israelis, which would
effectively see the Palestinians sort of pull back at trying to get a United
Nations Security Council vote to censure the Israelis and the Israelis would
sort of step back or scale back some of these raids in the West Bank. But also
their precondition for that was that the Palestinian Authority regains control
in some of these key cities like Jenin and Nablus. That looked like it might
hold, but it simply now appears to be failing. Tom Bateman, Ham Middle East
correspondent, joining us live from Jerusalem. Let's turn to Gaza, which is run
of course, by the militant group Hamas and hear from the Palestinian journalist
Issam Adwan, who spoke to the World Service Programme News Hour from Gaza, where
he expects the violence to continue. I think it's creating an endless cycle of
violence in which the Palestinians are the ones who are dying the most, the
Palestinians, the ones who are suffering the most. With the mention that those
also, with whatever response that the Palestinians are having, there's always a
blame on the Palestinian side more than ever, I would say to the Israeli
government. Today, the Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Israel would
continue to act against perceived security threats to Israel. Israelis have
mourned amid the deadliest spate of Palestinian attacks in years. We always say
that we will settle accounts with those who attack Israeli civilians and IDF
soldiers and we have done so again. We will continue to take strong actions on
all fronts, near and far, in order to thwart our enemies' efforts to attack us.
Whoever tries to harm us will pay the price. A short time ago, I spoke to the
Israeli journalist Gideon Levy, who has reported for Haaretz, the liberal
Israeli newspaper, since 1982. I asked him what's behind the latest violence.
This is part of Israel's arrogance in the last months. It started in Jenin, by
the way, where they did a very similar raid at 7 o'clock in the morning, and
two, three weeks later, they go even farther and they are penetrating a city
like Nablus, a very vivid city, at 10 o'clock in the morning when everyone is
outside, and then they do this operation. They do it because they feel that they
can do it. And their target are particular groups of Palestinian men, gangs in
particular. Is that right? Yes. It's this organization in Nablus, which is a
very local organization, is not affiliated neither to the PA nor to the Hamas.
But what is the target? I mean, by the end of the day, one should ask, what did
they achieve? Okay, they killed two wanted people and they created another 200
wanted people in the future. Everyone who was witnessing this attack, I mean,
this is really a vicious circle, which never will get to its end if Israel will
continue to attack and attack. And the group that you're speaking of, they're
called the Lion's Den. And these are people whom the Palestinian Authority do
not have any control over at all. Is that correct? It's totally correct. But the
Palestinian Authority has very little control everywhere today. It is really a
dead walking man, I would say, the Palestinian Authority. It's not being taken
seriously in any place. In Nablus, in the West Bank, together with Jenin, there
is a local organization of young people who cannot take it anymore, who have
very little to lose, and above all, who are ready to die. And those are
obviously the most devoted people and also the most dangerous people. In the
context that you paint, where the Palestinian Authority has no control over
these groups, and the Israelis regard these young men as a potential security
threat to the state of Israel, that there is common ground between those two,
the PA and the Israeli state. With the Hamas and with other opposition
organizations, we had evidences in the past that the PA and the Israeli forces
did collaborate. Yes, there is a common ground. But on the other hand, you're
dealing with two unequal forces. While the PA is totally neutralized and is
becoming more and more irrelevant, Israel is still the only power around. And
fighting against those groups, by the way, in Nablus it's groups, in other
places it's just individuals who take the destiny in their hands. We had in the
last weeks attacks by teenagers, by certain year old children, because they feel
they have to do something. And these are groups that are hugely disaffected with
the Palestinian Authority as much as they are with the Israeli occupation.
Right. But their main object is obviously the Israeli occupation. I mean, they
dislike the Palestinian Authority, but they don't fight the Palestinian
Authority. They are fighting the occupation. This recent spate of violence, do
you see it as the beginning of the possibility of a third Intifada? Are there
comparisons to be made with the 1990s and the early 2000s? Not at all. And yes,
there is a sense of uprising. But there is not the infrastructure, which was in
the 90s and in the beginning of the 2000s. There is no leadership this time. The
Palestinians are much more divided. I mean, you can call it an Intifada, but it
will not go to the well established Intifada. It will be mainly a resistance
made by individuals. And this is very hard to fight. Israeli journalist Gideon
Levy. Now, if you want to a longer listen on this, our colleagues on the World
Service produce the Real Story podcast. Their latest episode is Why is violence
escalating between Israelis and Palestinians? It's available now on BBC Sounds.
The panel of experts delve into the history of the conflict and what possible
solutions there may be. To Northern Ireland now, where Detective Chief Inspector
John Caldwell is in a critical condition tonight after being shot multiple times
outside a sports complex. He was off duty and shot in front of his son and other
young people after a football coaching session in Oma, County Tyrone. Tonight,
the US State Department has strongly condemned the shooting. Three men have been
arrested and the focus of the police is a group called the New IRA. I've been
speaking to our Ireland correspondent Emma Vardy. She told me what we know about
the New IRA. Well, there's still several dissident Republican armed gangs who
operate in Northern Ireland, but the New IRA is known to be the largest and most
active of them, although they've been in the back foot over the last few years.
They were infiltrated by MI5. A number of their key leadership members were
arrested in a standing trial now, although that takes a long time to go through
the courts. But nevertheless, police will always tell you they remain an active
group. And, you know, part of their core beliefs is that police officers or UK
officials are legitimate targets for violence. Now, of course, that's a real
throwback to the days of old in Northern Ireland, back to the days of the
conflict known as the Troubles and the fringe, very small groups of violent
dissident Republicans that still operate today still believe in using a campaign
of violence to bring about a united Ireland by force, effectively get rid of any
British or UK governance of Northern Ireland. So those are their core aims. But
in reality, police often just described them today as criminal gangs who are
involved in organised crime. Now, there are attempted attacks that can be
thwarted by police, we hear about those from time to time, it is much more rare
these days, for any of their attacks to actually be carried out, many of them
actually fail, whether that's undercar devices, or improvised explosive devices
and things like that. So that's partly why today's attack is going to be a great
shock to the police service, a great shock to many people in Northern Ireland,
of course, because to a generation of people who do remember the days of
conflict, the Troubles, this evokes very dark memories. Three men have been
arrested for attempted murder. You mentioned that in some cases, the police
argue that these are criminal gangs. The motive of whether it was sectarian or
just criminal has not been established yet. Well, those lines can often be quite
blurred when it comes to the activity of violent dissident groups in Northern
Ireland. John Caldwell had a long career investigating many different murders,
many of those linked to dissident activity, and activity involving organised
crime. And he had, we understand, a number of threats made to him in the past,
but he wouldn't be alone in that. So would other sort of senior officers
involved in this kind of thing. And it's not yet clear if any of that is
actually relevant in the events that led up to this attack. But police are
making it very clear that the suspicion is very much falling on dissident
Republicans and particularly the new IRA. Our Ireland correspondent Emma Fardy.
Let's turn now to common or garden produce because the sales of some fruit and
veg have been limited by most of the country's largest supermarkets. The
shortage is being attributed to bad weather in Europe and Africa, according to
the government. And there is the issue of high electricity prices on produce
grown in greenhouses here and in the Netherlands. Asked about the shortage in
Parliament, the Environment Secretary, Therese Coffey, said it could continue
for another two to four weeks. Ms Coffey also said this, prompted by another
Conservative MP who said supermarkets were still importing too many products.
It's important to make sure that we cherish the specialisms that we have in this
country. A lot of people would be eating turnips right now rather than thinking
necessarily about aspects of lettuce and tomatoes and similar. But I'm conscious
that consumers want a year-round choice. And that is what our supermarkets and
food and growers, food producers and growers around the world try to satisfy.
Well, we thought we'd turn to a turnip farmer and found Richard Parry, farm
manager of Home Farm in Nacton in East Suffolk. Only he stopped farming turnips
six months ago. I used to grow pretty well all of the UK retail turnips. So I
used to grow a lot of turnips. I'm currently not growing any turnips as of about
six months ago. Indeed, people have coined you as the turnip king. Once upon a
time, yes. And now no longer, the crown has slipped. Why are you not growing
turnips? Predominantly struggling to get hold of labour and the costs of growing
the crop and the value we were getting in return from the supermarkets. Just
explain when that started to happen and the kind of impact that it's had on you
generally. Three, four years ago, it started to become a bigger problem. And the
last couple of years, it's just become really tough. And you made the decision
that it wasn't viable for you at all to grow turnips anymore. It wasn't viable
to grow. It was hard to get the labour to harvest the crops and the other
operations involved with growing the crop. And the consumption was steadily
declining as well. So we weren't getting sufficient volume to help keep some of
our costs under control. And what do you put that down to, the lack of people
being able to harvest the crop and then the lack of demand? It's a lot harder
now for us to source labour. Traditionally, it was a lot easier to get labour
through. From Eastern Europe, it is a bit harder now. There is now a source
scheme, a seasonal cultural wages scheme that is helping again. But the
structure isn't as easy as it was before. And people don't seem quite so willing
to want to come over here and work like they did five plus years ago. So when
you hear the environment secretary saying a lot of people would be eating
turnips right now, and you were one of the people that produced those turnips,
do you even think that that's true, that people are eating turnips as much as
they used to? I don't think people eat turnips like they used to. And it's not
perceived as a sexy product like some other things. And when you used to grow
turnips, did you used to eat them yourself? Yeah, I did. Yes. I used to cut them
relatively thinly and fry them in like a bit of garlic butter or something like
that and sort of lightly crisp them. So now you grow carrots and potatoes,
sexier vegetables? Carrots, potatoes, onions and other vegetables. They're first
of all vegetables that people have a better comprehension how to use them and
what they can do with them and cook, etc. But also from a farming perspective,
they need a lot less labour for the harvest or the operations of those crops as
in seasonal labour than something like a turnip or a salad needs. Richard Parry,
who used to be the king of turnips. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has brought
strong Western condemnation and sanctions, but there are many countries around
the world who have chosen not to join what appears to be a united front. Indeed,
many have balked at joining multilateral sanctions and have been reluctant to
censor Russia. As we were hearing on yesterday's programme, Beijing continues to
deepen its relationship with Moscow and there have been joint naval exercises
between Russia and South Africa. India has been criticised by the US for a
perceived cleaving to Moscow and many Latin American countries have rejected the
US request to donate their ageing Russian-made military kit to Ukraine. I've
been speaking about the possibility of a new non-aligned movement emerging with
Jorge Jaini. He is a former Chilean government minister and ambassador to China.
He's just co-written a book called The Active Non-Alignment Option. I began by
asking why Latin American countries are staying neutral in the war. The vast
majority of countries in Latin America and in Africa and Asia have condemned the
invasion of Ukraine by Russia. What they have not supported is the political and
economic sanctions proposed by the G7 against Russia and the efforts to make
this, what is a European war, into a global war. The war in Ukraine is a very
tragic event but it's certainly not the only war in the world. Its distinctive
character is that it takes place in Europe. When wars take place in Africa or in
Asia, somehow they are disregarded. They do not qualify as having the same kind
of significance that is attributed to the war in Ukraine. And what countries in
the global south reject is the effort to make this into a global war and make
them pay something that Europeans should take care of. Isn't the fallout from
Russia's invasion of Ukraine a global war? Doesn't that make it a global war?
The fact that we have seen the price of fuel go up in the way that we have, that
we've seen shipments of grain being prevented from being distributed and so on.
Many countries in the global south have been profoundly affected by this war.
Yes, of course. But the notion that somehow applying economic embargoes and
sanctions on Russia by countries, say, like Brazil. Brazil imports one fourth of
its fertilizers from Russia. It is a major agricultural exporter. So they
sacrifice its agricultural production for the sake of supporting Ukraine in this
European war. It is not obvious that that should be the case. Moreover, the
request by the United States and by Germany for countries in Latin America to
provide weapons to Ukraine obviously pushes these things to the limit. That
would mean that Latin America would take an active part in a European war in
which Latin American countries have no direct interest and there's no reason why
they should take part in it. Do you not accept, though, that this is about the
violation of the UN Charter, which is something that Chile has signed up to and
many, many countries in the world have signed up to and that in the end this is
about being on the right side of history? Well, yes, I fully agree. I condemn
the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, as do many countries in Latin America. Now,
there have been many other invasions in the recent past. The war that we're
seeing in Yemen, which has cost 250,000 lives in the past eight years, is being
waged with weapons provided by NATO countries to Saudi Arabia. Nobody has made a
big fuss on that, nor has anybody proposed that global embargo should be imposed
on Saudi Arabia. So it seems to me there's very much a double standard here at
play, that because a war takes place in Europe, the whole world should be
concerned and if wars take place elsewhere, well, they don't matter very much.
So you reject the rhetoric that has been coming out from the West and the United
States in particular and the US president this week that this is really a war
about autocracy versus democracy? The fact is that some of the largest
democracies in the world, like India, like Indonesia, like Brazil, are not
siding with the West. So this means that in fact the cleavage that is being
shown by the war in Ukraine is not one between democracy and autocracy. Do you
see this, the invasion of Ukraine and the way in which the countries in the
global south are talking about this particular conflict, do you see this as the
beginning of a new non-aligned movement for the 21st century? Very much so.
There is in fact a new momentum for the rise of such a movement and we are
seeing it in Latin America and now also in Africa and in Asia. And this is also
triggered by something that predated the war in Ukraine and that is what we call
the second Cold War that has arisen between the United States and China. And
that means that many countries are being pressured to take positions to side
either with Beijing or with Washington and what we say is that that should not
be the case. The country should put their own interests front and centre and
make decisions accordingly. Would you, would the people that you are talking
about in the global south back calls for a negotiated peace including Ukraine,
the country that was invaded, surrendering some captured territory to Russia?
Well, what it seems to me, what is becoming more and more apparent, there are
two stances in the issue of the war. There's one position that is to continue
the war as long as it takes to weaken Russia permanently. There's another
position that says that what must be done is to mediate and to look for a
peaceful solution. That is the position, for example, that President Lula of
Brazil has taken and that it seems to me is something that makes a lot of sense.
It seems to me that peace is a much more worthwhile objective than weakening
Russia permanently. That was Jorge Haini, a former Chilean government minister
and ambassador to China. Now, according to mountain rescuers, a fell walker is
lucky to be alive after getting lost in the Lake District. He was relying on
directions on his smartphone. The hiker had called for help at 6.30pm on Monday
but was not located until 2.30pm the next day. And by then he was hypothermic
with knee, leg and foot injuries. He was asked by the police to stay where he
was, but rescuers were unable to locate him. The Wazdel Mountain Rescue Team
said that they don't normally comment on rescues but said he was fortunate to
have been found alive and that Google Maps on smartphones are not suitable for
navigation on hills. They added that there was no substitute for a map and a
compass. So, have we lost the ability to read maps because of our reliance on
technology? Is it in fact dangerous? Let's speak to Heather Thompson, Director
of the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme for South West England. The DOE scheme
teaches young people expedition and adventure skills, of course, among many
others. And Ross Cady is Senior Mountain Safety Advisor for Mountaineering
Scotland. Welcome to you both. Ross Cady, what do you think? Dangerous to rely
on the phone? I think it's a very good question and very apt in this situation.
And I think it's, in this context, if I was just to answer just your very first
question, which is, yeah, if you're going to rely just on your phone, then
absolutely it can lead to sort of issues. What we're suggesting is you don't
just rely on your phone and there's lots you can do to back up your phone and
make sure it works properly. If you are choosing to do that. Yeah, I mean, the
issue of the battery running out, I guess, is one thing. But there is also the
issue of the kind of the lack of detail in a map on a smartphone that you
wouldn't have if you had a compass and a map with you. Yeah, so Mountaineering
Scotland did a survey of over 4,000 people and 87% of people, 87% said that they
used some form of electronic device to navigate. And of those, 40% said they had
issues and things. So we've issued out some guidance in the last couple of weeks
where if you're choosing to use your phone to navigate, then there are certain
things that we're kind of advising that people do to look after themselves and
to make sure that if they're using the phone, it works in the way they're
expecting. And one of those big things to kind of come back to the issue that
this is around, which is the mapping and the data, which is there are ways of
downloading proper maps that will look exactly the same as a map on a paper map
where you download it beforehand. And then all it is, is a map. So like an
ordinance, an OS map, an ordinance survey map. Yeah, absolutely. Full detail.
You can zoom in. It's actually really, really good. And it doesn't rely on data.
It doesn't rely on any form of signal. So it becomes a map on your phone that
you're reading. So you still need to read the map and it's just on your phone.
Okay, so that's a way around it. Let's turn to Heather Thompson. The Duke of
Edinburgh expeditions are designed to teach young people how to do the very
thing that these rescuers were saying was absolutely critical in this instance,
being able to read a map. Absolutely, yes. Part of their expedition planning,
young people need to undergo training over a period of time and they need to
learn the basic navigation skills to read a map and use a compass. And it's, as
we would have seen this situation, really important and it could save someone's
life. Indeed. So you appear to agree with the rescuers, but I mean, some would
argue that it's just sort of an outdated approach and that perhaps it's a good
idea to have the phone as well. Because one of the things that you do when you
send young people out on these expeditions is to take their phones away from
them. We don't take their phones away from them. I'm sure most groups actually
do have a phone. And for many situations, actually having a phone is very
useful. So we wouldn't necessarily advocate taking them away, but we'd ask them
not to rely on them because of the very reasons that they're not reliable. And I
think what's important is that young people can sort of prepare and get
themselves out of a situation should they need to. So, as you say, nothing beats
the actual physical map. But the problem is when you rely on a mobile phone, as
the gentleman was just saying, they're very good, there's some very good
applications on them, but actually you need to be able to adapt to the
situations that you're facing. The weather conditions can change very quickly
and batteries in this cold weather that we get can run out very quickly. And our
Duke of Edinburgh expeditions are really about giving young people that sort of
independence, leadership and teamwork skills that we want them to develop. And
actually getting them away from the phone is a wonderful opportunity for them to
experience the great outdoors because that's what we want to engage to. Do you
both agree that map reading is a skill, that everybody needs to learn how to
read a map, particularly when there aren't roads anywhere? Ross, Katie? Yeah,
absolutely. I mean, I'm obviously an advocate for learning to map read. I spend
a lot of my time teaching people to map read. I think it's a wonderful skill,
not just for hill walkers and mountaineers, but for everyone. And it's a
wonderful skill to have. What we're saying is that people are choosing to use a
phone to navigate or to watch their, to look at their map. And we're saying if
you're going to do that, then there are certain things you need to do to prepare
for that. Just like if you take a paper map out in the hills, you've got to put
it in a map case so it doesn't get wet. I mean, we've had people that need
rescuing because then paper map gets soggy because they didn't do something.
Right, something that's very, very basic. Heather Thompson, we must all learn
how to read maps properly. Absolutely. It's a great skill to have and it can
stand you in good stead at any point in your life. You never might know when you
might need it. So we definitely recommend it. And we encourage obviously all our
participants to learn how to read a map. So it's a great skill to have. Heather
Thompson, Director of the Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme for Southwest England
and Ross Cady, Senior Mountain Safety Advisor for Mountaineering Scotland.
Thanks for joining us both. On the eve of the first anniversary of the invasion
of Ukraine, President Zelensky has paid tribute to all those who have died since
February 24th last year. And in Russia, in another message today to mark
Defender of the Fatherland Day, the speaker said it was time to celebrate the
men and women who faithfully serve Russia, but not those who have committed what
he called the treacherous act of fleeing the country. Tens of thousands have, of
course, to escape last September's partial conscription. With rumours of more
call-ups ahead of a spring offensive, we're going to hear from two men opposed
to the war who avoided the draft but are still in Russia. Volodya is from
Buryatia, a region in eastern Siberia. He fled first to the woods and then to St
Petersburg to avoid the draft. He's now back in his home village. Dima is 33
years old from Moscow. In September, he hid in a village a few hours from Moscow
to avoid being sent to Ukraine to fight. He's now back in the capital. The
Waltonites' James Kumrasamy asked him what he was doing now. Many people feel
deceived, betrayed. I feel mostly that I didn't have a say in matters for many,
many, many years. But now I feel like it's time to say something. I'm still
thinking about joining Navalny's new resistance. This is Alexei Navalny, the
jailed opposition leader, his organisation. His organisation, yes. Anti-
corruption fund. As someone who opposes the war, how are you able to live at the
moment? What do you have to change about your life? Not talking to people who
obviously do support what's happening. Watching much less social media because
it's a battlefield of sorts. Focusing on my family. Right now I'm focusing on
finding a new job. And when you look for a new job, again, do you have to hide
your views on the war? Yes. Somewhere there is a mark about me being a Navalny
supporter. I want to bring Volodya in at this point. Volodya, tell us a bit
about yourself and your view of what's happening in Ukraine. It's horrible. It
was a year of horror. You can't even wrap your head around it most of the time.
Are you afraid that you will be called up for the war? Yeah. You just try to not
think about it that much. Dima was saying that he switches off from social
media, from the news, if you like. Is that something you've felt you've had to
do as well? Yeah, yeah, of course. It's almost a requirement if you want to keep
at least some resemblance of mental health. You can't watch it all, all the
time. Of the people that you are in contact with, friends, family, colleagues,
how many of them would you say feel the way you do about the war? Almost all of
my friends, almost all of my close circle think the same thing as me. They all
oppose the war. Half of my family opposes them too. So it's something. How have
you found it amongst your circle of friends and family, opinions about the war?
Relatives in the region, they support what's happening. More in the way of, yes,
the West is bad and they're causing us trouble, but we will prevail because it's
a good fight. I wonder, both of you, whether you watched the rally yesterday at
Luzhniki, where President Putin stood in front of this huge crowd with various
members of the armed forces alongside him, whether you watched that and what you
thought of it when you saw it? I'm still curious. Because his last speech, I
actually, like usually I wasn't angry. I actually was somewhat enjoying watching
it. Like, what are you talking about? Enjoying? Why enjoying? Such a joke, such
a travesty, something surreal. Like he's living in a completely different story
and world. It's an interesting way of looking at it. I wonder, Volodya, what do
you think? Did you see the rally at Luzhniki? The man is delusional. It's kind
of scary if he really believes all of that, all of what he's saying. Then we
have a delusional man in charge of our army and our nuclear rockets. And that's
a pretty scary thought. I want to just end by asking you both about the future.
Dima, you told us you're looking for a new job. How about your wife? You've got
a child as well, haven't you? How are they doing? It's terrifying, but they stay
by me. They feel like we can protect ourselves from the government. And what
about you, Volodya? In Buryatia, it's a region, one of the regions, I guess,
where more people have been sent to the front lines than from the big cities
like Moscow and St. Petersburg. You don't feel more vulnerable to mobilisation
there? If the second wave actually starts, I'll try to escape. I go back to St.
Petersburg because, yes, this region was heavily targeted in the first
mobilisation. It was pretty gruesome. And it was the time when I went to live in
the woods for a couple of weeks. There were people walking down the streets and
just catching all men that looked like they should be conscripted. So it was
nerve-wracking. So you would do that again? If you had news that a new
mobilisation was coming, you would just go and live in the woods? Yeah, I would
either live in the woods or I would go back to St. Petersburg. The government
doesn't want to raise concerns in big cities. Volodya and Dima speaking to James
Kurosami. One closing headline. 141 countries at the UN General Assembly have
backed a call for Russia to withdraw its troops from Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. That's The World Tonight. I'm Razia Iqbal. From me and everyone
else on the programme, a very good night. The studio engineers were Alison
Purcell-Davis and Lee Wilson. The editor, Emily Craig. Eugene is going to
Tatiana's name day celebration in tonight's reading of Eugene Onegin by
Alexander Pushkin. That's coming up in a moment. But now more epic content
closer to home. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC radio drama.
The huntsman now purposefully erected his footsteps. Analysing the most
groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive. It's intensely physical, this
room. He just took your wallet, sir. You can go to different places and tell the
stories from different points of view. Dramatic beats with me, Michael Simmons-
Roberts. Everything in British storytelling, film, television, owes so much to
radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, on Saturday night at 8. To 19th century
Russia now for Pushkin's novel in verse, Eugene Onegin. Some months after Onegin
rejected Tatiana's declaration of love, Lenski persuades him to come to her name
day celebration, assuring him it'll be a modest affair. And lo, with crimson
hand, Aurora leads forth from Morningdale's The Sun. And brings in merry mood
before her the name day feast that's just begun. Since dawn, Dame Lauren's near
relations have filled the house. Whole congregations of neighbour clans have
come in. Dreys, Kibitkas, Ritzkas, Coaches, Sleys. The hall is full of crowds
and bustle. The drawing room explodes with noise. With bark of pugs and maiden's
joys. With laughter, kisses, din and hustle. The guests all bow and scrape their
feet. Wet nurses shout and babies bleat. Then for a moment, chatter ceases as
mouths start chewing. All around the clink of plates and forks increases. The
glasses jingle and resound. But soon the guests are somewhat sated. The hubbub
grows more animated but no one hears his neighbour out. All laugh and argue,
squeal and shout. The doors fly back, two figures enter. It's Lenski with
Eugene. Oh dear, the hostess cries, at last you're here. The guests all squeeze
toward the centre. Each moves his setting, shifts his chair. And in a trice,
they seat the pair. Across from Tania, there they place them. And paler than the
moon at dawn, she cannot raise her eyes to face them. And trembles like a hunted
fawn. Inside her, stormy passions seething. The wretched girl is scarcely
breathing. The two friends' greetings pass unheard. Her tears well up without a
word and almost fall. The poor thing's raised her eyes. All, the poor thing's
ready to faint. But deep within her, will and strength of mind were working
still. And they prevailed. Her lips more steady. She murmured something through
her pain and managed somehow to remain. All tragico-hysteric moaning. All
girlish fainting fits and tears. Had long since set Eugene to groaning. He'd
borne enough in former years. Already cross and irritated by being at this feast
he hated, and noting how poor Tania shook, he barely hid his angry look and
fumed in sullen indignation. He swore that he'd make Lenski pay and be avenged
that very day. Exalting in anticipation, he inwardly began to draw caricatures
of those he saw. But tea is brought. The girls demurely have scarcely taken cups
in hand when suddenly, from ballroom doorway, bassoon and flute announce the
band. Elated by the music's bouncing, his tea and rum at once renouncing that
Paris of the local towns good Ptushkov to Olga bounds. To Tania, Lenski,
Harlikova, a maiden somewhat ripe in glow, my Tambov poet takes in tow.
Belyanyov whirls off Pustyakova. Then all the crowd comes pouring in to watch
the brilliant ballroom spin. Monotonous and mad procession, young life's own
whirlwind full of sound, each pair a blur in quick succession, the rousing waltz
goes whirling round. His moment of revenge beginning, Eugene with secret malice
grinning approaches Olga. Idly jests, then spins her round before the guests. He
stays beside her when she's seated, proceeds a talk of this and that. Two
minutes barely has she sat, and then their waltzing is repeated. The guests all
stare in mute surprise. Poor Lenski can't believe his eyes. He steers her,
gliding nonchalantly, and bending whispers her gallantly some common madrigal to
please, then gives her hand a gentle squeeze. She blushes in appreciation. Her
prim conceited face alight, while Lenski rages at the sight. Consumed with
jealous indignation, he waits till the mazurka's through, then asks her for the
dance he's due. But no, she can't. What explanation? Well, she's just promised
his good friend the next dance too. In God's creation! What's this he hears?
Could she intend... can this be real? Scarce more than a swaddler, and turned
coquette, a fickle toddler. Already has she marred the dance, and is ready to
dance. Toddler! Already has she mastered guile, already learned to cheat and
smile. The blow has left poor Lenski shattered, and cursing woman's crooked
course, he leaves abruptly, calls for horse, and gallops off. Now nothing
mattered. A brace of pistols and a shot shall instantly decide his lot. Though
pleased with the revenge he'd taken, Onyegin, noting Lenski'd left, felt all his
old ennui awaken, which made poor Olga feel bereft. She too now yawns, and as
she dances, seeks Lenski out with furtive glances. The endless dance had come to
seem to Olga like some dreadful dream, but now it's over. Suppers heeded, then
beds are made, the guests are all assigned their rooms from entrance hall to
servants' quarters, rest is needed by everyone. Eugene has fled, and driven home
alone to bed. The note was brief in its correctness, a proper challenge or
cartel. Politely, but with cold directness, it called him out, and did it well.
Onyegin, with his first reaction, quite curtly offered satisfaction, and bade
the envoy, if he cared, to say that he was quite prepared. Avoiding further
explanation, Zaretsky, pleading much to do, arose and instantly withdrew.
Eugene, once left to contemplation, and face to face with his own soul, felt far
from happy with his role. He could have shown some spark of feeling, instead of
bristling like a beast. He should have spoken words of healing, disarmed youth's
heart, or tried, at least. Too late, he thought, the moment's wasted. What's
more, that dueling fox has tasted his chance to mix in this affair, that wicked
gossip with his flair for gibes, and all his foul dominion. He's hardly worth
contempt, I know, but fools will whisper, grin, and crow. So there it is, the
mob's opinion, the spring with which our honours wound, the god that makes this
world go round. Convinced that Olga's heart was cruel, Vladimir vowed he
wouldn't run to see that flirt before the duel. He kept consulting watch and
sun, then gave it up, and finally ended outside the door of his intended. He
thought she'd blush with self-reproach, grow flustered when she saw his coach,
but not at all. As blithe as ever, she bounded from the porch above and rushed
to greet her rhyming love like giddy hope, so gay and clever, so frisky carefree
with her grin, she seemed the same she'd always been. Once more in solemn, rapt
attention before his darling Olga's face, Vladimir hasn't heart to mention the
night before and what took place. It's up to me, he thought, to save her. I'll
never let that foul depraver corrupt her youthful heart with lies, with fiery
praise and heated sighs, nor see that noxious worm devour my lovely lily, stalk
and blade, nor watch this two-day blossom fade when it has yet to fully flower.
All this, dear readers, meant in fine, I'm dueling with a friend of mine.
Impatient but in no great panic, Vladimir waited near the dam. Meanwhile,
Zaretsky, born mechanic, was carping at the millstone's cam. Onyagin, late, made
explanation. Zaretsky frowned in consternation. —Good God, man, where's your
second? Where?—induels a purist doctrinaire. —My second,—said Eugene
directly.—Why, here he is, M. Guillault, a friend of mine, whom you, correctly,
will be quite pleased to greet, I know. Though he's unknown and lives obscurely,
he's still an honest chap, most surely. Zaretsky bit his lip well-vexed. Onyagin
turned to Lenski next. —Shall we begin?—at my insistence. Behind the mill,
without a word, and while the honest chap conferred with our Zaretsky at a
distance, and sealed the solemn compact fast, the foes stood by with eyes
downcast. The gleaming pistols wake from drowsing. Against the ramrods, mallets
pound. The balls go in, each bevelled housing. The first sharp hammer clicks
resound. Now streams of greyish powder settle inside the pans. Screwed fast to
metal, the jagged flints are set to go. Behind a nearby stump, Guillault takes
up his stand in indecision. The duelists shed their cloaks and wait. Zaretsky
paces off their fate at thirty steps with fine precision, then leads each man to
where he'll stand, and each takes pistol into hand. Approach at will. Advancing
coldly, with quiet, firm, and measured tread, not aiming yet, the foes took
boldly the first four steps that lay ahead. Four fateful steps. The space
decreasing, Onyegin then, while still not ceasing his slow advance, was first to
raise his pistol with a level gaze. Five paces more, while Lenski waited to
close one eye, and only then to take his aim, and that was when Onyegin fired.
The hour fated has struck at last. The poet stops, and silently his pistol
drops. He lays a hand, as in confusion on breast, and falls, his misted eyes
express not pain, but death's intrusion. Thus, slowly down a sloping rise, and
sparkling in the sunlight's shimmer, a clump of snow will fall and glimmer.
Eugene, in sudden chill, despairs, runs to the stricken youth, and stares, calls
out his name, no earthly power can bring him back, the singer's gone, cut down
by fate at break of dawn, the storm has blown, the lovely flower has withered
with the rising sun, the altar fire is out and done. In anguish, with his heart
forsaken, the pistol in his hand like lead, Eugene stared down at Lenski,
shaken, his neighbour spoke, well then, he's dead. The awful word, so lightly
uttered, was like a blow. Onyegin shuddered, then called his men and walked
away. Zaretsky carefully then lay the frozen corpse on sleigh, preparing to
drive the body home once more. Sensing the dreadful load they bore, the horses
neighed, their nostrils flaring, and wet the metal bit with foam, then swift as
arrows, raced for home. Eugene Onyegin by Alexander Pushkin was translated from
Russian by James E. Phelan. It was abridged and produced by Mary Ward Lowry.