TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Coming up next it's business matters right here on the BBC World Service. Today
why the European Parliament has joined the US and Canada in banning TikTok from
politicians phones. Also today we'll be talking electric vehicles as the race
seems to be heating up off the road to secure critical battery supply chains.
We'll be heading to Mexico to hear about Tesla's latest manoeuvre to that end.
And we'll also be talking a car of a very different kind, one that knows whether
you've paid your lease or not and if you haven't it'll drive itself back to the
garage. Much more on that and plenty more on business matters after the latest
world news. BBC News hello I'm Gareth Barlow. The governing party candidate has
won the most votes in Nigeria's disputed presidential election. But the
electoral commission has yet to confirm Bolotunubu's win as he must also pass
the benchmark of 25% of votes in all of Nigeria's states. The main two
opposition parties have alleged fraud and want a rerun. Osai Ojigo, Amnesty
International's director in Nigeria, says more could have been done to allay
people's concerns. We have received reports of violence and general anxiety and
worry and anger because the results are not reflecting some of people's
expectations which they were hoping to see, one of which was electronic
transmission of results directly from the polling units to INEC servers. I think
a lot would have been helped if INEC itself had come out clearly to state what
the processes are and to communicate what their challenge is with regards to the
resource coalition. The UN's nuclear watchdog, the IAEA, says it's asked Iran to
explain the origin of highly enriched uranium particles it discovered at an
uranium plant recently. In reports seen by the BBC, the agency said the
particles were enriched up to 83.7% purity. Weapons-grade uranium is 90%.
Bethany Bell reports. The particles were found earlier this year at the Fordow
nuclear site, which is dug into a mountain. The report said Iran had informed
the agency that unintended fluctuations in enrichment levels may have occurred.
Discussions with Iran to clarify the matter are ongoing. Fire officials in
Greece say at least six people have been killed and dozens injured in a late-
night train crash. A rescue operation is underway near the city of Larissa. Meta
Sykryka reports. It was close to midnight when a cargo train collided with a
passenger train, causing it to derail. Rescue teams are helping evacuate
passengers from the carriages that caught fire. They were badly damaged, with
broken windows. Thick plumes of smoke are in the air. Seventeen fire engines
rushed to the scene. Some passengers have been pulled from the wreckage. Rescue
workers can be seen with torches searching carriages for those trapped inside.
One rescued passenger spoke of panic on board, with people trying to escape and
screaming. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last remaining independent
media outlets are to be put on trial. The three women work for the liberal
online newspaper Madamassa. They're charged with offending legislators from the
Nation's Future Party, which strongly supports President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
If convicted, the journalists could face prison sentences of up to two years.
Nation's Future disputes a corruption article carried by the website last
August. World News from the BBC. The coffins of 65 victims of a migrant
shipwreck in southern Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in Cretone in
the Calabria region. They died when the overloaded boat that set sail from
Turkey broke up in a storm on Sunday. About 80 people survived. Others, though,
are still missing. A Turkish man and two Pakistanis have been detained. The US
Supreme Court has heard arguments over the legitimacy of President Biden's plan
to give loan relief to millions of students. US Republican-controlled states
have brought the case, arguing Mr Biden is exceeding his powers. He promised to
cancel $430 billion worth of student loans after the pandemic. A ruling is
expected in June. This Democratic congressman, Maxwell Frost, said President
Biden's plan is needed. We need to ensure that our people don't have this
crushing student debt so that way they can thrive, that way they can move to
ownership. You know, Gen Z is on track to be the generation that owns the least
amount of wealth. And I know what it's like, too. People know me for being Gen
Z, but also being able to not afford an apartment here in D.C. And so this is
part of this greater struggle to ensure that people have the resources they need
to have true freedom in this country. A Bolivian man has recounted his
experience of being missing in the Amazon for a month, one of the longest known
periods someone survived in the rainforest alone. John Atayacosta said he'd
eaten insects and worms and drunk his own urine. He was found by rescue teams
last Saturday after becoming separated from friends during a hunting trip in
late January. And Peruvian police have discovered a mummy, believed to be at
least 600 years old, inside the cool bag of a food delivery worker at an
archaeological site in Puno. He explained he'd been sharing the room with the
bandaged mummy that he'd nicknamed Janita, considering it to be, in his words, a
spiritual girlfriend. Experts say, though, it was in fact likely to be a
45-year-old male and are considering charges against the worker. You can see it
for yourself. Head to our website. Just go to bbc.com slash news. Hello and
welcome to Business Matters on the BBC World Service. I'm Will Bain. Thanks for
being with us. On the programme today, Tesla's big bet on Mexico. Well, this is
a major victory for Mexico. It's really a testament to the country's ability to
lure some of the biggest global companies. Yeah, a bit more on Tesla's decision
to build a new factory there on the programme. Also today, student debts are
raising temperatures across the United States. Yeah, those protesters outside
the Supreme Court today as it tries to decide whether what President Biden is
doing around student debt forgiveness is actually legal or not. Plenty more on
that and other stories throughout the hour with our two guests. Memar Safras,
co-founder of The Current PK. She's in Lahore, Pakistan. Memar, welcome back to
Business Matters. Thank you, Will, and good morning. Good morning to you. Great
to have you back with us. Also joined by Gabby Castro Fontura, who runs the
consultancy Sunny Sky Solutions. She's in Punta del Este in Uruguay. Good
evening to you, Gabby. Welcome back to the programme. Thank you, Will. Good
evening. Great to have you both with us. We're going to start with a story that
I'm sure both of you have touched on in the past when you've been with us on the
programme, but taken a new twist and turn today because in Europe, the embattled
video sharing app TikTok felt more political pressure. Hot on the heels of the
US and Canada, if you were with us last night, we were talking about that. The
European Parliament announced it was banning its MEPs and their staff from using
the TikTok app on official devices, and it strongly advised them to delete it
from their personal ones too. The German MEP Moritz Koerner has campaigned for
TikTok to be removed from European Parliament devices. He gave us his reaction.
Yes, I asked the president of the European Parliament, Roberta Metzeler, last
week to follow the EU Commission and to also ban TikTok on official phones,
because if the EU Commission and the EU Council have serious cyber security and
security issues, then I think also members of the European Parliament who also
handle sensitive information should follow this ban because there might be
really very serious security issues. Has the European Union any move because the
US and Canada have moved on this? That might be the case. I warned the EU
Commission for a long time, since three and a half years. I raised the issue of
the data protection issues concerning TikTok. And it was always the case that
the EU was only acting after the US did the next step. And I think we were a
little bit geopolitically naive. And I think we, it's finally, Europe is waking
up. Why is TikTok only interested in politicians' data? Why not make it a wider
ban? So I think the main issue here is, of course, to have the ban, because
there might be the fear that the Chinese government is buying via TikTok on
European officials. But we know that there might also be data protection issues,
and we know that there are content issues. We know that there are some
censorship issues on TikTok. So I think the European Commission should go
forward, use this example now to talk really seriously to TikTok, make sure to
use all the data protection angles that are there to make sure that TikTok is
really following European rules. It'll seem almost laughable, Moritz, to some
people listening, that the EU has decided that this is the particular Chinese
company that's the biggest threat to the European Union, an app that's used by
kids to put dances on, and yet will allow Chinese companies to be involved in
our nuclear power plants, in our railways, in investing in buildings, in
investing in 5G rollout. I mean, it seems kind of extraordinary. Why a social
media app over any of the other things that we allow China to be involved with
in the European Union? I think we have to look at this whole issue from a
geopolitical angle. We have to be more careful also on other issues. We have to
see that we protect critical infrastructure and of course the phones of our
decision makers, where you can listen in, where you can spy on. It's a critical
infrastructure. And to bonus, a social media app on millions of children's and
teenagers' phones is also, I think, very, very crucial. But of course we have to
look at infrastructure and at our 5G nets and everything. Has Europe been too
cozy with China and does it remain too cozy with China? I think so. I think
especially also Germany has been too cozy. We have seen, we have been cozy with
Russia on gas and we have been cozy on lots of other trade and economy issues
with China. And I think this is something where the new government in Germany
also has to follow now its plans to really look into issues, into risks and
dependencies also concerning China. That's the German MEP Moritz Koerner
speaking to us from Brussels a little bit earlier on. And Emma Safaraz listening
in Lahore. Does feel like governments in particular around the world are
starting to put up a squeeze on TikTok, doesn't it? Well, you know, I was
actually reading this report on AP and where Ivan Greer, who is a director of
the non-profit advocacy group Fight for the Future, said that it's equally
concerning because the US is also going to do that, delete TikTok from, they've
asked the federal agencies to delete TikTok from government phone. The thing is
that it's, he basically, Greer basically said that it's equally concerning that
the US government and many other governments already abuse and exploit the data
collected by every other US-based tech company with the same data harvesting
business practices. I mean, well, we've heard how all these tech companies
collect data, and you know, social media apps, they collect data, be it Facebook
or Twitter or other apps. And so the thing is that, you know, there is this
thing that it looks like either they should all advocate for a basic privacy law
that actually ensures that, you know, these companies don't collect all this
data in the first place. But I think it's a problem. And by the way, just a fun
fact that, you know, Pakistan banned TikTok four times, but not because of
security or privacy concerns, but because of immoral content, according to our
government and the courts back then. The ban has been lifted though. Yeah, and
that has been... It's been banned four times. That has been one of the... Yeah,
it doesn't seem to have... If it needs banning four times, you do wonder about
the effectiveness of a ban, don't you? But... No, they lifted it after TikTok
cooperated and removed, you know, almost 12.5 million videos... Right, I
see....of content. And that in terms of some of these pressures from these other
governments, Canada, the US and the European Union has been too about TikTok's
pace, perhaps, in taking down videos it believes is sort of damaging or
encouraging self-harm, those sorts of things. Gabby Castro Fontura, listening on
in Uruguay. Manmohan makes an interesting point there, doesn't she? The Googles
of this world, every big tech company in the world, we know that they're taking
our data too, and not necessarily that we're opting into all of it all of the
time. Is it purely that this company is Chinese, that these governments are
taking the approach they are? It sounds like it, Will. And also, in here in
Latin America, you know, cyber security and data protection awareness is not as
developed as in Europe. I think we're also a lot more practical about the
effectiveness of this ban, you know. What's the point of regulating it in our
part of the world if then you cannot really implement that? And I think the
journalist is asking about China being involved in infrastructure, in other
projects, and nobody's doing anything about it. He admits it's too cozy. And
here in Latin America, you know, China is all over infrastructure, mining
energy, agriculture and so on. So what's the point of, you know, addressing or
investing a lot of very scarce resources into this TikTok ban? We've got so many
other things that you need to be also, you know, looking after. Is there a
sense, though, Gabby, in Uruguay that that relationship with China needs looking
at at all? Or are the two governments cooperating in a much more harmonious way
than, say, the Chinese government and the US government right now? Yeah, I think
Uruguay is taking a very, very pragmatic approach with respect to China. You
know, you might not agree on everything that China does internally, but we are
in the process of signing a free trade agreement with China. So we're pretty
market friendly. I imagine in terms of agricultural exports, for example, they
must be a huge market for businesses in your part of the world. Absolutely, yes.
Beef, for example, but also, you know, soybeans, cellulose and other
commodities, absolutely massive. Memal, also an interesting relationship between
Pakistan and China. I mean, you mentioned you mentioned some of the shenanigans
around TikTok previously, but obviously a close relationship and a heck of a lot
of investment, including debt financing between those two governments. Yes, of
course, it's that. But, you know, I will what I find really interesting about
TikTok is that, you know, it has actually broken class barriers in ways that we
haven't seen other social media apps do. Because the thing is that, you know,
people who are not literate or even, you know, a lot of people working at
offices as office boys or, you know, security guards or others, they're all on
TikTok and they can create content. You know, there's no language barrier. You
don't really need to know English, use Instagram or, you know, you don't have to
be literate to use TikTok that way. So there's that. And I think it has given a
lot of opportunities to a lot of people from the lower income class. And I
actually think that, you know, TikTok is revolutionary in that way, especially
when it comes to the Pakistani market. At least that's what I've seen. Gavi, do
you see that in Latin America as well? The power of TikTok? Yes, absolutely. A
voice for the kind of voiceless a bit. Yes, yes, absolutely. And in terms of
bans, you know, if you're going to ban our MPs, sort of our parliament members
from an app, it probably should be WhatsApp, knowing, you know, the volume of
data that is shared. You know, we said Latin America wouldn't exist these days
without WhatsApp, you know, and our politicians, that's the main way of
communicating. So if WhatsApp, you know, grabbing any data from a government is
probably from, you know, it's probably a lot more dangerous than TikTok. Mamal,
a final thought, because it's one thing asking the politicians to put the TikTok
down, but as you rightly say, the core audience might take a little more
persuading. Well, actually, I mean, I don't think that anything should be
banned. And if there are security concerns, they should be raised with the
company. TikTok has so far denied any of this. So I do think that there may be
some paranoia just because it is a Chinese company. And also, I mean, it has to
be, you have to do it with other tech companies then as well who do mine your
data and who do collect a lot of data from users. Yeah, an issue, probably one
of the big issues of the moment, isn't it really, is the more that we put
online, how we protect that, how we keep the bits that we want to be kept
private, still being wrestled with by people all around the world. Certainly a
topic we're going to return to here on Business Matters. You with me? Sorry,
Mamal, go ahead. Sorry. Yeah. Sorry, Will. So, you know, something that, you
know, I got a call on my phone the other day from some marketing chap, and I
said, how did you get my number? And he actually said it was from one of the
apps that I use, even though my number is not public there. He said, you could,
you can still get it off of that app. Yeah, that was very surprising for me.
There's one of the issues in a nutshell, isn't it? And it does raise those
questions, as Mamal rightly says, about cybersecurity full stop for all apps,
not just ones made by Chinese companies. I want to move away from TikTok now,
though, because the aftermath of the devastating earthquakes in Turkey and Syria
that we've been talking about on the World Service continue to take pretty
immeasurable cost on human life in those two countries. Today though, the World
Bank has tried to put some numbers in terms of financial costs, certainly in
terms of Turkey, as to what impact the earthquakes have had. $34 billion in
terms of the hit to the economy, they reckon. Arda Tuncer, economist in
Istanbul, gave us his reaction to that figure. There are some private
institutions and their estimates tell us that the cost of the earthquake is
going to be somewhere between $20 and $25 billion. We should keep in mind that
all these estimates tell us the physical damage cost only and direct costs on
the economy. But there are some indirect costs as well, which is, for instance,
the loss of business and impact on growth, for example. As you mentioned, Arda,
what we can't work out yet is the cost on humans who aren't working, those
humans who've been left homeless, who can't support themselves, have no money to
go and buy things that would be spending in the economy, and also the support
that they'll need in terms of finances from the government to look after them,
to house them, to give them some money to spend on food and that kind of thing.
We haven't even begun to scratch the surface in terms of that number. Not yet,
but I mean, whatever the estimates tell us, all figures are going to go up
because there are some foreseeable estimates and unforeseeable estimates. Now
roughly 1.3 million people are homeless today. And as you know, Turkey hosts
around four, five million refugees. That cost burden was already on the
shoulders of the economy. Now we have the consequences of the earthquake. One of
the things that President Erdogan has done in recent months has been boosting
the minimum wage, boosting public sector salaries, raising pensions, all things
to try and meet both the cost of living crisis and the inflation crisis that
we've been talking about in Turkey for quite some time. His ability to do that
going forward and meet some of these costs in terms of the physical rebuilding
you talked about and the support for those people made homeless, that is going
to be pretty difficult, isn't it? Yeah, it is absolutely going to be difficult.
And economic policies in Turkey had already harmed the proper functioning of the
market economy to a substantial extent even before the earthquake. So for
example, pricing mechanism in the credit sector was totally frozen. So we have
record breaking rate of inflation, record breaking current account deficit,
record breaking lack of foreign reserves. And a lot of that inflation picture
are being mitigated by government support programs like the one I mentioned. So
I'm guessing those must be in question now. Surely you can't do both? Well at
the beginning, no, we're not going to see any damage on the inflation side, but
growth is going to be damaged. But afterwards, there are going to be some sort
of ripple effects in the future. And how important also in the future then is
going to be, I mean, the World Bank had that initial package just shy of $2
billion. That's again, not really scratching the surface in relation to the
estimates of what this is going to cost. I guess international support is going
to be needed and welcomed pretty soon. Yeah, absolutely. Turkey needs financial
aid and financing the economy is one of the major problems today in Turkey. As
President Erdogan mentioned previously, Turkey entices funds, foreign funds from
Turkey's friends in the Gulf region. But this is not a strategy plan. You cannot
finance 50% of the country's current account deficit via unknown resources. The
net errors and omissions item and the balance of payments is huge. It's about
$30 billion. Under normal conditions, the amount should be roughly $2-3 billion.
This can be understandable. This can be tolerated. But 50% financing, 50% of the
current account deficit is just impossible to be sustained. Arda Tuncer speaking
to us from Istanbul earlier. Memal, unfortunately, Pakistan all too aware of the
type of problems facing Turkey right now. Yes. You know, I mean, we've had the
worst floods that affected the country last year. And it affected at least
around 33 million people. And the financial losses were estimated to be between
$30 billion to $35 billion. And you know, the thing is, Will, that it's not just
about the losses that happen right away, you know, in the aftermath of a
disaster, natural disaster like that. But it's how you, when you're
rehabilitating those people, or you know how you help, it actually takes a long
time. I mean, it's been six months. And even now, whenever, you know, reporters
go there and cover the flood affected areas, a lot of places actually, the water
hasn't receded from there. And these people are still living in makeshift tents,
and they haven't been relocated. That's also a huge problem. And of course, you
know, with an economy that is facing a lot of crisis, and you know, I mean, it
sounded very familiar, because we have an all time high inflation and, you know,
an all time high food inflation as well. And there's food insecurity as well,
because, you know, crops were damaged. So there's that. So I think it's going to
be very difficult. I mean, we also had a devastating earthquake back in 2005.
And so we've seen that. And then now the floods in 2022, I think it will be,
it's going to be a very rough ride for Turkey as well as, you know, Pakistan.
Yeah, some of the financial lessons in particular, there were, I think it would
be fair to say missteps in Pakistan's case, weren't there, Memo? What would you
say are some of the perhaps key lessons that the politicians and regulators in
Turkey might be able to learn from some of those missteps? Well, you know, the
thing is that actually, it wasn't in anybody's hands as far as the floods are
concerned. I mean, it was because of, you know, climate change, they were
induced by that. I meant more in terms of some of the sort of responses in
particular, actually, to the earthquake, you know, because that's still, we've
had the IMF there recently, haven't we? And there's been some lingering
questions about the response to the earthquake back in 2005, still affecting the
kind of economic picture now. Yeah, because, you know, I mean, there was slow
response. And of course, the problem with the floods is that, you know,
international donors have pledged more than nine billion dollars, almost around
10 billion dollars to help rebuild, you know, those areas. But the thing is that
even the pledges are coming in very slow. And as we struggle economically, it's
going to be very, very difficult for these people. I mean, we've had a harsh
winter. And then, of course, there's this looming danger that there will be
floods again this monsoon season. So, you know, that's just over there. I mean,
it's looming over our heads. Yeah. But Gabi, listening in there, I mean, just
the pressures, the multiple pressures. I mean, you know, from a number of the
economies around you in Latin America, when those inflationary pressures as they
are in Turkey, get to the state they are, it's very difficult to find any wiggle
room when something disastrous like this happens. Yes, exactly. And there's also
a question about the strength of the institution and the trust in the government
and the institutions. You know, if you've got a country like Turkey, which
ranks, say, in the Transparency International, you know, corruption perception
index, it ranks 101, so very, very low. You know, there's very little trust in
the government. Now, these disasters, I don't think they're going to start now
trusting the government more. For example, Uruguay ranks number 14. So, at the
moment, we are suffering from a really nasty drought, no rain for about three
months. And that's heating our agricultural sector. We estimate it's about a
billion dollars, which for a country as small as this one is massive. It's also
a natural disaster. Nothing could have been done about that, apart from some
prevention. But, you know, there's still trust in not just the current
government, but the institutions as a whole. That's such an important point,
isn't it? Because when people don't trust things, they vote with their feet,
don't they? They leave and go somewhere else. They decide that they can't
rebuild their life there, that they have to look for a new one somewhere else.
Exactly. It's that sense of despair, isn't it? Of, yeah, whatever, no one's
going to help me out here. And businesses feel like that. And, you know, human
beings feel like that. There's no network. You know, there's no support network
like there is in other countries, even in the region here, like countries like
Chile, for example, that have been hit by earthquakes again and again. But
they've still got that network. They've got that. They know what to do in case
something like this happens. Yeah. Rebuilding that trust is going to be a key
issue. And of course, we've got big elections in Turkey coming up a little bit
later in the year as well, which don't always make that the easiest backdrop for
doing so. Great to have the thoughts of Memo and Gabi in the first half here on
Business Matters. Plenty more from them in the second half, too, after we get
you up to speed with the latest world news. This is the BBC World Service, where
Natasha Loder is examining the challenges we face from long COVID. COVID's trail
of destruction to human health is only gradually becoming fully apparent. At
first, when I got COVID, I thought I'd be back after 10 days. Then it was a
month. Then I started to think, three months. I'll be hearing from scientists
trying to unravel a condition with around 200 symptoms. Long COVID is a health
crisis. And finding out what the latest research on some sufferers is showing.
When we exercise participants and we walk them up and down just for six minutes
and we do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like they've run the London
Marathon. Depression, psychosis, sleep disturbances are mostly reported by
women. The long haul of long COVID. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. You're listening
to Business Matters from the BBC World Service with me, Will Bain, and our
guests, Memar Safras in Lahore, Pakistan, and Gabi Castro Fontura in Montevideo,
Uruguay. Coming up in the next half hour, why Tesla is betting big on Mexico and
what it tells us about the electric car supply chains, and the row over student
debt forgiveness in the United States. All that and plenty more in the second
half of Business Matters after the break. Breaking news with Neil Nunes,
Nigeria's governing party's candidate, Bolotinobu, appears to have won
Saturday's disputed presidential election with all votes declared. But the
Electoral Commission must still confirm he's taken at least 25% of the vote in
all states as well. Two opposition parties have alleged fraud. The fire service
in Greece says 16 people have been killed and more than 80 injured. In a late-
night train crash, rescue workers have been scouring severely wrecked carriages
which derailed and caught fire after colliding with a cargo train. The UN's
nuclear watchdog has asked Iran to explain the origin of highly enriched uranium
particles discovered at the country's Fordow plant. Iran claimed that unintended
fluctuations in enrichment levels may have occurred. The coffins of 65 victims
of a migrant shipwreck in southern Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in
Calabria. They died when the boat they were travelling in hit rocks and broke up
in a storm on Sunday. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last remaining
independent media outlets, Mara Massar, are to be put in trial. They are charged
with offending legislators from a party which strongly supports President Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi. Putin has banned the use of non-Russian words in official
situations and in government publications. Residential areas often use words
such as cottage, house and forest instead of their Russian equivalents. A
Bolivian man has recounted his experience of being missing in the Amazon for a
month. Jonathan Acosta said he had eaten insects and drunk his own urine. And
Peruvian police have discovered a mummy believed to be at least 600 years old
inside the cooler bag of a delivery worker. The man was searched at an
archaeological site in Puno. He explained he had been sharing a room with the
bandaged mummy. BBC News. Welcome back to Business Matters, where we're going to
kick off the second half in Mexico, where the country's president is celebrating
a major investment from the US electric car firm Tesla. A little earlier on, we
spoke to our North America business correspondent Samira Hussain, who was in
Monterrey, Mexico. Well, this is a major victory for Mexico. It's really a
testament to the country's ability to lure some of the biggest global companies.
And remember, Mexico is really trying to establish itself as a manufacturing
hub. And this particular area of Monterrey, it's specifically attractive because
it is so close to the US border. It has a skilled workforce. And generally,
companies are able to manufacture products here at a lower cost. Right. And how
significant, Samira, in all of this, something we've talked with you a lot
about, the US Inflation Reduction Act, which, of course, has a lot of subsidies
for companies just like Tesla if they bring their manufacturing back to North
America. Well, one of the key things about Tesla manufacturing here is that the
cars will actually benefit from the electric vehicle tax breaks. And that has
been extremely beneficial for a lot of people that are making the switch from
these regular cars to electric cars. And because of the trade agreement between
Canada, the United States and Mexico, this makes it a perfect place for Tesla to
start production. Also, remember, it's really going to be a test for Tesla as
well. It has to show that its investors that it can actually manufacture at
scale outside of Asia. Remember, a lot of their manufacturing has been happening
in Asia. But between the global pandemic and the trade wars between the United
States and China, you're seeing increasingly American companies are setting up
shop in Mexico because it's closer to home. You have more reliable supply
chains. And of course, the trade tensions are making trade with China really
difficult. Which is really interesting, isn't it, because the US and Mexico,
certainly these two current administrations, have not necessarily been on the
most cosy terms either. Well, if you compare it to the cosy terms that the
United States is on with China, meaning we're not so cosy these days, it's a
better relationship from where they're sitting. Yeah, absolutely. And it seems
to be part of a trend, as we were mentioning, and as Samira mentioned there, of
American companies perhaps bringing some of their manufacturing back to the US.
Run us through some of the timetable then, Samira, of what the company has been
saying or not saying so far, and when we might know a bit more detail about
things like jobs. This is very key. Now, the announcement actually did not come
from Tesla, from Elon Musk himself. It actually came from the president of
Mexico. And all he would sort of offer was that, look, it's a major investment
for the country, and that it's going to bring a lot of jobs. Now, on Wednesday
is when Tesla will have its big investor day. And I think everyone has been
expecting – I mean, the rumors have been going on for months and months now. And
I think most people had expected Mr. Musk to make the announcement during
investor day. And I think that's when we'll have a sense of just the kind of
scale. But if you – from people that I'm speaking to here in Monterrey, I mean,
already so many people are talking about this massive investment from Tesla. And
there are rumors that the original investment could be somewhere around a
billion dollars, and it could balloon up to $10 billion, which would be a real
significant impact for the country. Samir Hussain reporting from Monterrey,
Mexico, where potentially it looks like this new Tesla gigafactory could well
be. Sticking with batteries, though, some interesting news out of the UK this
evening. The owner of Jaguar Land Rover, Tata Motors, apparently demanding more
than £500 million of government aid for a new battery factory here. Mark Syrod
from our team is in with a bit more on that, Mark. Yeah, so Tata own JLR, which
is Jaguar Land Rover, which is the biggest UK car manufacturer. And like the UK,
like many other Western economies, it is trying to grapple with how to move to a
low carbon economy. And batteries are a big part of that, and batteries in cars
are a big part of that. And what you're seeing now, and you've seen with Tesla
and Ford and other companies, is them reworking their supply chains and looking
at how to start to build cars with batteries in their various jurisdictions. JLR
is looking to build cars either in the UK or in Spain. We know that. The
reported amount that they would like from the British government, and this is
reported in the Financial Times, is £500 million. And it's a real challenge to
see whether the government can put that forward and they're going to get the
return on that in terms of jobs and investment. JLR would say that they need
that because they need to build a battery in the UK so they can put it into
their cars in the UK and then ship those cars abroad. The other jurisdiction
they're looking at is in the EU, in Spain. And the EU, just like the US, has had
this big kind of green investment vehicle. In the US it's called the Inflation
Reduction Act. And in the... Made in Europe here. Made in Europe has a similar
one. And so it's about... And that's where the incentives are. The UK at the
moment doesn't have that. But whatever the motives of the discussions, it'll be
a real key indicator of where the UK is sort of determining... Two really
interesting things, isn't it? It ties in a little bit with what we were talking
in the first half about TikTok, isn't it? It's about sort of security and where
your supply chain is. But also then as we try and really rapidly shift towards
this transition, who... You know, having it on your doorstep and being the
leader in this new element of technology. I just wondered whether the UK
government have had any response to that? Not that... So far there hasn't been
any response to that. One of the things I would say about car production is,
whereas it used to be across Europe or across jurisdiction, that's not
happening. It's always, as you said, coming in. The other thing is if you're
exporting a car to either, for example, the EU or the US, 55% of that car has to
be made in that jurisdiction. So it has to be made in the UK to qualify for a
zero tariff effect. And that is a really big kind of indicator of how battery
capacity and car building is going to change over the next 10 years. And that's
such an important element, isn't it, of the Inflation Reduction Act and what
Tesla appears to be announcing today. And Gabi, in Uruguay, we know that Latin
America, certainly Brazil, has been a place where companies have been looking to
do this because of various trade links with the US. Now, they don't qualify
automatically for some of the subsidies that people relocating to Canada or
Mexico would do. But it does seem like South America could be a beneficiary of
some of these shifts. Yeah, I mean, I'm absolutely delighted for Mexico for
being able to attract this $1 billion to $10 billion investment. The other
country I thought of to manage that sort of scale was, of course, Brazil. Maybe
it wasn't competitive, it wasn't strategic from a logistics point of view.
Particularly with current freight costs, it would be pretty insane to ship from
Brazil to the US. Mexico is a lot handier. Here in Uruguay, we've got a lot of
Mexican-built cars, believe it or not. India, South Korea, China, and of course,
Brazil, which is next door. And we've got more and more Teslas, particularly
where I live, which is Punta del Este, which is a very chic seaside resort. And
you get your Maseratis, your Ferraris, and your Teslas. It sounds much more
glamorous than the view I've got out the window, Gabi, right now in the dark in
Manchester in the northwest, west of England. But just in terms of those wider
trade ties, I mean, you talked about the importance of China as a market for
agriculture and things like that. What about as the US kind of shifts its focus
back to nearer to home and away from Asia, is there any sort of re-upping of
ties with the United States and North America? I mean, the United States is a
really important trading partner for the whole of Latin America. For Uruguay,
definitely, it's also in terms of geopolitics, is a very important partner. And
we see the US is also an important investor in terms of FDI, investing in every
single Latin American country. And yeah, there was a shift towards China and
China is still strong, but I wouldn't think the US is going to lower its
influence in Latin America, not under this administration. I want to get the
thoughts of Memel Safaraz in Lahore in a moment, but also want to introduce a
guest who's going to be with us for the next few minutes here on Business
Matters 2. That's Peter Bible, the former chief account officer at General
Motors, one of the other giants of the US car industry. Peter, welcome to
Business Matters. Thank you, Will. Nice to be with you. Great to have you with
us. I know we're going to talk forward in a moment on something slightly
different, but just I don't know how much of Mark's piece you heard there, but
just this shift now for car companies full stop, it's about bringing supply
chains closer to home and back to sort of the jurisdictions where they're
selling the highest volume in their cars, I guess. That's right. That's correct.
I mean, how much of a shift is that from your time in automotive? It's a
significant shift. It really is. When I exited the automotive industry, we had
just started bringing literally cars from China that were 100 percent assembled
in China. So it is a major shift. And is that all about the inflation? How much
of a part, perhaps is a better way of putting it, is the Inflation Reduction Act
in that and in particular, the kind of the subsidies and incentives and tax
breaks it offers? I think that is a very large motivator. And I think there's
also movement, especially with large consumer items, to buy national or stay
national, if you will. In terms of how that then shakes up other parts of the
world, you know, Gabby mentioning about perhaps the opportunities for
manufacturing in Latin America. I mean, does that do we see a sort of de-
globalization of the automotive industry here? Is it all going to be just done
at home? And is that necessarily great news for consumers everywhere? I mean,
I'm assuming it's great news for consumers in America if you get a massive whack
off the car you buy thanks to this act, but maybe not for everywhere else in the
world. I think, you know, GM's mantra was always, you know, manufacture where
you in the country you're in. And that was with globalization that really tore
that concept or that policy down. And so now we're left with, you know, where
best economically, let me put it that way, to manufacture parts and assemble
vehicles that will be the best, you know, obviously the best for the local
market, but also the best for the company. I mean, does that mean subsidy wars
then? You got it. Interesting stuff. Peter, stay there, because as I mentioned,
we're going to chat forward in a moment on a slightly quirky story. But Mehmal,
I want to get your thoughts on this and what you've been hearing. Well, you
know, I mean, Pakistan has actually agreed that by 2030, the total number of new
cars in Pakistan, out of that 30 percent will be electric vehicles running on
renewable energy. And Shagufta Shabba reported this for the Express Tribune,
that the government has said that, you know, this number will rise to 90 percent
by 2040. But there are a lot of problems with that, Will, because this poor
infrastructure for renewable energy and even if, you know, people want to switch
to electronic vehicles, they may not be able to. And there has to be a policy
shift, even though, you know, we have a national electric vehicles policy which
came out in 2019. But even then, you know, there there's a lot to be done. I do
think that actually given climate change and, you know, we were just discussing
floods earlier, we should switch to electric vehicles. I mean, I have we have
solar in our house here. So we use solar for electricity. But the thing is that,
you know, a lot needs to be done from the government side to promote this.
Gabby, how did they manage to do it in Punta del S? Because it sounds like if
there's Teslas driving around everywhere, you must have better infrastructure
than we've got on my street. Or here. Yeah. Sorry, in Uruguay. Yeah, the
infrastructure is good in this part of the country. I wouldn't say it's the
same, but it's a small country with fairly decent infrastructure, I have to say.
Well, there we go. There's the there's the model that we all need to go to. And
the BBC can go and send me out there. It sounds like a great place to go and
make a make a piece about all that, Gabby. Let's bring Peter Bible back in again
here, because Peter, the reason we got you on the program tonight was this, I
think, almost extraordinary story. Ford patented a system for automatic
confiscation of vehicles. Just explain how this works. Yeah, no, it's well,
first of all, let me say the automotive industry has been a always been a
pioneer in the technology area. And I think if you've driven a car any time over
the last 30 years, you see the new the new vehicles are technology,
technologically much, much more advanced. And there's a that comes with
consequences. And I know in Europe, you've been developing self driving vehicles
for a long time and longer than the US. But with that, you know, one of the
biggest costs that a captive finance company has is credit losses, including
repossession costs. Right. And so what this does is basically, you know, because
with with a vehicle, most of the damage to occurs when a owner has gone into
default. So the ability to say, OK, drive yourself back to the dealer is a way
to limit those losses. So, you know, so this is a this is a patent stage. I
mean, how far away are we talking in terms of that? I'm guessing the tech is a
long way off, right? Yeah, exactly. Because I think, you know, the bulk of
investment right now is going as your previous segment is going into battery
production, electric vehicles. And so I think it's so some of the self driving
innovation has kind of been put on pause. Yeah, that that is my view. Yes. And
so, I mean, it it will be here. I think I'm not sure how soon I think we're
going to see the low carbon initiatives take precedence in vehicle production.
So anyway, but it is a very thought provoking concept. It's certainly that. I
mean, what do our guests make? Memal, Gabi, who wants to jump in on this? What
do you make of this? Well, you know, I mean, I actually found it quite advanced
and also amusing. I mean, over here, you know, if somebody defaults on their car
loan, they send people manually right to follow them, to track them and
everything. But this this is something, you know, actually quite tech savvy.
Yeah. What do you think, Gabi? Should we fear the car police, the self driving
car police? It just made me laugh. It just was so it's a reality. It's so far,
you know, it is so detached from all of this. I was always saying we're a lot
more, you know, yeah, I think we're not this advanced. But of course, there is,
you know, defaults on credit, there's tax evasion. So but it sounds like taking
from, you know, that back to the future kind of film. Yeah, absolutely. I've got
a friend who's a who's a patent lawyer who I was away on holiday with recently.
And they certainly do talk about things that don't impact my life right now. But
there we go. That's why they're paid the big bucks. And that's why they get the
first round in when you go to the bar. Great. Big thanks to Peter Bible, former
chief account officer at General Motors for bringing us that story. Mehmal and
Gabi are going to stay with us now because we're going to end the program
heading over to the United States again. As protesters outside the Supreme Court
in Washington, D.C. on Tuesday, their concerns that the court there might strike
down President Biden's bill for giving four hundred and thirty billion dollars
of loans to millions of Americans after the Covid pandemic to clear some of
their student debts. But six Republican controlled states argue he's exceeded
his presidential powers by trying to implement the scheme. And we're in court
today to challenge the bill. Dan Ehrman, law professor at Northeastern
University in Boston, Massachusetts, explains more. The center of the case is
whether the Biden administration's reliance on a 2003 law called the Heroes Act,
a law passed during the post 9-11 moment when a lot of soldiers were abroad,
allow President Biden to cancel between ten thousand and twenty thousand dollars
of debt. So I would say at its core, it is whether the old wine, as they say,
the 2003 act works in the new bottle. And one of the key issues, of course, is
an emergency. The emergency in 2003 was the war on terror. The emergency, of
course, in the past few years has been the coronavirus. And the larger question
is basically how much can presidential administrations do when a law does not
specifically talk about particular policies? They call it separation of powers,
right, between the branches. What does Congress have to do and what do
presidents have to do? And so what do the Republican governors, what's their
argument? They say that the Biden administration is basically behaving in a
lawless manner, grabbing power, violating the separation of powers and going
beyond anything Congress intended. Back in 2003, the biggest concern was debt
collectors going after our armed forces while they were abroad. There would be
people fighting the war on terror and they were getting collection calls while
deployed. So their argument is this is much different and Congress can just pass
a new bill if they want to get rid of all of this debt. And from the White
House's side? From the White House's side, look at the HEROES Act. It grants
tremendous authority to waive or modify the terms of a loan. And actually, this
law speaks more clearly to what President Biden is trying to do than lots of
other cases where the court has allowed some wiggle room. In America, Congress
grants tremendous authority to administrative agencies, but these agencies have
expertise, they have experience. And the argument would be that actually, this
is exactly the type of situation that Congress might have contemplated. The
question, as with all legal cases, Dan, of course, is, is the precedent in legal
terms that it does or doesn't set down the track? And that seems to be an
argument the Republicans are making in particular as well around this.
Absolutely. And the metaphor here is the loaded gun. What if a future president
decides to use emergency authority to do something else, and maybe something
that is even more controversial? So as you know, courts are often very concerned
about granting what is seen as unchecked authority to an executive. And
actually, Justice Kavanaugh brought that up today at oral argument. He said,
isn't our precedent really the court behaving heroically when it reigns in and
out of control executives? So there is that larger concern that you mentioned,
and a few groups have expressed those concerns. And these have been groups that
are traditional allies of President Biden. And they've said, I don't want the
court to give too much authority because President Trump 2.0 or President
DeSantis could use it in a way that could really be harmful down the road.
That's Professor Dan Urman of Northeastern University in Boston speaking to us a
bit earlier. Gabby, stepping back from the American politics, the reason we
thought this resonated was because ultimately it's about the cost of education
and who is or isn't excluded from it. Yes well, in the case of Europe-wide,
university is free. So tertiary education in general is free. I always say it's
free at the point of use, right? So you can go to university, you know, to the
state university and not pay. So we don't face this sort of dilemmas. My concern
here is about what you mentioned about setting this precedent and what signal
you're sending in terms of, for example, so from now on you will just take up
any loan because one day there might be this kind of amnesty, as we call it
here, and you might not need to pay it. We have this sort of problem here around
tax rather than loans. Like at some point government says, okay, we've got a lot
of people who are unemployed or they're facing financial trouble, so let's just
kind of forgive the tax that they haven't paid for the last year. And then that
means it's an incentive not to pay your tax anymore because you're like, what
would I pay if one day I'm just going to be forgiven? And it's also the people
that have paid and made a huge effort to pay it, they just don't feel they're
being treated fairly. So if it's something that's used in very extreme
circumstances as a one-off tool and there's belief in that, then it can work.
But then if this is done repeatedly, then there's no trust anymore in those
rules. Mem Al, as Gabby says, it comes back to fairness, doesn't it? And trust
again. Yeah. And you know, I mean, the thing is that, Phil, you were talking
earlier about the cost of education and the cost of education is a lot. And you
know, with a struggling economy in Pakistan, I mean, we know that there are a
lot of children who drop out of schools, who don't go to colleges or
universities because either their parents cannot afford to send them to colleges
or they would rather that their children work and earn money in a tough economy.
Recently Pakistan's government launched the School on Wheels project to improve
education in rural areas where they're bringing education to the doorstep of
children whose parents are unable to send them to school, which is a good
initiative. But at the end of the day, the thing is that, you know, we have to
make our public education better and we also have to we should also have provide
them proper loans and also send them on scholarships, which are the Higher
Education Commission does to an extent. But, you know, I mean, it is actually a
lot of people do want to study, but it is because of their financial constraints
and also the financial constraints of their families that they're unable to.
Yeah, absolutely. And Gabby, I imagine even though education, secondary
education is free, university education free in Uruguay, still some people might
not, even if it's free, they need to go and be earning money. They don't have a
choice to go and to go and carry on learning. Their families need them to start
working as soon as they possibly can. Exactly. That's the problem. That's why we
don't necessarily agree that free means fair. And also it's opportunity cost,
isn't it? So you can go there and it's free. But then if you need to, you know,
if you need to bring up your family, then it's not as free as you might think.
And one of the issues we've got with particularly university tertiary education
is that the timetable for the free, that the state university is very it's not
well designed. So you might have lectures, you know, in the morning, in the
afternoon, in the evening. And so if you want to work and study, it's very
difficult. Well, if you go to a private university, the schedules are a lot
better. And for example, might allow you to work in the morning and then go to
university in the afternoon. So this strange thing happens where sometimes
students from low income backgrounds, you know, end up going to private
universities because they can arrange the work shifts better. So it seems
ironic, but sometimes, you know, the free university punishes low income
students more than the private. In the minute or so we've got left, Mem, I'll
just give us, if you can, in a sentence or two, what you think. I mean, what can
you think of a sort of solution or the beginnings of a solution to some of the
problems you've both brought up? Well, I actually think that, you know, public
schools, the quality in public school should be good. It has to be raised
because the problem is that a lot of people end up sending their children to
private schools because, you know, the public education institutes are not
providing quality education. Is that about pay? No, no. Which is a huge problem
with the quality of education. It's not just about pay. Sorry, I meant pay in
terms of the teachers pay. Yes, there's that, of course. And of course, there's,
you know, a policy implementation. There's not many checks and balances. We saw
we had a lot of ghost schools as well. You know, I mean, people are employed,
but they're being paid, but nobody's there. I mean, it's just on paper. So
there's that as well. They have to be checks and balances. I mean, my family
runs a private school, but basically it caters to very lower income class and by
giving them good quality education and less money compared to other private
schools. So there's that. I think the private sector has to do its part, but
it's actually the government that has to come and, you know, do this. Yes. Yeah.
One of the we know one of the things that really can help people energize their
lives. Really great to have both of your company here on Businessweek. This is
the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull
Project. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to children around
the world. Children in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. Give them
something to wake up excited about. Give them something to go to bed giggling
about. Otherwise, what is the point? Flying Seagulls, Child's Play at
bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries. In 30 minutes. I'm Misha Glenny. I'll
be digging deep into Russia's past, where it came from and how over the
centuries it expanded into the biggest country on earth. There is this
ambivalence between how people regard Russia. You could accept the culture, how
wonderful the ballet is and the literature, but yet you can still see it as a
part of the culture.