TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's five o'clock, time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello there. Crossing the
Channel in a small bloat to claim asylum in Britain, it's a terrifying way to
arrive. God saved me and Jesus brought me here, so it's a journey I never want
to do that again. Well, the government wants to stop that traffic. It'll set out
its plans tomorrow, making it even less attractive to come that way and possibly
offering alternatives. We'll discuss some different options with the former head
of Border Force and a charity helping those in Calais. Also on the programme,
Sue Gray is waiting for her appointment to the Labour Party to be okayed. The
row over her move rumbles on. We'll have the latest developments. The Spanish
cabinet is set to impose legal gender parity requirements on businesses and
political parties. It's causing an argument in the country. We needed this like
years ago. I can't feel any unbalance. Women are very integrated. I am a little
bit fed up of men telling me what to do. We'll hear from Spain. And a US court
says yes to American cheese producers using the name Gruyere for cheese that
doesn't come from Gruyere. Whether it's Gruyere today or Parmesan or feta or
cheddar, that approach lets companies compete for consumers' taste buds on the
merits of their products. We'll hear from both sides of the fight for the highly
contested name tag. But we'll start with the BBC News, read today by Neil Nunes.
The Metropolitan Police has apologised for missing opportunities to arrest Wayne
Cousins before he raped and murdered Sarah Everard, despite complaints that he
had exposed himself to several women in Kent. Cousins, who is serving a full
life term, has been sentenced to a further 19 months in prison after admitting
three counts of indecent exposure. The last offence took place just days before
he kidnapped Miss Everard in March 2021. At his sentencing earlier, the judge at
the Old Bailey, Mrs Justice May, praised the victims for their courage and
resilience in coming forward. The victim personal statements of A, B and C speak
justly of their shock and upset at this defendant's selfish, sexually aggressive
acts. All have spoken of their sense of freedom and security taken from them, of
feeling vulnerable and fearful for themselves and others going about their
ordinary lives. Refugee charities and Border Force staff have criticised the
government's plan to ban anyone arriving in the UK in a small boat from claiming
asylum as draconian and unworkable. Under the proposed legislation, illegal
migrants would be removed and stopped from applying for British citizenship. The
government says it hopes to open more legal routes for asylum seekers coming to
the UK once the laws are in place. Our chief political correspondent Nick Attlee
has this report. Rishi Sunak has made stopping small boat crossings a key test
for his government. Tory MPs believe it matters to their constituents and
they're desperate for the Prime Minister to succeed where previous Conservative
governments have failed, bringing down the number of people crossing the Channel
in small boats. To try to deter would-be asylum seekers, the government wants to
ban anyone arriving through an illegal route from making an asylum claim. It
also proposes to ban them from ever returning to the UK or making any future
citizenship application. Refugee charities said the proposals would mean asylum
seekers are treated like criminals. Conservative MPs have suggested that Sue
Gray may have breached civil service rules by not properly disclosing her
decision to take a top job at the Labour Party. The Paymaster General Jeremy
Quinn said the Cabinet Office was not aware whether the former civil servant had
notified an appointments committee ahead of the announcement that she's to
become Sir Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff. The Labour leader insists he had
absolutely no contact with Ms Gray when she was investigating Partygate. The
leader of the Democratic Unionist Party, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, has set up a
panel of eight people to consult on the Windsor Framework. The party's yet to
make a formal decision on whether to accept the new deal between the UK and the
EU on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. Sir Geoffrey said
he had asked the group to report back to him by the end of March. National-level
talks between the rail industry and the RMT union appear to be on the brink of
failure. The rail delivery group, which represents train companies, has told the
union it will withdraw from negotiations if its latest offer is not put to
members. News 8's our transport correspondent Katie Austin. Since the RMT's
National Executive Committee rejected offers the government and employers called
best and final last month, the dispute has in effect ground to a halt. The union
has said it consulted extensively before the rejection. But the rail delivery
group now says if members don't get a vote, national-level talks may stop and
negotiations would have to be started with individual train companies instead.
Network Rail's boss Andrew Haynes has also questioned the point of resuming
talks following previous frustrations. The RMT says it is focused on coming to a
negotiated settlement. Firefighters across the UK have voted overwhelmingly to
accept a new pay offer, ending the threat of strikes. Members of the fire
brigade's union voted for industrial action in January, but the walkout was
suspended when the new offer was tabled. The new deal includes a 7% increase
backdated to July 2022, plus an additional 5% from July this year. Neil, thank
you very much. Now the government has trailed it for days, but tomorrow it will
set out its plans for trying to bring some control to the numbers of refugees
and migrants coming into the country on small boats across the Channel. In the
first two months of this year, the data suggest almost 3,000 came that way,
which is about twice as many as came in the equivalent period last year. Part of
the new policy, as you've heard, is to remove and ban from future re-entry
anyone coming to the UK that way. But will there be more to it than that?
Alternative, safe ways in? Or more detail on where exactly removals will be to?
We wait to see. And we will also, of course, have to wait much longer to see
whether the new policy works. For the most part, the Rwanda policy has not
really been tried, and the other policy, boat pushbacks, has been declared not
to work at all. So we'll discuss some of the costs and benefits of different
approaches shortly. But it is also important to hear the testimony of those
who've arrived in a small boat. Now, a couple of weeks back on PM, we heard from
Atta, a Christian who left Iran. He's currently in Skegness. He's been waiting
over a year for his asylum application to be processed. And I spoke to him again
today to see what he thought the government approach should be. We smuggled
here, not by choice. You know, we just want a safe place to stay and live, and
it's not our fault. Smuggler brought us here. I remember when I reached the
shore in another country and I saw the boat, and I don't want to get on the boat
because I was scared like dead, but the smuggler had gone and they forced us to
get on the boat. It was night, I remember, and I couldn't see anything but
water, and I was scared. All of us were scared, you know, and in our boats, we
had some children and a pregnant woman. Atta, tell me this, because it's a
horrible, horrible story, and being in a small boat in the English Channel in
the dark is terrifying. It's absolutely terrifying. Why do the people smugglers,
why do they force you onto the boat rather than just say, look, you paid us to
get you to England. If you don't want to go to England, don't come to England,
but this is the way we get you to England. If you want to live in Calais, then
get off the boat, stay in Calais. What are they doing when they force you onto
the boat? That's the bit I don't understand. I didn't know what country I came
to, and I come to, you know, and most of us didn't know where we should go. And
they just tell us, you are not safe on that country and you have to go to
another country. And my cousin paid the smuggler and the smuggler told me, if
you don't go to the country your cousin told me, I never paid. So you have to
go, you know. Right. I see that they think they won't get paid if you don't get
to England. You've taken that journey from Iran. You've ended up in Skegness. Do
you feel you had any choice over that, embarking on that on that difficult
journey? No, no, no. I don't think so, because I knew the Iran situation and I
have to go to the safe place. And actually in my journey, I was scared like
this. And sometimes I felt this kiss my neck, you know. It's a journey. I never
want to do that again. And actually, I had a good life, I think, in Iran. But
right now, I miss my wife, I miss my family, I miss everything I had in Iran.
But it's a very hard journey and I think most of people don't want to do that.
Atta there, an asylum applicant waiting for his application to be handled. Now
by way of context, it's worth noting the UK does get significantly fewer asylum
applications than France or Germany. And that is likely the effect of being an
island, making it much harder to arrive and make a claim. The government goal is
to reduce the numbers arriving by boat, which would undoubtedly reduce the
numbers overall applying for asylum. And that would increase the gap with
neighbouring European countries. Let's talk through the two approaches, the hard
line approach, ban on applying for asylum if you come by small boat or removal.
And the other approach of the possible provision of safe routes in. Well, today,
Downing Street said the government hopes to open more legal routes for asylum
seekers once new laws to deter small boat crossings are in place. Let's just
talk this through with Kevin Saunders, who was chief immigration officer for UK
Border Force in northern France for 16 years. And Claire Mosley, who's founder
of Care for Calais, which assists refugees on the French coast. Welcome both to
PM. Claire, just before we start, I'm fascinated in the story we've heard from
Atta. How typical is that story? The people are forced onto the boats, basically
not really knowing where they are or where they're going, that they're forced by
the smugglers onto the boats, even though, of course, they are the clients of
those people smugglers in some way, in that it's their families that have paid
for them to leave their country. I'm not sure that I could tell you how typical
that is, because I'm not close enough to what the people smugglers do. But are
you surprised to hear that? Because in a way, you would really have thought the
people smugglers are helping the refugees rather than abusing, exploiting or
forcing them to do things they don't want to do. Yes, I think my understanding
of it, not being somebody who speaks to people smugglers, is that people who are
smuggled are paying for a service, people who are trafficked, which is a very
different thing, are forced to do things against their will. But I mean, that is
a detached understanding. No, no. Okay. Well, we've heard from Atta first hand.
Claire, talk us through, let's go through the hard-line part of this policy.
What effect will it have, do you think, if your simple objective is to stop
small boats crossing the Channel, what effect do you think it will have? Well,
on the surface, it doesn't sound that different to what we've heard before, does
it? Apart from the detention aspect, it's not a million miles away from the
Nationality and Borders Act, from what they've tried to do with Rwanda, which so
far hasn't been possible and hasn't had any impact. It just raises lots of
questions around practicality, on how are they going to detain people, where are
they going to put them. Overall, if they want to deport people, where are they
going to send them to and how are they going to do it? So, I mean, overall, it
sounds impractical, it sounds unlikely and it sounds brutal. Claire, do you have
any idea, this is the question we've been asking ourselves in the office today,
what proportion of people who arrive by small boat are picked up, if you like,
and then handled by the authorities and what proportion are arriving and are not
picked up? Because obviously, if we're missing many of those who arrive or might
miss many of those who arrive, then the detention becomes much less of a
deterrent, doesn't it? The figures for the year to December 22 said that 90% of
those arrived claimed asylum on arrival. That's not to say that the other 10%
weren't picked up, but we know that 90% claimed asylum and therefore must have
been picked up. Whether the other 10% either weren't picked up or were picked up
and chose not to claim asylum, I can't tell you, but I can tell you that 90%,
the year before, 98% claimed asylum, which is a really high percentage. Indeed.
So... Okay, but we don't know how easy it is, if you like, to get a boat into
the coast of the southeast of England and then just, if you like, disappear into
the economy somewhere. I think it's pretty hard because that's been one of the
aspects of the small boats is their high visibility. Right, so they tend to
get... That's what's put them in the news, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Kevin
Saunders, if we like, the hard line part of this approach of making it less
attractive to come because when you get here you'll just be detained and sent
away or never allowed to come back. How effective do you think that will be on
stopping small boats? Good afternoon. I think it will be very effective, quite
honestly. The idea being that everybody that's picked up will be detained and
the politicians are saying that the Home Secretary will have to remove them
within 28 days. Now, again, I don't know how they're going to do it, what the
plan is, but that's what they're saying is going to happen. Actually the easiest
way of removing people would actually be to put them back in France, would it
not? I mean, if you could persuade France that the way to stop people arriving
in Calais, and it's disruptive to the city of Calais, the way to do that would
be to put them back in France if they came to the UK and back to square one.
That would be easier perhaps and much cheaper than sending people to Rwanda or
persuading somewhere else to take them perhaps. Well that would be one plan. And
of course the Prime Minister is meeting with the President of France on Friday.
So we have to wait and see whether anything comes out of this. I think I'd also
like to add that the people of Calais are absolutely fed up with this. They
really are. That's what's in it for France, isn't it? If you can stop the small
boats and then you stop people coming to Calais, that is in it for France. And
it's a question as to whether that's enough of a way in which the British and
French could cooperate on that. Well that's the question. But it's not just
France, it's the EU as well. It's not just a French problem, it's an EU problem.
And hopefully now that we're all big pals again with the EU, we might get some
movement on this. Right. Let's go to the other part of this policy, which we
don't know what this is going to consist of, but Clare Moseley, safe and legal
routes to get into the UK. What is your feeling about what the UK government has
so far said, that after the small boats are under control, we can look at other
ways for people to get in? I think it's... Sorry, is that for me? No, for Clare.
I'll come back to you, Kevin. Going on past experience, it's likely that it will
be very little and it will take a long time. But that's the interesting bit of
this, because they say the key task is to stop small boats. But if they really
wanted to stop small boats, there is a very easy way to do it, because if they
did give safe passage to people in Calais who have a viable asylum claim, they
could actually stop small boats within a matter of weeks. If they looked at
people in Calais and said, who's got a viable claim, and those people were
transferred safely to the UK, that would put the people smugglers out of
business within a matter of weeks. And we've talked to them about this. We've
had this conversation with the government. And they have a blueprint for this,
because this is what they did with Ukrainians. They gave Ukrainians safe passage
and no Ukrainians got on small boats and no Ukrainians paid people smugglers. So
it's putting an office in Calais, effectively, to pre-handle asylum
applications. And if people are refused, you don't get a small boat. Basically
the French are then going to have to deport them or what? It's actually a lot
simpler than that. They wouldn't even need an office in Calais, because what
they did with Ukrainians was they had an online process where they could apply
online. And if you had something like that, that was very similar to our current
asylum screening interview, that had just enough information to work out if they
have a viable asylum claim. And if they do, they then got a letter the same as
the Ukrainians did, where they could transfer safely to the UK. So the asylum
claim would actually be in the UK, just like it is now. No big difference. The
only difference would be that the way of getting here would be safely instead of
in a small boat. And all those people would not be getting in small boats. And
that takes all that profit away from the people smugglers, with a very nice side
effect to saving people's lives. Right. Now, well, let's test that one on Kevin
Saunders, because what Claire says makes a lot of sense there, doesn't it,
Kevin, in terms of stopping small boats and regularizing the traffic? I'm afraid
it makes no sense at all. At the moment, only about 8% of people that claim
asylum actually receive full asylum. The balance, the vast majority, get
something called humanitarian protection because we can't remove them, because
Claire Moseley and her friends have told them to destroy their documents and
they're coached into giving us not the right name, not the right date of birth.
I'll give Claire a right of reply on that. But of course, but broadly speaking,
you say there would be too many getting a no if you did it that way. And then
they would want to come anyway by small boat or other means. Right. Yeah.
Claire, just a last one, because he made a very specific accusation that you
encourage people to destroy documents and you may want to just come back on that
specifically. The thing about destroying documents just simply isn't true. A lot
of people don't have documents, but that's because they're refugees, because
they come from dictatorships or they come from war zones. The fact is the vast
majority of people in Kelly are genuine refugees and the data to back that up is
on Parliament's own website. And that means that the vast majority are coming to
claim asylum. And the people who get refused, it is a very different proposition
to risk your life in a small boat if you know you're never going to get asylum.
They're risking their lives for the hope of a safe future. That's why they come.
They wouldn't risk their lives if they knew that was never going to happen. It's
a very different proposition. Very, very interesting discussion. We've let that
run for some time. But Claire Mosley from Care for Calais and Kevin Saunders,
who was chief immigration officer for UK Border Force in northern France. Thank
you both so much. And we obviously will be returning to that as the government
set out the full policy tomorrow. But it's actually it's after twenty past five
already. We should have a look at some other headlines. Here's Neil. Two women
and a man, all in their early twenties, have been found dead in a crashed car
near Cardiff two days after they were last seen on a night out in Newport. The
Doctors' Union, the BMA, has announced plans to ask consultants in England
whether they want to go on strike in their dispute over pay and pensions. And
one of the UK's most notorious prisoners, Charles Bronson, has made his latest
bid for freedom. The 22-year-old described himself to a parole board as almost
an angel compared with his old self. Thank you, Neil. Now, the row over Sue
Gray's decision to leave her job in the civil service to become chief of staff
for the Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has not died down today. The Conservative
Sir Robert Buckland used to be attorney general and raised an urgent question in
Parliament. Will my right honourable friend, the paymaster general, make a
statement on the impartiality of the civil service in light of the proposed
appointment of the second permanent secretary of the department for levelling up
housing and communities as chief of staff to the leader of the opposition? Well,
answering for the government, so this was from a Conservative MP to the
Conservative paymaster general and Cabinet Office Minister, Jeremy Quinn, he
suggested Sue Gray may have broken civil service rules by not properly
disclosing the decision to leave her post. For very senior civil servants, rules
apply when they wish to leave the service. Permanent secretaries are subject to
the business appointments process, which for most senior leavers is administered
by ACOBA, the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments. They provide advice
to the Prime Minister, who is the ultimate decision-maker in cases of the most
senior civil servants. Once the Prime Minister has agreed the conditions and the
appointment is taken up, ACOBA publishes a letter to the applicant on their
website. The business appointment rules form part of civil servants' contracts
of employment. The rules state that approval must be obtained prior to a job
offer being announced. The Cabinet Office has not as yet been informed that the
relevant notification to ACOBA has been made. Well, earlier, Sir Keir Starmer
was speaking to LBC radio and said there was nothing improper about the timing
of Sue Gray's appointment as his Chief of Staff. I had absolutely no contact
with Sue Gray during the preparation of her report, when she was writing it or
anything like that. So the whole suggestion is a complete and utter nonsense and
not for the first time from Boris Johnson. It's a dwindling group of people
around him that are still supporting him, but the vast majority of sensible
Conservatives... You give no credence to the line that possibly some Johnson
supporters would say, ah, it was all a put-up joke. I know you don't believe
that, but you don't give the idea that it would give credence to that. It's a
complete nonsense. I had no contact at all with Sue during that entire period,
as you'd expect. That was Sir Keir Starmer with a little bit of Nick Ferrari
from LBC for free. Well, the BBC political correspondent Jonathan Blake joins
us. Now, Jonathan, did we learn anything from that urgent question in Parliament
this afternoon? Well, I think we did, Evan, learn that there are a few areas
here where the government and Conservative MPs think Labour is on dodgy ground
with this attempt to appoint Sue Gray. And they're all at pains to say it's not
about her. They're not questioning her impartiality or integrity. But as Sir
Robert Buckland said in that question, many of his colleagues are disappointed
and surprised about what's happened. And the minister's response, which sounded
quite technical there, essentially went through the most important point they
feel that may not have been followed in terms of the rules governing civil
servants leaving and taking up roles elsewhere, was that essentially, ACOBA, the
appointments watchdog at Westminster, needs to give the go-ahead for a job to be
taken up before it can be announced. And the minister was saying there that the
Cabinet Office hasn't yet been told that Sue Gray did inform officials that she
was looking to take up this role. There are other areas, too. The General Civil
Service Code calling on them to act in a way that keeps the confidence of
ministers, a declaration of outside interests where there could be a conflict,
and also guidance for senior civil servants to get permission from ministers to
talk to senior opposition party figures, too. Very ironic everyone's talking
about whether Sue Gray stuck to the rules. She has been the enforcer around
Whitehall for such a long time. Now, are we actually expecting to hear from Sue
Gray at any point, Jonathan? No. We've been told that she has intended to tell
ACOBA, the appointments watchdog, when she first had talks with Sir Keir Starmer
today. And as we've heard, Sir Keir Starmer himself not putting a date on that,
but only saying there's nothing improper about it. And there was no discussion
during or after the Partygate probe took place. They seem to be putting the
emphasis on Sue Gray following the rules for this appointment and insist that
the process has been followed and everything is above board. But as the
exchanges in the Commons this afternoon show, there are a lot of Conservatives
who do sense an opportunity here, I think, to highlight an area where somebody
who holds himself up as a stickler for the rules, that being Sir Keir Starmer,
hasn't necessarily gone over and above what's required in recruiting Sue Gray to
become his chief of staff. Jonathan, thanks for that. Jonathan Blake. If you're
a David Attenborough fan, clear your diary for Sunday night because there's a
new series beginning that features the great man and for the first time ever,
he's focusing on the British Isles. The Wild Isles series celebrates some of the
wonders of the islands that we call home. Team have captured animal behaviour
never before recorded on film and it also highlights just how vulnerable many of
the species we treasure have become. Here's our climate editor, Justin Rowland.
Welcome to a place that is astonishing. Nature in these islands can be
extraordinary. It rivals anything I've seen elsewhere. It's not far. It's home.
At 96 years old, Sir David Attenborough is back on the road, visiting a series
of remote locations to bring you the British Isles as you have never seen them
before. There are some stunning scenes. Their strategy is one of surprise. Orca,
killer whales, hunt seals off the coast of the Shetland Islands. It wakes up and
flees, but there's a pup here too. This one sequence was filmed over three years
using specialist cameras and drones. The orca takes its catch out into open
water and there shows younger members of the pod how to drown it. The imagery of
British wildlife is as spectacular as anything you could see anywhere in the
world, says Alistair Fothergill, the producer behind the series. He says that's
because for the first time the BBC has committed the same sort of resources to
filming in the UK as it would on a major international series like Planet Earth.
I think very few people realise that we are actually globally important for
wildlife. You know, we have more ancient oak trees in England than the whole of
Europe. We've got 50% of the world's common bluebells, a quarter of Europe's
badgers, most of the world's chalk streams, and we've got globally important
populations of seabirds. The series has captured animal behaviours that have
never been filmed before. Like our biggest bird of prey, white-tailed eagles,
hunting barnacle geese in flight. The goose is so heavy the young eagle has to
struggle to hold on. And there is a powerful conservation message too. We've
lost 60% of our flying insects in the last 20 years, 97% of our wildflower
meadows since the Second World War. Wild salmon could be extinct in the British
Isles within two decades, the series warns. It prompts an urgent call to action
from Sir David. Almost half a million of these lovable birds come to our coast
each summer. Filmed on the Welsh island of Skomer, surrounded by puffins. Here
off the coast of Pembrokeshire, puffin numbers have been steadily increasing.
But Skomer is an exception. So rich in places, Britain as a whole is one of the
most nature-depleted countries in the world. So what can be done? Dr Philip
Wheeler is an ecologist from the Open University who acted as a consultant for
the Wild Isles series. We can make choices ourselves about what we buy, how we
travel, what we eat. We can also put pressure on our politicians at local and at
national level and force them to really show the leadership that's required to
see big scale visionary changes in how we manage the environment. But the
greatest threat to puffins on this island comes from a smaller gull. The black-
headed gull. They try to snatch the sand eels right out of the puffins' beak.
The message of the series is clear. It's up to all of us to save the fragile and
beautiful ecosystems of our island nation. Never has there been a more important
time to invest in our own wildlife. We try and set an example for the rest of
the world and restore our once wild isles for future generations. That report
from Justin Rowlatt with quite a bit of help from David Attenborough. What would
a documentary made by artificial intelligence sound like? I'm Laura Lewington
and I'll be guiding you through ChatGPT, the AI technology that's popping up all
over the place. Can it write my script? Will it be able to transform jobs? Can
it change our lives? I'll be interviewing experts, some users and ChatGPT
itself. We'll explore the immeasurable possibilities, the problems and the
creativity of this new sophisticated technology in a documentary by ChatGPT on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds this evening at 8 o'clock. It's 27 minutes to 6 now,
you're listening to PM and we'll have a summary of the news from Neil Nunes. The
Metropolitan Police has said sorry for failing to arrest Wayne Cousins for
indecent exposure just days before he kidnapped and murdered Sarah Everard. The
former officer has been sentenced to a further 19 months after admitting to
exposing himself to women in Kent on three separate occasions. He's already
serving a whole life sentence. The government has said it hopes to open more
legal routes for asylum seekers if it passes new laws aimed at deterring
migrants from crossing the Channel in small boats. Under the legislation due to
be introduced tomorrow, illegal migrants would be banned from returning to the
UK or from applying for British citizenship in the future. Refugee charities and
Border Force staff say the proposals are unworkable. Ukraine's President
Volodymyr Zelensky has committed to strengthening the defence of the devastated
city of Bakhmut, despite recent reports that the city was about to fall. Bakhmut
is surrounded on three sides after months of bombardment, but Russian forces
have so far been unable to dislodge Ukrainian troops. Two women and a man, all
in their early twenties, have been found dead in a crashed car two days after
they were last seen on a night out in Newport. Police found the car late last
night in Woodland, just off a busy roundabout in Cardiff. Another woman and a
man who were with the group are seriously injured in hospital. Senior doctors in
England are to be balloted on strike action. Their union, the British Medical
Association, said a poll of consultants had indicated strong support in favour
of a walkout. A formal ballot will take place next month. Junior doctors are due
to begin a 72-hour strike next Monday. The last original member of the US rock
band Leonard Skinnerd, Gary Rossington, has died aged 71. The guitarist appeared
on their best-known song, Free Bird, and co-wrote their 1974 hit Sweet Home
Alabama. He was still playing their Free Bird in concert only a few weeks ago.
Thank you, Neil. Now, among the public services under strain right now is
dentistry. The British Dental Association says its analysis of government data
suggests that in England last year, 6 million people tried and failed to get an
NHS dental appointment and 3.6 million people didn't try because they were
resigned to not getting one. And then another million felt they couldn't afford
the cost of one. Add all of that together and you're at about 11 million people
in England with unmet dentistry needs. Well, the Commons Health and Social Care
Committee is examining dentistry at the moment. It's starting evidence sessions
this month. But when it launched, it's noted that 90% of practices across the UK
weren't accepting new adult NHS patients. Let's briefly talk to Chris
Groombridge, who runs a dental group in Hull. And Chris, just tell us a little
about your group and whether you are accepting new adult NHS patients. Good
afternoon. Yes, we are accepting new NHS patients, but we have a waiting list
and the waiting list is sadly about two years. We're meant to look after about
approximately 22,500 patients and we're currently looking after about 49,000
patients. And so essentially, someone has to move out or die essentially, and
then one out, one in? Well, it's putting a lot of strain on our associates. We
have 15 associates who are obviously working quite extended hours to see these
patients. Yes, inevitably, it does mean that obviously, as some regular patients
that were SOARs in the past can no longer see us because obviously we're seeing,
you know, cases that are building up. We are working through that waiting list,
but it sadly, as hard as we're working to get through it, it's going in the
wrong direction. What are the kind of horrible things you see in teeth? Because
people can't get timely dental appointments. Well, what you're finding out,
sadly, is that some people are going to A&E units, some people are going to GPs,
which is obviously the wrong place to go. And that's putting strain on the rest
of the system. Sadly, if you don't get on top of your oral health, it can have
an impact into the rest of your general health. And that's having obviously an
impact into the rest of the NHS and the rest of healthcare. And in a sentence,
what is the problem? Is it that we haven't got enough dentists? Is it the
dentists all want to do private work rather than NHS work? What is the issue? In
a nutshell, it's we have a failed contract. As the Health Select Committee, them
actually themselves, declared in July 2008. Sadly, though, that contract is
still not really being addressed. On top of that, we have a lack of workforce,
partly because we don't train enough in our own nation. And also because,
frankly, because we have a failed contract, it's unattractive to the workforce
to actually work in it. And what's happening is they're starting to vote with
their feet, which, yes, sadly means some of them are going over to the private
sector because they feel they can't see a future in the NHS. Chris, thanks for
that. Chris Groombridge from Hull running a practice there. Steve Brine is the
chair of the Health and Social Care Select Committee in the Commons,
Conservative MP. Steve, thanks for joining us on PM. Well, you're early in your
inquiry still. You haven't started the sort of hearings on dentistry yet, but
does what Chris just said there ring true? 100 percent. So I take some
responsibility for this. I was the dental minister for a couple of years and I
couldn't reform the contract. I made tweaks to it, but not what's needed. So we
have we have a double whammy here. We have practices not accepting new NHS
patients because of, as Chris said there, for instance, the waiting list. And
then we have practices moving away from the NHS altogether. Rather ironically, I
had a letter from from my family dentist just the other day saying that they
were doing that. And it's not that they want to go and work privately because,
you know, the streets are paved with gold. Quite the opposite, actually. It's
because the contract works on what they call UDAs, units of dental activity, and
they often get paid the same for doing those units of dental activity. So they
don't then get to spend the preventative oral health work with their patients
and all the things they wanted to be a dentist for. So until we can reform the
contracts and tweak it, which we keep doing, and just at the end of last year,
there was another tweak to the contract. But what the British Dental Association
said to me, and I met with them just a few weeks ago, is that we need to move
away completely from the UDA system and move to a much sort of cavitation system
that looks at preventative, the whole piece around oral health. Pays them
properly for all the different work they do rather than just... But look, what
is the impediment to just doing that? That would surely be something that would
take six weeks, two months, maybe even three months, but this problem can't be
allowed to persist if that's all it is. It eluded the last government and it's
eluded government since 2010. There is some hope in this, in that the ICBs, so
the integrated care boards that now commission health services across the
country, they take on formal commission responsibility from the April 1st. Some
ICBs, Hampshire, the area that I represent, they were an early adopter, took it
on last year, but they're going to take on that commissioning work. And one of
the things that we're going to be looking at in the inquiry is to what extent
they are able to move the dial on this. They're going to need government to help
with respect to the contract and respect to training more people. So we have a
surplus of people who want to go to dental school, who want to go and do this,
but not dissimilar to the other issue that you've covered on your programme,
Evan, around not having enough places at medical school for general doctors. We
have the same situation in dental school. So we'll be looking at that, the
extent to which the contract disincentivises dentists from taking on new
patients and just trying to move this forward in a macro way, because actually
twigs around the edges have been proved to not work. What happens? I mean, we
heard from Chris, people go to A&E. What is the actual advice to somebody who
does not have the money to pay a private dentist for treatment and who has an
acute problem and cannot get because they're not on the books of an NHS dentist?
What are you actually meant to do? Is it just to go to A&E because you've got a
really bad toothache, a problem that needs dealing with? Well, I can't pre-empt
what 111 would say if you phoned them with an acute dental pain, which I don't
have any experience of childbirth, but many say it's pretty horrid. And I've
certainly had dental pain. I suspect 111 would try and send you through the
route of finding a local dentist. And some of the changes that they made last
year do make it easier. Patients have to, for instance, update the NHS website
to make it clear which practices are taking on new patients and services, so
improving access through that way. But again, it really is just fiddling at the
edges. And I suspect that's why people do end up in the emergency department,
which, as Chris rightly said, then just impacts on the wider system. So look, I
think that there are big things that we are going to look at to try and move the
dial. We're going to be taking evidence from later on this month. The Integrated
Care Board's taking it on is a positive thing, but it's the prevention agenda,
getting on top of oral health, that's really important. And I would also say,
you know, we legislated last year for the Health and Care Act. One of the things
in that was allowed water boards to put fluoride in the water, which dentists
will say is one of the single most important things that you could do to improve
oral health. That still hasn't happened. And I think we just need to bite the
bullet on that, no pun intended, and do it. Will your inquiry talk to patients?
Because there are reports of people having to pull their own teeth out and
things like that in absolutely desperate circumstances because they can't get a
professional. Yes, we've had. And will you talk to those kinds of cases? We've
had hundreds of pieces of written evidence already from trade bodies,
professionals, charities, people working in the profession. But quite a lot of
it has been from Local Health Watch and from patients themselves telling some
pretty painful stories of what they are doing themselves, where they're
resorting to, I can't even say it, DIY dentistry. And you know, you see home
tooth extractions, people tying shoelaces to teeth and this shouldn't happen. I
guess, Evan, just sort of finally, if you indulge me, I think the wider point is
what does the government, we have been asking them this, asking the ministers,
what does the government want from NHS dentistry? Is it the Blair vision that
everyone will have access to an NHS dentist? Or is this just something that the
NHS can't do, can't afford to do, doesn't have the staff to do and it has to
therefore cut its cloth accordingly? If it is that vision of everyone having
access to an NHS dentist, then ministers need to move fast and have big ambition
matched with big action as to how they're going to get there. Because right now,
I'm not sure what the ambition is and I'm certainly not sure how they're going
to get there. Steve Brine, thank you very much. Thank you for that. Steve Brine,
Chair of the Health and Social Care Select Committee. Now Wednesday is
International Women's Day, hashtag embrace equality. But in a move to support
that goal, the Spanish Prime Minister, Pedro Sanchez, has announced a major plan
this week to require a level of parity in politics and business between men and
women. The cabinet there is set to approve rules tomorrow which would require
women to make up 40% of the management of any medium to large company. It would
require political parties to offer equal numbers of male and female candidates
during elections. Now, it causes something of an argument, of course. Guy
Hedgcoe is in Madrid for PM and he did some fox pops for us, which are of course
entirely unscientific. I'm in the heart of Madrid, just round the corner from
Gran Via, which is the big street, big commercial street that runs through the
centre of Madrid and where a lot of large businesses are based. And I'm going to
talk to a few people here and see what they think about this government
proposal. There are only a few women in very big positions, you know. I mean we
have always fought for our rights. I am a little bit fed up of men telling me
what to do, you know, because they are all the time telling us what to do, you
know. I think people want to, but if you don't make a rule about this, we don't
have this. If you want to make a change, you need to make a law, I think. Well,
if they are considering, probably there is something to improve. But as a person
that lives here, I can't feel any unbalance. Women are very integrated in a
society, you know. Fox pops from Guy Hedgcoe in Madrid. Well, Lily Meyers is a
journalist based in that city. She co-presents La Portada, a podcast about
Spanish news and culture. Lily, thank you for joining us on PM. Hi, Evan. How
big a deal is this in Spain? How talked about is it? Well, it's early days. This
was just announced over the weekend. We're expecting more details to come out.
But gender quotas are always a controversial topic in business. These proposed
changes are very far-reaching. I've just spoken with one of Spain's leading law
firms, Cuatro Casas. Their partner specialising in equality and diversity,
Almudena Batista Jimenez, says that whether this is democratically correct or
not is a very difficult topic. Some companies do favour quotas, particularly as
a temporary measure to achieve equality with the idea that they will eventually
not be needed, that they can just fade away. You break the glass ceiling and
then once you've broken it, you don't have to have the law to support that.
That's right. Whereas others, including many women, don't approve of quotas
because, well, it implies that we're being hired on the basis of gender, not
merit, which can be starting a position or a job on the back foot. But what she
says is that right now there's not enough strong details about the requirements
of the women and the men going for the jobs or on the boards for clients to rush
to their lawyers concerned about the new measures at this point. I think
everyone in the business sector will need more details before they start making
judgments on this. It's quite a radical government, this Pedro Sánchez
government. There's been quite a few of these kinds of measures. Yeah, the
coalition government is a partnership between the Socialist Party, PSOE, and the
Leftist Party, Unidos Podemos. They're governing in a minority, so they have
traditionally had quite a hard time passing these quite ambitious equality
measures, but last year the coalition introduced a number of measures. There was
the only yes means yes law, which was introduced after the so-called Wolfpack
case. Do you remember that? In Pamplona in 2016, where a woman was raped by five
men. It was very, very talked about internationally. So the only yes means yes
law is better defining enthusiastic consent. It makes consent or lack of it a
key determinant in assault cases. It also changes the range of prison terms.
There was also the transgender rights law we had last year, which included the
ability for transgender people aged 14 and over to change. A radical government.
We have to move on, I'm afraid. Lily Mayer is there from La Portada's podcast
about Spanish news and culture. Thanks, Lily. A lot going on there. Now, 12
minutes to six. Let's have a last look at some other headlines. Here's Neil. The
head of Russia's Wagner mercenary group has accused Moscow of not providing the
ammunition it needs to gain control of the Ukrainian city of Bakhmut. Ukraine's
military commanders have urged President Zelensky to continue to defend the
city. The head of the Confederation of British Industry, Tony Danker, has
stepped aside while an investigation takes place into complaints about his
conduct at work. And Gary Rossington, the last remaining original member of the
American rock band, Leonard Skinnerd, has died at the age of 71. He co-wrote
their 1974 hit, Sweet Home Alabama. Thank you, Neil. Justice Secretary Dominic
Raab is being investigated over multiple allegations of bullying in his working
government. He denies those allegations. The inquiry into his behaviour by
Casey, Adam Tolley, has dragged on for three and a half months. The BBC's
politics team has been doing some digging into the claims against the Deputy
Prime Minister and Justice Secretary. And political correspondent Ione Wells is
here. Ione, let's start briefly on the progress on the investigation. Evening,
well, this investigation was launched more than three and a half months ago now,
so it has been going on for some time. And just to quickly recap, it's
investigating eight formal complaints from his time at three different
government departments, involving at least 24 different complainants. Now, as
part of the evidence gathering process, Adam Tolley, the senior lawyer
investigating, has interviewed dozens of witnesses as well as the complainants,
including also Dominic Raab himself. Now, the investigation is expected to reach
its final stages pretty soon because Dominic Raab's evidence is now being
reconciled with some of those complainants and other witnesses in this case. OK,
now, what have people told you? Well, I've been speaking to lots of different
people who've worked with Dominic Raab over the years. These are not
complainants because they can't speak publicly while this investigation is
ongoing, but people who have worked with him in different capacities. And we've
anonymised their voices to not compromise their jobs. We can hear firstly from
somebody who advised Dominic Raab in a senior role in one department who said
they had no question that what they observed from him was bullying behaviour. I
didn't personally feel bullied. I did observe, though, what I would characterise
as bullying behaviour. He was somebody who, it's right to say, expected high
standards of people. He however was pretty belittling in terms of how he would
go about those things and he would frequently humiliate members of his private
office. At a flick of a switch, he could turn incredibly angry and pretty
offensive. One former parliamentary member of staff as well said that he wasn't
a bully in their eyes but that reports that they've read about his behaviour
have resonated with them. There were a handful of occasions where I observed him
make a member of staff cry because he was not happy with their work. I think if
a colleague cries and they come back to their desk and they're still fretting
and that happens more than once, then I think anybody should recognise that
somebody is hurt from that interaction. It was always work-related. If a member
of his staff had delivered some work which he didn't think was at the standard
it should have been, he would tear it apart, frankly, literally at times.
Literally, as in literally rip up people's work? I did observe that. Some staff
members, though, who have worked with him have had a slightly different
recollection of what they witnessed when they worked with him. One parliamentary
member of staff who Mr Raab's team put us in touch with said they had only good
things to say about him and one official who has given evidence to the inquiry
said he was always very focused and a perfectionist but thought he was very
nice. He was always very focused on the job but always super nice. And what was
your response when you heard about media reports accusing him of bullying? I was
sad because it didn't correlate at all with my experience in the slightest. I
think people would admit it's hard work because he's a perfectionist and he will
go above and beyond to deliver for a department where he wants to make changes.
What Adam Tolley has to do is turn some of these different testimonies and,
crucially, different characterisations of Dominic Raab into a document of fact.
I'm told that he won't make any conclusions. Those who have given evidence have
been told he won't be making recommendations but he's documenting the facts
around these complaints and it will then be for Rishi Sunak to decide does what
Adam Tolley has presented breach the rules that ministers have to follow around
behaviour if he judges that it has. Mr Raab has said he will resign but he's
been pretty adamant so far that he thinks he's acted professionally throughout.
Ione, thank you for that update. Ione Wells. The town of Griers in Switzerland
is a half hour drive from the shores of Lake Geneva. If you're feeling uptight
and you want to chill you can do a lot worse than to go online and gaze at
pictures of its medieval streets and alpine surrounds. But its name will forever
be associated with a cheese, the cheese, Griers. Now an American court has just
declared that Griers is a generic style of cheese and can thus come from
anywhere, not just Griers. It's like cheddar which is unprotected too. In Europe
the Griers name is protected although the French managed to jostle their way
into it securing protection for the French Griers cheese alongside the Swiss.
But that isn't going to help either country in the US after this court ruling.
Eveille Alline organises cheese tastings in Paris. PM asked him for his
reaction. For me that's a pity. They will have confusion I think for the
consumer between the real Griers that is made with raw milk, with local races or
very beautiful cheeses that has an identity and preserve the traditions and we
will find some I'd say not so good cheeses made with pasteurised milk with not a
lot of taste and not a lot of identity in it. Well that's a French reaction. I
spoke to Shona Morris, Senior Vice President at the National Milk Producers
Federation in the US. We're thrilled that the judges in the end reached the
conclusion that Griers is generic, it remains generic and so consumers won't be
facing elevated price costs moving forward because you'll continue to be able to
have that product supplied from a variety of companies here in this market.
Where do they make American Griers? A few different spots across the country.
Some in Wisconsin, there's some produced in other upper Midwest areas including
some also in the Northeast. Can you tell the difference between a Swiss Griers
and a Wisconsin version? I'd say I can tell they're all Griers quite clearly.
Anybody's cheese is going to taste a bit different from one company to another.
I think you'd probably find the same between different cheddars made by
different British producers in the exact same way. Europe is full of these so-
called geographical indications which are restrictions on who can call Parma
ham, Parma and Parmesan cheese and the like. Europe's full of them. Is the US a
bit more reluctant to adopt these European geographical names? Well, I'd say the
US is more in favor of open competition and a fair landscape and preserving that
for generic products. You mentioned, you know, of course, the geographical
indications are broadly enamored across much of Europe. Frankly, we think that
other EU countries would do well to take a page out of the United Kingdom's book
on this. You mentioned earlier that cheddar isn't restricted. It hasn't been.
Every time we've talked to our British counterparts, they've said that they have
no plans to restrict it in the future. We think that's a pretty common sense
approach. And that approach lets companies compete for consumers' taste buds on
the merits of their products, not on how successful they are at getting a policy
monopoly on use of the term. Is part of the problem here, Shauna, that America
doesn't make as good a cheese as Europeans? And there aren't geographical
indications that would be worth anything in Europe from the United States. So,
Kraft sliced cheese is just not going to cut it when you compare it to beautiful
European cheeses. We make an awful lot of fantastic cheese in the US. Certainly
some of it is cheese slices for use on things like burgers or other food service
uses. But a large amount of it as well is just as good and frankly goes toe to
toe in international competitions with European cheeses as well. No, this is not
a matter of quality being only on one side of the Atlantic. It's a matter of one
side of the Atlantic standing for free competition and the other standing for
restrictions and policy monopolies to advantage one special group of producers.
Sell me American cheese, because obviously we do associate the canned cheese
that comes out with a spray or the orange slices that you can put on a burger.
Tell me the high quality, the American Roblechon or the Camembert and the Brie.
Is the US making a lot of those kind of high-end cheeses? We make a lot of
fantastic products. I'd say a number of high quality cheddars, Parmesan,
particularly in Wisconsin. That's in the past even beat out Italian Parmigiano-
Reggiano in a global competition for best Parmesan and a number of other
products, whether that's Fontina, Asiago, Feta. And then others as well,
Munster, Monterey Jack. It really is a pretty diversified industry here. Which
is your favourite cheese, Shona? My favourite? I'm partial to Parmesan. You
can't beat Pont Levesque in my view. That's Shona Morris from the National Milk
Producers Federation over there in the US. Now it's very cold. Let's get some
weather from Darren Bett. Darren. Yeah, so far the snow has been falling across
northern parts of Scotland, but over the next few days as this cold Arctic air
sweeps down across the whole of the country, we're going to find some snow
falling in other areas as well. Now at the moment we've got rain that's moving
down across England and Wales. It'll sort of stop really later in the night
across southern parts of England and Wales. And with the colder air digging in
behind that, we may see a little bit of sleet and snow in southern parts of
England and Wales with temperatures close to freezing. We're more likely to have
frost and icy conditions as you head further north and snow showers will
continue in northern Scotland tonight. And we could see a centimetre of snow or
two of snow in Northern Ireland as well as the north east of England. Heading
into tomorrow then, it looks like southern England and south Wales will probably
start off quite wet, may well become drier through the day, but still a bit of
dampness and still the potential for a little bit of sleet and snow in the air.
And further north across the UK, we're going to have more in the way of
sunshine, still some more wintry showers coming into Northern Ireland, into
northern Scotland, the north east of England, one or two wintry showers possible
elsewhere as well. It's going to be a cold day, temperatures across the UK
typically three or four degrees and quite a chilly wind in northern Scotland and
down the east coast of England. Thanks Darren, let's hope that's the last cold
snap this year now or this winter. Studio Director Adrian Bargover, Editor Tom
Baker. Have a good evening.