TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to tell them. Newsday is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Rob Young
and Reedy Klemmi. In Israel there have been protests against a riot by Israeli
settlers in a Palestinian town. We'll talk to the leader of an Israeli political
party about the deteriorating situation in the occupied West Bank. The United
States has welcomed a new Brexit trade deal between the UK and the European
Union. We'll assess the agreement and the improved relationship between London
and Brussels. International donors have failed to provide all the cash asked for
to help deal with the crisis in Yemen. Aid agencies are furious. Thousands of
Somalis are fleeing an ongoing drought in their country to seek safety and help
in neighbouring Kenya. And Lionel Mercy has been named as the top men's football
player of the year. All of this news and more after the latest world news. This
is Danielle Jaworowiecka with the BBC News, hello. There's been a broad welcome
in Britain and abroad for a deal with the European Union governing post-Brexit
trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. President Biden said it was an
essential step to preserve the Good Friday Agreement which ended years of
sectarian violence. France's President Emmanuel Macron said it would protect
Europe's internal market. With more on the view from Brussels, here's Katia
Adler. The European Commission President flew to the UK yesterday to stand side
by side with Rishi Sunak, promising a new beneficial chapter in bilateral
relations. But if the revised deal is eventually rejected, the mood music with
Brussels, which believes it's made a considerable number of compromises, may
darken pretty quickly. Reopening negotiations would be tough, Ireland's Prime
Minister Lia Veradika has warned. And if the UK government returns to its
earlier threat of acting unilaterally, a trade war with the EU could loom large
once again. The media tycoon Rupert Murdoch has admitted in a US court that some
hosts at Fox News endorsed the idea that the 2020 presidential election was
stolen from Donald Trump. The comments appeared in a deposition as part of a
defamation suit by Dominion Voting Systems. Here's our North America
correspondent Peter Bowes. Dominion Voting Systems is suing Fox News for
maligning its reputation during coverage of the 2020 election. Rupert Murdoch
testified that he doubted claims of election fraud from the very beginning. He
said with hindsight he would have liked the station to have been stronger in
denouncing false claims. He said he could have stopped high profile presenters
promoting them, but he didn't. Dominion's $1.6 billion lawsuit accuses Fox News
of knowing that Donald Trump's claims of voter fraud were false, but broadcast
them anyway. The White House has given US federal agencies 30 days to wipe the
Chinese social media app TikTok off government devices. It follows legislation
passed in December. The Biden administration says it's to protect people's
security. The White House itself has already barred the hugely popular app. The
Japanese authorities have filed criminal complaints against the country's
largest advertising firm Dentsu over alleged bid rigging for Tokyo 2020 Olympic
contracts. Prosecutors are expected to indict six companies, including Dentsu
Group. The company's president and CEO, Hiroshi Igarashi, has admitted that the
Japanese advertising giant was involved in rigging bids over contracts to plan
and run Olympic test events and competitions. Prosecutors have already arrested
a former Dentsu executive and a former operation executive at the Tokyo Olympics
organization committee. The alleged bid rigging is the latest corruption scandal
to emerge in relation to the Tokyo 2020 Olympics following revelations of
bribery. BBC News. Hong Kong is to drop its Covid mask mandate from Wednesday.
Masks won't now be required either outdoors or indoors. The territory's chief
executive John Lee said this was a clear message to show Hong Kong was resuming
normality. He said hospitals could decide whether to require the wearing of face
coverings, which have been mandatory in the territory since June. The country's
foreign policy chief, Josep Borrell, said that both Kosovo's Prime Minister,
Albin Kurti, and Serbia's President, Aleksandar Vucic, endorsed the plan, but
they needed further talks on implementing it. More than a third of the
population of the territory is in the EU, and the EU has been a key player in
the negotiations with the EU. The EU has been a key player in the negotiations
with the EU since the last time the EU met. The EU has been a key player in the
negotiations with the EU. More than a thousand people have protested in central
Tel Aviv against a riot by Israeli settlers in the Palestinian town of Hawara.
They condemned the far-right-backed administration of Benjamin Netanyahu over
its support for Jewish settlements in the occupied West Bank. This man explained
why he was taking part. We are protesting against the horrific pogrom committed
by the extremist settlers in the West Bank. They came because they have the
support of the government. They have the support of high-ranking Kahanist
ministers serving in the government, and they are deepening the occupation,
deepening the bloodshed, and bringing this country into a spiral of violence and
escalation. Police made arrests after some protesters blocked an exit from a
major highway. There were also smaller demonstrations in Jerusalem, Haifa and
Beersheba. British scientists have warned that flying without harming the
climate remains out of reach. Research into climate-friendly fuels show there
are still no clear alternatives to traditional fuel. The scientists looked at
four options for greener fuel to replace kerosene. They concluded that using one
option, biofuels, for all of Britain's flights would require half of the
country's agricultural land. BBC News. We start in East Africa, where the
drought is expected to stretch into its sixth failed rainy season. Kenya,
Somalia and Ethiopia are the worst affected as climate change makes dry spells
worse. Now thousands of Somali people are fleeing their country, a term known as
climate refugees, as they seek safety and help in neighbouring Kenya. Our Africa
correspondent Catherine Muir-Hanga has been to the Dadaab camp, where more than
100,000 people have arrived in less than a year. Through the night and into the
early morning, new arrivals from Somalia make their way to some of the camps in
Dadaab. I can see hundreds of small huts that have been made by people who've
arrived, so they're made out of pieces of stick, cloth or mats. Aiden Ali's
family arrived here two days ago. They're fleeing the worst drought in decades,
caused by at least five failed rainy seasons. It's much worse compared to the
previous droughts. No water, the dams are dry, a lot of people have died, let
alone animals, due to drought and hunger. It's not easy here either. We borrow
food from the neighbours. You cannot borrow food from someone you borrowed from
yesterday. Hindiyo Ali is helping her 98-year-old ailing mother drink some tea.
Despite decades of conflict and hunger in Somalia, this is the first time
they've fled their home. The war and the drought has gotten worse. The bullets
are always flying. If the animals you were milking, some are robbed and others
killed, what would you do? That's what's happening. I have lost 50 people from
my family. Others were shot while others died of hunger. We have run away from
hunger and war. Without basic facilities like shelter and toilets, living
conditions here are deplorable. The overcrowding is putting huge pressure on
crucial facilities in the camps. Yaya Aden is admitted at a Médecins Sans
Frontières-run hospital in Dadaab with her grandmother Habiba Mohamed. She is a
year old. But looks too small for her age. The child is not feeding well since
she's had diarrhea. We do not have enough food to eat. This child has not been
breastfed since she was born. The mother is mentally ill. What can she
breastfeed? MSF's deputy medical team leader here in Dadaab, Jermayen Bithi,
says the surge of child admissions is alarming. They are coming from a country
where the health systems are weak. Along the way they take so many days, there's
hunger. You find others are zero doses, they have never been immunised. And when
they come you find a child having cholera and severely, acutely malnourished.
Once a month, thousands of refugees, including the new arrivals, come into this
crowded food distribution warehouse to receive cereals and cooking oil. And the
numbers keep increasing. The head of the UN Refugee Agency in Dadaab is Guy
Avignon. The same facilities are having to cater for more people. Refugees
cannot be relocated to the site until they are registered. But the government
has to give the go-ahead for registration to resume because there was a ban on
registration in the past. Kenya's government promises to start registration
soon. But the people here need help now. That was the BBC's Catherine Biara-
Hanga reporting from Dadaab. So now, returning to one of our top stories, Rupert
Meehan, who is a senior researcher at the University of the West Indies, and who
is a senior researcher at the University of the West Indies, and who is a senior
researcher at the University of the West Indies, the host of the New York Times,
has endorsed the idea that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from Donald
Trump. To find out more, let's bring in our business correspondent, Katie Silva.
Katie, what's the story here? Well, the billionaire acknowledged under oath that
some of his hosts had endorsed this idea. So it's part of a defamation suit
being brought about by Dominion Voting Systems. And this suit is worth about
$1.6 billion. They're the tech firm behind voting technology. And this voting
technology was used in 28 states during the 2020 election, most of the swing
states, in fact. Now, the lawsuit's being heard in Delaware court. And Dominion
alleges basically that Fox promoted the idea that the election was stolen
despite knowing that it was false. Now, according to this court filing, most of
which is still sealed, it indicates that Mr. Murdoch was asked by a Dominion
lawyer if some of Fox's commentators had endorsed the idea that the 2020
election was stolen. And Murdoch responded, yes, they endorsed it. That's
according to the filing. He pointed to two commentators, in particular, Lou
Dobbs and Maria Bartiromo, as people who may have endorsed this idea. And Mr.
Murdoch told the court that he would have liked the network to have been
stronger in denouncing Mr. Trump's narrative. Now, Dominion for its part says
that it's caused irreparable harm to its business. It's caused a terrible
reputation that it's had to work to remedy. And the filing shows that there were
internal deliberations that Fox made really when it came to balancing these
claims of election rigging with wanting to keep viewers. Fox lawyers, for their
part, say that Dominion has produced no evidence that high level executives had
a role in the host comments. So we're going to have to wait and see. And this is
all ahead of a five week trial that's due to begin in April. Mm hmm. And Katie,
I find this very hard to believe. There are moves to see the video app TikTok
banned entirely in the US, but it's still a long way off, isn't it? That's
right. So what we understand at the moment is we're going to see one of the
House committees in the US voting today as to whether or not President Biden
will have the right to overrule any, would have the right to basically impose a
ban nationwide from allowing that. So that's just one particular part of the
House that would go to the full House and then to the Senate. And after that,
President Biden would have this power to potentially get rid of it altogether.
This follows, of course, we've seen they've also been given 30 days for
government employees to take the app off their phones, the Chinese owned app.
And we've seen similar moves being made in Canada as well as the European Union.
All right, Katie Silva, our business correspondent. We're going to connect with
you later on in the program as we bring you business news from around the world.
Thanks indeed. Now, world leaders, including President Joe Biden, have welcomed
the new Brexit deal between Britain and the European Union. Mr. Biden's remarks
focused on the peace in the region, saying the new agreement would help keep in
place the Belfast or the Good Friday agreement, which had ended years of
sectarian violence. Fears of a so-called hard trade border between the Republic
of Ireland, which is in the European Union, and Northern Ireland, part of the
UK, had raised fears again of a renewal of the troubles. Well, we're going to
talk to Jack Parrick now, who's a Brussels-based reporter who covers the
European Union. Welcome to Newsday, Jack. Let's just start out with what has
briefly been agreed. What will change between the existing trade agreement
between the UK and the European Union and the new one? It's a really complex set
of details, but I'll try and break it down in the simplest way possible, which
is essentially that they're trying to reduce the amount of checks on goods that
go from the island of Great Britain into Northern Ireland, which is within the
UK, and left the European Union as part of Brexit. Since that happened, since
the deal came into force in 2021, there have been a lot of checks on goods going
across the Irish Sea. And for Northern Ireland, this has felt like they're no
longer part of the United Kingdom. They're not exactly aligned in the same way.
Essentially, when that Good Friday Agreement was agreed, they needed the
European Union single market, which Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland
was all in, in order to keep a free and open trading border between the two
countries. But when the UK left the European Union, there was fears of a hard
border, so goods going over that border. Now, what they've tried to do is set up
green lanes and red lanes. This is what they're calling them that allow goods
that are traveling from Great Britain into Northern Ireland. If they're going to
stay in Northern Ireland, then they will just have a few checks, and they'll
just be able to go straight in. And if they're destined then to go into the EU's
single market through that border from Northern Ireland into the Republic of
Ireland, there'll be a red check and they will have all the goods checks. This
is fundamentally what they've tried to sort out. Okay, so the main aim is then
to try to ease trade restrictions within the United Kingdom's own internal
market. Everybody within the European Union seems to think this is a pretty good
deal. Certainly all of the leaders who've spoken publicly about it. That's not
necessarily the case within the United Kingdom, though, is it? One key political
party in Northern Ireland and some members of the governing Conservative Party
in Great Britain have said that they're not entirely sure about this deal. Is it
still likely to go through? That is the big question. As you say, there's a
really powerful voice in the Democratic Union Party called Ian Paisley. He has
said that this deal isn't good enough for them. The DUP essentially want
Northern Ireland to have exactly the same rules, no change, no differences in
rules to the rest of the United Kingdom. For the European Union, that's simply
not possible if they keep this trading relationship between Ireland and Northern
Ireland exactly the same. I've been speaking to officials in Brussels over the
last 24 hours, and pretty much all of them have said that from an EU perspective
in the 27 member states of the European Union, they'll be able to get this deal
signed off pretty quickly by the end of March. It works for them. Whether Rishi
Sunak, the British Prime Minister, can persuade the DUP round, can persuade
those hardline Brexiteers in his party that this is a sealable deal, that is
another question. But another thing that I've been hearing from EU officials
over the last couple of days is that if the UK thinks it can get a better deal
than this, it's delusional. I've had a few people saying that kind of thing to
me, that this is the final deal they'll get. One of the points of Brexit from
those who advocated it was that the UK would return sovereignty back to London,
reclaiming powers that were held in Brussels. Yet fundamentally, Northern
Ireland, part of the UK, is still part of the European Union in some senses,
isn't it? Yep, definitely. It still has to come under EU law. One of the things
that they did agree as part of this Windsor framework, as they're calling it, it
was announced in Windsor yesterday, is that members of the Northern Ireland
Assembly, 30 of them, if they're upset about a new piece of EU law, they can
announce a kind of break, a sort of freeze on that EU law coming in. That was
another fudge by the European Union. But essentially, the European Court of
Justice is the final court, which is the EU's top court, which so many
Brexiteers don't want to have any control over any territory of the United
Kingdom. Thank you very much indeed for explaining that. Jack Parrick there.
Let's get the very latest in sports. Isaac, what's happening? Lionel Messi has
been named Men's Player of the Year at the 2022 Best FIFA Awards. The Argentine
captained his country to a third World Cup in Qatar in December. He scored 29
goals in 47 games for his country and his club PSG. His teammate and Morocco
defender Ashraf Hakimi was the lone African to make it into the team of the
season. Alexia Puteas won the Women's Award for the second year in a row. The
Barcelona star scored 34 times last season, but really sadly, we didn't get to
see her at the Women's European Championships. BBC.com has a full roundup of the
winners from this year's awards in Paris, which were a very, very glitzy
ceremony. I'll just have a look at that then. I love glitzy. Thank you very
much, Isaac. We'll chat to you again in a few minutes. You're listening to
Newsday on BBC World Service. That's where we leave the World Service and start
the day here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning. I'm Caroline Nichols. There's news
and weather before six, the problem with pigs and the delights of seeing a
golden oriole in France. And tomorrow night, Radio 4 begins a series of special
talks in the run up to Easter. On Radio 4. Our Father, who art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by Christians around the
world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this year's Lent Talks, six people
reflect on the words of this prayer. As we forgive those who trespass against
us. Sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. Lent
Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins tomorrow evening at 8.45. Now on Radio
4, here's Chris Fawkes. That's Caroline. Good morning. Now the shipping forecast
issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at
0505 on Tuesday 28th February 2023. The general synopsis at midnight. High Fair
Isle 1041. Expected Bailey 1043 by midnight tonight. The area forecast for the
next 24 hours. Viking North Utsira. Northly or northwesterly 4 to 6, increasing
7 for a time. Showers. Good. South Utsira. Northly 4 to 6, but variable 3 or
less for a time in south-east. Showers. Good. Forties. Northly 4 to 6. Showers.
Good. Cromarty. 4th. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Occasionally
moderate. Tyne. Dogger. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Occasionally
moderate. Fisher. Northly or north-westly 4 to 6, becoming cyclonic 3 to 5
later. Fair. Good. German Bight. North or north-east, becoming variable 2 to 4.
Fair. Good. Humber. Thames. North or north-east, varying east or north-east
later, 4 to 6. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Dover. White. Portland.
North or north-east 4 to 6, increasing 7 for a time. Showers. Good. Occasionally
moderate. Plymouth. North or north-east 4 to 6, occasionally 7 later. Showers.
Good. Occasionally moderate. Biscay. North or north-east, varying east later, 4
to 6. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Fitzroy. Eastly or north-eastly, 4
to 6. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Seoul. East or north-east, 4 to 6.
Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Lundy. Fastnet. East or north-east, 3 to
5, occasionally 6 later. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. Irish Sea. North
or north-east, 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Shannon. South-east, backing east or
north-east, 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Rockall. South 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to
4, then east 3 to 5 later. Fair. Good. Malin. Hebrides. Variable 2 to 4,
becoming north or north-east, 3 to 5 later. Fair. Good. Bailey. South or south-
west, 4 to 6, becoming variable 2 to 4 later. Fair. Good. Faroes. South or
south-west, varying north or north-west later, 3 to 5. Showers. Good. South-east
Iceland. Southerly or south-westly, 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in north-west,
varying westerly or north-westerly, 3 to 5 later. Showers. Good. Occasionally
moderate. And the weather reports from the coastal stations for 0400. Tari
Automatic. North 1. 27 miles. 1040 rising slowly. Stornoway. North north-west 1.
27 miles. 1040 rising more slowly. Lerwick. North-west by north 1. 32 miles.
1039 rising slowly. Bridlington. North north-east 2. 1034 falling slowly.
Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. East north-east 4. 11 miles. 1030. Greenwich
Light Vessel Automatic. 11 miles. 1030. Jersey. East north-east 2. Channel Light
Vessel Automatic. North east 6. 1031. Silly Automatic. North east 4. 24 miles.
1033 now rising. Valencia. East north-east 2. 27 miles. 1036 rising slowly.
Ronaldsway. North east by north 2. 1037 steady. Marlin Head. South west by west
2. 27 miles. 1039 rising slowly. Here is the weather forecast for the inshore
waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours
and issued by the Met Office at 0500. General Situation. A slow moving high over
Northern Scotland will slowly intensify, bringing strong north-easterly winds at
times over southern waters. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head including Orkney.
Northerly 2 to 4, occasionally 5 later in east. Showers. Good. Rattray Head to
Berwick-upon-Tweed. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Berwick-upon-
Tweed to Whitby. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Occasionally
moderate. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good.
Occasionally moderate. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Northerly or north-
easterly, varying easterly or north-easterly later 3 to 5, occasionally 6 in
south. Showers. Good. Occasionally moderate. North Forland to Salisbury. Eastly
or north-easterly 4 to 6. Fair then showers. Good. Occasionally moderate.
Salisbury to Lime Regis. North or north-east 4 to 6. North or north-east 4 to 6.
Mainly fair. Good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly.
North or north-east 4 to 6. Occasionally 7 later. Fair then showers. Good.
Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. East or north-east
4 to 6. Showers. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's
Channel. North-east 3 to 5. Occasionally 6 later. Fair then showers. Good. Great
Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. North or north-east 3 to 5. Showers. Good. Isle
of Man. North or north-east 3 to 5. Mainly fair. Good. Loch Foyle to Collingford
Lock. Variable 2 to 4, becoming northerly or north-easterly 3 to 5. Fair then
showers. Good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde
and the North Channel. Including the Firth of Clyde and the North Channel.
Variable 2 to 4, becoming northerly or north-easterly 3 to 5. Fair. Good. Mull
of Kintyre to Ardenham Erkin Point. Variable 3 or less, becoming north or north-
east 3 to 5 for a time. Fair. Good. Ardenham Erkin Point to Cape Wrath. Variable
2 to 4, becoming north or north-east 3 to 5 later. Fair. Good. Shetland Isles.
North or north-west 3 to 5. Showers. Good. And that completes the Shipping
Bulletin. I'll be back with the general weather forecast in a few minutes' time,
but for now, it's back to Caroline. Thanks, Chris. This is BBC Radio 4. It's
half past five on Tuesday 28th February. Good morning, this is News Briefing
with Caroline Nichols. MPs are studying the details of Rishi Sunak's new deal
with the EU on post-Brexit trade for Northern Ireland. Thousands of teachers
across Scotland and in the north of England are on strike today over pay. In
business, Disney World in Florida has lost its self-governing status after 50
years. And in sport, New Zealand have beaten England by just one run to win a
thrilling second test. The Prime Minister is expected to travel to Belfast today
as he tries to persuade MPs to back his new deal with the European Union on
post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. It removes most checks on
goods moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and provides Stormont with a
mechanism to object to certain EU rules. The Northern Ireland Minister and
prominent Brexiteer Steve Baker urged MPs to back the deal. If only everybody
will read the text, think seriously about what an amazing achievement this is,
what an incredible opportunity it provides for the people of Northern Ireland
and actually for the whole of Europe to move beyond this awful populism we've
suffered. Unionists who've been blocking any government at Stormont in protest
against the current rules are yet to say if they'll back the deal. The DUP MP
Ian Paisley doesn't think the agreement is good enough. My gut instinct is it
doesn't cut the mustard. We're not there. So this matter is not resolved and not
resolved yet satisfactorily. So the government needs to keep pressing and
showing that if you push Europe, you will get changes. A couple who disappeared
with their newborn baby more than seven weeks ago have been arrested in
Brighton, but their child is still missing. Police found Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon after they were spotted by a member of the public. An urgent search
operation is underway to find their baby. Thousands of teachers across Scotland
and the north of England are striking today in their fight for an above
inflation pay rise. A Scottish union has rejected an offer of a six percent
increase. Teachers in England and Wales have had a five percent wage rise. Sean
Kelly is a primary school teacher who's striking. My son is 16, he's doing his
GCSEs. He's not going into school today because of the strike. I fully
understand why his teachers aren't going in, but obviously he's losing out. With
teaching as well, I would say the workload is a huge issue. So when you have a
massive workload and you're not being rewarded in your salary, I think it makes
people a little bit sickened. Dozens of health and equality organisations have
written to the retired judge chairing the Covid-19 public inquiry, calling for
race to be examined as a key issue at every stage of the investigation. A
preliminary hearing is to be held today. The Royal Mail has revealed the final
set of new stamps to feature the image of the late Queen Elizabeth. These
commemorative stamps will mark the 100th anniversary of the Flying Scotsman
steam train. Now Chris Fawkes is back with today's weather. Thanks a lot
Caroline, and we've got an area of high pressure that we've had now for a number
of days, just to the north of Scotland, and that's bringing a fairly quiet spell
of weather. However, we are seeing some patchy outbreaks of rain for some of
you, so let's delve into the detail this morning. Well, across southern counties
of England, first of all, the easy bit is there's a widespread frost this
morning, temperatures down to minus five or so in parts of Oxfordshire. It will
be a sunny start in these cold areas, but elsewhere across really the rest of
England and Wales, it's a very cloudy start to the morning, and we've got some
very thick layers of cloud, particularly heading across northern England, down
to Lincolnshire, the north and west Midlands, and eastern areas of Wales, where
we have fairly widespread light patches of rain here and there, and I think
that's going to continue to be the case really as we go on through the morning.
So I think for these areas it may well stay rather damp. Now where we start off
with the sunshine across southern counties of England, I suspect the cloud will
tend to build in, and heading into the afternoon, I think we're at risk of
seeing a few patches of light rain spreading across parts of East Anglia, across
the Midlands, into south and east Wales, and across southern counties of England
as well, so there will be some damp weather to come today. All the while, we'll
have a gusty north-easterly wind, so not really much sunshine around as we head
into the afternoon, and temperatures about eight to ten degrees, but feeling
cold in the wind. For Northern Ireland, a cloudy start to the day here, but I
think there are at least prospects of seeing some bright or sunny swells
breaking through. The best of these likely towards Antrim and down, temperatures
around eight degrees celsius. In Scotland, a cloudy start as well, a few spots
of rain today across eastern areas, and with the west stays dry, and across
western Scotland, that's where we'll see the best of the sunshine developing
today, with temperatures probably reaching around eight degrees. That's the
latest. Thanks Chris. Time now for a look at the papers, and the new deal on
Northern Ireland trade dominates the front pages. Brexit breakthrough, the Times
headline. Inside, it says the devil's in the details of the deal, designed to
meet DUP demands. The Daily Mail asks, has Rishi done the impossible? It says a
feared Tory revolt melted away after Rishi Sunak unveiled what it called the
historic deal. The Daily Telegraph, in its editorial comment, said it was
arguably his best day yet as Prime Minister, adding time will tell if he's
pulled off a political triumph. 1,215 days late, Brexit deal is finally done, is
how Metro puts it. The Sun's headline says, got Brexit done, again, before
adding in brackets, hopefully. Inside the paper, the Foreign Secretary James
Cleverley has written an article in which he says the agreement is a turning
point for Northern Ireland, and that he was proud they secured what everyone
needs. The Guardian reports the choreographed agreement has been broadly
welcomed, but that the Prime Minister still faces opposition from hardline
Brexiteers. The DUP have sounded a warning over the claim that Stormont will be
able to veto new European law, according to the Eye. Its political editor, Hugo
Gye, says that Boris Johnson is weighing up whether or not to intervene. In an
editorial, a Dublin-based Irish Times sees the deal as a route to stability and
progress, but adds that the very nature of Brexit means that no agreement is
going to give everyone all that they were looking for. In his column, Sam
McBride, the Northern Ireland editor of the Belfast Telegraph, says the Windsor
framework is more democratic and less unpalatable for unionism, but is not what
Rishi Sunak has claimed. He says the Prime Minister's spin is not backed up by
the fine detail of a phenomenally bureaucratic new system, and the reality is
that the Irish sea border will be staying. The Daily Express says Number 10 has
been accused of dragging the King into political issues after asking him to have
tea with the European Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen, as the new
Brexit deal was struck. The Daily Mail's editor-at-large, Richard Kay, asks,
could this meeting be a moment the King comes to regret? One of a kind is the
headline in both the Daily Express and The Sun as they pay tribute to Betty
Boothroyd, the first female Speaker of the Commons, who has died aged 93. The
Guardian quotes the current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, who called her an
inspirational woman. The Daily Telegraph said she was renowned for her fair
play, sense of humour and passionate belief in the sovereignty of Parliament.
The Daily Mirror reports that the ashes of Peter Sutcliffe, the serial killer
known as the Yorkshire Ripper, have been scattered at a beauty spot near the
Cumbrian village of Arnside. His niece Emily told the paper that he visited
there as a child. And under the headline, It's all happening in the world right
now, the Star reports that the President of Mexico has claimed a mythical tree-
climbing elf has been captured on camera. Yes, the actual President, the paper
says. It prints the grainy photo of the creature up a tree. Now, with news of
the big change at Walt Disney World in Florida and the rest of the business
news, here's Katie Silver. Decades of effective self-rule at Walt Disney World
in Florida has ended after the state's governor took control of its land. Ron
DeSantis, who is widely tipped to run for the Republican presidential
nomination, took action against the entertainment giant after it spoke out
against his political agenda. He said Disney's half-century of autonomy gave it
an unfair advantage over other theme parks. Signing the bill, Mr. DeSantis
announced there is a new sheriff in town. The American Civil Liberties Union has
urged lawmakers in Congress not to ban TikTok, saying it would violate freedom
of speech for millions of Americans. The House Foreign Affairs Committee is set
to vote later today on whether to give President Biden new powers to ban the
Chinese-owned video app. It would then need to be passed by the full House and
the Senate. Canada has joined the US and the European Commission in banning
TikTok on government devices. And the UK has hit its target for women on boards
of FTSE 350 companies three years early. Women now make up 40 percent of
boardroom positions in the 350 biggest London-listed companies, a goal which was
targeted for the end of 2025. There was an almost three percent jump last year,
some companies including Greggs, 7Trent and Vodafone have more women on their
boards than men. In the markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones
finished up two-tenths of a percent at 33,889. And the FTSE 100 ended up seven-
tenths of a percent at 7,935. In Japan, a short time ago, the Nikkei 225 was up
117 points at 27,541. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.21.
Against the euro, sterling is at 1.14. That makes a euro 88 pence. There's been
an astonishing finish to England's test match in New Zealand. With the details
and the rest of the sports headlines, here's Richard Newman. England's
cricketers suffered defeat to New Zealand by the barest of margins in an all-
time classic second test in Wellington. Needing 210 to win on the final day, Joe
Root and Ben Stokes looked to have put them on course. But once they were out,
England fell short when James Anderson was caught giving the host victory by
just one run. It's only the second time in test history a team's won by such a
margin. The series ends one-all. England's Serena Vigman was named the Women's
Coach of the Year at the best FIFA football awards in Paris last night after
guiding her side to the European Championship title last summer. It's the third
time she's picked up the honour, but Beth Meads lost out to Alexia Puteas for
the Women's Player Prize. Lionel Messi won the Men's Player of the Year award,
having led Argentina to win the World Cup. The lowest-ranked team left in the
Women's FA Cup second tier, Lewis, have drawn Manchester United at home in the
quarter-finals. Holders Chelsea will go to Reading. And a British teenager, Mia
Brooks, says she felt like she was in a dream after becoming snowboarding's
youngest-ever world champion. The 16-year-old won Slopestyle Gold in Georgia.
Finally, a glance back at some of the stories that were making news on this date
in earlier years. The first Gulf War ended in 1991 after Kuwait was liberated by
American troops. The then US President George H.W. Bush declared victory in a
live address to the nation. Iraq's army is defeated. Our military objectives are
met. Tonight, the Kuwaiti flag once again flies above the capital of a free and
sovereign nation. Another US President Donald Trump was making global headlines
back in 2019, as he began his second summit with the North Korean leader Kim
Jong-un at Hanoi in Vietnam. A political assassination shocked the world in
1986. The Swedish Prime Minister, Olof Palme, was murdered in a street in the
centre of Stockholm. Benedict XVI became the first Pope to resign for almost 600
years in 2013. In 2001, ten people were killed in the Selby train crash in North
Yorkshire. The accident was caused by a motorist who fell asleep at the wheel
and careered onto the line. Two years ago, pieces of a meteorite crashed onto a
drive in Winchcombe in Gloucestershire. Scientists say the small chunk of space
rock is one of the most important meteorites to ever be discovered in the UK. It
contained extraterrestrial water. In 1966, bankruptcy forced the closure of the
Cavern Club, made famous by the Beatles. It reopened later under new ownership.
In 1983, the final episode of a TV show, MASH, was broadcast, with almost 106
million people in the US tuning in. And finally, if you're heading to work on a
bike or in a car or bus, it was back in 1888 that the first pneumatic tyres were
fitted by John Boyd Dunlop to his son's tricycle. And that's the end of News
Briefing. Now on BBC Radio 4, it's time for Prayer for the Day with the Reverend
Deleth Liddell, coordinating chaplain at Cardiff University. Good morning. This
week we're following in the footsteps of St David, the patron saint of Wales.
There is a tradition that David crossed the Bristol Channel to consecrate a
church and found the monastic community of Glastonbury. It's said that St David
founded 12 monastic communities in all, with a rule of life that included
working with their hands at daily labour before returning on the bell from the
monastery to spend the rest of the day and evening reading, writing and praying.
Their meals were frugal, simple bread seasoned with herbs and salt and
accompanied with water, with more lavish hospitality offered to the sick, the
poor or those wearied by a long journey. The monks in Glastonbury under David's
care held everything in common, owning no property and not even books and
garments were mine or yours, but belonged to the whole community. The monastic
rule of St David was a system of charity and charity. The monastic rule of St
David is in stark contrast to the consumer values of today's world and our
individualistic ownership of everything we have. But St David's monks had love
for each other and community, and today we can see that at work in many food
bank and food pantry projects around the country, offering food that's not mine
but ours to freely take for those who need it. Holy God, let us follow in the
footsteps of St David to do our part to love our community. Help us to share not
what is mine, but what is ours as a gift from God with those around us. Amen.
Prayer for the day was presented by the Reverend Deleth Liddell, the
coordinating chaplain at Cardiff University. Now on BBC Radio 4 on farming today
with Anna Hill, Dutch farmers protest at government plans to seize their farms
if they keep polluting the environment. Good morning. The barriers come down for
trade between GB and Northern Ireland. This agreement, I hope, will pave the way
to a more constructive relationship on trade between UK, Great Britain and the
whole of the EU, because that's something that really will be a challenge. We'll
have much more on that a little later. First though today, many farmers here are
watching what's happening in the Netherlands, where farmers are protesting over
plans to cut ammonia and nitrogen oxide emissions by 50% by 2030. The Dutch
government wants to reduce livestock numbers near protected countryside to
reduce emissions, and it has said it'll force buyouts of the 3,000 worst
polluted areas in the UK. The farmers have taken to the streets, but some of
their tactics have been condemned after they staged a protest against the Dutch
finance minister holding flaming torches, as Anna Holligan reports. Burning
torches. In the video, Zygrid Kaag is standing with her hands clasped behind her
bag as a cluster of farmers confront her. This is, of course, terribly
intimidating. D66 MP Thiers de Groot has been one of the most prominent figures
in the nitrogen discussions. You have become synonymous with this idea of the
expropriation of some farms. Is mandatory buyout inevitable now? Or to stop? So
the government has to be clear and honest about the alternative, and the
alternative is not so nice. So we hope that they voluntarily use these
regulations. Is it realistic to think of all those 3,000 heavy polluters, they
can all continue to farm in some way if they're prepared to adapt or move
elsewhere in the Netherlands? We also have to be realistic about that. For most
of them, stopping their activity definitely will be the most viable option. If
we do it as we from D66 propose, you know in the end that there are non-
voluntary measures being taken. So holding this kind of stick over people
saying, look, if you don't sacrifice your farm, we will take it from you. Yes,
it's the classic keratin stick. That's a really big stick. Well, this
problematic is not from yesterday. We have a very small country with an enormous
number of animals. And the manure and the ammonia has led to a degradation of
our nature of 90%. It's very urgent we act now. It's almost like letting go of
one of your children. Janet Mensink runs a dairy farm in the east of the
Netherlands. It's on the edge of a European network of protected countryside
where certain species of animal in their natural habitats are protected in order
to preserve biodiversity. The uncertainty is so big for us as far. It makes me
sad. How could I choose between the animals? You can stay, you have to go. You
can stay, you have to go. How could I choose? This area has been designated as a
place where you have to really cut those nitrogen emissions. And people are
concerned about it, yeah. I asked MP, Chirs de Groot, what would you say to
people like Janet about the fact that they may be about to lose everything that
they have ever known? It's certainly very emotional. So we have to change the
old agriculture into a more circular agriculture so that farmers who want to
continue to grow and who want to continue and aren't unlucky to be in the wrong
place, have the opportunity to do so. So it's to create space also for the
farmers who want to stay but based on a different model of agriculture. That
report from the BBC's Anna Holligan in the Netherlands. All week we're talking
pigs because the last 18 months have seen massive disruption for this farming
sector. For many pig farmers, a huge rise in the cost of production has meant
they're making constant losses. And although they might be keeping their heads
just above water, it's the inability to reinvest in things like animal housing,
which makes their business unsustainable. I've been to meet George Gitters,
whose family produced pigs for more than a century in Suffolk. He sold his last
pig in 2022. The farm still produces arable crops and rents out its buildings
for business training. In his office, he showed me a picture of the farm from
1965. It shows the Enfield firing arcs out of the back of the old farmhouse. We
have a history here of a family which has been producing pigs for many, many
years. Well over 100 years, yes. At our peak, we had a feed mill producing 200
tonnes of finished pig feed a week with the wheat, barley coming from the farm
itself here, yes. So sustainable again in all those senses of the word. Let's go
outside and see where your pigs used to be and we'll talk about the other
factors that eventually led to you not having pigs on this farm. I love this. Is
this a training... That's UK Power Network's training field. They train people
to go up poles and... So we've got a field here with telegraph poles and...
Yeah, telegraph poles, yeah. Transformers. Transformers, yeah. Our indoor pig
buildings that were constructed in 1997 needed a revamp and in 2017, we got to
the end of what we felt was their economic cycle at the time and looked to
whether we could reinvest and carry on pig production within them. The long and
the short of it was we could not make the figures stack. You were producing top
quality meat for the market but actually the amount you were getting paid was
enough for the meat itself but not for you to reinvest in the buildings to keep
the quality control up. Yes, correct. Profit should not be seen as a dirty word.
Excessive profit, you can argue, yes, but profit in itself, no. You need to
reinvest and also if you're continuing to produce food as economically as you
can, you need those livestock to grow as best as they can and that is by
providing them with the best possible environment and that all costs. Shall we
go and have a look at the buildings where the pigs used to be? Let's hop out. So
we're looking inside this shed which used to be a pig shed and staring back at
me is a very beautiful calf. So when did you decide that that would be it for
the pigs? Was there a straw that broke the camel's back? Our outdoor pig
production cycle we've finally decided to stop in February 2022. The last pigs
left that site in August 22 and that's because the increased costs of
production, partly due to the Ukraine crisis and the war, tragically, pushing
grain prices up and the marketplace not being profitable. The marketplace not
being prepared to understand that that is an increase in cost of production. So
we were losing money for the past 18 months plus. Although the price of pigs at
the moment is actually at a historic high. Yes it is. There is a rule of thumb
that for every pound a tonne the wheat price is we should be getting in pence
per kilo for our pig meat. The wheat price is currently 230, 240 but the pig
price that is still a long way short. There's that awful feeling that you might
have let everyone down but actually you've done probably the right thing. Yeah I
mean it is sad and we took a heck of a lot of agonising over the decision. It
has cost me personally and my family in terms of my health back in 2000s. I had
a nervous breakdown and I think sadly because the supply chain is so totally
broken it just doesn't make sense to continue. It breaks my heart that
agriculture seems to constantly bring itself to these ends. George Gittus. The
major supermarkets have been called to a meeting with the Farm Minister Mark
Spencer to discuss overcoming the shortage of salad goods. The minister said he
wanted to know what supermarket chiefs are doing to get shelves stocked again
and to outline how we can avoid a repeat of this. You can hear a special Farming
Today panel discussion looking at all aspects of the salad shortage on BBC
Sounds. You can look out for our Saturday programme. The Prime Minister has
announced plans for a new deal for trade between Great Britain, Northern Ireland
and the EU, known as the Windsor Framework. The agreement would mean what Mr
Sunak described as a smooth flow of trade within the UK. Goods going from Great
Britain to Northern Ireland only will have free passage and goods then
travelling on to the Republic of Ireland will be under separate scrutiny. I
asked the NFU's Director of Trade and Business Strategy Nick von Westenholz what
this could mean for farming businesses. Essentially the EU's external border has
been there within the UK internal market rather than at the actual geographical
border. So that is of course going to give rise to trade frictions, difficulties
trading. But I mean it has been so far limited to some degree that disruption
because since the withdrawal agreement and us properly leaving the EU back in
2020, there have been a whole load of easements and grace periods in play. Some
of those unilaterally decided on by the UK government and that has tended to
minimise the disruption. But we still see it in some areas. Seed potatoes is an
obvious one where we haven't been able to export seed potatoes into Northern
Ireland because of an EU import restriction. But the concern was it could have
been a lot worse if the full range of controls within the protocol had been
properly put in place. What are farmers hoping to see now? We know that Rishi
Sunak in his announcement has mentioned freer movement of food, specifically
potatoes he's mentioned. What do you think will change now? Well yes, I mean
live animals is another one where there have been problems. I think the real
concern was that if the EU and the UK had been unable to reach an agreement,
then actually things would have got considerably worse. This agreement hopefully
will mean that not only can we get around some of those problems that already
exist like seed potatoes for example, but also make sure that in future going
forward, trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland is as smooth as
possible. It'll never quite be as smooth as within Great Britain because it is
obviously over the Irish Sea and Ireland as an island is a single
epidemiological area. So there's always going to be some sorts of checks there.
But it'll be, we hope, significantly improved and smooth by this agreement. That
I presume will be very good news for agricultural companies that were trading
with Northern Ireland before. I think that there's a kind of bigger picture
here. The bigger problem that a lot of British farmers are experiencing is not
necessarily trade with Northern Ireland, even though that has been made a bit
trickier. It's trade with the whole of the EU where the full gamut of checks do
exist. And we have seen very clear drop-off in exports of agri-food. And this
agreement between the EU and the UK government over Northern Ireland, I hope
will pave the way to a more constructive relationship as well, to come to some
agreement on trade between UK, Great Britain and the whole of the EU. Because
that's something that really will benefit farmers right across the UK. Nick from
Weston-Holtz from the NFU. And there will be a vote in Parliament before any
plan can be implemented. That's all from us today. I'm Anna Hill. The studio
manager in Bristol is Ilse Laderman and the producer is Rebecca Rooney. Now on
Radio 4, Tweet of the Day. The musician Fife Dangerfield recalls the joys of
hearing a golden aureole in France. I remember that as a child, getting out from
the local library, a kind of tape of the bird songs and calls of Britain and
Europe. On the tape, you didn't have anyone saying what the birds were. You had
an inlay and saying, you know, seven seconds, it's this bird. And then 21
seconds, it's this bird. So I kind of sat there with a little microphone, like
for a few days, like copying this epic volume of like nine tapes or something
going like sort of red-throated diver, black-throated diver, kind of sitting
there. This is like in the summer holidays or something, when most kids are out
playing football and so on. I was building up my bird call library. But as a
bird watcher and as a human being, it was really, it was great. One of the best
examples of this was another holiday we had in France. And we were sat out in
the garden having breakfast. And I just suddenly heard this call, this kind
of... I leapt, I was like, golden aureole, golden aureole. And just like legged
it round and down to the field near. And this golden aureole, which is a
beautiful bird, it's like bright yellow and black, was sat right on top of a
tree. And I think quite often they're quite hard to see. So I was really lucky.
And that was amazing. And like that, I would never have seen that had it not
been for knowing the call. And tomorrow it's the Bitton. On FM, on Longwave, on
digital and on BBC.