TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 4 and BBC Sounds, tomorrow night at 8. BBC News at seven o'clock Ukraine's
allies have marked the anniversary of the Russian invasion with new promises of
weapons for Kiev and further sanctions against Moscow. The US has announced it
will provide another 1.6 billion pounds worth of weaponry. The United Nations
Security Council has been discussing the war. The Foreign Secretary James
Cleverley told the meeting a huge amount was at stake in Ukraine. Putin cannot,
must not win in Ukraine. Because what's at stake on the battlefields is the
international order itself. And that is at the heart of the United Nations.
Junior doctors in England had to go on strike for three consecutive days from
the 13th to the 15th of March over pay. The action will affect both routine and
emergency care. Junior doctors make up more than 40 percent of the entire
medical workforce. The government called the move disappointing. UK health
officials have begun drawing up plans for a possible bird flu pandemic. It
follows the death in Cambodia of an 11-year-old girl from the H5N1 virus, the
first since 2014. The health security agency said while very high levels of
transmission in wild birds presented a constant threat, there was no evidence
that the virus was getting better at infecting humans. A major rescue operation
has been launched after a tug capsized off Greenook in the west of Scotland.
Rescuers could be seen climbing onto the overturned hull of the boat. It's not
known how many people were on board or if there have been any casualties. Sir
Bernard Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's long-standing press secretary when she was
prime minister has died aged 90. His family described him as a journalist to his
bones. Sir Bernard had continued to write a column for the Yorkshire Post until
last month. Cricket England are out of the women's T20 World Cup. South Africa
beat them by six runs in a gripping semifinal in Cape Town. BBC News. We'll be
adding five more tracks to our playlist in a quarter an hour. Ukrainian-born
pianist Dinara Clinton will be in the studio at the Grand Piano. And James
Taylor from the jazz funk outfit, the James Taylor Quartet will be there too
with his C3 Hammond organ. And to playlist is at 7.15. Ben gets ready to take
notes in the arches. It's after this. Hello, this is Sharon Horgan. And because
this is radio, you can't see me, obviously. But if you could, you'd probably be
wondering why I'm sat in a wheelbarrow from Monty Don's garden wearing Graham
Norton's jacket holding a winner's trophy from Pointless. Well, there's a good
reason. Because these are just some of the iconic BBC items that you could win
this year as part of Red Nose Day. Oi, we haven't finished with the wheelbarrow
yet. To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward
slash Red Nose Day. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You
must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59 p.m. on Saturday, 18th
of March, 2023. Good luck. This is BBC Radio 4 Now in the arches. As will Ben's
breakfast meet Ennis's expectations. Here you go. One scrambled eggs on
sourdough toast. Thank you. I must say it looks very inviting. More coffee? I
feel like I'd try and limit myself to one a day. Tea will be much appreciated,
though. Decaf? Please. These eggs? Yeah, fresh from my brother's egg business
here on the farm. Ah. And the sourdough? Baked by my gran in the kitchen, where
Bess has not set foot since last night. Mm. I'm sure she has somewhere else to
stay dry when it's raining. Yes, yeah, don't worry about her. She's been safe
and dry all night. Good. Mm. After what turned out to be quite a surprising
evening, this is a welcome breakfast indeed. Good. I'll leave you to enjoy it.
Oh, Mr Archer. Ben, please. Ben, please could you call me a taxi for about half
an hour from now to take me to Bautista High Street? Oh. Is there a problem? No,
no, not at all. Consider it done. Tony, I've been summoned by Mum. Do you know
what it's about? Sorry, I don't. Tony. She's upset about you wanting to travel
in a separate car from us. She'd like us all to go to the funeral together. Oh,
for pity's sake. It's one short car journey. It's not the end of the world. When
you're a parent going to bury your child, it can seem like it lasts forever. But
if you insist that you're not a child, you're going to be a child. It lasts
forever. But if you insist, Pat and I will go in one car and we can just tell
Mum the kids want to travel with you and her. Is that Dad's carriage clock? Yes.
It's working. Yes. It looks so new, different. Hasn't worked in years. Just
needed a bit of attention and polish, that's all. And I've reattached the handle
that was laid on top as well. Well, he wonders. I was trying to give it to you
when you were last over, but you left in such a rush. Well, I had a lot on my
mind. Don't we all? Actually, I had a favour to ask. I found this old projector
and box full of slides. I can't seem to get it working. Where did you find that
old thing? I've often wondered where that went. It was in the attic, but I'm
afraid it might be beyond repair. I'll have a look at it when I've got the time.
Right, well. I'll go and speak to Mum. If we can get it working, maybe we can
see if there are any images of Jenny we'd like for the funeral or that the
children might want of her. Well, if you put it like that, I'll have a look at
it now. OK. Well, back in a mo'. Right, so the taxi should be here soon. Is
there anything else you need from us? Yes. Firstly, these notes are private, so
please don't try and peek over my shoulder. Sorry? Also, could you bring my bags
down for me? I have an inflamed knee and I'd rather save myself the discomfort.
Oh, Linda, I had no idea. Do you want me to have a look? Enus is the one with
the inflamed knee. Ah, yes, of course. Absolutely, sorry. Oh, and Hansel the
taxi, would you? I've decided to ask a friend to pick me up. Cancel it? Please.
But it'll be here any minute. You know, drivers can get a little gnarkey if they
get cancelled last minute. Not my problem, I'm afraid, Ben. You can bring the
bags in here, if you like. Fine. It's fixed already. The projector was just
jamming. From age, I think dust got inside the moving parts. Should be fine now.
Well, can we test it? Here? In the workshop, yes, just... Well, you know, just
us. I can put a sheet up on the wall. Great. Erm, well, what about this great
big dust sheet? I know. That's for the train set. It's thick, Tony, but only be
using it for an hour or so. Let me go put it back. Well, there's some old
curtain linings over in one of those boxes. Where? Never mind, I'll get it. You
know, I'm surprised Pat doesn't make you tidy your workshop up, Tony. It's a
real jumble in here. I know exactly where everything is, thank you very much.
Found it. See? Now, if we just get this up on the wall here... We can hook the
curtain rings onto the rail. Yes! Er, let me get the step ladder. Now, if you
hang on to the curtain, I'll... I'll do it. No, let me. Tony, I have not
decrepit. I didn't say you were. It's barely three steps. I'm not climbing up
Mount Everest. For heaven's sake, I'm trying to be... Sexist? No. Aigist? Good.
Stand aside. Fine. Now, if I could just... Grow a couple more inches. You are
not helping. I'm just a little too... Short? No, I just need... A bigger ladder?
Ah-ha! Well, you should have let me do it then. Don't lean any further. Just
move the ladder. I'm almost there. Oh! Oh! Elian! Are you all right? I think
I've squished your boxes. Oh, come on. Up you get. There's only old sheets and
blankets. It was a good landing spot, actually. Thank goodness it wasn't your
toolbox. Or my train set. Oh, you and your little train set. Will you ever
listen to me? Oh, fine. You hang the curtain. Good. You can sort out the slides.
Deal? Good girl, Bess. Good girl. Bess. No, I'm so sorry, Ines. She's not
supposed to be in here. Don't worry, Ben. I am pleased to report Ines has left
the building and you are now in the company of your friend and compadre, Linda
Snell. Right. So, no more allergy? No, no more silly allergies. Isn't that
right, girl? So, how did we do? Well, then, Robert will be here to pick me up
soon and we've got a lot to get through. Ah, right. First and foremost, I'm
going to be here to talk to you about the building. And foremost, how do you
think it went? I think the room went down well and the breakfast. Agreed. Now, I
must say, I was a little unsure about the shared bathroom situation and, of
course, the pole-dark incident last night. Honestly, Linda, Dad doesn't normally
wash or change in the kitchen. Even during carving, he was just trying to keep
the bathroom nice for you. Poor David. I understand his predicament, but finding
a half-naked man in threadbare long johns, washing at the kitchen sink, is not a
sight one is ever prepared for. Yes. No, I understand. Neither should one be.
No, no. I must say, you showed much patience in the presence of Ines. It wasn't
a walk in the park, that's for sure. By design, Ben. By design. The best test is
a trial by fire. Once you've dealt with the worst-case scenario, everything else
should prove a walk in the park. And in this business, the worst-case scenario
is a fussy customer with lots of particularities. They expect you to address on
the hoof. But we addressed them, didn't we? Oh, yes. Very well, indeed. Perhaps
too well. Really? Can you do too well? I believe you can. For instance, Ines,
being allergic to soap ingredients, is definitely her lookout. So what should I
have done? Pointed me in the direction of the village shop, with opening hours
and bus or taxi details. Got it. But your attentiveness, your politeness and
accommodation of Ines's needs means she is much more likely to pass your details
on to friends and family. Your USP isn't the finery of country living and views
of the un-unulating hillsides. It's more the action-packed uber-reality of
farming life. I believe that there are plenty of potential guests out there who
would be interested in such a place. So remember it in all your promotional
work. I will. Thanks, Linda. This has been a real education. I believe that with
a few tweaks here and there, you will be a very recommendable host of a very
recommendable B&B. Yeah? Definitely. You're going to make a success of this. I
can feel it in my bones. I can't believe some of the outfits Mum made us wear to
church. There are way too many ruffles on that shirt. Jenny and I were always in
the same clothes in different colours, like twins. Oh, no. Oh, you without your
two front teeth. How long did they take to come in? Too long. What beach was
that? It's definitely Wales. Aberystwyth, probably. Dad's favourite. Look at you
in the rock pools. Looking for crabs, as usual. Jenny and I were always in the
sea, but you weren't one for the water when you were little. I swam. Well, yeah,
I know, but you always preferred to look in the rock pools by yourself rather
than swimming with us. Two's company? Oh, nonsense. We didn't make you feel like
that, did we? Oh, come on, Lillian. It's not a big deal. I was a bit of a loner
as a child, that's all. You two were all right because you were both girls and
you shared a room for ages. Oh, nice boat. Oh, look. Jenny's tenth birthday.
Look at the pout on you. What on earth was I so grumpy about? I had no idea. And
there she is, trying to make me smile. Succeeding. Yeah, she always did. She was
the only one. Whenever you were in a front, Jennifer was the only one who could
snap you out of it. Sorry, Tony, I just need to message Justin, tell him where I
am. I'll only be a minute. Lillian? I'm sorry, darling, I'll be back in a
minute. You haven't even got your coat on. No, no, please. Oh, thank you, thank
you. Are you OK? No. No, actually, I'm really not. Me neither. I keep going over
it, them trying to resuscitate her and nothing happening. Don't, don't do that
to yourself. She'd want to be remembered as we knew her, not like that. I know,
but I just can't get it out of my head. I'm really sorry you had to deal with
that alone, Lillian. No, I know. And I know why you're angry. I understand.
Really, I do. But if you could have been there, heard how adamant she was that
you didn't need to know, that she didn't want to burden you with it until she
had to, if she'd known it was going to happen while you were away together, we
just never expected it would be so soon. I still can't believe she's gone. If
there was anyone who could bang our heads together when we were fighting, it was
her. She was always the glue. She kept us together, always. So now it's up to
us, Lillian. If you'll forgive me, we can be the glue that keeps us all
together, for Jennifer's sake. Oh, Tony, there's nothing to forgive. I've been
such a fool. Oh, come here. You've not been a fool. You just miss your big
sister. I love you, Tony. I love you, Lillian. I always will. The Art Truth was
written by Nyla Ahmet, and the Farmian countryside advisor is Sybil Rusko. We're
directed in our Birmingham studio by Gwenda Hughes. The editor is Jeremy Howe. A
British jazz-funk musician and a Ukrainian-born pianist help us add pieces to
our playlist in a moment. First. Hello, I'm Brian Cox. We're back at Season 26
of The Infinite Monkey Cage. Where do we begin, Robin? We're going to be talking
about the nature of the light that comes from stars and how to commit the
perfect murder. And we've done more about maths as well, which turns out Brian
doesn't understand at all. Makes it all up. We've got guests like Susan Callum
and Russell Kane, and a Bern-Jo Brand Sally Gunnell. And we've got special guest
spiders. We actually do have spiders with us on the show. So we have a very
large spider in a very large web. That's not large. To me it's large. That's the
new series of The Infinite Monkey Cage with me, Brian Cox and me, Robin Ince. On
Saturday evenings at 7.15 on Radio 4 and BBC Sam's. Now on Radio 4 it's time to
join Caris, Geoffrey and guests for another weekly musical session in the
studio. Hello and welcome to at the playlist of me, Caris Matthews. And me,
Geoffrey Bwachi. As ever, we've got a long journey to go on together tonight. So
Geoffrey, explain the kind of map we're going to follow. It's very simple. We'll
take a piece of music and find a musical link to another. Adding to the
itinerary, like a map, until we have a playlist of five tracks in total. Each
week we do this with the help of studio guests and specialists. And I am
absolutely delighted to welcome James Taylor of the jazz funk outfit, the James
Taylor Quartet. James, amazing to have you on the show. Welcome. Well, very
excited to be here. Thanks for having us. You're in front of a giant instrument.
You've got to give us a tootle on it. Okay. Yeah, yeah. What is it? This is a C3
Hammond organ going through a Leslie 147. Hey, it's great to have you with us
because we did catch up with you last series. Yes. But we've got the studio and
the Leslie Suker, which I can see turning in the studio with us. So very
exciting. Fast and slow. Welcome, James. Thank you so much. And also with us in
the studio is the Ukrainian born pianist, Dinara Clinton. Great to have you back
with us, Dinara. And our thoughts are with you and the people of Ukraine today
being the first anniversary of the Russian invasion. But it's lovely to have you
here with us playlist at the grand piano. Are you warmed up? Yes, Sam. Thank you
very much, Kerry. Thank you very much, Geoffrey. It's fantastic to be back. How
do you warm up? Like this. Thank you so much, Dinara and James. Keris, we've got
a job to do. We've got five more tracks to add to the growing playlist. As
usual, we pick up where we left off. And my choice for track five last week was
this. Gnažien number one by Eric Satie. So, Keris, where are you going to take
us from here? And what's the musical connection? Well, Gnažien's melody and
places reminded me of Menov Haare. But we're not going there. I honed in on the
tripping fingerwork on the piano, and that took me to the stride pianists of
Haarlem. But in the end, it was the melodic trickery of a highly influential
song that I went for. It starts exactly where Gnažien ends. I'm going to choose
this as the first song. Let's hear them back to back. First up, the final bars
of Satie. I was straight into the groove of drums, and both bass guitar and the
pianists left hand playing bass notes in the fifth intervals. Bum bum bum bum
bum bum bum bum. And then in come the trumpet and sax, and it feels like we've
well and truly arrived. It's Song For My Father by Horace Silver from 1965.
James, you're a funky player. What do you reckon? It is funk, isn't it? It's the
beginning of funk for me. It's the sound of his ancestral voices as well. It
feels like he's fusing so many different things from his ancestry with Western
music and coming up with something completely new. A new thing in its own right
is like a perfect kind of alchemy, a synthesis. Dinara, what do you reckon of
this playing? I think it's absolutely beautiful, and what actually amazes me as
a classical pianist is the sense of rhythm and the sense of groove there. I
think that gives it some additional swagger and determination. It definitely has
that swagger, doesn't it? Immediately. We're hearing the work of Horace Ward
Martin Tavares Silver, born Connecticut in 1928. He died in 2014. He's a
composer, arranger, pianist, co-founder of the great jazz messengers with Art
Blakey, and a key figure in the formation of hard bop in the 1950s. Hard bop
being the more driving music developed by East Coast musicians compared to the
more cool bop of the West Coast. So let's go in and talk rhythm then. Bossa
Nova, which takes us, and I want to remind us all of the 80s, if we were around
in the 80s, and if you did, we're lucky enough to have a cheap Casio in your
Santa gift box at some points. Press the Bossa Nova button and you'd hear this.
I think that the funk bass line pulls out of Bossa Nova because there's so much
swing in there and it lands on the one, but it's pushing the one. Can you play
what you mean? If you've got sort of that... OK. If you groove on that swing for
a while, that Bossa Nova sort of swing for a while, first of all, you're going
to kind of speed up a bit and get more intense. That song for my father, the
recorded version, is quite laid back, isn't it? And it's sort of is quite a
haunting sort of thing. But when he performed it live, it was fast. And I think
this is what happens when you start to do a lot of performances, things speed
up. And you could imagine that the bass player will start to embellish a bit and
you'll end up with something more like a kind of funk bass line. James, you
mentioned his influences of his ancestors. Well, the background to this
composition is really interesting. He'd been to Brazil with a Brazilian pianist
Sergio Mendes for Carnival, as you do. And when he returned, the Bossa Nova, and
these are his words, haunted him. So you can imagine him on the plane bringing
back that movement. So he wanted to write a song with this rhythm. So he sat
down to try and write. He came up with this melody and it's inspired by the Cape
Verdean folk song. So his dad played him because his dad was from there. And so
he dedicated the song to his dad. What key are we in, Denara? F minor. Is the
sati also in the minor? F one, yes. Yes. Also in F minor, yes. So it's also F
minor. Exactly, yes. Play us the F minor scale. Does that have a kind of vibe to
you? I like F minor. And actually, some of the very personal and very intimate
pieces of piano literature were written in F minor. Like Chopin's second
concerto, which was actually his first. Even the Chopin's nook turns. Could you
play us a little? If I go down. I don't remember how I do it. I'm just
improvising. There is some very solemn feeling to this key. James, are you a fan
of F minor? Star Skynhoch. Let's hear someone have in. Sort of F minor, F blues,
something like that. Doesn't sound so solemn when you think of Star Skynhoch.
This song has been hugely influential. Let's revisit it and listen again to
that. It's Ricky, don't lose that number, isn't it? Yep. There's another song
we're thinking of too, Buddy Rich. The beat goes on. So more about Horace Silver
then and this particular album which came out in 1965 on Blue Note. The cover is
beautiful as well. The photo of Horace Silver's father, Grace is the cover. His
father was born around 1900. What's fascinating to me is that back then this
kind of rhythm would have sounded quite fresh in the 50s and 60s. You know,
those growing up in the 80s, we had that boss in no of a pattern. But back then
it would have been really something else. Have you written a song for your
father? I have. But it's really a homage to the Horace Silver thing. My father
passed away, I do. So it's got that, it's in A, it's got that. But I added that
push on the right hand. So he's, I've got up tempo and I've got... So now he's
just skipping it? Yeah and the drummer catches that on a rim tap. So song one is
song for my father by Horace Silver. The personnel on this recording, Carmel
Jones and Trumpet, bassist Teddy Smith, drummer Roger Humphries and tenor sax
player Joe Henderson. Thank you so much, Kerris, for that groovy opener. James
Taylor, it's over to you, sir. Where are you going to take us for track number
two and how does it link back to Horace Silver? Starting with the idea of a tune
that is kind of haunting and in a way puts you in a trance. And then I thought,
well, jamming that, you will kind of speed up a bit and certainly he does. And
you will embellish that bass line a bit and you'll end up with from... Do you
see what I mean? Yeah, yeah. It kind of goes in that direction and I think
that's what happened and that sort of funky stuff went that way. And the other
thing, next track that I'm going to choose, the reason I wanted to talk about it
is because it's a live track. And for me, the work that I do is really focuses
on the interaction between performance and the audience. And this space in
between what happens in between what the players do and what the audience
receive and what the audience feedback to the players, which for me is very
interesting. And I observed that for the last 40 years of performance. What's it
going to be then? Well, this band come on stage and go straight into a state of
hysteria and you hear Earth, Wind and Fire. The band and the crowd. The band and
two seconds later, the crowd, straight into it. And I've never heard anything
like it and I've done gigs on festival stages with this band. I've never seen
anything like it. What is it? It's called Africano. We're talking about
Africano, a live version by Earth, Wind and Fire, which came from their double
live album, Gratitude, which was released in 1975. Can you see how that
connects? Do you know what struck me with that? You know, you hear the crowds,
the keyboards, there's this kind of holding pattern on the drums. So you know
something's going to happen. You are going to take off at some point. But it's
when the bass comes in and the reaction of the crowd when the bass comes in.
Verdine White, when I play this to bass players, they can't believe there is.
Bass players can't believe this guy. I mean, he's a monster player. For me, it's
like a shamanic experience. It's something which is completely like a spiritual
event, which kind of brings the audience and the band into another zone. And
that's the thing that I focus on and that I like in performance and that I try
to pursue. And you do it with very intense rhythms from the drummer and from the
bass player, even in ballads, there's a massive intensity and a lot of kind of
call and response and bringing the audience right into the center of the
performance. Let's talk about that call and response and the structure of the
song and the chords. Let's start with the chords. Are there many chord changes?
Is it quite linear? I don't think there's too much movement around, but they get
to a breakdown and then they have some call and response of the audience. Then
they have some horn fanfare parts which start on the beat and then move on to
the two. So they go... and then they go this... absolutely groovy as hell. After
that, the horns do a lot of fast movement. This is a great impression of when
you fire. Tony Green of Spin is a quote, A frightfully accomplished funk hit
machine flexing its muscles live is a truly beautiful scene. I think that I
think GPs should prescribe this because I think it makes you well to stand in
front of something like this. You come away feeling absolutely transformed.
Well, we've got to go in on that moment. So you talked about whether there's a
call and response with a crowd. It's just after the one minute mark. There's a
breakdown. What do I mean by a breakdown, James? Well, you go down to the drums.
Just drums and a bit of conga. Yeah, percussion, everything drops out. And then
somebody shouts. He may have been using kalimba or something, but there may be
some African sounds on there as well. Morris White. And somebody shouts, party!
And the crowd goes... Straight back. So they're all locked in. There's such a
sense of unity. That's the really beautiful thing about music, I think, is that
sense of unity that can come between a band and a crowd. This is the best band
that I've ever seen in my life. That's why I wanted to present it. And I had the
misfortune of having to follow them on stage once at a festival, which was not
great. We have to ask you before we move on to the next one, can you play us
some full blast, a piece of full blast of the Hammond, please, James? Full blast
of the Hammond? Yeah. Thank you, James Taylor, Play in the Hammond live for us
here in the studio. And we were talking about the live version of Afrikan by
Earth, Wind and Fire. So, Jeffrey, which element of that track are you going to
focus on for your choice? It's track three now. For me, Earth, Wind and Fire are
masters of tension and release before giving you the big payoff of a fat, fat
groove. Right. So the intro to my pick for song three is gloriously tense and
plays with you. It wrongs you with syncopation, off rhythms, gaps and pauses
before the groove finally kicks in. We've just had Afrikan, so I want to go back
to the roots. I want to go back to Africa. Join me specifically in the Gambia
with this. Benaya by the British Gambian singer, composer and virtuoso, chora
player Sona Jobate from her 2011 album, Fassaya. It's that tease, isn't it,
Jeffrey? Yeah. So you hear the instrumentation start the song. That's it. Before
they hit the groove. Yeah. There's a lovely kind of three note fanfare intro.
Then you get just three drum kicks tantalizing you, still holding back. Then the
licks come on top. It's so exciting to me. And then the hi-hat gives you the
metronome. But the whole time you sort of aware something's about to happen, but
it doesn't quite happen. I love the introduction so much. And then when it hits
the groove, I'm hearing a similar pulse to Afrikan, oh, James. It's definitely
got a kind of Afro beat feel to it, isn't it? Also for me, whenever I've
encountered the chorus, I've been mesmerized by the sound. Denara, Benaya, what
did you make of it? I really like the connection with the folklore. And it
really always amazes me how music is representing one or another country or a
culture. So that makes me troubled about when I'm hearing something like that.
And also it uses such a set of instruments that I hadn't encountered before, to
be honest. On Nada Playlist, we often have specialists. And to help us go deeper
into the sounds of the chora, the stringed instrument we can hear throughout
this track, I'm absolutely thrilled to welcome to the show the chora player and
composer Kajali Kawate, who was born into the great line of Kajate Grio in
southern Senegal and is a chora teacher at SOAS at the University of London.
Kajali, it's so good to have you on the show. Welcome. Thank you for having me.
It's a great pleasure to be here. Could you start by describing the chora? What
is it? Yeah, the chora is described as the West African harp lute that belongs
to the Griot Mandinka people, where you have the Mandinka tribe, but you have
the musicians within the tribe that are called the Griot, which is a Western
word, what we call ourselves the jelly, which means it's in your blood, you're
born to play it. But the chora is the youngest instrument of the Griot that came
in the Gabu Empire in the Guinea-Bissau, southern Senegal and the Gambia that
all was part of one territory called the Gabu Empire. Describe what we're
watching now, how it's built and how it works. Yeah, it's made of calabas, which
is a dried pumpkin, a wild fruit, and then cut in half covered by leather. It
used to be antelope skin, but now cow skin. And this used to be animal gut as
well, the strings. But now we use fishing lines, technology. And how many
strings? This is 22 strings. So 21, 22 strings. And how tall is it? Because it's
on your lap, you're holding it with two sticks and kind of it's sat on your
thighs. Yeah, so in this position when you're sitting, then you can put it on
your thigh like this. Or traditionally you can also sit on the floor and across
the legs and then put it on the floor. Could I ask you to put you on the spot to
play a bit now? Yeah, okay. We're tuning up the corner. So this one is a song
called Cantondero. It's a song about the importance of greeting. Cantondero,
Cantondero, Cantondero. Oh, it's beautiful. Absolutely beautiful. Oh my
goodness. Because you had a co- distinctive of the sound of the chorus. Wow. How
old were you when you started playing? Well, I grew up in the environment, so
surrounded by father, grandfather, uncles, cousins, you know. So I don't think
there is always a particular age. I think it was just like an attraction, a toy
for, you know, around the house. As a chorus teacher. I wonder if you could give
us a critique of this beautiful track that we're honing in on Banaya by Sona,
Japanese. I can only say beautiful things about this track and I think Sona is
not only amazing to the chora player, but a beautiful composer that shows in all
her album. Of course, the success also shows how it's not like a privileged side
because she's just a female who is the first female to play the chora. Actually
she worked hard to learn, to develop the technique, you know. Improvisation
plays a big part of it and she nurtures that as well within her playing. And the
simplicity in the song and the skill, I think that's what makes it beautiful at
the same time. There is this precision in it. We are talking about Banaya by
Sona Jabatay and I want to add that she's a multi-instrumentalist. She studied
cello, piano, harpsichord at the Royal College of Music and then soon after went
to the Purcell School of Music to study composition. Kajali Kiyate, thank you so
much for answering our questions and for bringing and playing the chora so
beautifully. My pleasure, thank you for having me. And thank you, Jeffrey, an
absolutely beautiful place to take us in the Atta Playlist. You are listening to
Radio 4, this is a music show called Atta Playlist and I'm Kerris Matthews. And
I'm Jeffrey Bwachi. With us in the studio are the pianist Dinara Clinton and the
Hammond organist James Taylor as well as Kajali. Jeffrey, reminders of the track
so far. Track number one was Song for My Father by Horace Silver. That was
followed by the live version of Afrikan by Earth, Wind and Fire. And we've just
had Banaya by Sona Jabatay. So Dinara, it's over to you for track four in
today's playlist. Where do these griot sounds from the Gambia Lido and what's
the musical connection? Well it may seem quite a stretch for some, but this
really somehow reminded me of Rachmaninow Concerto No. 3, first movement. This
ascending minor third. It's absolutely beautiful and sounds like it's never
ending. Sevens. Now the easy part gets over. And then you get one billion notes
per minute. So Dinara's brought us to concerto number three in D minor, opus 30
by Sergei Rachmaninoff written in 1909. Dinara it's almost like looking at a
landscape, long vision, but constantly shifting. Your eye doesn't know where to
dwell because there's always somewhere else to take your attention. Exactly.
This is a very rich concerto. The orchestration is very complicated. The themes
that you interlinked. It's extremely intense for the performer, for the
orchestra, for the conductor and also for the audience. How long is it? It's
roughly 45 minutes, depends on the interpretation. The whole concerto, the first
moment, I never timed it. I would say it's somewhere around 15 or 18, also
depends which concerto has been used. But we're honing in on concerto number
three. It's known as Rach 3, is that right? And it's known as a pretty scary
place to go for a pianist. I just wonder before we go there, what was he trying
to do? He didn't want to just write to make a difficult piece, did he? Was he
trying to communicate something? Where was his headspace at the time? Well, he
was an unknowingly amazing pianist of those times. He was an absolute superstar
and he was capable of playing this music. Not many people would be able to hear
dedicated to Joseph Hochmann, who was another amazing pianist who never played
this work himself. He said it wasn't for him. I mean, probably just, you know,
it scared him off. But then Vladimir Horowitz, another great Ukrainian-Russian
pianist who immigrated to the United States, he became quite a pioneer of this
work and played it really a lot and protected in front of Rachmanin as well. So
he did write it just to be difficult. I don't think it's that. I think it was
just a way of expressing himself, because for him it was his mother tongue.
That's how he communicated his thoughts and his ideas. Denara, I wonder if this
particular first movement is about 19 minutes long. Could you talk us through
the different sections? Yeah, definitely. So I played this beautiful first theme
and it does come back in the beginning of the development section. And then
basically the first movement finishes with this beautiful melody again. After
that, so there are passages of piano kind of accompaniment, which are pretty
tricky. And then the orchestra takes over the theme. So you can imagine this
melody played over the passages. I'll do this. So the theme starts developing,
but it's this time it's in the orchestra. Yeah, and the piano just has a role of
an accompaniment here, even though it has quite a few notes. Then this whole
section speeds up. It says pure vivo, goes back to Allegro, and there is the
first cadenza. And the cadenza. Cadenza, yeah, we're getting there. What is a
cadenza? So cadenza traditionally when the piece is written for a solo
instrumental instruments and an orchestra, cadenza is the place where a pianist
can display or pianist, any instrumental artist can display their capabilities
because orchestras traditionally not really playing there and it can be done in
free time. It can be traditionally it was improvised, but then the romantic
composers they tended to ride the on cadenzas. Is this the hard bit? Because it
was in that film Shine, wasn't it? Yeah, yeah. Well, this fast cadenza just is a
very small one. There's a moment where if you're driving a car, you're going
into the highest gear. If you've got an amp in front of you, you're going to
turn it up to full whack, the biggest volume. Talk us through that gear shift in
the cadenza. What's happening and why does he want this to be heard? I feel like
I have to mention that there are two versions of the big cadenza existing. So
Rachmano first composed the version which is now nicknamed Osea, which in
Italian means like an alternative. So he first composed that one, but himself he
premiered this concerto and kept playing this concerto with the tocata, with the
second version. I do play the big one, the Osea. Play it so that we know what
we're talking about. I'll try, yeah. The whole thing is about four minutes long,
I think. I'll try. Just a little bit. A little bit. The entire year, I think.
And then the main theme comes back. Wow. In this corridor. It's a privilege to
watch you and listen to you play all in the basin. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. It's so
spooky. I think it's almost cause for our primary instinct. Yeah. How do you
feel playing it? Physical, but very satisfactory. Okay. Okay. It does feel
gasket. Yeah. Thank you for that dinner. Absolutely brilliant. Our track four is
Rach 3 as you call it. Otherwise known as Kindreda number three in D minor, opus
30 by Sergei Rachmaninoff. Wow. So to round things off this week, Keris, you've
got a big job to follow that. It's over to you, Keris, for our final track.
Where does the drama of Rachmaninoff take you and why? We've had a heck of a
journey, haven't we, J.F.? We've really gone on it today. Well, we could go with
the D minor tip and go with Crazy in Love, Beyonce and Jay-Z. We could be
inspired by the bubbling notes that we've been hearing across many of the pieces
today, like Mountain Springs, I felt. You could go to Bluegrass, something like
that. But no, I wasn't going to go there. I'm going to go focus on that cadenza
and those hard-hitting. The way the piano is a percussion instrument, thumping
out the minor with all the emotional and physical force a human can muster. It
took me to a song, which I often think of, when that on first hearing brought me
absolutely gasping for air. It was so physical, with its deep, minor grieving.
It's Kirie Eleison by Bashar Mar Khalifeh. We're listening to Bashar Mar
Khalifeh, Kirie Eleison from his album, Yabalad or Homeland. I love Kirie
Eleison, I love the words, but he's added his own words to the Kirie text. He
brings together Arabic singing, and the lyrics obviously are inspired by the
title prayer from Christian Mass, so it becomes a universal prayer for peace.
Yeah, and it's that explosive section, which is just so visceral. I think that's
what links all five of these tunes, is the kind of visceral nature of all of
them. What really fascinated me about this track were those syncopations in the
piano. They're almost like a heartbeat. So we're talking about Bashar Mar
Khalifeh. He was born in Beirut in 1983, but now living in France. Bashar is a
graduate of the Conservatoire of Paris, and I'm happy to say that he is on the
line with us today to tell us more. Are you there, Bashar? I'm here. How are
you? I'm fine. Thank you very much for having me, and hello, everyone. Hello.
Hello. Well, let's talk about the inspiration for this song. When I was
recording my album, Yabbalat, in 2014, I had always this theme in my head, and I
was just playing it in the studio during a time that I was maybe lost, because
in the studio, I am often lost. And a few words came to my mind. I wanted to
express something, a shout to God, maybe. It was like a prayer, as you said, a
modern prayer, because at the end, I just say, spare us and leave us alone,
because I feel religion took a lot of place in social discussions and in the
media and everywhere. And I just prefer when religion is like very intimate
matter. I come from Lebanon, and maybe this was the main inspiration, because
religion is very much present in this country, maybe too much, and it mixes with
politics, etc. And there is a lot of taboos. You cannot talk about everything
concerning your doubt, maybe. If you doubt the existence of God, you cannot just
tell it. And I think the way I used the piano, like I wanted to destroy the
piano at this moment, and I destroyed it in each concert I played this song. It
was very heavy, and I played it with my band, with drums and bass. So it was
more like a rock version of the song, and I think it fits well my anger, maybe.
It's a mix between anger and peace. You have a very musical family. Your father
is a renowned Lebanese ude player, Marcel Khalife. What did he say when he heard
this composition? It was a mixture of proud and fear, because he knows very well
that those subjects in our country can be problematic. And he was right, because
this song was banned in Lebanon, and my album was banned, and there was a lot of
talking about this song, and why is he addressing God? And no, he's not
addressing God, etc. I refused every interview concerning this matter and this
song, because I knew that I was going to talk with people that don't know
anything about music, or poetry, or imagination, or dreams. The lyrics have
mercy on me, singing, For you, O Lord, my silence is for you, O Lord. I believed
I struggled, receive me. For me, it's like an opera or a theatre thing. I don't
know if it's really me that is asking for this. The words cannot say everything.
The most important part of the music is maybe when there is the silence. That's
what I believe in music. Miles Davis too, I think. So not everyone is capable of
hearing this silence and understanding it. I can't. Thank you so much, Bashar
Markhilife, for joining us today. It was a great pleasure. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Bye. Keris, thank you so much for our final track tonight, Kyrie Ileson by
Bashar Markhilife. Thank you to Bashar for joining us on the line from Paris,
and to Kijali Kuyate, who was with us in the studio earlier. And thanks as ever
to our studio guests, James Taylor of the James Taylor Quartet on the Hammond.
Thank you. And Inara Clinton at the piano. Thank you very much, Keris and
Jeffrey. Como pullio, como pullio. Don't forget you can catch up with all
previous episodes of Add to Playlist on BBC Sounds, where you'll find a list of
the five tracks we've been discussing tonight. So thank you also for listening
and for coming along on these journeys with us. And now to end then, to come
home, how does a Hammond and piano duet sound? Good question. Might you both
sublage, please? Oh my gosh. It's my favourite part of the show. It starts on
45. It's your heart out. This evening's Add to Playlist was produced by Jerome
Weatheralt and presented with Music Direction by Keris Matthews and Jeffrey
Bauche. After the news in a moment, this week's edition of Any Questions, live
from the west of England. That's in a couple of minutes. Tomorrow morning,
though, it's Saturday live with Richard Coles and Nikki Beatty. On tomorrow
morning's Saturday live, the Reverend Richard Coles and I will be talking to the
best-selling author and doggo file Jojo Moyes, performer and playwright Henry
Naylor, author Ava Glass, whose previous job involved working with spies, and
musician, podcaster and soundbath proponent Aaron Horn. And what we'd like from
you are your stories about things you own and love that no one else likes, and
the story behind it. You can see Our Summer