TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. It's five o'clock, time for PM with Evan Davis. Hello. The
final chapter of the public inquiry into the Manchester bombing is published,
arguing that mistakes were made by MI5. I have found a significant missed
opportunity to take action that might have prevented the attack. It's the end of
the inquiry but not the last word. We'll have reaction from the UK's reviewer of
terrorism legislation and from the mother of one of the victims who was sad
rather than angry. I feel that they all look in the mirror every morning and
have to face themselves and that is for the rest of their lives so hopefully
those mistakes are never repeated. Also on the programme, PM comes to you today
from Birmingham but I've been in Solihull visiting Jaguar Land Rover. It takes
us about 36 hours from the very start of a stamping facility so where we go from
raw metal to a finished car. Well they're embarking on a new strategy. They're
all dead keen as you'll hear but it does carry risks. Boris Johnson has given
his verdict on Rishi Sunak's Windsor framework and it's a thumbs down, we'll
hear what he had to say. I think that we should be able to wear what we want
because we look hideous walking around the school with long skirts. Who should
rule the school? Students and Britain's strictest headteacher. Tell us about the
rise of pupil protest. But we'll start with the BBC News read today by Andrew
Peach. The chair of the inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing has said the
security service MI5 missed a significant opportunity to prevent the attack. In
his third and final report into the events leading up to the bombing in 2017 in
which 22 people died, Sir John Saunders said there'd been a realistic
possibility that actionable intelligence might have been obtained. Our
correspondent Nick Garnett has followed the inquiry and says most of the
classified evidence won't be released to the public. We've been told that if an
MI5 officer, one MI5 officer, had acted differently there was a chance that the
bombing might have been stopped. We're told that the radicalisation was down to
his father and his brothers and people in Libya who taught him how to make a
bomb. Yes there were failings. They didn't stop him when he came back to Britain
from Libya. They didn't follow him in his car where there were explosives. They
didn't search him when he arrived back from Libya because he may well have had
the trigger to the bomb in his luggage. But there's so much more to it and it's
all in that private report and we'll never ever know what was really said. The
government has said it's committed to learning the lessons of what it described
as this unspeakable tragedy. The head of MI5 Ken McCullum said he was profoundly
sorry the attack wasn't prevented and deeply regrets that intelligence wasn't
obtained. Richard Scorer, a lawyer representing 11 families, said the
possibility that a chance to prevent the attack had been missed was devastating
to them. The failures exposed in this report are unacceptable. The public are
entitled to expect that information of national security importance will be
acted on speedily and, crucially, that the system will ensure that this happens.
It must do so in the future. Officers who found the body of a baby in woods in
Brighton yesterday say they believe the child may have been dead for some time.
The baby's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, are being held on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The former Prime Minister Boris
Johnson has said he'll find it very difficult to vote for Rishi Sunak's new deal
on post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. Mr Johnson, who brokered the initial
protocol with the EU, said the new deal would act as a drag anchor on divergence
from the EU. The government has managed to get most parties on side with its new
agreement but is still waiting for a response from the Democratic Unionists,
who've set out seven tests to consider it against. The Foreign Secretary James
Cleverley said he hoped the DUP would agree to it. I believe very strongly that
we've matched and met those tests and I really really hope that the DUP
recognise how much work that we've done on behalf of the people of Northern
Ireland and actually how far the EU has moved from the positions that it took
initially. So we want to see the institutions of the Good Friday Agreement back
up and running, including Stormont. The civil servant in charge of the inquiry
into lockdown gatherings at Downing Street, Sue Gray, has quit the Cabinet
Office and is reportedly on the verge of becoming Sir Keir Starmer's Chief of
Staff. Ms Gray's report into so-called Partygate led several Conservative MPs to
call for Boris Johnson to resign. Labour hasn't commented on the speculation
about her appointment. The inquiry into allegations of racism at Yorkshire
County Cricket Club has been hearing from the player who made the claims, Azim
Rafiq. Lawyers for the former England cricket captain Michael Vaughan have also
given evidence. Matt Graveling reports from the hearing in London. Azim Rafiq,
who's accused the former England captain Michael Vaughan of using racist
language towards him and three other Asian players in 2009, has been giving
evidence to the hearing. Michael Vaughan's lawyer Christopher Stoner KC asked
the former Yorkshire spinner how well he remembered the incident almost 14 years
ago, as his exact version of what Mr Vaughan was alleged to have said has
changed slightly. Mr Rafiq apologised for the discrepancy in his account, saying
he's been put through a lot but was certain that the racist term had been used.
Michael Vaughan denies the allegations. Earlier the hearing heard from current
England player Adeel Rashid, who said he'd heard the comment but he didn't think
it was racist, just bad humour. Matt Graveling reporting. Thank you, Andrew.
Well MI5 says it's profoundly sorry that it didn't prevent the Manchester
bombing. We will hear that apology in a second. It came in the wake of the third
and final chapter of the findings of the public inquiry into what happened. And
what went wrong. And today was really about Salman Abedi, the bomber, how he was
radicalised and how he was overlooked. Here was Sir John Saunders, who spent
three years chairing the inquiry, on the latest of those findings. I have found
a significant missed opportunity to take action that might have prevented the
attack. It is not possible to reach any conclusion on the balance of
probabilities or to any other evidential standard as to whether the attack would
have been prevented. However, there was a realistic possibility that actionable
intelligence could have been obtained which might have led to actions preventing
the attack. The reason for this missed opportunity included a failure by the
security service, in my view, to act swiftly enough. Well you heard the word
failure but you will also have heard the words could and might there. However,
the response was rapid from Ken McCallum, the Director General of MI5, who gave
these words. Gathering covert intelligence is difficult. But had we managed to
seize the slim chance we had, those impacted might not have experienced such
appalling loss and trauma. I am profoundly sorry that MI5 did not prevent the
attack. Well he made a short statement but he didn't take questions from the
media. Let's talk to Daniel DeSimone in Manchester, our correspondent. And
Daniel, we know a lot of the report was hidden from public view but what did the
chair say more specifically about what MI5 did wrong? Well he details in his
report how in the in the months before the attack the MI5 received two pieces of
intelligence that were highly significant to, highly relevant to the plot and
he's critical of how these pieces of intelligence were handled. He says the
first wasn't shared with police and it should have been and that he thinks he
was really concerned that it wasn't. On the second he says it was the officer in
MI5 who considered it had understood at the time that it may be of pressing
national security concern but that this person didn't write a report about it on
the day the chairman says that should have happened and that MI5 wasn't swift
enough in responding to it. And he says that had certain actions followed in
response to that intelligence then it could have led for example to Salman
Abadi, the suicide bomber, being stopped at Manchester Airport when he arrived
from Libya on the 18th of May 2017 and we know the bombing was on the 22nd of
May and that he might for example have been followed from the airport to the car
where he'd stored the explosives and that if if the officers from MI5 had
followed him given the way he was behaving and we could see that on CCTV about
how he's behaving around the car then MI5 might have actually found the
explosives. So he gives these specific examples about what might have happened
if actions had flowed from the intelligence. Now what about other people being
involved in the plot? What did Sir John have to say about them? Well during the
inquiry there was quite a lot of debate about this and victims' families
encouraged the chairman to to find that there was, there were other people
involved beyond the bomber and his brother and his brother is serving life in
prison for his involvement. The chair says that in relation to people in the UK
who'd associated with them at a perhaps helped them sometimes possibly
unwittingly he said he couldn't find for certain any of those people were
knowingly involved he just said the evidence wasn't there but he went further
than we've ever heard anyone go before in that he said that he concluded that it
was probable that the bomber and his brother had assistance from someone or some
people in Libya and in doing that he has contradicted an MI5 assessment which
was revealed during the inquiry that said they thought MI5 that no one else had
assisted the two brothers. Okay that's important. Daniel thanks, thank you for
that. Well let's talk to Jonathan Hall Casey who's the UK's independent reviewer
of terrorism legislation much closer to these issues than most of us and
Jonathan thank you for joining us just your general reaction to what we have
heard today whether you are surprised whether there's anything that has if you
like been of interest to you. First of all I suppose that it wasn't about
resources but was about human judgment I mean that was interesting there was
quite a lot of argument about whether that because MI5 were under such pressure
as we know 2017 was a terrible year in terms of terrorist attacks with that
could have led someone taking the eye off the ball but it wasn't that so that
that's interesting to me and I think what's also interesting is the process
actually so the the fact that ordinarily you have one witness from MI5 known as
a corporate witness but the judge wouldn't have that here and he actually heard
from frontline MI5 officers and again I mean this this I don't think there's a
precedent for this this led to the judge saying I'm actually not going to agree
with what the MI5 corporate position is because I've heard from the officers and
in my view this information was more significant than MI5 says it was so that's
really interesting to me and I mean clearly the judge was mindful that by
criticizing judgments it could have a if you like an effect on MI5 in the future
it could be sort of chilling it could lead them to take defensive attitudes but
ultimately you know his commitment was to the truth. Right, extremely
interesting. Put the mistakes that were made in context for us there are
appalling mistakes there's negligence and there are everyday mistakes that we
make because we're busy or we have other things on our mind I mean it's
difficult from you know from the perspective of someone away from this to make
that judgment about what kinds of mistakes we're talking about here. Yeah I
agree and I haven't yet read the closed report so it's a bit difficult for me I
don't get the sense that this was a gross error of judgment to use that sort of
language obviously everyone was acting in good faith but it was an error I don't
know if that assists and I mean it's a very it's worth reading it again and
again because it's a very careful report he looks at intelligence and he looks
at action so what he says is that if the intelligence had been sufficiently
appreciated and it had been passed on as quickly as it should have been and it
wasn't it could have led to what he says is potentially important investigative
action and we don't know what that could have been I mean whether it would have
been surveillance. It's all couched in coulds and mights isn't it I mean when
you hear Sir John talk about it. It is and I think quite deliberately. I mean
MI5 officers must be making mistakes every day and I suppose there's in the back
of my mind a question about most of them will be inconsequential and for that
reason they will never be discovered and I don't know whether there's a kind of
a horrible hazard here that some mistakes are gonna be made and just ignored or
no lessons learned because they were mistakes but no one ever spotted them and
others have a deadly consequence. I agree I mean it's gonna be so interesting to
see which I will do the closed recommendations and actually and I think this is
this is the really difficult thing about it whether actually there is anything
you can do about human judgment because ultimately human judgment is human
judgment and it's inevitable that some mistakes will be made so be interesting
to see whether he makes if you like systemic recommendations or ultimately he
just says you know do better next time which is which is quite tricky to
implement. Do you have faith in MI5 in the security services generally Jonathan?
Should we have faith in them? Yeah I think so I mean I spend a lot of time
interrogating them seeing the way they work I mean they are very effective and
they have stopped an awful lot of attacks. That we don't hear about? We don't
hear about absolutely I mean I'm just going back to that point you know because
once you've had an inquiry you want to know that lessons have been learned I
suppose my feeling about this is this is an inquiry that was very much dedicated
to the truth the awful prospect remains doesn't it that that that it wouldn't be
possible to stop this sort of thing in the future because I don't get the
impression reading between the lines there was some sort of smoking gun like
intelligence that if you'd added together you would have worked out there was a
bomb in a flat which MI5 could then have put surveillance on it was about
raising someone up the order of priority and thinking okay well this person he's
tasty actually there's more information here let's do some investigation let's
hope that we get some more information and a sort of chain like that but I mean
the slightly bleak thing reading this is there's no guarantee that this wouldn't
happen again even if the recommendations that he's going to make in his closed
report are accepted. Jonathan thanks for that Jonathan Hall Casey independent
reviewer of terrorism legislation and what we've learned so far this afternoon.
Now it's got a past five we'll we'll have some some of the other day's headlines
from Andrew Peach. 57 people are now known to have died in a rail crash in
Greece earlier this week a station master has been charged with manslaughter by
negligence. A meeting of G20 foreign ministers in India has ended in acrimony
with disagreements over Russia's attack on Ukraine making a joint statement
impossible. Steve Mackey the former bassist with the band Pulp has died at the
age of 56 he played on numerous hits including disco 2000 and common people
which he also co-wrote. Right just one other little bit of news that has just
dropped onto our screens as we sit here Sue Gray of Partygate fame. Sue Gray who
we heard in the bulletin at the top of the hour has resigned from the civil
service it is now confirmed she is going to be or she is hoping to be the the
chief of staff for Sir Keir Starmer so she is leaving the Cabinet Office her
official government job it's not a Conservative Party job and she is taking one
with the office of the leader of the opposition. Now that whether there will be
appointments issues around what a senior civil servant can do we will probably
discover a little later but let us talk about Boris Johnson now because he has
said he can't support Rishi Sunak's Windsor framework deal with the EU heralded
by many this week as a breakthrough solution to the long-running problem of the
Northern Ireland Protocol. Boris Johnson said today it was more or less an offer
it was more or less on offer last year when he in fact was Prime Minister thus
downplaying any achievement anyone might have thought Rishi Sunak had in
negotiating it. He also said it's not about the UK taking back control because
it yields too much this is the EU graciously unbending to allow us to do what we
want to do in our own country not by our laws but by theirs he said a drag
anchor on divergence. I'm gonna find it very difficult to vote for something
myself because there's something like this myself because I believed that we
should have done something different no matter how much plaster came off the
ceiling in Brussels. Now that could all be seen as something of a bombshell a
clear challenge to the current Prime Minister but he also said he didn't think
he would have another big job in politics did he mean that because he did say
things like he pointed out to his audience that the Tories poll ratings were
much better under him well out in central Birmingham from which we're where
we're broadcasting this afternoon you could find a spectrum of well-rehearsed
views on Boris Johnson and his best next move. I'd welcome him just gone in
general full stop. Did you ever like him have you changed? No absolutely never I
saw him for what he was from the very beginning. All things considering he did a
pretty good job in the pandemic. But would you like him to come back again? I
think his time's up let someone else shine for a bit and so you're nodding to
that too yeah yeah. Did he get Brexit done by the way? No, not even in the
slightest bit, just made it worse. Do you like Boris Johnson? Yeah he's nice.
Where were you originally from? Romania, he loved Romania. He said he loved
Romania? Yeah because he'd been a few times there so he said we have a beautiful
country. I think he's a make-believe politician I think Boris is very much about
himself and he doesn't represent the public. What do you think then?
Unfortunately I have a thing for bad boys and I just think he's just such a
lovable rogue. Views around Birmingham on Boris Johnson. Well his biographer
author of Boris Johnson the rise and fall of a troublemaker is Andrew Jimson who
joins us now. Andrew what's he up to do you think? Well he's showing that he's
still the insurgent. He mentioned with pride during his speech today that most
readers of The Times had voted against him and various people have been saying
in the last few days actually how much they loathe him including Keir Starmer.
If and when we again want an insurgent Boris Johnson will be available and that
palpably might happen if and when Keir Starmer becomes Prime Minister. Here he
is getting Sue Gray in to run things for him. That is the establishment writ
large. I mean Keir Starmer is about the most pious member of the establishment
you could imagine and that may be exactly what the nation wants but if it isn't
then Boris Johnson will be waiting in the wings. But hang on suppose I'm Rishi
Sunak how worried do I need to be that Boris Johnson is on manoeuvres saying I'm
not on manoeuvres I've probably got my main political jobs behind me while still
plotting something this year? I don't think well the whole protocol thing seems
to have gone quite well for Rishi Sunak. I don't think he needs to worry in the
slightest at the moment. It's only last June that 148 Tory MPs voted against
Boris Johnson in the confidence vote and then a lot a lot of people started
resigning. So one absolutely essential function of the leader of the
Conservative Party is to unite the party and I think it's I think it's too soon
for him to do that. I think it would have to be after after Rishi Sunak had lost
an election and Keir Starmer had come in in his pomp and people start getting a
bit fed up with it. Okay that's very clear. Now I need to ask you Andrew to
deconstruct a bit of his talk today in which well he acknowledged that his
Northern Ireland protocol had put barriers in the Irish Sea between Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and he seemed to have been taken quite surprised by
that and said I must take responsibility you know my mistake I fess up it's my
mistake. How could he possibly have not understood what his protocol did? I mean
though everybody told him from the get-go you put the barriers in the Irish Sea.
Theresa May rejected that idea from the beginning from the get-go because it put
barriers in the Irish Sea. How could he possibly not have known? Wishful
thinking and a tremendous instinctive resistance to priggish advice which he
wouldn't listen to and an understanding that he got to get the damn thing done
and something was going to give and he did oversell it. On the other hand the
alternatives he would argue were all worse. Was he lying at the time? He's
trying to I mean he has made a slight concession to his he has many very fierce
critics sort of columnists for The Times and eminent people like that and he did
say today it's all my fault I fully accept responsibility so he's he's given a
bit of ground on that. Right now Sue Gray we do need to talk about Sue Gray you
say she's the establishment. Yes she's a great woman she's an amazing woman and
the establishment hands all as for many years for many years she couldn't get
out of doing that ethics job in the Cabinet Office because no one else would do
it no one else was competent to do it and so all the most difficult sort of
decisions were handed over to Sue Gray but it is it is a it is very interesting
she I mean it really does look like an establishment person of a very high grade
kind joining another establishment person the former Director of Public
Prosecutions. Fascinating isn't it? Jacob Rees-Mogg has just tweeted out
something to the effect of so much for an impartial civil service the Gray
report now looks like a left-wing stitch-up. There will be others who say Sue
Gray has clearly seen what goes on inside the Cabinet Office and has run a mile
and gone to the other side and sort of said let's bring the other lot in. Which
interpretation should and will the public take do you think? Oh people will
people will cleave to whatever their original inclination was. Some people do
think that life is simply all a matter of finding out what the rules are and
obeying them to the letter other people think rules are made to be broken live
and let live it's the difference between the Cavalier and the roundhead and it
runs absolutely through the middle of our of our public life. Andrew Jimson,
thanks so much for that. Does it feel like we have more protests these days than
we used to? Maybe not or maybe it's social media spreading subversive ideas
maybe there's more to protest about these days but if we are becoming more
protest-y the habit seems to be trickling down into younger members of society
because quite a number of school protests have been occurring this year. Videos
are shared on TikTok or elsewhere protests on issues like school dress rules or
toilets being locked during lessons. Now I spoke to Stevie who's in year eight
her sister Bobby in year seven and their mum Terry about protests at Stevie and
Bobby school. So it all started off with someone making a group chat called
Castle View protest it was all just like making up plans and how we're gonna do
it and then they all said like 8.50 after four meet up near Durkin's office
that's Mr. Durkin to start the protest and then everyone got there all the years
like on the first floor gathering around the railing just refusing to go to
lessons and then all the teachers came out and started telling everyone to go to
lessons some people didn't and then some people did and then when everyone
eventually got to lesson Mr. Durkin like went on the tannoy and said well done
we know that you're trying to do this for your rights but please just keep it
calm and hopefully don't happen again and then everyone said that they're gonna
do it on the first break so everyone on the first break ten minutes before it
ended everyone went on a field it all started off calm everyone just standing
there and it started getting violent where people was throwing shoes around and
getting bottles of fizzy and like shaking it and throwing it up in the air. Okay
so it did get a bit more than just standing outside Mr. Durkin's office in the
end. Bobby tell us a little bit more about exactly what the school is doing that
you're protesting against. Well they've been looking up the toilets during
lesson times and you can only go to the toilet if you ask the teacher and you
have to go down to student reception so that they can see you go into the toilet
and come out the toilet and we have these like really long skirts which
basically go past on these and girls roll them so they were protesting about
being allowed to roll them otherwise you're going to skirt ban. And the makeup
was makeup involved because what's the rule that you're objecting to? You're not
allowed to wear a lot of makeup. The most realised way is like concealer and
mascara and stuff like that. What do you think though isn't it up to the school
to sort of set some rules and to have some boundaries and to kind of to treat
you like not like adults but like teenagers like kids where they set the rules
and you you listen to them. I think that we should be able to wear what we want
but like not too crazy because there's some girls with like big eyebrows and
covering their face with a load of makeup but I generally think that we
shouldn't wear loads of makeup we should keep it simple and with the skirts I
think we should be able to roll it up once or twice because we look hideous
walking around the school with long skirts. So I just want to be clear you
accept that there should be some rules you just think the rules are much tighter
than they should than they need to be? Yeah and Mr. Durkin sent out an email
saying teachers should allow kids to go to the bathroom but not two at the same
time but teachers don't do that they still say no. Right and Terry are you proud
of your youngsters for being involved in protest or do you tell them no you've
got to listen to the teachers you mustn't stand outside Mr. Durkin's office? I'm
quite happy for them free spirit and free will and stuff but as long as it's
within reason I don't think they should be able to wear a cape and have makeup
or there's no need for makeup at school but you know they're not allowed to dye
their hair they're not allowed to have certain things but rules are there for a
reason it's got quite frequent isn't it with the old protests with you know with
the adults and stuff and all the things so he's rubbing off on the children
their views are if the teachers going off on strike so obviously the kids are
now well we're gonna protest then. Stevie is this a social media thing have you
been posting videos of the the protests at your school? Yeah loads of people
have done it and most videos have gone viral my friend's sister really and she
got over 200k views and 200k likes. 200,000 people watch her her protest? Yeah
her protest video. Hmm well that was Stevie and Bobby and their mum Terry I feel
Mr. Durkin deserves a right of reply to all of that but we actually did contact
the school we haven't had a had a response for them but let's talk to Katherine
Birbal Singh headteacher at Michaela Community School in North West London often
called Britain's strictest headmistress. Katherine I don't know what you thought
when you heard that but would you be proud of the children they're standing up
for themselves thinking about what they're doing and saying here we have rights
or would you say they they should just sit at the desks and do what they're
told? Well no I mean the idea of sitting at desks and doing as you're told
obviously you want children to engage with ideas but there's a time and a place
for that and behaving in a way as the children described there which results in
violence and chaos and disorder children possibly being endangered certainly it
reduces their their sort of dignity and dignity matters it's not a good idea and
it's for us as adults to lead the way when it comes to children that's our role
and so obviously there's a place for them to book in to see the head and have a
conversation sometimes children put together petitions they can write essays
about why it is they think this is wrong and put that forward and have a
discussion about it but protests are a bad idea it's always quite interesting
this idea that they're protesting and the teachers are forcing them to get to
their lessons I mean what if the teachers just said okay then don't worry don't
go don't bother going to your lessons we'll all just go home let's forget it we
don't need to bother obviously not be great but look let's suppose let's suppose
teenagers wrote an essay explaining why they thought the dress rule was the
dresses are just too long and they should and they're not being silly about it
they're not saying can wear anything but but they would like the dresses to be
shorter would the head of a such a school be well advised to listen to what the
students ask for I always listen to what children say now it doesn't mean I'll
necessarily agree with them and I do think it's an incumbent on us as adults to
persuade the children and explain to them why it is that short skirts are a bad
idea and that is what we do here at Michaela our children aren't protesting over
the uniform and that's because they agree with us and they agree with us because
we've explained it to them and they understand the reasons for why we do what we
do and they agree with us are there more protests in school these days I mean I
I can remember bits of this kind of thing happening in my school days decades
ago so I I'm actually wondering whether this is a thing or whether it's a social
media thing because obviously now the the videos are shared or maybe it is a bit
more contagious than it used to be as people see other schools doing it they
they feel led like a bit of it yes well you're right when you say it's a social
media thing and that is a great concern you'll notice the girl who was being
interviewed was talking about 200 likes they the children understandably want to
be popular they they're very much driven by that idea of getting more likes so
they want the most provocative thing that they can do to be on social media and
then that encourages people to follow them and and get interested in them so of
course they're going to do that and we should be trying to encourage them to
spend time doing their algebra instead which is perhaps not as exciting but will
enable them to live a more exciting life later and that our role as adults is to
restrict their freedom now so that later they can be truly free and if you just
allow them to do whatever they want now we want to wear whatever we want we're
going to do whatever we want well of course that's what they say all children
say that and if we did allow them to do that well they wouldn't learn any
algebra at all and that is wrong it really affects the most disadvantaged
children I understand I understand the point now look while we have you
Catherine Burble sing I want to ask you about just one quick question about the
the whatsapps that would be published between Matt Hancock and Gavin Williamson
you would have seen these telegraph whatsapps Matt Hancock was pretty rude about
the teaching unions Gavin Williamson who was education secretary said I know
they really really do just hate work now first thing is he talking about the
unions or is he talking about the teachers I don't know how could I possibly
know what do you think what do you think when you saw that though from the
leader of education well I thought oh well my my my thinking is gosh the
whatsapp how how is that happened and then I was really interested in how it
happened now under these whatsapps got out I don't know people have their own
private conversations all the time I I sort of don't care I mean what I care
about actually which is far more important is how should we run our schools how
can we do what's best by our children you know we need to as a society back head
teachers who are doing the right sorts of things and unfortunately nowadays I
had a whole bunch of head teachers in here today actually and they're all
terrified of the backlash that comes from the public so they're unable to do the
right things by their kids in helping children develop into moral sentient
beings who are going to be successful adults they're unable to do it because of
the backlash that comes from the public and that is not a good thing for our
society or for our country and that is what I find far more interesting Gavin
Williamson has to say in a whatsapp right right but just for the record is it
your view that teachers hate work they just don't need any excuse really to try
and shut the schools and go home is that is that your view of how teachers in
England are no my teachers are absolutely amazing obviously in any profession
there are some people who hate work and there are some people who love it and
frankly again the public should just know for those teachers that my teachers we
work so hard I have known so many teachers in my lifetime who easily work
70-hour weeks who are so dedicated we're in school here at 7 o'clock in the
morning and here I am still at school and we're coming up to 6 p.m. and this is
what I do daily so when they tell me that we don't work I'd like to have a word
or two with them really I think I think we got there Catherine Burble sing
headteacher at Michaela Community School thank you very much indeed now oh my
goodness we're running a bit late that ran on it's 26 minutes to 6 this is p.m.
we'll have a summary of the news from Andrew Peach the head of the Security
Service mi5 has said he's profoundly sorry after the final report into the
Manchester Arena bombing concluded that a significant opportunity that might
have prevented the attack was missed 22 people died in the explosion at the end
of an Ariana Grande concert in 2017 the inquiry chairman sir John Saunders found
that the bomber Salman Abadi probably received assistance from someone in Libya
and that an mi5 officer failed to act swiftly enough on a key piece of
information the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock has accused the journalist
who leaked more than a hundred thousand messages linked to his handling of the
pandemic of a massive betrayal and breach of trust Isabel Oakeshott has defended
her decision to pass the messages to the Daily Telegraph insisting it was in the
overwhelming national interest the Deputy First Minister of Scotland John
Swinney has confirmed he'll step down from government when Nicola Sturgeon
leaves office mr. Swinney has served as finance secretary and education
secretary during his 16 years in government he'll remain a backbench MSP a woman
described as a territorial pedestrian has been jailed for three years for the
manslaughter of an elderly cyclist who'd been riding on the pavement in the
Cambridgeshire town of Huntingdon Peterborough Crown Court heard how senior ward
who is 77 fell into the path of an oncoming car after Oriol Grey who's 49 had
shouted an expletive at her and gestured in an aggressive way a lawyer for grey
said she'd appeal against the sentence the bass guitarist with pulp Steve Mackey
has died in hospital at the age of 56 he played on hits including disco 2000 and
common people which he also co-wrote pulp posted a tribute on social media
saying Steve made things happen in his life and in the band archaeologists in
Egypt have described finding a hidden corridor in the Great Pyramid of Giza as
the most important discovery of the century they say the corridor is around 30
feet long and was likely built to relieve some of the weight of the pyramid or
for another as yet undiscovered chamber thank you Andrew now p.m. is coming to
you from Birmingham today but this morning I was in Solihull for a visit to the
Jaguar Land Rover plant there and there's a reason why we're interested in that
company JLR it's embarking on a new strategy called reimagined that's going to
reshape its future more luxury more electric and you're going to hear from my
report in a moment that the company and its staff are behind the strategy but
really it should be of interest to us all because reimagine is important for the
future of JLR JLR is an important piece of the British car industry and the car
industry is an important piece of the economy it would be helpful to the UK for
JLR to succeed nothing though is guaranteed now before we hear from the plant
itself with me here in our studio in Birmingham is David Bailey professor of
business economics at Birmingham Business School a motor industry expert before
we go to the plant I'm David how is JLR doing at the moment is it profitable is
it selling it's got back into profit so the last quarter figures were actually
pretty good but it had been through an extremely difficult time and partly like
other car firms it had been affected badly by the semiconductor crisis so it had
cut production quite dramatically and had to focus on the very profitable cars
like the Range Rovers to really make the most of the limited resources so back
into profit that's good news but it's really lagging behind in terms of
electrification that's that's the problem right and that's a big part of their
strategy all right well I went to the plant in Solihull just to get a feel of
what goes on there and whether they're ready for that electric future while
there I met Rory O'Murtu who's the vehicle line director and the plant director
Ross Leslie so we're going to take you into the build hall now so just on a on a
safety point you said we now are in a build hall there are moving trucks and
things so just just have your wits about you we'll be very careful perfectly
safe as long as you stay with us. So the plan to show you today is in here we've
got about 600 employees there's 250 stations so each station's got a couple of
people on it but we can build any spec of any car and you'll literally not see
two Range Rovers today that are the same right there is so much build
variability because we allow the customers to give us that variability so the
customers can choose whatever they want. Rory just how many different specs are
there of Range Rover because when you think into the count the wheels the
hubcaps the colors whether you go for them. Literally millions and I wouldn't
like to put a precise figure on it because it is literally every Range Rover is
spoke to the customers needs. And are you making them here specs so each one has
been ordered the customer has said I'd like it like this with this yeah and
we've got a huge order bank for new Range Rover and Range Rover Sport 215,000
order bank for Jaguar Land Rover as a whole. So it's a waiting list basically.
It's a waiting list and most of those are Range Rovers or Range Rover Sports. It
takes us about 36 hours from the very start of a stamping facility so when we go
from raw metal to a finished car. It's not very long is it really I mean you go
back to I don't know when you started here when did you start here? So I've
worked here for 30 years. When you started it wasn't like that was it? It was
not like that it was a little bit slower the combination of technology
automation enables us to deliver as Lisa said every 90 seconds a car to our
customers. Oh we're going this way. We're now seeing what are recognizably Range
Rovers passing on a belt in front of us. These are recognizable because the
vehicle body's there but they don't have windows in and things like that. Now
what's interesting is that the belt is big enough that the team are on the belt
with the car is that what you meant? So each station is seven meters long and
it's got a meter and a half each side of the station on the belt so that the car
and the people all move together yeah and they collect their material the
material is sequenced and delivered to where they will be at that time so that
they literally just turn and pick up the parts. Right so the employee is going
seven meters along the track basically and then walks back to get the next one.
Every 90 seconds they do a seven meter walk. So what were your names? I'm Kayla.
I'm Greta. So can I just talk to you about your career so you left school
obviously did you go to university or did you think no I'm gonna do this
apprentice route rather than a higher education route was that a choice you
made? I did my A levels and then I applied for the apprenticeship to do my four
years to get my advanced here. Any regrets over that thinking I missed my
college days and I could have been? Absolutely not it's been a really good
experience because you do part-time in college part-time in work and I've gained
so much experience and skills working in here I love it. You're both living sort
of in this area presumably. Incredibly important that this factory works right?
Yeah. Because for this area it's going to be a bad thing if it if it doesn't
work. Yeah we keep running we keep moving that's all we can do is keep improving
and moving and that's how the team works. We are seeing internal combustion
engine cars being made here right these are going to have petrol engines in.
Some of them will have petrol engines one of the things that is amazing about
this product is it's on a new architecture by which I mean the platform the
underpinnings we call it the modular longitudinal architecture and it's flexible
so we can take any power train ranging from petrol engines to plug-in hybrid
engines and next year there'll be a fully electric Range Rover and Range Rover
Sport all on these vehicles. So this is what I wanted to ask it's quite noisy
I'm sorry but the idea is that you're going pretty well all electric in a very
small number of years how much do you have to do at the plant to make that
happen? So the great thing about the way we've laid this plant out is it's
effectively ready for electrification. We'll have to make some modifications to
the facility and some modifications to the body that you're looking at but not
extensive at all because we've planned this architecture from the get-go to go
all the way through the power trains to fully electric. My name is Barbara
Bergmaier and I'm executive director industrial operations at Jaguar Land Rover.
In terms of the turmoil that has been in supply chains in the car industry where
are we now we know that you've had problems getting chips everybody's had
problems getting chips it's been a real roller coaster just talk us through
where we are now have you come through the worst on that? Yes I'm really sure
that we see some ease in our semi-con crisis but we are still in a crisis we are
still constrained unfortunately but we are now in a much better position as
Jaguar Land Rover because we have worked through some additional contracts with
nine or ten of the most significant semi-con suppliers and they are of course
bringing us in a much better place than we used to be. There's another risk to
JLR China related risk is you sell a lot of the cars coming off the line here a
lot of those cars do go to China right how many is that in what proportion do
you know? I think it's nearly evenly distributed between Europe China and and
the US. And do you have worries about whether that Chinese market is is a
reliable market? I believe it's such a big market that I think we need to be in
this market. We have a target in the UK to get rid of all new sales of internal
combustion engines by 2030 we need a lot of charging points to go in around the
country to make that happen and make that realistic is it realistic that we can
do that you're going to be electric before that aren't you but is it realistic
do you think for all cars to be all new cars to be electric by 2030 in this
country? I can speak for us we for Jaguar Land Rover we will have all our
nameplates electric by 2030 as you said and I don't know about all the details
from from the market but for us I think it's a realistic plan. Well that was
Barbara Bergmayer director of industrial manufacturing at JLR an executive board
member there ending my little tour of the plant I'm still with David Bailey here
so David the strategy they're betting the farm on this they're calling it
reimagined electric and making it more luxurious almost making Jaguar like a
Rolls Royce is that possible? That's what they're trying to do it was a real
change for them so they'd almost got a Jaguar XJ electric ready to roll spent
hundreds of millions on it and the previous CEO scrapped it said no we're going
fully luxury so they're going to compete with the likes of Rolls Royce and
Bentley interesting question to see if they can do that I think what they saw
was the sky-high valuations put on Ferrari and Porsche when they were floated so
whether they're looking at floating off Jaguar down the line I do wonder. Right
now am I right in thinking that means fewer cars will roll out of that plant but
hopefully for them more expensive upmarket high margin cars is that really what
they're going to be doing? Absolutely, fewer Jaguars but the consumer as we were
hearing there kind of co-designs the car so that it's unique and they charge a
much higher price for it. Is this going to work for the economy I mean obviously
we want a motor industry I suppose it's it's okay for the UK if it's a very
upmarket motor industry it's still getting plenty of value in for the UK economy
is it going to work? Good question I don't know if it will work is me honest
answer to that they're trying to do something that Jaguar has never been before
I am skeptical about whether it will work I think they could have been better
off using one of the other brands like Daimler to be the luxury brand and keep
Jaguar as a premium one so it's a big gamble I'd be interested to see what
happens. Right there's one last thing be as brief as you can they need a battery
factory to supply them Tata the parent company is going to build a battery
factory it may be here it may be in Spain what is going to happen there they're
asking for a lot of government support to get that off the ground if it's going
to be in the UK? Yep asking for a pile of cash there's loads of money available
in Europe through European Battery Alliance and through the European Investment
Bank to if we don't subsidize it will go elsewhere even if the government does
put in a lot of money there's still a big issue about energy prices here and the
government's probably gonna have to do more around energy costs in the UK to
make it happen. All right David Bailey from Birmingham Business School thanks so
much. Thank you. And thanks to Jaguar for giving us such a tour now at just
after quarter to six Andrew Peach can give us some of the other headlines. Sir
Keir Starmer has said he's delighted that Sue Gray the civil servant who
investigated the lockdown parties in Downing Street is likely to become his new
chief of staff. The former deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Sir
Stephen House has been referred to the police watchdog for allegedly saying that
the bulk of rape complaints were the result of regretful sex. Wayne Shorter the
jazz saxophonist and composer who played with the likes of Miles Davis Herbie
Hancock and Steanie Dan has died at the age of 89. Thank You Andrew. Well we've
been hearing earlier in the program about the third and final report of the
public inquiry into the Manchester bombing. Everyone recognizes that mistakes
have been made and that Salman Abedi might have been stopped if they'd not been
made. What do the families of the victims of those who died feel now? I spoke to
Fegan Murray the mother of Martin Hett who was 29 and died in the bombing and I
asked what her feelings are at the end of this three-year inquiry. It's the end
of a long long journey and at the end of a big chapter. It's obviously not the
end of our story of grief unfortunately that we were forced into by no fault of
our own. I'm kind of relieved that this part is over because I now need to focus
on the work I do with Martin's Law and with the children at schools to talk to
them about the dangers of online radicalization. They're going to be my focus
now. In terms of what happens now out of this inquiry what are your hopes and
what are your fears at the end of all of this that may result from it? I have at
this moment in time no fears because I need to look forward with hope. Inquiries
are there to find out what went wrong and there are lots of people as far as I'm
aware who are working really hard at setting things right. I see a lot of
proactive action by police counterterrorism and the security industry. Everybody
I come across really wants to make a difference. You know a lot of people that I
come across they feel the weight of the failings on their shoulders although
they may not have been personally involved but by default of being in the police
in counterterrorism and in security they feel partly responsible and want to do
good what went wrong really and people are working very hard. There's been a
government commitment to what is called Martin's Law named after your son Martin
which is law to place a requirement on venues to think about terrorism and what
they would do and to have a plan. What is happening on that law? What have you
been told about when that becomes an act? So I've had a meeting with Suhail
Braverman and Tom Tootin, the security minister, mid-December as well as a phone
call with Sunak and that means we have been given the green light for the
legislation. However until it actually becomes a legal act it has to still go
through parliamentary processes that will be happening from spring onwards and
it's moving forward in the right direction. I can see the end in sight now. It's
been a long time coming but once the legislation is in that mandates security at
venues from 100 plus capacity a lot of people will feel hopefully a lot safer.
Obviously mistakes were made, mistakes that might have if they had not been made
stopped Abedi from doing what he did and I don't know what you feel about that.
We all make mistakes in our lives, our professional lives don't we, but they
don't have the consequences that mistakes that MI5 make had for you and I just
wonder what your feelings are. Is it anger? Is it a sort of a desire for them to
be punished or what are your feelings about the security services? No I don't do
anger nor am I finger-pointing or after retaliation. It's just not in my nature
and I feel that they all look in the mirror every morning and have to face
themselves and that is for the rest of their lives. So to me that is in a way
punishment enough and hopefully those mistakes are never repeated. You go to
schools don't you Figen? Yes. You talk to young people and you hope that you
make an impression on them and reduce the chance that they turn into a Salman
Abedi. Yes but my view is prevention has to be better than cure. So Salman Abedi
was 22 years old which was you know so so young and I just felt very strongly
that if I can somehow speak to young people and warn them about the dangers of
online radicalization, how they can recognize recruiters mainly online because
that's where a lot of the recruitment happens. If they can see or recognize the
signs of radicalization in themselves or others and if they know how to get
support then then hopefully somebody will maybe change their mind if they were
tempted to go down a bad route. You must have thought if you'd been able to
confront an Abedi before he turned in this terrible terrible direction you know
how different things would be. Yeah I wish I had been at his school when he was
still a student. I mean I go regularly to his school, where he and his brothers
went. I speak to the children there quite frequently. There's often this word
isn't there used of bereavement about closure. Do you ever find closure Figen?
There will never be closure. People often say to me oh now the court case is
over you'll have closure you'll draw a line under it. People said to me after
certain milestones now you'll have closure. You know when you lose a family
member to the way we did, especially when it's your child and it's in the wrong
sequence as well because I should have died before he did. There is never
closure. There is just an abyss of grief and a Martin shaped hole in my soul
that will be there forever. So no there's never any end to my grief but that
doesn't mean I don't function. I'm broken but not destroyed. Figen Murray the
mother of Martin Hett who died in the Manchester bombing. On BBC iPlayer, step
right in perfect timing, the East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter!
The order has entered the 1960s barely eight years late. But the midwives of
Nonata's house are forever constant. You've a home here now and purpose and
people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every step of the
way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now there's a Conservative MPs away day today and
tonight apparently there's going to be a quiz, a sort of pub quiz hosted by the
party chairman Greg Hands preceding a dinner hosted by the Prime Minister and it
made us think of pub quizzes you know and we thought we'd have one of our own.
So we're joined by parliamentary journalist Rob Hutton who claims to have won
the parliamentary quiz a couple of times. He's going to pose four questions to
someone here in Birmingham who should be better than these things than most of
us. Quizmaster Jamie Cartwright who is from the Actress and Bishop pub in
Birmingham. Good evening to you both. Rob we've got four questions. Let's see
how many Jamie can do. Okay so question one. So question one. Theresa May has
the shortest, has the joint shortest surname of any British Prime Minister. Who
is the other one with a three-letter surname? Poor Jamie normally asks the
questions. It's a good question. I've got the answer in front of me so I...
Thinking of surnames with the three letters. Okay I think that's a no. It's a
slightly tricky one. It's Andrew Bonar Law. But you've, Bonar was the middle
name wasn't it? Is that the point? Bonar was the middle name. Bonar was what his
friends called him. Right. Question two. Nigel Farage has a self-imposed limit
of how many pints of beer beyond which he will not let himself do a live
broadcast interview. How many pints? Well I'm partial to a drink when I'm
hosting quizzes but so I would say possibly what six pints maybe? Not bad
actually Rob. No but it's five isn't it Rob? It's five yes. I actually have them
in front of me by the way. I wouldn't have got it so I'm sounding very bright
here. Question three Rob. Question three. What did Winston Churchill say was the
perfect size of champagne bottle? Jeroboam? No. I think we need to have an
easier one. It was actually, I know, I did know that one because it was the pint
bottle wasn't it Rob? It was the pint bottle. They recently tried to reintroduce
it. Question four. Civil servant Sue Gray became famous last year for
investigating Boris Johnson's parties but in the 1980s she took a career break.
To do what job? Party planner? No she did. She ran a pub and it was in Northern
Ireland didn't she? Yes. That's the story anyway. I mean look I'm afraid that
was a zero out of four in fact. I'm used to asking the questions. But you asked
the question. How often do you do politics in Birmingham? You're the actress and
the bishop. Bishop and actress. We try and mix it up. So politics does come in
and out of the questions but it's not always, so we do mixed rounds rather than
actual rounds of solid politics. And those would be hard by the category I'm
imagining of a pub quiz is that right? Yeah you'd normally want 25% where
everybody could get right, 50% where most and 25% where the top quizzes would do
really. So yeah they would be considered the 25 or the 4. Rob I don't know if
the Conservative Party went to you and asked you to set some of the Greg Hand's
quiz questions but they had some hilarious categories didn't they? I think
Conservative Party victories was one and Labour Party scandals was another. I
want them to have a Liz Truss round. A Liz Truss government round. The hardest
round we ever had in a press gallery pub quiz was when we were asked to identify
members of the Jeremy Corbyn shadow cabinet and from photos and we found that we
found ourselves staring at these people thinking well I know who that is but
what job do they do? Well there was certainly a period in the middle of last
year where you could have done that for the not the shadow cabinet but the
cabinet and it was getting quite difficult to keep up. So what are the
parliamentary pub quizzes? Is there actually a proper tournament between
journalists over there in the lobby then? Every so often we pile, we've just
done one very recently but we hadn't done one obviously during lockdown, we pile
into a bar and it's fiercely competitive. Well look Rob thanks for setting those
four questions. Jamie thanks for being a sport in trying to answer them. Thank
you very much. They were obviously far too difficult, very very niche by someone
who's in the lobby there. Thanks both very much. Now two minutes to six I think
we should get some weather and I think Chris Fox should answer all the questions
about what it's going to be. Yes Evan but I can't guarantee I'll get a hundred
percent but here goes. Looking at the weather picture today well we've seen a
lot of cloud across most areas but across Wales, Midlands, Southern England,
parts of East Anglia some lovely sunshine for these areas but really the
forecast over the next 24 hours again is about chasing lumps of cloud around.
We've still got northeasterly winds, we've still got high pressure in charge but
overnight tonight I think for Scotland we start off with cloudy skies and that
cloud will continue to bring outbreaks of light rain and drizzle across eastern
areas as it indeed it has done for much of the day today but I think eventually
later in the night it should start to become a little bit drier and we'll
probably get some clear skies working into northwest Scotland to allow a frost.
Northern Ireland stays cloudy overnight and we'll have extensive cloud
continuing across northern England across the Midlands into East Anglia and if
anything that cloud sheet will probably move its way back into parts of the
south Midlands probably southern England the eastern areas of Wales as well so I
think for many of us it's a case of the weather turning that bit cloudier
overnight. Where it's cloudy temperature about two to four degrees but a frost
where we keep the clearest skies. Now tomorrow I think most areas will have
quite a bit of cloud the best of the sunshine, western Wales probably parts of
southwest England and into the northwest of Scotland temperatures about seven to
nine degrees and then next week it's set to get colder with snow for some. Evan.
Okay yes that's been pretty chilly up here in Birmingham but that's PM studio
director was David Evans in London Mike Newman in Birmingham our editors Rebecca
Keating in London Ed Prenderville in Birmingham