TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 A long marriage. Your 630 comedy for Wednesdays on Video4 and BBC Sounds. BBC
News at 9 o'clock. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving everything we've got to
secure a deal with the EU on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. The
Prime Minister told The Sunday Times he was hopeful of a positive outcome.
Earlier his Irish counterpart, Leo Varadka, said there was a possibility of
agreement in days. Dr Clare Rice, who's a Northern Ireland politics expert, says
small details are now key. It's not so much about the nitty gritty of getting
the big picture onto the paper. It's those smaller, those minutiae details that
are being dealt with at the moment. And very much at this stage it's about
making sure that all of the key stakeholders with regard to the protocol are on
board with it, essentially, before anything can be effectively presented
publicly. Police in Northern Ireland have been given more time to question four
of the five men arrested in connection with the attempted murder of an off-duty
police officer on Wednesday. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains in
hospital with serious injuries. Earlier, hundreds of people took part in a march
in County Tyrone, calling for an end to paramilitary violence. Two bodies have
been recovered by divers searching for the crew of a tugboat which capsized in
the Thirth of Clyde yesterday. The vessel had been escorting a cruise ship into
harbour when it went down. Turkish officials are now investigating more than 600
construction contractors, property owners and other people in connection with
substandard buildings which collapsed during the earthquakes three weeks ago.
50,000 people died in the quakes in southern Turkey and northern Syria. BBC News
This is BBC Radio 4. Now we continue our detective series, Stone, created by
Danny Brocklehurst and written by Alex Ganley. The prime suspect in the murder
of Simon Peverell has been named as Neil Fitzhugh. He and Jackie Stanton Hope
are trying to silence Sarah as she is the only person who can identify him at
the scene of the crime. Hello Sarah, it's been a long time. Twenty years? What
are you doing here? I've just got up, I've got to get ready to go to work soon.
Jackie asked me to call. This guy is a 91.7% match to the individual in the
picture from twenty years ago. Why didn't Jackie call me herself? Why'd she ask
you to take me to the cottage? Why did she not tell me to get on a train? She
wanted someone she could trust. Trust? To do what exactly? What happened to
Simon Peverell, Neil? How should I know? What were you doing at the hostel? I
saw the picture of you from the security camera. Everyone, listen up. We have a
name. Neil Jeffrey Andrew Fitzhugh. Sarah! No! No! No! No! No! Stop it! Stop it!
Sarah! You're only making it harder! No! No! No! No! No! My name is Sarah
Martindale. Someone is trying to kill me. Hello, this is Jackie Stanton-Holt.
I'm unavailable at the moment but please leave a message and I'll call you back.
Jackie, it's Neil again. Just in case you tried to call me on my mobile because
I had to get rid of it. Listen, please, I really need to speak with you. It's
urgent. Neil? Yes, Jackie, it's me. Don't call this number again. Hello? Hello?
Just hang on a sec while I get somewhere I can hear you. Right, sorry about
that. Hello? Dixie, it's Jackie. Well, it's quarter past three in the morning.
I'm guessing it can't be good news. She's been in development. What? Sarah,
she's been found. Found? Alive. By you? Someone driving through the woods came
across her in the middle of the road. She's at a hospital outside of Barland,
all the way off. No, she told me to. I don't know. Right, well, I'm not sure
what's going on. She's been leaving messages on the voicemail, seeing he's going
to kill himself. Do you think he's serious? I don't know. He has the backbone.
Where are you? In the car on the way to North Wheels. What? To see Sarah? To get
Sarah. How's she insane? Have you been like you're near her? What if she's told
them everything? She may well have, but what's the alternative? We can't risk
leaving her there, Dixie. If we do, she'll definitely end up telling us. At
least this way, we've got a chance. I'll let you know when there's something
worth knowing. Until then, we should keep contact to a minimum. Yeah, all right.
Can I leave you to handle Neil? Neil? What do you mean, handle him? He's a
liability, Dixie. I can't take care of everything. I need you to get involved,
take some responsibility. You sent him to say, Simon, that trail leads right
back to your door. If the police find him in the state, he's in. Dixie, all
right. I'll get him. Where is he? I wonder if you can find him. Get one of your
minions to watch the house. You go home at some point. He's nowhere else to run.
Morning, boss. Is it? Just about. I got you a coffee. Thanks. Want your sugar?
Yep. Cheers. Had I got you a triple shot if I'd realised you hadn't been to bed
yet? What do we know? Sarah Martindale was found disorderly. She was in the
hospital. Just over an hour and a half ago by a motorist travelling on a road
through the Benwin Forest in north Wales. How is she now? She has a bruising to
her thorax consistent with attempted strangulation as well as blunt force trauma
to the head. She told the driver who found her that someone was trying to kill
her. Who? Did she name Neil fix you? All I have is that she said someone was
trying to kill her. That, and that she confirmed her own name but apparently
hasn't spoken since. I don't know whether that's shock or... What's the latest
on this? There's a levee. What's the latest on the office here? No body
sightings? Co-found abandoned, no body, no sightings. Whilst local police will
resume a search of the nearby river at first light. OK, let's head to Wales.
Hello, can I help you? Oh, hello. My name's Jackie Stanton Hope. I'm here to see
Sarah Martindale, who was brought onto your ward last night. I'm afraid we can't
allow anyone to see her at the present time. I'm my sister. I'm really concerned
about her. I've just driven all the way from Manchester to see her. I'd really
appreciate it if you could let me in, please. You look knackered. Get your head
down if you want, boss. It's a long drive. I won't sleep. How did it go with
Alice? I spent the night trying to locate her. Finally found her at a party at a
friend's house in Disbury. Oh, dear. Still, standard regulation teenage
behaviour there, boss. I may have overreacted. Oh? Yeah, I made a bit of a
scene. Went into the house and removed her. Oh, dear. She was mortified. Went
berserk. Cats at her wit's end. We've concluded we need Alice to seek some
counselling. It's not getting any better. Sorry to hear that. Thanks. I should
give Turner a call. Let him know what's going on. You think you'll be able to
rouse him at this hour? BEEPING Boss? Mike? Is he in a club? Just a second. Let
me find a quieter spot. Can you hear me? Yeah, just about, Mike. We've had a
development. Sarah Martindale has been found in North Wales. Sue and I are en
route to the hospital now. Are you hearing me? Just about. Where the hell are
you, Mike? I couldn't sleep, so I decided to come out and see what Mr Dickson is
up to. You're at his club? Yeah. Actually, I'm looking at him as we speak. He
just left an office in the back. All right. Good work. Stay on him, Mike. Keep
us updated. Mike? Mike? You travelled through the night from Manchester then?
That's right. She's very fortunate to have a sister like you come all this way.
I'm sure it'll cheer her up. How's she doing? We've all been worried sick about
her. Is she OK? Is she talking? She's bruised quite badly round her throat. Took
a blow to the head and her hands and face are scratched, poor love. She was
shaking quite badly. The doctor gave her a sedative to help her get some rest.
Things don't usually get so out of hand. Thank you for taking care of her. We've
been worried sick. Sorry. I'm not sure I... Sarah has a history of delusional
episodes. They've been getting more and more trouble in these last couple of
years. Oh, I see. I didn't realise. I'll just take a peek. See if she's awake or
not. Sarah, love, your sister's here to see you. Your sister? Jackie's here to
see you. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. You're there,
there. Then what's up until you are? No, stay away from me. Come down, Sarah.
No-one wants to harm you. Jackie's come all the way from Manchester to see you.
Come on, don't, don't, don't, don't speak, don't speak. Would you like giving us
a minute, sister? Thank you. Of course. He tried to kill me. He said, you sent
him. Come, calm down, please. Breathe. Stop it, Sarah. Come on, come on, stop it
right now. Just pull yourself together, Sarah, now! There you go. I'm sorry I
had to do that, but you just need to calm down and tell me what happened to you.
Who did this? Neil. Who's Neil? Neil? You're not helping me. I've been worried
sick. You didn't show up for work. The next thing I know I'm hearing, you're in
a hospital in Wales. What's going on, Sarah? What? Neil Fitzhugh, he came to the
flat yesterday morning saying you asked him to pick me up, to take me to the
cottage in Wales. You said he was only at the hostel to help a client. I think
he killed Simon Peverell. Jackie! Neil Fitzhugh. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah. I was asking him about why he was at the hostel and he started
being really aggressive. He's the man on the security camera. The police were
trying to identify the night Simon Peverell was killed. What? That's impossible.
Then I realised he was going to kill me too, so I jumped from the car and ran
into these woods, but then he found me and tried to drown me, but I bit him and
managed to get away. I ran until it got dark, and then I kept on running through
these woods and I found this road. Neil Fitzhugh. Yes. And he told you I sent
him. Yeah. And you believed him? Well, yeah, I did. But it makes no sense. Why
would I call Neil Fitzhugh? I haven't seen or spoken to him in 20 years. You
know that. I wouldn't even know how to get in touch with him. Probably wouldn't
even recognise him. But you said you'd got him to help on some case at the
hostel. No, Sarah, I didn't. Yes! No, Sarah, you're confused. I never said that.
It all makes sense, Jackie. That's why that male woman, Cody Stafford's sister,
came around asking questions about Simon too. And what? I called Neil up out of
the blue and asked him to come and... And what? Get me out of the way! Because
the police are asking about Simon's death about the man with the silver head.
This is absurd, Sarah. Have you listened to yourself? How have I missed this?
How long have you been feeling like this? What? What do you mean? This? This?
How long, Sarah? Have you been taking your medication? Dr Mills was concerned
you weren't taking it as prescribed the last time we spoke. They made me slow.
That means they're working, darling. You know that. And if you stop taking them,
there is a big crush. Paranoia, delusional episodes. We've been here before,
Sarah, haven't we? This was real, Jackie. I'm not confused. I am not imagining
it. Neil Fitzhugh was there, chasing me in the woods and he killed Simon. It
sounds ridiculous now, I know, but it's true. You... You listen to me, Sarah,
and you listen carefully, my love. You are having a manic episode. I know. You
are a danger to yourself right now and they are going to have no option but to
lock you away if they hear you talking like this. And we don't want that
happening again, do we? No, but Jackie, please, this happened. Neil, he said
that you... Stop saying that! Do you even realise what you're saying? You have
no control at all. I've protected you all these years, but I cannot carry on
doing it forever. That poor man who tried to help you last night. What do you
mean? What, you don't remember? The driver who found you. What do you mean?
Remember what? You attacked the man who tried to help you. What? You took the
train to London early yesterday morning. You told no-one where you were going.
You went missing in the woods, where the doctors believe you tried to take your
own life. You tried to hang yourself in the woods, Sarah. That's where the
bruising around your throat came from. The attempt failed and you were left
disorientated from falling and hurt in your head. I didn't. I would. I don't
remember. I can't do this any more. I can't be part of this. I should just leave
you to it before you drag both of us down with you, Sarah. Jackie, Jackie,
please. I can't go on like this. You make it impossible for anyone to be on your
side. I should really just... I'm sorry, Jackie. I don't remember. Just please
don't leave me. Please, Jackie, please. You scratched. Please. That poor man's
face, Sarah. You were lashing out wildly. Do you really not remember? Or are you
just allowing yourself not to? Remember what we've talked about? Taking
responsibility for our actions. I need to hear the truth from you. I need to
know. I deserve the truth. I don't know how many more times I can be there to
pick up the piece of Sarah. I cannot keep covering for you any more. It takes
its toll on me, you know. Oh, Jackie, help me. I'm sorry. I think... I think I
remember. I think I was just scared. I think Simon Pepperough. I think seeing
him brought it all back. Please, help me. Help me. I don't know what I'm doing.
OK, call me, call me. I just... I just want to go back to how it was before
being happy. It will be all right, love. Just do what I see and we'll get
through. OK, Jackie, OK, OK, Jackie, Jackie. OK. Tanner, where are you? I'm on
the move. Looks like Dixon's leaving the club. He's at the door talking to one
of the bouncers. We're nearly at the hospital. You know, signal here, Tanner.
Can you hear us? Just about. I was just saying, I'll keep you posted. You off,
Mr Dixon? Yeah, I'm just off to see an old friend. Yeah, that'll be sick. I'll
look at his security footage in the fire here, yeah? See that guy on his own?
Mid-40s, looks like double. Yeah, yeah, he is. You know him? No, I haven't come
across that one. What's he looking for, Mr Dixon? Well, he's here because I am.
And when I leave, he's going to follow me. How can I help? Mr Dixon. This is
John Stone. Leave a message. I'll call you back. Boss, me again. Just left the
club. I'm following Dixon on foot. He's crossed over Deansgate, heading in the
direction of Salford. I'll check back in soon. DCI Stone, DS Kelly, here to see
Sarah Martindale. How is she? She's doing OK, but shaken. I took her sister down
to her not so long ago, so hopefully that'll have cheered her up some. Sister?
She's not got a sister. She's not supposed to be seeing anyone. Is there an
officer on guard? No, not now. They left a while ago. Why? I've no idea when
nurse is not police. Where is she? Hurry! She was right here. Where's your CCTV
control? Tana, it's me. I need you back at the nick. Give me a call when you get
this. It's urgent. This is CS Sue Kelly. I need to issue an urgent APB, please,
in the name of Jackie Stanton Hope, driving a Silver Lexus registration Delta
Echo 53 X-ray Tango Sierra. Last seen in vicinity of Barla, North Wales, at 5.48
this morning, believed to be heading in the direction of Manchester. Stop and
detain. I can hear you. I've called the police. Christine, it's me, Don Pally.
Neil! Oh, my God! What's been going on? Where have you been? I've been worried
sick. The police were here. They said they'd found the car, crashed in Wales.
They told me to expect the worst. I came through the back, crossed the Dawson's
Garden. I didn't know if they were watching the front door. They were watching
the front. Who? The police. Why would you be hiding from the police? They said
there was a chance you'd become disoriented and fallen in a river. I spoke to
Evie. She was beside herself. She's on her way back from the French exchange.
Police are searching a river in Wales for your body, Neil. Who let them believe
that? I needed to come and see you, to tell you that I'm sorry, Chris. What the
hell's going on? None of this makes any sense. Keep your voice down. I can't
stay long. Please, I just wanted to come and see you and explain everything
before you hear it somewhere else. Neil, Neil, you're frightening me. What the
hell's going on? I wanted to tell you everything, Christine, everything. But you
must promise me that you won't ever tell them I was here. What do you mean?
Where are you going? What am I supposed to tell your daughter, Neil? I don't
know. Just... Just tell her I've got a missing. Tell her I love her. You bloody
well tell me why I should do that! I can't carry this any longer. I wanted to
tell you. I almost told you so many times that I was...but I was scared. Scared?
I'm scared of what your reaction might be. I want to tell you everything. Sarah,
wake up. Wake up, Sarah. You need to listen to what I'm going to say. I'm just
so tired, Jackie. If the police come to say us, you need to remember to keep
quiet. Whatever they ask, you don't remember anything. That's all. Don't add to
it. Don't say another word. You've got the perfect alibi. You've memory
problems. You're on medication. You experience occasional blackouts. No, I don't
remember anything. And if they ask you about the man in the picture, you answer,
No, I don't recognize him. If you don't, they'll find out about everything. Do
you understand me, Sarah? They'll sit there in silence to try and trick you to
say more, but don't fall for it. Are you listening to me? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just
play up your memory issues. It's all in the medical notes. Stick to that line. I
don't remember. I have memory problems. I don't want to lose my job at the
hostel, Jackie. What if they say, I can't work there because of the blackouts?
What if they think my blackouts were responsible for what happened to Simon the
Fire? They won't. Trust me. Do you trust me, Sarah? Yes. You don't sound
certain. Do you ever think about what happened? Have you ever talked to anyone
about it? Of course not, and neither should you. Sarah, stop tugging your hair.
You know you're going to make it so. I can't help it. You know I do it when I'm
stressed. Shit. What? What is it? Remember what I told you, memory problems.
What's the matter? Police card. My God. Don't panic. They might not be looking
for us. Just remember, you asked for me to take you home. This is John Stone.
Leave a message. I'll call you back. Boss, I've followed Dixon to an industrial
state along the Erwell. He's taking the footpath down to the river. I'm
pursuing. Don't get out of me! I'm playing! I'm gonna play! Come on! Come on!
Take that! Come on! Come on! Come on! Come on! Come on! Oh! Oh! I just thought
you should know you deserved the truth. Yes! Yes! You're bloody well right. I
deserved the truth. I deserved it years ago when we made vows to one another.
What the hell am I supposed to do now? Oh, God, you know you've made me an
accessory. No. You know I haven't... No. Yes, I am. I'm now withholding
information or something. No! No! You've protected... It's a prison. Spousal
privilege. They can't force you to testify against me. Oh, well! There's a
silver lining then, is there, you stupid, stupid man? Testify! This can never go
to court, Neil. You cannot put Evie through that. No, I won't. Can you imagine
Evie going for an interview with her father's murder trial splashed all over the
tabloids? Oh, God, they seize assets, you know. Proceeds of crime, Neil! There
were no proceeds. No one profited... The family! Neil! The family can sue. They
can take everything, everything we have. That won't happen. Oh, for God's sake.
Get up, Neil. I need you to go. I'm sorry, Chris. I really am. If you really
care about us, you'll go, Neil. Now. Tell Evie I love her. And I love you,
Chris. I love you, Chris. I love you. I heard you. Tanner, it's Stone. Give me a
call back when you get this, will you? Where the hell is he? Is that Mike? It's
McCaffrey. Oh, Pollux, I'm not here. You speak to him. DCI, Stone's phone. DS
Kelly speaking. Chief McCaffrey, put him on. Erm, he's not here presently, sir.
Can I pass on a message? Yes. Tell him you're uncomfortable being put in a
position of having to lie to your superiors because you worry you could reflect
badly on your prospects. OK, sir. I'll pass on that message. Will you understand
it, sir? Mike Tanner is in hospital. He's been attacked and left unconscious.
Oh, my God, is he all right? Dog walker found him down near the earwalls around
5.30 this morning. Do you know anything about this? Sir, it's Stone. Mike was
tailing Philip Dixon. He's a suspect in this case. We lost contact with Mike. Is
he all right, sir? Where is he now? He's at the infirmary. He was unconscious
when they found him, but he's awake now. I think he's quite badly shaken, which
is understandable. We'll head directly to the infirmary now, sir. I've just seen
a stop and detain notice that came up the wire for Jackie's dad and hope in
connection with an abduction. Tell me straight, John, have you taken leave of
your senses? Sir, with respect, Sarah Martindale has survived an attempted
murder by the man we're seeking. We also place at the scene of Simon Peverell's
murder. Jackie stands on hope, has just removed her from the hospital to
deliberately obstruct her investigation. One of your team ends up in hospital,
and you don't even know where they are or what's happened to them. You've got to
ask yourself, am I in control, John? This investigation is running away from
you. Hannah could have been killed. The ex-head of a national charity picking up
one of her former staff members from hospital isn't sufficient evidence of
anything to put her name on a stop and detain order. This isn't a wire west,
this isn't a type of police and we'll try ourselves out. I'm pulling the stop
and detain immediately. We'll discuss everything else later. Oh my God, poor
Mike. I'm heading straight to the MRI. Hello, Kerry. Did you hear about Mike?
Just heard. I'm with the DCI. We're on our way to see him. OK, but you'll want
to know. We just had a call from Cheshire Police. A traffic patrol pulled Jackie
Stanton Hope on the M56 near Stockton Heath. Does she have a passenger with her?
Sarah Martindale. Cheshire wants to know where we want them taken. Tell them to
separate them and move them to our Nick. DS Kelly's on her way. I'll drop you at
the Nick, then go and see Mike. You OK handling Jackie on your own? No problem.
Just take a seat there, would you? Has someone offered you a tea? I'm fine. Can
we just get on with it? Just a second. This is DS Sue Kelly, interview with
Jackie Stanton Hope at 9.27am on Wednesday, 17th January, 2018. Am I under
arrest? Because no one's read me my rights. No, Jackie. You're not under arrest.
I'm not. I'm not. Are you under arrest? Because no one's read me my rights. No,
Jackie. You're not under arrest. You're free to leave at any time. However, I'd
be grateful for your cooperation in clarifying the incident that took place
early this morning. Namely, the removal of Sarah Martindale, the victim of an
attempted murder, from her hospital bed while she was sedated. I gave Sarah a
lift home at her request from the hospital. What is it you're alluding to,
Detective Kelly? What's the nature of your relationship with Sarah Martindale?
She's an employee. She's also a close friend, though, isn't she? I picked her up
and was bringing her home with her behest. I don't see the crime in that. So she
rang you to ask you to come and get her, did she? Someone did. Someone? Someone
at the hospital. I'm listed as her next-of-kin emergency contact. That's right.
You've known Sarah a long time, haven't you? Yeah. How long exactly? Since high
school? Yes. So you knew her parents? Yes. Did you go to their funerals? Her
father's, yeah. How about her mother's? No, I was too young. I was only 11. I
see. But you remember it happening, nonetheless. Yeah, I do. I looked after
Sarah. Yet, yesterday, you told DCI Stone and myself that Sarah was, in fact,
taking time off work to care for her gravely ill mother. You do recall saying
that. What about Neil Fitzhugh? What's your relationship with him? No comment. I
don't have to sit through this. I'm free to go. You are, indeed. Mike. Boss. Oh,
mate. How are you? Looks worse than it is. Oh, mate, I'm sorry. I must have
hurt. It's mostly bruising. Is that the obvious? What are they saying about the
break? Relatively clean. Six to eight weeks in plaster. Well, at least it's your
left. I'm left-handed. Oh, yeah. That's right. Look, Mike, I feel terrible. I
should never have let you follow him down there alone. I'm sorry. It's not your
fault, boss. I should have seen it coming. Was it Dixon? Did you get a look at
him? No. I don't think so. He was up ahead of me. I don't know who it was. Some
random kids, maybe. I would have thought I'd caught a glimpse, but I didn't.
Little vicious bastards. They weren't messing around, were they? We'll get them
for this, Mike. It hurt me pride more than anything. Well, don't rush back to
work. You need to take time to recover. So what do you remember? You were
following Dixon down the earwold. That's about it. What happened then? You went
onto the towpath? He was up ahead of you. How far? Mike? How far up ahead was
he? Dixon? I don't want to talk about it. Look, I know it's difficult, but... I
don't want to talk about it. I didn't fight back. I don't blame you. You were
clearly outgunned. No. I panicked. I rolled up into a ball. It's all like...
It's OK. No, it's not. I just... gave up. Just like my old man did. Just like I
saw him do. I'd lost all respect for him the day I saw him getting battered.
When I saw him give up... Don't overthink things, Mike. You've had a shock. I'm
sure you had no time to react. You had to do what you had to do. None of this is
your fault. I felt so ashamed of my old man back then. There are times when you
just can't fight back. When survival is the best we can hope for. How's Tanner?
Not good, to be perfectly honest. Physically, he's hurt pretty badly by your
men, but... He's been shaken by this. How long's he going to be in there? Not
sure yet. I think he might need to take his time. How's it gone with Jackie? No
great progress. Walked out the interview. Managed to rattle her cage. What about
Sarah Martindale? How's she seen? Just heading into interviewer now. Seems a bit
vacant. Told the custody sergeant that she suffers memory problems. Has she
requested a doctor? Nope. Right. Get in there and make hay. Will do. You're
heading in there. Take these. One on the right's yours. Others got two sugars
for Sarah. Tea and biscuits. There are never any biscuits around here when I
look for them. I've got a secret stash. Good luck. Morning, Sarah. How are you?
I'm Detective Sergeant Sue Kelly. Do you remember we met previously? I remember.
OK, I've got your tea with two sugars and biscuits. What do you like gold dust
round here? DS Sue Kelly, interviewing Sarah Martindale at 9.38 on Wednesday 17
January 2018. So, Sarah, I gather you've had quite a traumatic experience. How
are you feeling now? Tired. I just want to go home. Well, that's what we want
to, Sarah. So the sooner we can get through these questions, the better. What do
you think? Now, it's my understanding that the doctors gave you the OK. I don't
want to make this any more unpleasant than it's already been, but I do need to
talk to you about what happened. I'm feeling a bit... What? I've got concussion
and memory problems. I don't remember anything. You don't remember anything? No.
OK. Well, if it's all right with you, I'd like to just work from what you do
remember and see how we get on, shall we? No. So, yesterday, Neil Fitzhugh
arrived at your temporary accommodation on Morley Street early in the morning.
No, that's not right. A neighbour identified you both leaving together. No, I
imagined it. I'm sorry? I had an episode, I've had them before, where I imagined
things happening. How do you know you've imagined these things? People tell me.
Which people? Who tells you when you've imagined something during these
episodes? Jackie. Do you think that Jackie always has your best interest at
heart, Sarah? Just to eliminate any doubts you might have, this is a still taken
from CCTV at Delamere Services yesterday. Remember that? Delamere Services. You
do recognise yourself in the picture, Sarah? Yeah. Do you recognise the man with
you? Do you recognise that man? It's Neil Fitzhugh. So, let's try and establish
a timeline for yesterday, shall we? Neil Fitzhugh called round to your
accommodation yesterday morning. Do we know what time was that? I don't
remember. OK. Were you expecting that? No. Is Neil Fitzhugh an acquaintance of
yours? Sarah, have you met Neil Fitzhugh before? No. Do you remember Neil
Fitzhugh arriving at the flat, Sarah? I don't. Do you remember why he came
round? No. That's OK. But you do know Neil, don't you, Sarah? No. Not... Really.
Well, you've met him before. Yeah. So, you know one another, your acquaintances.
Yeah. And where is it you know Neil from? Is it through work? He's a solicitor,
I believe. Had you caused to encounter him through one of the foundation's
clients, perhaps? Or do you know one another socially? Does the relationship go
further back? Is he a boyfriend or ex-boyfriend? What about university? You went
to Cambridge, right? For a year. And Neil Fitzhugh went to Manchester, studied
law. Yeah. The same course as Jackie. And Jackie's an old friend of yours, isn't
she? Yes. So is it through Jackie that you know Neil? And when was that then?
Did you visit in the holidays from Cambridge? I was coming to talk with you
yesterday about this. This is a still from the CCTV on Chaplin Way behind Mary-
Lian House on the night Simon Peverell was killed. Do you recognise this man?
Don't. I'm afraid I don't recognise him. But you did when we showed you them
after the fire, didn't you? Do you know what I think, Sarah? I think you do
recognise him. I think you're scared to tell me for some reason, because even to
the untrained eye, this person here looks like the same person as this one here,
walking into Delamere Services with you yesterday. See the similarity? And that
is Neil Fitzhugh, isn't it, Sarah? Were you aware he'd visited the hostel prior
to Simon's death? Was he coming there to meet you? No. You didn't see him then?
No, you sure? I hadn't seen him for 20 years till yesterday. Is that right?
Morning, Jackie. How are you? Where's Sarah? I demand to see Sarah. Sarah? Sarah
Martindale. She was arrested along with me. She was in the car. Neither of you
were arrested. She was detained for questioning. Then why are you holding her?
Well, not. She's free to leave any time she wants. So where is she? She's
talking to my colleague, DS Kelly, in an interview at the moment. Like I
explained, Sarah's free to go any time. Then let her go? Any time she wants, she
can go. As it stands, she's voluntarily assisting DS Kelly with her inquiries.
Now, if you'd excuse me... I want to talk to her now. Sorry. I can't interrupt
an interview, but I'll pass on a message if you want to get off. Does she
understand that she's free to go? Why wouldn't she? I demand that you take me to
see her. Sarah! Sarah! DCI Stone. Mr Stanton, Hope. Chief. Chief McCaffrey.
Liam, I was just explaining to your detective, Stone, how I need access to my
colleague. She's been brought in for questioning Sarah Martindale. She's a
vulnerable individual with a history of delusional episodes and shouldn't be
interviewed without a legal friend. Mr Stanton, Hope, would you give me a minute
to speak with DCI Stone alone, please? This bitch looks higher than I remember
it. Do you see? All right, Neil. What are you doing here? Thought you might come
here. It's not worth it, mate. Why don't you come back this side of the rain,
you say? I can't, Dixie. I've made a mess out of things. I can't see a way out.
I don't want to go to prison, Dixie. I won't last. I'll end up killing myself
there. At least this way, I can spare my family this shame. Hey. Hey, come on.
It's quiet here now, isn't it? I suppose people hardly use it anymore. Not since
they opened the big bridge a few years back. This place has pretty much
forgotten. Nothing round here now. I haven't been here for 20 years. Even before
the new bridge opened, I avoided this place like the plague. I'd sooner be stuck
in traffic another half hour and go down the other way than cross this bastard
bridge. I've been here. I used to come here a lot in the early days. His friends
and family, they left flowers here every year on the anniversary for the first
ten years or so, at least. Then they just stopped appearing. Do you think about
it much? Truthfully. No, I don't. How? I think they call it
compartmentalisation. You move on, and you keep moving on, and you never look
back. That's what I've done. Kept moving like a shark. I couldn't stop looking
back. I've tortured myself about it for years, thinking if I'd have just done
this instead of that, I'd all be different. Yeah, with all other chance to do
things over there. But you can't let the past dictate your future. But it has.
Ending up like this. Me and you back on this bridge. Come on, Chief, think about
it. Think about your daughter. What's she going to think if you end it all here?
My daughter. The truth is, she's going to see me behind bars for the rest of my
life. But if I take one step forward here, all that shame goes into the girl
well with me. I could see you fought this through. She never need find out about
any of this. The book stops with you. If you're not here to answer the
questions, where did the cops go with this? Not back to you and Jackie, that's
for sure. No, no, no, not back to me. No, but more importantly, for her sake.
Not back to you. At the moment, all they have is you in the vicinity of the
hostel when Simon Pevell died. And what are you thinking? They've got no motive.
Right? And they're never going to get one. If you say your secret with you. My
secret? You've come a long way, Dixie. You've done well for yourself. But to me,
you're still that scrawny little lad who lived with his gran in a grotty old
terraced street full of students back in the day. Like I say, I don't look back.
I always wondered why you didn't resent us. All these high and mighty university
types invade in your area. Your gran was one of the last locals on that street?
Yeah. But I never got any of that from you. Never felt like you resented us.
That's because you saw opportunity in it. That's how you became our confidant.
The scrawny little local scally you sold crap drugs to the wet behind the ears
students. I'm trying to help you mate. I thought you'd appreciate an old friend
coming down here. I don't think it was ever about friendship with you, really.
It was solely about opportunity, wasn't it, Dixie? And so when you turn up here,
acting like you've come to help me out of the goodness of your heart, out of
friendship, I have the question, what's the angle? I don't follow you, Chief.
How did you find me, Dixie? Jackie. And what did her Highness say? He might need
encouragement. No. We both know that's a lie. She told you to make sure I went
through with it. No. How did you know I had a daughter, Dixie? You told me. I
never mentioned it before you did. You and Jackie have been putting your heads
together. I jump and the trail ends. I stay and we're all going to jail. I
reckon for at least the next 25 years. So why am I the only one who's desperate
enough to be standing here? That's not fair. We're all equal partners in this
enterprise, aren't we? Neil, you can't put your daughter through a court case
when every sodded little detail's poured over, hearing what her dad did. He
sounded desperate now, Dixie. If she heard the whole story, then she'd know that
I was the only one who tried to help that night. But... Neil. Neil, what are
you... What are you doing? Neil, where are you going? Tell Jackie I said thanks.
You've changed my mind. I'm not going to do it. Neil, think about it. You've got
nowhere to go. Where are you going, Neil? When did you meet him, Sarah? Sarah?
It was years ago. 20 years ago. And how did you meet him? Was it at a party,
through a friend? Through a friend. Which friend would that be, Sarah? Would it
be Jackie? That's not exactly hard to deduce. She's the only friend I have. And
how did Jackie know Neil then? He was her boyfriend they met at university. Neil
Fitzhugh was Jackie Stanton Hope's boyfriend. Yes. What the hell is the matter
with you? I pulled a notice on Jackie Stanton Hope. Why is she here? She
believes she had already pulled them, Chief. Are you out of your mind? Look at
the scrutiny you're bringing down on us here. Sir, with respect, you and I owe
it to ourselves to see this resolved. Meaning? Meaning we need to acknowledge
that mistakes were made 20 years ago. The Cody Stafford case. You know it and I
know it. This thing is not going to go away until we find the truth. Sir, Marcus
Allison is here. Marcus Allison? What does he want? Sir, he's been called in as
legal counsel for Sarah Martindale. Sir, Sarah Martindale hasn't requested a
solicitor. He'll have been instructed by Jackie Stanton Hope. Did you witness
something? Yes. Was Neil Fitzhugh there? Yes. What happened? Did someone get
killed? Yes. I want to tell you about a killing. A killing? A murderer? Whose?
My client, Sarah Martindale, is a vulnerable individual. Your client? You've
never even met her. This interview is being conducted with an already vulnerable
individual whilst under duress and extreme traumatic stress from a sustained
assault not 24 hours ago. Chief is right. The interview has to be terminated.
You've got to be kidding. Whose murdered Sarah? Whom? DS Kelly, this interview
is hereby terminated. Switched at the front. Simon Peverell? Yes. DS Kelly, I'm
ordered here. Who did it, Sarah? Who killed him? Right. Detective Constable
unplugged DLR. Who was it, Sarah? DC Shaw unplugged the DLR. No! It was me. I
killed him. I killed Simon Peverell. In Stone, DCI Stone was played by Hugo
Spear, DI Mike Tanner by Craig Cheatham and DS Sue Kelly by Deborah McAndrew.
Jackie Stanton Hope was played by Jill Harpony, Sarah Martindale by Christine
Bottomley and Neil by Graham Hawley. Dixie was played by Kieran O'Brien,
McCaffrey by Conrad Nelson and Christine by Emily Peton. Stone was created by
Danny Brocklehurst. It was written by Alex Ganley, script edited by Caitlin
Crawford and produced by Gary Brown. More from Stone at the same time next week.
This is BBC Radio 4 Now, the news, remixed as a current affairs comedy concept
album. With some very strong language, it's the secure. What a Patrick Evil
Before I chopped the gr jumper, I was FA chewed by Doug Gr WiFi, the Supreme
Court Resolute overdone with Matt are introducing limits on human trafficking.
Morrison's is restricting people to two each. And King Charles will commission
12 new pieces of music to be performed at his coronation in May. Among them will
be an anthem composed by......Cady Price's disabled son Harvey. Would we stand
up for the sovereignty of nations? Would we stand up? Would we stand up for
democracy? Stand up, stand up... For the right people to free. Stand up for the
right people. But she's got dicky days. So that brings us to the end of our
program. Now let's have a look at the cop sucker that cops up this weekend.
President Biden made an unannounced visit to Ukraine's capital. Yo Joe!
Literally what I think is a war crime. Fight for freedom wherever there's
trouble. Yo. How can I be of help? A real American hero. A comet from the
Kremlin. That's what you have me do with Washington. Pepper it with spitballs.
God knows what he's thinking. I don't think he's thinking that. Knowing is half
the battle. D.I. Joe! Pooh's kleptocracy... Yeah. Roald Dahl's iconic books have
received a woke makeover. His publisher has made hundreds of changes to the
original text. Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. Charlie and the Fair Trade
Avocado Factory. Read by James Bonewood. And the big friendly giant in the BFG.
The BFG. TQIA+. Read by Olivia Colman. The BFG TQIA+. Was a genderfluid
dreamweaver. Did anyone check with Roald Dahl when they did these rewrites? The
Unpleasant Magical Women. Read by Patrick Stewart. It's important to remember
that witches aren't real. So they couldn't possibly be offended. Even if they
are bald and ugly. What was glorious about Roald Dahl's books is that they were
violent. Brood and offensive. Matilda. Read by Miriam Margulies. Matilda loved
reading books. One day she was reading in her room when her father came in.
What's this rubbish? He asked. It's a book by Roald Dahl. They've changed it
though. They've taken out the offensive language, Matilda said. What a bunch of
woke twats! Her father fumed. You can't just change it. You can't just put words
in people's mouths. I prefer it actually. Matilda said calmly. Shut up, you
stupid little cunt. The Prime Minister is in Belfast with a deal with the EU on
the Northern Ireland Protocol, thought to be close to completion. Welcome to
Delaune Open. Well today I had positive conversations with political parties in
Northern Ireland. Hello. God's sake! He did not see that coming at all. There's
work to do. We have not got a deal yet. Get off! Great times in the Dream
Factory. See you tomorrow. It was one of the most daring heists in British
criminal history. It's been announced that MPs are going to get a pay rise. This
is April this year. By April the gang were ready. They've taken something that
doesn't belong to them. MP should turn this money down. No, I think they should
take it. This part of London is the very heartland of one of Britain's most
notorious crime organisations. They're running the country. One of the
ringleaders put it like this. I feel that Christmas has come out. They're public
servants. A gang of ageing criminals. The perfect crime. They don't just sit
there in Parliament. Old school villains. Look, some MPs, some would argue, may
be on the take a little bit. I'm told by underworld sources that it's two,
three, four times that amount. I don't think we'll ever know. Should MPs get a
pay rise of 2.9%? It harks back to a kind of golden age of robbery. There was a
boy... A former kickboxer and online misogynist, Andrew Tate. Andrew Tate. The
British-American influencer, Andrew Tate. A very strange, enchanted boy. He's
someone who's built a social media empire by encouraging men to embark on these
sort of self-improvement programmes. He's someone who's built a social media
empire by encouraging men to embark on these sort of self-improvement
programmes. Andrew Tate's misogynistic tirade to be viewed billions of times
online. Much of his content is also sort of caricatured. There's a whole bunch
of men in the world who understand my value. Of what an alpha male might look
like. Pictures of him next to supercars, smoking enormous cigars, next to guns
with hand-skipped hand limits. So, Andrew Tate has this thing called the
Hustlers Academy, where he says he's going to teach how to sort of live this
lifestyle like he does. And he charges about $50 a month. Topics like women are
the property of men, women who are right, so probably the contributing to that
by being out on their own. I've been seeing what my son's watching on YouTube.
And struck a female to provide sustenance. He does seem to speak to young men. I
think my sister is her husband's property. My son seems to put Andrew Tate on a
bit of a pedestal. If I meet a girl who's 33 and single, I know the amount of
dick that's been through her before me is just simply unattractive. Women,
women, women, women, women should clean up. If you're sitting there going,
that's sexist. Well, it's sexist for me to fucking pay for everything, isn't it?
You fucking bimbo. If men grow up to be like me, you're going to have a whole
bunch of people with no criminal record. Andrew Tate was arrested in Bucharest.
Who protected and provided for the people close to him. On suspicion of human
trafficking. Are fantastic for the economy. Rape and of forming an organized
crime. The lawyer protects the set that his client rejects all the allegations.
Vice News obtained WhatsApp messages and voice notes sent by Andrew Tate to a
woman who accused him of rape. The more you didn't like it, the more I enjoyed
it. I fucking loved how much you hated it. Shit, turn me off. Sometimes you
forget exactly how lucky you were to get fucked up by me. Are you seriously so
offended I strangled you a little bit? You didn't fucking pass out. Chill the
fuck out. Jesus Christ, I thought you were cool. What's wrong with you? The fact
that masses of men are parading through the streets in defense of him, after all
of that stuff came out, is deeply distressing. I didn't put a magic spell on
everybody. I managed to accumulate a large amount of affinity with the male
populace across the Western world because I'm simply saying things that many men
believe, think, and feel. So many adults have literally no idea what is being
said to the kids. I am one of the most dangerous men on this planet. I forget to
smash that like button. It's a nasty horror. Why, BAFTAs? Welcome to the 76
BAFTA Film Awards. I'm White Actor. Richard E. Grant. And I can ride a horse.
What was it like on the red carpet? Give me a feel, Marty. Give you a feel?
Yeah, give me a feel. Christ, that's not that kind of shit. What's not being
funny? Where is the diversity of the BAFTA? Fundamentally, there aren't enough
people of color in our industry. It's a nasty horror. Why, BAFTAs? You bet. It
happens every time. Do not wear white. Please welcome the legendary white actor,
Sir Patrick Stewart. From where I was sitting, I can see your belly. It's a
nasty horror. Why, BAFTAs? It's a nasty horror. Why, BAFTAs? It's a nasty
horror. Why, BAFTAs? And I judge every trade on its merits. The Scotland Now
with a search is on for their next first Minister after Nicholas Staget in
surprise resignation. This is Naked Attraction. Tonight... Could Kate Forbes be
the one to step up as, FM? Trouble, son. I like trouble, though. Puns are,
Yousef's name is also being floated. Please, please, please don't be a bloody
dickhead. He's currently the Health Secretary. What a dream job. Now, the third
person in the race is Ash Wagon, not as well known. Total cringe. Wow. Oh. Dion
and John are from the party's youth wing. Who do you want? I mean, I think, for
me, it's more about the qualities I'm looking for in some days. A nice bum as
well. Little peachy. Leadership hopefuls will need the backing of 100 members.
Nice bit of girth on that penis. You're going to have to make a decision. I'm
looking for someone that will just really represent the Scottish people and
focus on independence for Scotland. Wow. One person who it won't be, the MP, Ian
Blackford. He's got a great bum. Oh, I hate his twacking that bum. The former
Westminster leader of the SNP has ruled himself out. Naughty, and there are
clear dividing lines between the candidates. That is one hell of a hairy crack.
He's got a nice set of balls as well. A lion-hearted litigator becomes a
fractured fiend. The Labour Party is unrecognisable from 2019. The notorious
gangster known as Two-Face. I am working with Jeremy Corbyn to try to win the
next general election. His experiencing of violent breakdown. Jeremy Corbyn will
not stand for Labour at the next general election. Have I read all of Batman's
case files about Two-Face? Well, look, I don't think that the role of
politicians is to go on to picket lines. Two-Face... And it's really important
you get politicians to come out and support you and stand with you. Two-Face is
a maniac, but he knows it. I'm not going to resign from my belief in the NHS.
Two-Face is losing his grip. I'm proposing there's a partnership model with
private business. His obsession with his own duality is beyond his control right
now. I've changed my mind on the latest of things. And just like that, his mind
broke clean in two. And it will never go back. I've seen much of the world. It
is brutal and cruel and dark. Bankership police have confirmed they've recovered
a body from the river wire just a mile away from where Nicola Bully disappeared.
The investigation was attracting amateur sleuths. TikTokers have been playing
their own private detective. Some of them live-streamed their own theories on
social media. Hundreds of people. I am filming. I'm just getting some little
quits for TikTok. You should see the Coliseum, Spaniel. 50,000 Romans. What? The
creation of what some critics have called true crime brain. To view everything
as a true crime story. Social media and true crime creation has become
democratized. Win the crowd. The world with eyes haven't worked. Conjume magic
for them and they'll be distracted. We feel a sense of ownership over the person
that is not actually due. The whole world and its wife is weighing in on this
one. I would often see you enjoying the pleasures of the vulgar crowd. The
audience is titillating. He knows too well how to manipulate the mob. That is
somebody's mum, somebody's partner, somebody's daughter. The crowd wants battle,
so the Emperor gives them battle. Do you think the police were right to reveal
deeply personal information? All the people were seeking to make that
information public. I will win the crowd. I will give them something they've
never seen before. Their hand was forced to die. You didn't align. The beating
heart and road is not the marvel of the Senate. It's the sand of the Coliseum.
Alexa, who twisted the skewer. The skewer was twisted by John Holmes, Katy
Sayer, Paul Carney, Dave Wall, Henry Person, Cooper Moore, Hemsworth, David
Rifkin and Tony Churnside. Additional material, Nikki Roberts, Liz Ryan, Amy
Harrison, Selena Egan, Peter Edfer, Nick Harper, Jack Stewart and a few
mansfield. The producer was John Holmes. The skewer was an unusual production
for BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Yesterday, we recovered Nicola Bully from the
River Wire. Our girls will get the support they need from the people who love
them the most. And it saddens us to think that one day we will have to explain
to them that the press and members of the public accuse their dad of wrongdoing,
misquoted and vilified friends and family members. We tried to take in what we
had been told only to have, Sky News and ITV. We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you are using an internet radio, web or mobile,
this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.