TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 We will be with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at 7
o'clock. Downing Street has described criticism of the government's asylum plans
by the BBC presenter Gary Lineker as not acceptable and disappointing. The Match
of the Day host tweeted last night that the language used in setting out the
proposals was not dissimilar to that used in Germany in the 1930s. The BBC said
it was having a frank conversation with him. Richard Sambrook is a former
director of BBC News and Sport. He says the corporation needs to clear a few
things up. They've got to clarify the position in terms of the impartiality
guidelines and how widely they apply and about their relationship with
freelancers. And until they do that, we're going to have another one and then
another one of these kinds of crises. And they do corrode trust and corrode the
reputation of the BBC. Rishi Sunak has insisted that his plans to reform the
UK's asylum system show he's on the side of the British people. Speaking at
Prime Minister's Questions, Mr Sunak said he was acting with compassion and
fairness. But the Labour leader, Sakhiya Starmer, accused him of being
absolutely deluded and described the plans as an utter mess. A 14-year-old boy
who caused the death of a pensioner while on an electric scooter has been given
a 12-month referral order and banned from driving for five years. The boy hit
71-year-old Linda Davis on a pavement in Nottinghamshire in June. The Met Office
has said that parts of central and northern England could be hit by snow storms
tomorrow. It's warned of strong winds, bringing blizzard conditions and up to 40
centimetres of snow. The Government is to review how sex and relationships
education is being taught in schools in England after MPs claimed some children
were being exposed to inappropriate content. The Conservative backbencher,
Miriam Cate, said some pupils were being subjected to classes that were extreme,
sexualising and inaccurate. The Prime Minister's spokesman said children should
be given information that was factually based and age-appropriate. The UK's
entry for the Eurovision Song Contest will be revealed tomorrow morning. It'll
be unveiled by Zoe Ball on the Radio 2 Breakfast Show just after 8.30. BBC News.
The pioneering play Top Girls turns 40, plus two publishers owe a duty of care
to memoirists and the benefits of stopping the show all coming up in front row
in 15 minutes. Then the Morrow Maze examines the morality of breaching people's
trust. If we're told something in confidence, what are the moral limits to our
obligation to keep it secret? The Morrow Maze is at 8 o'clock. But first on
Radio 4, Cate has a lot on her mind in the Arches. Why don't we talk about
something else? It's fine, Mum. But you're leaving on Friday. I shouldn't be
going on about myself. Don't worry. We ought to be enjoying our afternoon tea.
We are. But you're obviously feeling confused. I'm sorry, darling. After the
funeral, it seemed like you'd changed your mind about selling Spiritual Home. I
had, pretty much. Your grandad gave me a real confidence boost. But now you're
doubting things? I just... I can't help wondering if he really meant it. Oh, I
don't know. I feel a bit all over the place. Anyway, tell me about the flat
you're looking at. What's it like? Looks like I'll be sharing with a girl from
college. She's just been through a break-up too. Oh, helpful then. Could be.
Well, is everything alright for you both? Yes, thank you, Freddie. Delicious.
Good. So, are you ready to be my guinea pig then? That depends on what I have to
do. What's this? Nolotando agreed to let me try out a new tour around the house
I've been working on. Oh, that sounds exciting. Well, that's the plan, at least.
Oh, you're welcome to join us. Oh, no, no. You two get on. I'm going to use your
Wi-Fi and then head into work. You ready? Yep. Thanks for lunch, Mum. I'll see
you back at home later. Bye. Have fun. See you. So, how are you getting on with
recruiting volunteers? Well, we've offered roles to Neil and Oliver. Hmm. Well,
like I said, I really think if you approach students completing a vocational
qualification... Yeah, there'll be some at Felthamshire Uni. Well, if their work
covers museums and heritage or conservation, I'm sure they'll be interested.
Yeah, I was planning on asking Lily to put the word out. Where is she? I'm not
sure. She's been a bit remote these last few days. Still, at least that means
she's not on my case about these tours. She loves reminding me how boring they
can be. Ah, but you're going to turn that around. Oh, I hope so. With a bit more
showmanship. I've got loads of ideas. I just need to put them into practice. So,
follow me. Folks aren't going to stand for it, Clary. Well, I told you. Eddie's
all for it. Oliver too, by all accounts. You haven't talked to Jim, though. I
feel like I have. He's got big plans for a fight back. What sort of plans? Oh,
well, I'm not at liberty to say at the moment, but Jim's not going to take this
lying down. Not like some people round here. Oh. Well, the bridge farm lot for
one. I don't think they fully grasp the implications, Clary. Don't forget
there's all these retail units. Oh, I know. Could be bad news for the farm shop.
And the tea room if a big cafe chain moves in. If you ask me, they're
sleepwalking into a disaster. And if they're not careful, this place will get...
Look, Helen's coming. Oh, good morning, Helen. Oh, sorry to interrupt. I just
thought you might be curious about my visitor this morning. Who's that, then? I
did see you with someone in the yard. Yep, a builder friend of Lillian's.
Builder? We're going to install an observation window here in the dairy so that
people can see what a wonderful job you do. An observation window? Yep, through
which the visiting public can watch us working. Us? All of us. We'll have a load
of people watching us. That's the idea. Well, what do you think? Dad? Oh, Kate.
I didn't think you'd be working today. Is everything all right? Yes. I thought
you were out with an olla tando. Only for lunch. Right. Do you have a nice time?
We always do. I'm going to miss her so much. What are you doing here, Dad? I
just wanted to see you. But you thought I was out. Well, did I say that? Yes.
Look, I didn't want to bother you. With what? I thought a treatment might be
called for. A treatment? What's going on? Well, I just wanted something to help
me relax. How have you been sleeping? Not brilliantly. Any aches or pains? Well,
my neck's been rather uncomfortable. Really? It's not surprising I keep falling
asleep in the armchair. Your mother always used to wake me up and order me to
bed. And I suppose I'm just feeling some general discomfort. Well, I've been
having deep tissue massages. Is that painful? No, it's wonderful. The thing is,
when you're grieving, there's an overwhelming amount of stress hormones being
released. And they effectively stun the muscles they come into contact with. OK.
So massage therapy helps alleviate some of the physical discomfort associated
with bereavement. I've seen it benefit so many people, including me. Well, do
you think it could help me? Definitely. I probably should have made an
appointment, though. It's all right. I think Shona's working today. Let me see
if she can squeeze you in. And when exactly is this installation supposed to be
happening? Well, the builder said he can turn the whole thing around in two,
maybe three days. When? Well, it sort of depends when he can fit it in. But he's
promised me to give us as much notice as possible. I can see you're very excited
about this, Helen. And, well, the family might be in agreement, but we really
should have been consulted. This is the first we've heard of it. And I can't say
I'm too pleased. Oh, Clary, I realise it will take a bit of getting used to, but
I genuinely think you'll both really enjoy showing people what you do. I ain't
so sure. I really thought you'd like this. We'd be like zoo animals. That's
right. Like a pair of chimpanzees. With people staring at us all day long. And
banging on the glass, I bet. I don't think there'd be any of that, Clary. Oh, if
it's kids, they will. And we'd be able to concentrate. No, we wouldn't. Me and
Susan haven't been making the cheese all that long. This is going to show the
whole of the dairy production. Cheese, yoghurt, ice cream. Well, whatever we're
doing, we need to focus. Not deal with a load of distractions. What if we end up
making mistakes because of it? Well, you'll get used to the window very quickly.
Well, why should we have to, though? What about our privacy? Would you want
people looking into your office? I don't think the public would have much
interest in watching me sift paperwork and answer emails. The art of cheese
making, however... And DTs and art. Absolutely. People will see the care and
expertise involved. All the hard work you put in. It's not a spectator sport,
Helen. I really wasn't expecting you to be this upset. Well, now you know how we
feel about it. I'm particularly surprised at your opposition, Susan. Why's that?
Well, you having already been a public figure. What do you mean? Your time as a
radio host. All that experience of interacting with an audience. I thought you
were a natural. There's no comparison. I mean, where's the interaction? Well...
There ain't none. None at all. They'd just be gawping at us through the glass.
But what if they weren't? What if there was the opportunity to communicate? Eh?
Go on. Well, perhaps some kind of intercom system. Susan! Well, that way we
could give them a running commentary of the work we're doing. Is it just a
minute? And answer any questions people might have. Well, I don't want to do
that. Oh, well. I'd be happy to handle all the presenting duties. As Helen said,
I have plenty of experience after all. That is a good point. That is a great
idea. Thank you, Susan. Oh, well. It just came to me. Does that make you feel
more comfortable, Clary? Not particularly. So, while there are many later
editions, the main part of the house was built in 1702. Now, does anyone know
why that was a significant year in English history? No, we didn't win the
Eurovision Song Contest. In fact, in 1702, King William III died after falling
from his horse near Hampton Court. So, Lower Loxley was built as the crown
passed from King William to his sister-in-law, Queen Anne of... Denmark. Very
good. Yay! Extra points if you can name William's horse. Ah, you've got me.
Right, now I'm going to take us up the main staircase to the Galleried Landing,
where we'll look at some of the most significant pieces in our art collection.
Can't wait. Not a tando. I mean it. I'm not being sarcastic, I promise. You
better not, or I'll chuck you off this tour. Is that official tour policy? Well,
it is when I'm doing the tours. Come along. Onwards. How was it? Oh, it was
wonderful, Kate. Shona's one of our best massage therapists. She's done a great
job relaxing my neck. I'm so glad. Anyway, how much do I owe you? Oh, my treat.
No, no, come on. It's fine, Dad. Oh, well, thank you, darling, but I shall pay
from now on. Oh, you're coming back then? Well, Shona recommended a course of
treatments. It really will help you to sleep better. Oh, Dad, I just wish you'd
said something sooner. We could have got this sorted for you ages ago. No, no,
no. Look, I'm just glad I'm finally doing something about it. You know, I'm
really touched that you came here, that you thought we could help. Well, it's
what you do, isn't it? Help people. Yes, yes, it is. What? Well, in spite of our
chat last week, I was still questioning certain things. Not sure if I really had
a future at Spiritual Home or if it had a future with me. I thought you'd come
up with a plan. Well, I'd sort of decided to stick with the business for five
years and see how it goes. That sounds eminently sensible. Mm. Because you're so
knowledgeable and passionate about everything you do here. And look at the
effect you have on your clients. This place is your calling, Kate. But if I'm
honest, Dad, I was only planning on coasting. I don't want that. So what are you
proposing? You're not back to the home, are you? I'm not back to the home. I'm
back to the home. I'm proposing, you're not back to the idea of selling up. No,
not at all. I want to be more proactive. I've realised I think I just want to
take a leaf out of your book and really make Spiritual Home flourish. I think
that's an excellent idea. And we end this guided tour in accordance with age-old
custom. A visit to the gift shop. Thank you for being such a wonderful group.
Yada, yada, yada, and have a lovely afternoon. That's it. Oh, except without the
yada, yada bit. Well done, Freddie. Thank you. Oh, I forgot to see if there's
anything you wanted to ask. Actually... I always encourage volunteers to stick
around and make themselves available for questions. It's not really a question,
though. More comment. Oh, all right. Give me your feedback. I can take it. I
mean, I thought you did brilliantly. Yeah? The content was engaging, felt fresh,
lots of detail, but not too much. Are you sure? It really held my attention,
Freddie. Oh, I worried I might have lost your interest towards the end there.
No, no, no. Only I did catch you on your phone. I'm sorry. I'll admit I got a
bit distracted. Is everything all right, Nolotando? It's one of the paintings we
saw. The huge one on the landing of the ship's officer. I was trying to do some
research on it. Just something I noticed. I knew there was something about it.
Did I get some information wrong? Actually, it's more about what you might have
left out. Susan is ready to lend a hand in the art shows tomorrow night at the
same time. In 45 minutes, William Crawley presents tonight's Moral Maze. Can you
keep a secret? It's a question some are asking the journalist Isabelle Oakeshott
after she broke her word and made public the political treasure trove of Matt
Hancock's WhatsApp messages. But you don't need to be a journalist to struggle
at times with whether or not to keep a promise. If you promised a friend to keep
a secret, would you feel duty-bound to keep shtum no matter what? Or would it
sort of, well, depend? If there are sometimes good reasons to break a
confidence, is there such a thing as a morally justified betrayal? Tonight's
Moral Maze. The promises we make, sacrosanct or subject to negotiation. In three
quarters of an hour. But first, on Radio 4, it's time for Front Rule with Nick
Ahad. Hello. Tonight, it's one of the 15 greatest plays ever written, according
to the Daily Telegraph, while the Times called it one of the greatest plays of
all time. We'll discuss the enduring legacy of Carole Churchill's Top Girls as
the playwright returns to the script and gives her blessing for it to be
relocated to Liverpool for a 40th anniversary production. Prince Harry's book
Spare this year became the fastest-selling non-fiction of all time, casting a
spotlight on the act of self-revelation in the form of memoir. Writing stories
involving your own life can require authors to revisit some of the most painful
and traumatic experiences they have ever endured. But what is the cost of
burying your soul on the page? And the old adage tells us that the show must go
on, but must it? David Byrne, Artistic Director of the New Diorama Theatre,
spoke to me on Front Rule last year about his decision to shut his theatre for
at least six months for an artistic reset. I can't remember the time when I was
genuinely shocked or challenged or surprised by ideas presented at the theatre.
More often than not, I feel like I'm listening to ideas I already agree with,
said back at me that I've been prepped for in the show flyer. And I think a lot
of that is because artists are afraid. They want to make work that fits in with
the status quo. They want to make work that's going to be funded, that's going
to be instantly palatable to the easily offended and the sort of censorious. But
life is messy and post-lockdowns it's only getting messier. And we need theatre
that really embraces that, that has the big conversations. And I currently don't
think we're having enough of them. Well, as his theatre reopens tonight, David
joins me live to talk about what the reset has revealed. 2023 marks 40 years
since the premiere of the revolutionary Carol Churchill play Top Girls. An
undisputed classic, the play is constantly and consistently referenced as a
highlight of British theatre. Premiering at the Royal Court in 1982, the play
arrived at a time when Margaret Thatcher's government was beginning to flex its
muscles. With the country's first female prime minister in place, Churchill's
play with its feminist narrative felt extremely timely and was written in
response to the political climate around it. Famously opening with a surreal
sequence featuring women from different periods of history sitting down for a
dinner, Churchill makes the audience's heads spin by then setting the following
scenes firmly in 1980s Britain. The unifying factor is Marlene, the host of the
anachronistic dinner, who we then see running a thriving employment agency, Top
Girls, in Thatcher's capitalist 1980s. As the story plays out, we realise that
Marlene has escaped a working class life and left significant parts of herself
behind, parts that we see come crashing back into her new world. As part of his
first season as Artistic Director of Liverpool Everyman, Shubha Das is bringing
a new production of Churchill's masterpiece to the stage. With Churchill's
blessing, he has refashioned the play so that Marlene and Joyce, the two sisters
at the heart of the piece, now live in 1980s Liverpool. I expect her children
will say what a wasted life she had, because nothing's changed. Alicia Ayo as
Joyce and Talha Gouvier as Marlene in Shubha Das's production of Top Girls. I
spoke to Shubha ahead of tonight's premiere at the Everyman and began by asking
why he wanted to direct this play now. It's a masterpiece. I never imagined I
would direct Top Girls. I guess the clue's in the title. I'm very much aware of
being a man. The play is an extraordinary exploration of femalehood and female
opportunity. It's, however, always felt deeply personal to me as somebody who
was brought up on social security and have moved across class. And that's
exactly the journey for Marlene, the lead character in the play. The final scene
where she returns home, there is that kind of heartbreaking, gut-punching
exploration of what it means when you move across class and perhaps leave family
behind and the difficulties of that. So on that level, the play has always
spoken to me really directly. And then when we started speaking to Carol about
doing the 40th anniversary revival, my name was suggested then to direct, and
Carol was really excited, I think, to have a director who has done that Marlene-
type journey. Carol has always said for her it's a socialist play before it's a
feminist play. Mason Despite Carol saying that it's a socialist inquiry before a
feminist one, this is regarded as a feminist classic. We're talking on
International Women's Day. Did you ever feel conflicted, Shuba, that as a man
you'd be directing this production? Shuba It wasn't my intention. And we reached
out to incredible female directors and there were dates clashes, and one
director didn't want to take it on. Mason Why would someone not want to take it
on? Shuba It has been 40 years, and I think perhaps for a female director taking
the play on now, there are issues around gender identity and sexuality that have
come to the fore, and the play doesn't examine those. Mason And you worked with
Carol Churchill on updating this, on resetting it, relocating it. What's it like
to work with someone who has such a position on what is clearly regarded as a
modern day classic? Shuba An absolute hoot. Terrifying. You know, you kind of
revere Carol as an icon, as a genius, of course. But she's really mischievous
and playful and political, incredibly angry about where we find ourselves in the
world today. Directing and being in the room with this incredible company of
female identifying and non-binary actors who make up the production. Carol
created a play that requires you to be an ensemble in terms of the way that
overlapping texts functions, and she invented that, the way the doubling works.
The company has to be a family. It's been a joy. She's a great human being.
Mason One of the ways that you've changed the play is by relocating the action
to Liverpool. It's set in 1982, but you're then in the shadow of 1981, the
Toxteth riots, then known locally, of course, as the L8 uprising. So that's one
of the changes that you made. Why did you want to do that? Shuba Really central
in the play is the idea that Marlene goes home somewhere and it's not London. I
just asked Carol, could we make Suffolk Liverpool? What would happen if we did
that? It transpired that Carol's dad was from Liverpool. He had made that
journey from a family of limited means, arriving in London and making his fame
and fortune. So there was a real resonance on a personal family level. The
second you look at Liverpool, early 80s, you kind of go, well, that culturally
what was happening in the city then and the L8 uprisings are kind of
fundamental. To me, it just felt really uncomfortable not finding a way to
reference that experience, to touch on that experience. Because the L8 uprisings
were really about the Black community, people of colour, feeling that lack of
opportunity, even more so, and structural oppression. Also people escaping to
make a better life, as Marlene ostensibly does. So I asked Carol the question
then, well, what happens if these two lead characters, Marlene and Joyce, become
women of colour from Topstiff at that time? And she was immediately up for it.
It's the most culturally diverse cast for a major production of Top Girls ever.
But also, really importantly, it means I've got loads of brilliant scouts talent
on stage. The other thing, of course, about the cast is that it's inclusive in
another way. In another way, you have actors who are non-binary and trans. In
fact, your whole creative team have their pronouns listed in the programme. That
in itself is, in the times in which we live, a political act. Why did you want
to make that statement? I don't think it's a political act. I think it's an act
of care. It's a personal act, actually, more than anything else. It will be
received as a political act, though, won't it? People will absolutely receive
that as politics in the sense that the personal is very political. They may
well. I wanted to ensure that we met as many people as possible that Carol felt
were appropriate casting-wise, and Carol has supported how we cast the play.
Really, fundamentally, I put the best actors I met on stage. It happens to be a
fact that that then becomes inclusive of trans artists and people who are non-
binary. But first and foremost, it's who's in the room, who read the scene the
best. The best, from my perspective, is the playwright, the genius to whom we
are all of this, Carol Churchill herself, has been behind that process. I will
never want to feel like I have a right to meddle in the fundamental humanity and
identity of a person that stands before me in a rehearsal room or in a creative
process. Within the BBC, we all call from our own correspondent just, Fook. And
I often think when I'm away on a story and I see or hear something striking,
Ooh, that's a bit Fook-y. Ooh, that would make a good Fook. For me, it's a place
for the strange stuff. The unexpected, the left field. The little details that
sometimes say more than everything else. The little things that make it feel
like a good story. The little things that make it feel like a good play. The
little things that make it feel like a good play. The little details that
sometimes say more than everything else. The things that linger in the mind's
eye. Filing for a radio programme that can bring those global stories home and
make you understand why they matter is the most valuable thing any foreign
correspondent can do. From our own correspondent, Saturday mornings at 11.30 on
BBC Radio 4. This is BBC Radio 4. I'm sorry, we're having a few problems which
mean we can't bring you our scheduled programmes. Apologies for the disruption.
We're doing our best to restore normal service as soon as possible. No one
around me was vegan, so it was constantly like, why are you not eating chicken
like everyone else? Stories about food. If you remove the alcohol, you are
removing an awful lot of flavour. The challenge is keeping that flavour in.
Investigating every aspect of what we eat. It elevates the conversation about
how to use food in a medicinal context. But these meals aren't for us, they're
for dogs. The food programme. An all-women team of cooks rather than
professional chefs prepare dishes that even in India you'd rarely find outside
domestic kitchens. On BBC Radio 4 every Sunday lunchtime at 12.30. And available
now on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. As you may have gathered, we're still
having some problems and can't bring you our scheduled programme at the moment.
While we try to sort it out, here's a reminder of what you can find on the BBC
Sounds website, where you'll discover a wide range of features to help you enjoy
our programmes. Listen to radio programmes, catch the latest music tracks, enjoy
classical mixtapes and discover binge-worthy podcasts, all whenever you want.
Head to bbc.co.uk slash sounds where you'll find lots of past Radio 4 programmes
permanently archived so you can explore years' worth of favourites such as
Desert Island Discs, In Our Time, The Food Programme, Book Club, Woman's Hour,
Today and many more. You can also listen to more recent broadcasts online and
download them to take with you on your phone or tablet with the BBC Sounds app.
You can also find a range of podcasts to download free and keep forever.
Everything from our Friday night comedy to the best documentaries and dramas.
Hello and welcome to Loose Ends. A bit of this. With a particularly happy,
talented, entertaining and impressive bunch of guests gathered round the Loose
Ends table. A bit of that. We have eight brothers performing on brass
instruments. Is this a record? And plenty of the other. I thought Clive was busy
cooking Faye's muffins. BBC Radio 4's lively mix of comedy, music and
conversation. I've been approached by BBC Radio 4 so... It wasn't to present
Loose Ends, was it? Yes, on chat! Yes, on chat! Clive Anderson presents Loose
Ends every Saturday evening at 6.15. I'm afraid we're still having problems
bringing you our scheduled programme at the moment. Please bear with us. We're
working as fast as possible to solve the problem. I'm Alex Kratosky and this is
The Digital Human. Navigating the digital world. Those who design the algorithms
need to have a really good grasp of the stimuli that we just can't get enough
of. The impact of technology and the internet. Social media lets us craft
whichever version of yourself that you want the world to see. You have probably
spotted where we're going with this. BBC Radio 4's The Digital Human. There are
people who have learned to be much more careful with their data than the rest of
us. And yet, personal information still slips through the cracks. Available now
on BBC Sounds. It's been 20 years since America and Britain went to war in Iraq.
There were horrible days. In a new series, I examine the build-up to the war.
Although it looks as though 9-11 was the trigger, I don't think it really was.
Hearing from insiders, some who haven't spoken until now. Potential for regime
change was very high on their list of priorities. And I look at the legacy. I'm
just sad because Iraq is a great country. Shock and war. Iraq 20 years on, with
me Gordon Carrera. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Next Monday to Friday afternoon at
1.45. Apologies for the technical difficulties there. You're listening to Front
Row on Radio 4 with me, Nick Ahad. And before that brief interlude, we were
listening to Shuba Das, the director of Top Girls, which opens at Liverpool
Everyman tonight. Top Girls, of course, the Carole Churchill classic that is
constantly and consistently referenced as a highlight of British theatre. Well,
joining me to discuss the legacy and the enduring impact of the play are
Charlotte Keighley, whose play My Mother Said I Never Should is the most widely
produced play ever written by a woman, and Susannah Clapp, author and theatre
critic for The Observer newspaper. Charlotte, all being well, you're with us.
Tell me, when did you first see Top Girls and what was it like to watch it at
that time? Hello. It was really more like going to the circus than the theatre
because it was so extraordinary and exciting. This bunch of women on stage, all
from different eras of history, all extraordinary, all talking at once. You
never just sit back as a Carole Churchill play because she always, always does
something new. And that opening scene, it is anachronistic. It is, as you
describe it, like a circus. Was it quite so extraordinary back in 1982? Was it
as revolutionary as people say? More so. I didn't actually see that first
production, but I'd been reading Carole Churchill plays. There's one shortly
before that called Cloud Nine, in which people were cast across gender, as well
as it being jumping about in time. Carole's so far ahead of her time that half
the plays of hers I've seen, I've just sort of watched in open, in all, because
you're trying to catch up with what she's doing. She's always experimenting and
doing something that nobody's done before in the theatre. So it's really
exciting. But at that point, in the early 80s, to have a play with all women on
stage was, you can't really get that impression now. We'd only just begun to
have plays by women on stages in Britain, let alone in other parts of the world
as well. So it was an extraordinary thing. I was fascinated by theatre, so I'd
gone to study drama at university, and in three years, we never studied a play
by a woman, nor were there any in the library. There's hundreds and hundreds of
years of play by men. We can't get back to that moment only 40 years ago. It was
like we were catching up a thousand years in a few years, and Carole was one of
the most important people doing that. And you were an important part of that as
well. And you followed five years later, you made your debut as a playwright,
with, as I say, My Mother Said I Never Should. Tell me about how Top Girls and
Carole inspired you. Well, following what I said about there being no plays by
women at university, I thought I'd better write some, because when I acted in
them, I was a waitress usually, because usually there were two parts for women,
the waitress and then the glamorous or mad woman at the centre. So I thought
I'll write about everything in life, but through female characters. I sent off
for Carole's plays, which I literally had to send off, and I got these kind of
pamphlet editions from Pluto Press and read them. And I was really, I couldn't,
could hardly get my head around them. They're so original and different. But the
most important thing, I think, which sounds very simple, is that she wrote
horrid women. So let me explain. We'd had a decade of agitprop in the 70s, lots
of outsider voices, and theatre that was being made by women celebrated and put
forward very positive views of us as strong and able to do things. And Carole,
particularly in Top Girls, shows women being absolutely horrible. And that was a
really big influence on me, because that's really important. That's the second
stage where we get to see how women will behave if they get the chance to do all
these things. Even now, people like Sally Wainwright talk about the fact that
Catherine K. Wood, the hero of Happy Valley, the note she always gets back is,
do we like this woman? And Carole Churchill, 40 years ago, wasn't afraid to say,
well, you might not like these women, actually, but they are women in their
multiplicity. Yes, absolutely. And then the other huge thing is she, nothing was
naturalistic. And that gave me the courage. I then wrote this play where time is
completely jumbled in the first half, as it is inside our heads and memories.
And it's for the audience to piece things together. So Carole Churchill plays
always involve you asking questions to yourself and thinking, oh, does that link
with that? Oh, I see. And I think this is very interesting across her plays and
myself and other women writers, particularly in that decade. We were forging how
women write plays and using, I'd say, juxtaposition to push plays forwards,
rather than that classic thing that there's a conflict and there's a resolution.
So it's very important, Carole's work particularly, in redefining how and what a
play is. But here's the thing, we were called women playwrights and nothing
expresses it better. OK, so what does that mean? That means a playwright is a
man and a woman is a kind of aberration. And that really does sum it up. So
Carole's play, Endlessly, or is it a feminist play or is it about women? It was
assumed that it was sort of for women more. And it's only, I think, in the last
20 years that that's dropped away and we are just playwrights. Absolutely. And
coming back to that point, the play is often, and I've described it tonight as a
great feminist work. Carole Churchill herself said it's a socialist inquiry
before it's a feminist one. Do you think that we don't fully, even now, 40 years
on, understand this classic properly? Yeah, I think this is something, I mean,
it reflects society. Imagine, I'll put it this way, imagine that the play Hamlet
is only ever billed as being a play for young men about being neurotic and
wanting to commit suicide. So it's mainly performed in small studios or the, you
know, the smaller theatre in a building. Well, that's frankly how a lot of plays
by women are still seen and publicised and reviewed. I don't think it's how
audiences see plays by women. But as I have flagged up, we have an art form that
was going for about a thousand years before women came in and redefined it. So
we are up against that. Now, you and I saw some of Schubert's production on
Monday night, and as he described it, it's the most diverse cast that's ever
taken on this play. It's been reset to Liverpool as well. Did you feel that that
production adds something to our understanding of what Carole Churchill's
saying? Yes, it does. And I found it more moving in ways that really surprised
me. I think it's also the passage of time. I mean, back in the 80s, we had
career women, that was the phrase, women being really tough to make it and get
there, and Carole shows at what cost. And this time, I saw that cost more. I saw
the loss. I was really struck by how all these amazing historical figures in the
first half, as they told their stories, they'd all lost babies at some point. Or
children, literally had them taken away and killed. Well, in Bob John, it's very
violent, and it's quite a visceral explanation. Yes, in the present plot, of
course, that comes up too. Yeah. And I mean, that's, it is still really, for
most women, a really central question. Are you the kind of woman who's caring,
nurturing? Are you going to do something else in the world? Can you do both? And
women are still having a completely split over that. Well, clearly, it's a play
that continues. Without using the bite and the anger of the play, I saw that in
a really moving way. Well, it continues to talk to now. Charlotte, thank you so
much for joining us. Thanks for bearing with us as well. Charlotte Keighley, and
apologies to Susanna Clap, who we were unable to speak to because of our
technical difficulties. Top Girls is at the Liverpool Everyman Theatre until
25th of March. Memoirs, almost by definition, require an author to delve into
some of the darkest, most difficult parts of their lives. Real life stories of
lovely picnics and happy families tend to not make for dramatic tales. But what
responsibilities are there towards the writers who dig into often dark pasts?
Literary agent Rachel Mills recently wrote in the industry's trade journal,
Bookseller, that the bleakest moments of her career had been with authors for
whom the process had been horribly destructive, financially and mentally. Kathy
Rensenbrick is the author of a memoir, The Last Act of Love, about her brother,
who was hit by a car walking home after a village disco one night in 1990. Matty
never walked or spoke again and eight years later he died. Last year, she also
published Write It All Down, about how to write your life story. Both Rachel and
Kathy, join me now. Rachel, let's start with you. There has been a market for
the celebrity memoir for some time, but how many more voices have now been
sought and published? Why is that? Well, I think people have always loved
memoir, whether that's hearing about the lives of famous musicians and actors,
or just finding out more about someone else's experience and understanding the
kind of most extreme of human emotions, whether that's grief or love or loss.
But fortunately, in recent years, I think there's been a big drive within the
publishing industry to seek out underrepresented voices and publish more memoir
from a diverse group of people. And also that's come from readers. Readers
definitely want to read stories from, you know, totally people with lives very
different to theirs. And I think that's what's been happening. But I think that
also means that there's a greater responsibility of our industry. And there are
different sorts of challenges to authors now than there have been in the past.
We'll definitely talk about that responsibility. But you mentioned the readers.
What kind of impact can the best memoirs have on an audience? Well, I think
there's, you know, huge positive impact in terms of awareness. If you, you know,
thinking about Manuel Bergdorf's book out this week, Transitional, that, you
know, many people are going to read that book who don't know much about trans
people, and that's going to be hugely beneficial. And I think you can really, a
memoir or any book, but a memoir is a really great way to get into a lived
experience of somebody different to you. And that can only be a positive thing.
As Atticus Finch said, you walk around in someone else's shoes, and I suppose a
book allows you to do that. Exactly. Let's talk about the authors. What are your
concerns about the impact on authors? Well, I think now there's a huge pressure
on authors, not only in the writing of the book, to go to the most extreme
places, because that's what the, you know, the publisher is going to ask them to
do, because, you know, the more dramatic the book, as you said, the more likely
it is to sell. It's a very, it's very difficult to sell books at the moment.
It's a very crowded marketplace. You know, books are competing with all other
aspects of media. And so I think authors are sometimes persuaded into going to
those places in the first place. That's a very gentle word, isn't it? Persuaded.
Unpick that for me. Do you really mean persuaded? Well, I think, I think, I
think, I don't, I think, I don't think any editor is really forcing an author to
do anything they don't want to do often. But I think what publishers sometimes
forget is that the experience of being published, particularly if you're not
someone from the media, and you're not, you know, this is all new to you, you
want to please the publisher. You feel incredibly grateful you've got this
opportunity. Right. And I think, you know, I think if an author did stand up and
say, I don't want to go there, of course, publishers usually wouldn't force them
to. But I think what we don't acknowledge is how hard it is for authors to stand
up and say that when they feel like they've been given this amazing gift. And I
think particularly people who do feel that their book, it's not just about
telling their story, but is representing a whole community. And, you know, they
feel a weight of responsibility, and they feel a weight of responsibility to
ensure their book sells. It feels like a Faustian pact that you've described. In
fact, let me pick up on that. In the book seller, you said there was one
particular author, a black author who cried because they felt the hardback not
meeting sales expectations meant the publisher would never acquire a book from
someone who looked like her again, and that it was her fault. I mean, that's an
extraordinary amount of pressure. Yeah. And I think, and, you know, and she's
wrong, of course, that it won't mean that, but I can completely understand how
she could feel that way, because there was a huge, you know, her book was
acquired sort of in the wake of Black Lives Matter. And so were many other black
authors. And I think if, you know, if publishers see that memoir by black
authors do not sell, like, is there a risk that then fewer are acquired in the
future? That's what she felt like. I think publishers would argue that's
definitely not the case, but I think you could understand how she felt that
she's not just about her and her book sales, but about all future black authors.
And so, yeah. I mean, that's a ridiculous responsibility to bear, but it is one
that I imagine the author felt, and clearly she did. And actually, Cathy, let's
come to you, because you've got firsthand experience of this. Your memoir, The
Last Act of Love, it must have been a very difficult thing to relive. Why did
you decide that you'd write about what happened to your family? Well, I mean, I
didn't really want to write about it. I kept trying to write other things, and
then, but I couldn't escape it. And quite often when memoirists do write books,
it's because they feel caught in this struggle with the thing that's happened to
them, and caught in the material. And I didn't originally intend to share it
ever. I just started writing it with the idea that I would kind of write it out
of myself. Right. And then at some point, that kind of shifted, and I could see
that it was book-shaped. And yeah, I mean, I kind of did it, and then
experienced a lot of the benefits of doing it. I mean, I wanted to communicate
about something really difficult. I had that urge to, that very human urge to
share something. That's what we want, isn't it? We want to be seen and
understood. I wanted to share something with other people. It sounds like it
began as catharsis, and then became something else. I want people to hear some
of the book. Let's hear you reading from the last act of love. So this is the
moment when someone offered you a lift home from the village disco, but your
brother decided to stay there longer. This is the moment. If I could go back in
time and force him to come with me, then everything would be different. Of
course, I know that's impossible. I just wish I could tell her, the girl with
the henna red hair, in charity shop clothes, to write down everything that
happened. Write it down, I'd say. You won't want to. You'll think every detail
will be burnt onto your brain forever. You don't know this, but you'll forget.
You'll forget what you talked about, who you chatted to, whether you danced. For
some years, you'll remember what Matty said as he turned down the lift. You'll
be able to see his lopsided grin the last time you saw his handsome face
animated like that. But then you'll forget. It's beautiful and it's difficult.
It's a beautifully written book. And like I say, it feels like a cliche to talk
about it being therapeutic or cathartic, but how does it feel, Cathy, to share
something so personal with the world like that? Well, I really split it up now
when I think about writing, because I think actually there is a therapeutic side
to it. I think actually there is a therapeutic benefit to writing, but I would
say then that the sharing process very definitely is not therapeutic. There's
lots of good things about it. It's stimulating and exciting, but it's very much
not therapeutic at all. And I think that, but often for, you don't have to do
both even. For people, often the benefit can come. There's just a great benefit
to be had from taking something that's like stuck inside you and externalizing
it onto paper. You know, it's better off out than in. If that's not therapeutic,
what is it? If it does feel better to have it out than in, as you say, but it's
not therapeutic, can you explain or describe the difference? Well, I mean, it's
better off out than in, as in rather than being trapped in your body, it's
better off in your notebook. But then it's not like, you don't then just post
your notebook to a publisher. So you do quite a lot of work on it, which also I
would say is arguably therapeutic. I enjoy, I like editorial work, but then it's
the moment where it goes out to the world, that's the bit that's not
therapeutic, because then you don't have any control over it anymore. And I
think that that's really important for anyone to know. You don't control
anything and you don't control the story after that. And you kind of become
slightly like, I don't know, it's a bit more like a rag doll, slightly always at
the mercy of whatever, you know, how the presenter's gonna be, or whether it's
all gonna work, or whether the people are gonna be nice. None of that's in your
control anymore. Right. Rachel, tell me about that, because you're on the other
side of this. Can you prep an author about being reviewed? I suppose really is
what Kath is describing, because when it's a memoir, it's not a novel, it's you
that's being reviewed in a way. Yes, and I think that's the big difference, is
that every comment isn't a comment on your work, which is hard enough for all
authors, but it's a comment on your personal life. You know, if somebody, you
know, criticises your mother, it's your mum, it's not a character you've
invented. And I think the big shift that we've had recently is those reviews are
no longer just in the newspaper, or, you know, on Facebook. They're online and
people are... They're in your phone 24-7, and the toll that can take is huge.
And I think, I don't think authors are prepped enough for that. And I think we
should, I think, you know, the industry is catching up with this new world we're
in. And it's brilliant, it's a brilliant opportunity for authors to be able to
talk directly to readers. That's very positive. But it is, and now authors are
contractually obliged often to post on social media and to have social media
accounts. You know, they can't really escape it if they want their book to be
successful. And I think having that, we need to understand more about the toll
that can take and warn people and make sure they really understand. Wow, the
obligation to have social media, again, it feels like a Faustian pact. Cathy,
you had good support. When you hear Rachel describing the kind of work that you
have to do now as an author of a memoir, how important is it that people feel
they can tell their story and have that support around them? Well, I think that,
I think that I always want people to be able to tell their story. There's
something though, isn't there? I mean, it's just the world we live in. That's
the existence of it. So I think that equally, I just would never want to be
naive in not telling people then what it might be like and that you can't then,
I think there's an expectation versus reality problem sometimes because it's
hard to get published. Of course, we just think of it as desirable, which it is,
but equally, it's just really hard. And sometimes therefore, because it's
difficult to, it's a difficult thing to get, so people then also don't realize
that, so people think that being published will make them feel successful and
great. Whereas actually normally it makes people feel more neurotic, fragile and
vulnerable than they did before. And now it's all playing out on social media
and anyone and everyone can tell them that they think they're awful and that all
their life choices are terrible. So that just is, and that's, I don't see how
you kind of legislate against that or stop that without dropping a bomb on
social media, which if that were possible. Well, we're definitely not gonna
advocate anything like that. Rachel, just finally, it sounds like a nightmare.
You listen to Cathy and you think, why on earth would anybody do this? However,
Rachel, sales on memoirs, tell us, how are they? Actually, we're in a bit of a
dip, I think. And aside from Smear, which has skewed the numbers this year quite
significantly, I think last year, I don't think a single memoir sold more than
100,000 copies. Whereas in, I think 2018, over 20 did. Back in 2006, far more,
25, 30. Maybe lessons are being learned, you never know. Thank you both for
joining us. Thanks for bearing with us as well. Rachel Mills and Cathy Renton
Brink and her memoir, Cathy's memoir, The Last Act of Love and Write It All
Down, are both available in paperback now. In August last year, the Artistic
Director of London Theatre, the New Diorama, joined me on front row following
his announcement that his theatre, the stage newspaper's fringe theatre of the
year, no less, would not be presenting a public programme for the rest of the
year. After our interview, the theatre, the organisation, social media,
everything went dark. Well, tonight the theatre reopens with After the Act. It's
a new musical about Section 28, the 1980s law, which prohibited the promotion of
homosexuality by local authorities. And I'm delighted to say that David joins me
now. Welcome back to Front Row, David. It's lovely to be back. Thank you for
inviting me. What was it like the morning after you closed, the morning after we
spoke? Intimidating and I suppose a little bit of relief. As an organisation, we
work and support artists sort of across the country. And sometimes it's a bit
nerve-wracking when you're taking a big risk and a big leap to say, we think
this is what artists really need at the moment. And then you put that out
publicly and you hope there are people out there who feel the same way that you
do. But actually the response across the country and actually from notes we had
around the world was really astonishing. Obviously coming on to speak with you
was a huge highlight of that. We were front page of the stage newspaper that
week. And over the preceding weeks, we had over 500 approaches of people wanting
to come to work with us or wanting to sort of discuss the ideas and thinking we
had around that sort of active decision to close for a creative reset. So was it
a great little market employee or was this for real? Tell me about what actually
happened. What does the theatre feel like, look like when you're not putting on
any shows? Well, obviously I like to think we did package it up as beautifully
as we could, but actually it came from a very emotionally sort of vulnerable and
honest place from us that on one hand, we felt that we couldn't continue with
the artists that we were supporting who felt like they were on the verge of
burnout after the sort of catalytic energy it took to bring theatre back. And on
the other hand, I think me as an artistic director, I think the team that I was
leading at the time were also feeling the same, sort of fatigued, not quite sure
what our purpose was in this sort of post lockdown landscape we were finding
ourselves in and really questioning what a theatre's place was in the city and
what we could do. And I suppose wanting to have a real time that we could delve
into that and really investigate it. So the last six months have been this most
invigorating period where we've had a real chance to sort of grapple with some
of those questions and come up with a few answers and some deeper insights into
where we should be going next. Well, look, when I spoke to you back in August,
you said the plan was to use the time to think about how you could make the
theatre more relevant, more essential to people's lives. It sounds like it's
been an invigorating period, but how far along with the plan are you? We're
further along than I thought we would be. I was very nervous when we were
talking around those subjects, thinking how are we ever going to realise this?
But actually what's great is it's not my job to realise that, it's the artists
that we support. We've come back with a small season of work that's a real
statement of intent that I think puts us in a more political mood than we've
been before. I think we've got some work that really plays into being pieces of
theatre, stuff that we have to see sort of live and that you need to be in the
room to experience. And we've got a whole mix of artists from some of the
country's most emerging and interesting talent through to some of the UK's sort
of most celebrated sort of theatre makers and directors. So actually it does
feel like we've got a real bounce and with a sort of renewed sort of mission and
purpose. And audiences seem to really agree. I mean, the sort of ticket sales
that we've had sort of coming back for the pre-sales for this current season are
more than the last two sort of lockdown seasons sort of put together. So we're
really optimistic that actually we're starting to tap into something that
perhaps people thought they're lacking and missing elsewhere. Wow. So you took
the advice of Joni Mitchell and you show the people that they might not know
what they've got till it's gone. I know that you have, as you say, not just
around the country but around the world people have been watching you and you've
suggested the intervention was a once in a generation moment. Do you think other
theatres and arts organisations would benefit from doing this? Do you see other
buildings following you? We've had quite a few organisations get in touch and
quite a few organisations sort of said publicly that they were either pausing
for a while or that they were stopping doing certain artistic work because I
suppose our intervention had sort of led the way. And sort of got rid of some of
the stigma that there always is around cultural institutions and closure. It was
once in a generation because fundamentally it came out of a sort of confluence
of different factors that were living in that time. But actually I hope that it
shows that listening to what artists sort of fundamentally need in their sort of
immediate sort of conversations with you actually is something that when you
deliver on it produces great results. I was talking to a lot of artistic
directors at the time who were saying, yes, artists are really burnt out and
exhausted and we're trying to work out how we sort of get them back to work.
Whereas actually the sort of first need was where we really need to focus. So
what I'm hoping is the sort of lessons around that might be what people take
away rather than the sort of general idea of sort of closing it as a sort of
remedy. Because it might be the remedy for sort of future challenges, but it's
not always going to be a sort of one size fits all solution. Speaking of what
the artist needs, for one of your productions this year, for one of your
productions next month, War on Culture, it opens on April the 26th. You got rid
of the press night. Why have you done that? So War on Culture is a show which
looks at, I suppose, the climate where we're existing in at the moment,
particularly around cultural institutions and sort of government interference,
the idea of protected heritage that's been embanded around during the lockdown
period. And it's a political piece. It's a piece that's come up from talking to
a lot of other leaders in arts organisations. And it's a really funny, sort of
sharp play. But fundamentally, it's a piece that we wanted people to come
together and have an experience about talking about. It's stuff that we don't
really want to be saying online. It's stuff we don't want to be writing articles
about. It is a piece of theatre. And therefore, we thought the discussion and
the discourse around it should be live and in that room. So the idea of not
inviting press is it's, we're actively saying, well, this is a conversation you
need to be there for. It's a conversation you've got to turn up. It's a
conversation that really is something that only theatre can do. And it's about
sitting down and conversing with each other for the hour or however long that
play is going to be. As we just heard in that clip there from last year, you
said you couldn't remember the last time you were genuinely shocked, surprised,
or challenged. So you're opening with After the Act, a musical about Section 28.
Very briefly, maybe even just a couple of words, has it shocked, surprised, or
challenged you? I think it really has. I think people forget how incendiary the
debate around Section 28 was. And the production creates a real lightning rod
between the situation that we had in the 1980s and the situation we're
experiencing now. If you want to be shocked, you can get along because the new
diorama is once again open. After the Act, a Section 28 musical is at the
theatre until the 1st of April. On tomorrow's front row, all being well, a
review of Margaret Atwood's new collection of short stories, Old Babes in the
Woods, and the film about love in later life, My Sailor, My Love. And as the
Bailey Gifford Prize, the UK Prize for Nonfiction, celebrates its 25th
anniversary by holding a Winners of Winners Award, we discussed the shortlist.
If the radio gods allow, you can join Tom Sotcliffe Live at 7.15pm. Good night.
Thank you. Front row was presented by Nika Hart, and the producer was Ekeni
Akolawu, with studio engineer Chris Hartman. We've live debate after the news.
William Crawley and panel examined the morality of breaching people's trust. If
we are told something in confidence, what are the moral limits to our obligation
to keep it simple?