TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM on digital, radio online and on BBC Sounds, this is Radio 4. It's seven
o'clock on Saturday the 25th of February. Good morning. This is today with
Martha Carney and Michelle Hussein. The headlines this morning. There are signs
that the UK and the EU are close to agreeing a new Brexit deal for Northern
Ireland. Health officials in the UK are planning how they'd cope with bird flu
affecting humans after a girl in Cambodia died from the virus. Also in today's
programme. I thought that she would be a lot more guarded than she was and she
wasn't at all. She was extremely open. She immediately dove into all these very
difficult parts of her past, these dark parts of her story and her life. The
podcaster who persuaded JK Rowling to talk about her life and the trans debate.
How have the government's plans to move arts money out of London threatened the
future of a theatre in Oldham? And... February 26th. His boxing career is over.
You're feeling a real professional boxer here. Without the cameras, this guy is
nothing. George Foreman versus Muhammad Ali. It is not why the new generation of
superstar boxers are all celebrity influencers. The BBC News is read by Vigee
Alice. Talks between the UK and the European Union are intensifying as both
sides try to secure a New Deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern
Ireland. Downing Street has described the negotiations as positive but an
announcement on changes to the Northern Ireland protocol has been delayed
repeatedly. It's not known whether the new agreement will be accepted by the
Democratic Unionist Party which has blocked the return of power sharing at
Stormont because of its opposition to the current arrangements. Here's our
political correspondent, Ionee Wells. The protocol keeps Northern Ireland inside
the EU's single market so that goods can flow freely over the border into the
Republic of Ireland. But that means checks on goods entering Northern Ireland
from Scotland, England and Wales. The DUP, Northern Ireland's main Unionist
party, wants to see significantly less EU oversight. There are signs that a New
Deal is close. Vichy Sunak has spoken with retailers and business
representatives. The Foreign Secretary James Cleverley has pulled out of a long-
planned trip to the Middle East at the beginning of next week and the BBC
understands the President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen was
due to be in the UK today. This visit was to include a meeting with the King but
has been cancelled due to operational reasons unconnected to the political
talks. While alterations to the protocol seem imminent, it may be difficult for
Vichy Sunak to get the type of wholesale change that the DUP and some in his own
party are looking for. Health officials in the UK have begun drawing up plans to
deal with the possible bird flu pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in
Cambodia after contracting the H5N1 strain of the disease. Our medical editor
Fergus Walsh reports. Not another pandemic might well be the exasperated
response of many to talk of the risk from bird flu. A new substrain of the H5N1
virus emerged in recent years and has been causing record numbers of deaths
among wild birds and poultry. It has also infected mammals, raising concerns.
Thankfully it does not spread easily from birds to humans, but when it does,
H5N1 kills about half those it infects. The death in Cambodia was the first
since 2014. The health security agency stressed there was no evidence of an
imminent threat to humans but said it was important to remain vigilant, urging
people to stay away from sick wild birds they might encounter. Just as they did
with Covid, scientists have begun modelling scenarios of how a bird flu pandemic
might have an impact in the UK and looking at whether lateral flow devices could
be used to test for H5N1 in humans. A fifth man has been arrested in connection
with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is critically ill after the attack on Wednesday.
Detectives say they are treating the shooting as a terrorist incident and their
main line of inquiry is focusing on the dissident group, the new IRA. Tens of
millions of people in Nigeria are heading to the polls today to vote for a new
president. The election is being seen as one of the most unpredictable in recent
years with three leading candidates instead of two. Here's our West Africa
correspondent, MyAnnie Jones. There's nervous anticipation on the streets of
Lagos, Nigeria's commercial hub. On the eve of the elections, the city's
infamous traffic evaporated as many headed back to their home states to vote. In
supermarkets, shoppers stocked up on essentials as there's an election day
curfew from midnight to 6pm with non-essential workers only allowed out to go to
the polls. There are 18 candidates in the presidential race. The free front
runners are the ruling parties Bo La Tinubu, former Vice President Atikwa
Bubakar and the surprise story of the campaign, Peter Obie. He's offered an
unprecedented third alternative for those, especially young people, who are
frustrated with the two parties who run the country for the past 24 years.
Whoever wins will have to tackle rising insecurity and a failing economy. A
search will resume this morning for two people missing in the firth of Clyde.
They were on board a tug which capsized yesterday afternoon off Greenock.
Eyewitnesses said the accident happened as the tug was escorting a cruise ship
into the harbour. The Defence Secretary, Ben Wallace, says the British Army's
Ajax armoured vehicle programme is back on track. Following a series of
setbacks, the Minister of Defence signed a £5.5bn contract for 589 armoured
vehicles more than 12 years ago, but they are yet to enter service. This is our
Defence Correspondent Jonathan Beale. Ben Wallace has called the Ajax armoured
vehicle programme troubled. It's seen as a key part of modernising the British
Army with a family of high-tech vehicles which can conduct reconnaissance
missions, identify multiple targets and fire on the move. But trials have had to
be halted twice over safety concerns, with test vehicles suffering from
excessive vibration and noise causing loss of hearing. But the Army and main
contractor, General Dynamics UK, now believe they've resolved the problems. A
number of fixes have been made. They include remounting hand controls to limit
vibration and the redesign of seat mountings and cushions. Almost a million
households which don't pay an energy company directly for their gas and
electricity can now start applying for government help with their winter bills.
They include people in England, Scotland and Wales who live in mobile homes,
care homes or properties off the mains grid. Nikki Hudson reports. Last autumn
the government promised £400 for every household to help with their energy bills
over the winter. Since October, most homes have been getting £66 a month,
knocked directly off their bill or given to them via a voucher. But those in
England, Scotland and Wales who do not pay an energy company directly for their
electricity, such as those living in park homes or care homes, are only now able
to apply for this money. Their local authority will then verify the information
they give and it will be up to six weeks before their payment arrives. The
government says it knows this is a difficult time for families and it is working
to get support to households. Racks from a warship which sank off the coast of
Norfolk in the 17th century are going on display in Norwich today for the first
time. Hundreds of people died when the Gloucester hit a sandbank. Among the
survivors was the Duke of York who went on to become King James II. Our reporter
Joe Black has been watching footage of the vessel's discovery released by
Norfolk Historic Shipwrecks. On the seabed, divers explored the site of a Royal
shipwreck. The Gloucester ran aground off the coast of Norfolk in 1682 and her
discovery by Two Brothers from Norwich has been described as the most important
maritime find since the Mary Rose. Although much of the ship has submerged in
sand, the footage shows a rope, a cannon, a wine bottle and the tip of one of
the anchors. Among the hundreds of artefacts brought to the surface are the
ship's bell, personal possessions such as spectacles and even a silk petticoat
which was discovered in a chest. Today items will go on public display at the
Castle Museum in Norwich. Joe Black reporting. Vigie, thank you very much. The
time is now nine minutes past seven and expectations are growing that a deal on
the Northern Ireland Protocol could be done this weekend. Downing Street has
indicated negotiations with the EU are positive and intensifying. Ione Welles is
our political correspondent. Take us through that sense that's coming through
from Downing Street first, Ione. Morning, Michelle. That's right. I mean, we
know that essentially the essence of a new deal with the EU over these new
trading agreements for Northern Ireland is basically there. And there are a
couple of signs that now announcing one is very close indeed. One is that number
ten is calling these intensifying negotiations with the EU this weekend
positive. Two, we know the Foreign Secretary James Cleverley has pulled out of a
long planned trip to the Middle East that was due to be this weekend into
Tuesday. Thirdly as well, King Charles had been due to meet the President of the
European Commission Ursula von der Leyen in the UK today. And Downing Street
claimed that this was cancelled due to operational reasons and they claim that
it wasn't part of negotiations with the EU. But I think it is significant
because it indicates that a deal was about to be done and publicly presented
while she was in the UK. And finally, we know that the government have been
briefing MPs, businesses, retailers about the substance of this deal, which some
of which is already very much in the public domain. So while number 10 are
arguing that in theory no deal is actually done until it's signed on the dotted
line, I think we know that it is now really a question of this announcement when
that takes place and it's the politics now that is really key for Rishi Sunak to
try and address. Well on that, does it seem as if they have behind the scenes
got the DUP onside? Well I think there are still some sticking points that
remain as we've discussed. Rishi Sunak has been trying to win support for
changes to his deal with both Tory backbenchers but also crucially the DUP if
they are to agree to go back into government in Northern Ireland. Now what we
sort of know about the deal so far is that essentially there are certain areas
which those Tory backbenchers and the DUP have taken issue with, particularly
that they feel there wouldn't be a sort of final say or control for Northern
Irish politicians over what single market legislation would apply in Northern
Ireland compared to the rest of the UK. Critics of the deal argue that this
would give the EU some sovereignty over Northern Ireland and we've heard that
view expressed by the likes of the former Prime Minister Boris Johnson this week
as well arguing that instead the government should just plough on with his idea
for new UK laws that would give ministers the power to override bits of that
international treaty entirely. So I think while the government will certainly be
hoping this weekend that they can meet those tests that were set by the DUP to
try and win their support, I think certainly that point about sovereignty is
going to be key going forward and there is still no guarantee that that test by
the DUP has been met. Ionee for the moment, thanks very much. The time now is 11
minutes past seven. Ukraine's allies have marked the first anniversary of the
Russian invasion by offering Kivmore support. The US has promised two billion
dollars worth of weaponry and leopard tanks are being sent by a number of
European countries. There has been speculation that China could be sending arms
to Russia and we are this morning hearing that the President of Belarus,
Alexander Lukashenko, a close ally of Russia, of course, will be visiting China
next week. Well, we can talk now to Justin Crump, former British Army commander
and now head of the defence intelligence firm Sibilin. Good morning. Good
morning. Let's begin by looking at this next wave, if you like, of arms and in
particular the tanks for Ukraine. How significant do you think this is? Look,
there is no one weapon system that's going to be a silver bullet. I think
sometimes people focus on a particular donation and hope it's going to be truly
game changing and it very rarely is. But nonetheless, the supply of very modern
western armored vehicles to Ukraine is significant because it is such a strong
commitment of support, something that would be politically very challenging even
just a few months ago is being achieved. I think that's the main benefit Ukraine
sees from this. There are a small number of vehicles, I mean, if used
effectively, they can have a very important role in the battlefield. So they're
not going to change the whole course of the war, but they'll certainly probably
change the course of a few battles where they're employed. Even just 14 or so
tanks were enough to lead the offensive that took back a lot of Kharkiv back in
September, for example. So if employed well, which the Ukrainians have shown
they can do with tanks, they will have a pretty important battlefield role. But
this is not enough on its own, especially in the numbers given to sort of truly
change the balance of power, but it definitely gives Ukraine a boost. So what
would change to that balance of power, do you think? Well, I mean, many pilots
would obviously say it's their power. That's definitely an area where Ukraine
would do a lot more. It's an area where having a very competent air force and
control of the skies has served the Western way of war very well over the years.
So obviously, there's always this focus on giving Ukraine more air power. And
there is no doubt that if they were able to suddenly employ news hundreds of
modern jet aircraft, of course, that would probably change a balance of power.
That is equally unlikely at this time. But hence the focus on essentially
opening the door to that sort of donation, the way that we've seen with heavy
armor with tanks with rocket launchers at one point. I mean, let's remember if
we'd had this conversation a year ago, I think you and I would both have found
it. You know, the idea of British tanks going to Ukraine pretty laughable at the
time. And here we are with them on the way. So will aircraft be coming is the
question we most often asked. And it's reasonable to say yes. I think it's a
question of when and how and lots of people still scratching their heads about
elements of that. But Ukraine will eventually need more aircraft anyway, because
the ones it has will wear out if they continue to be engaged in combat. Same as
the Russians themselves. And when we look at the Russians and the balance of
power, and we're hearing suggestions, particularly coming from the United
States, that China may be supplying arms to Russia. And I was just wondering
what you made of the fact of the news that we're just hearing this morning, but
that the president of Belarus is going to be visiting China. Yes, I mean, China
maintains that it's here to propose peace. But there's good reason to believe
that China has, of course, been supporting Russia in a number of ways during the
conflict. Not desperately overtly. But of course, Putin's last main foreign
visit before the conflict was launched was to Beijing. And there's a good reason
to believe that China's not quite on their side, but definitely has benefited in
some ways from Russia's actions. It's helped distract the US. And it's given
China opportunities. And in the past, China has also taken advantage of Russia
offering, for example, cheap energy supplies and things like that. So China
already sort of helping Russia obviously concerned about the situation, getting
out of hand truly, but also very worried about the idea of Russia losing in
Ukraine. And of course, the supply of weapons much needed by Russia and much
discussion of drones from China, an example going to help those sorts of things,
you know, keep the conflict going, arguably can keep the balance going and
actually force an outcome that's more favorable to to China and Russia. So in a
way, China now in that driving seat, speaking to Moscow, they're speaking to
Lukashenko. They're not really speaking to the Ukrainians moments when they talk
about a peace proposal, they're not talking to the other side. And that's one of
the things that the Ukrainians called them out on. So we shall see how far China
goes in real efforts, but at the moment, probably playing a certain degree of
games. Justin Crump, many thanks indeed. 17 minutes past seven now and Nigeria
is voting today for a new president and parliament in an election taking place
amid tight restrictions on the movement of people and vehicles. Mayini Jones is
our West Africa correspondent on the line from Lagos. Mayini, tell us first
about those restrictions and the climate in which this vote takes place. Yes. So
on election day in Nigeria, it's very common for there to be a curfew. It's
usually from about midnight to 6pm on voting day. And that's the case this time
around. So nobody can go out on a part unless you're an election worker or an
essential worker, you're only allowed to go out to vote. And that means that the
city of Lagos, which is usually bustling with traffic and people, has been
unusually quiet since yesterday. That's partly because a lot of people have
headed to their home states to vote. But it's also because people have been kind
of shopping, stocking up, staying at home, getting themselves ready to vote
today. Is there a front runner among the candidates? You know, for the first
time in a very long time, nobody is really sure who's going to win this. I think
it's because there's a third candidate, which has never happened before since
the country returned to democracy 24 years ago. He's made it very difficult to
predict how many states each candidate is going to win. So it's a really wide
open race. He's got a lot of youthful support. This is Peter Orby of the Labour
Party. A lot of young people see him as a credible option, but they've never
voted in huge numbers before. So it will be interesting to see if their votes
have any impact in this election. And of the three then, the three potential new
presidents, will they take Nigerian quite different directions? I mean, that's
certainly what voters will be hoping. In the last eight years when President
Mohammed al-Buhari has been in power, the country's seen a steady decline in its
economy. Unemployment has quadrupled. The inflation is currently at 21 percent.
And the security situation has also deteriorated. Listeners might be aware that
Islamist insurgent groups have been active in northeastern Nigeria for at least
12 years. But in recent years, the area of activity has spread to other parts of
the country that get criminal gangs that kidnap people for ransom. So lots of
insecurity in the country and voters will be hoping that whoever wins these
elections can help tackle this. Myoni Jones, thank you. 19 minutes past seven
and now to Westminster, where MPs joined the minute silence to mark the
anniversary of the invasion of Ukraine and still had time to approve new laws on
everything from flexible working to compensation for landowners, here's our
parliamentary correspondent Mark Darcy. Ukraine's parliament, the Rada, operates
amidst tight security with the danger of being bombed or raided by Russian
special forces never far away. Perhaps with that in mind, MPs paid their
respects as the Commons observed the national minute silence to mark the first
anniversary of the invasion. Shortly before it was due, a few MPs filed into the
chamber with defence ministers Alec Chalk and Andrew Murison amongst those
taking their place on the government front bench. And just before 11 o'clock,
Deputy Speaker Dame Rosie Winterton halted debate. We shall now observe the
national one minute silence to mark the one year anniversary of the full scale
Russian invasion of Ukraine. The main doors were thrown open, MPs rose from
their seats in the background Big Ben chimed 11. Slava, Ukraine. Slava, Ukraine.
Order, order. We'll now return to the debate on the private members bills. Dean
Russell. Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, and may I also echo the comments of
Slava, Ukraine and pay tribute to all of those in Ukraine at the moment and
those who have families here in the UK and around the world that are thinking of
their loved ones and those that were lost. The Conservative Dean Russell, who
had been speaking just before the silence, resumed his speech and MPs got back
to a productive day's lawmaking. He had been talking about a bill from Labour's
Yasmin Qureshi to give people the right to ask for flexible working from
employers from day one. She said it would give people the chance to balance work
and home life and would open employment opportunities for everyone. This bill is
also for the mothers who have to leave their jobs because their jobs don't
support flexible working. The bill is also for those with chronic long term
conditions, the disabled and the most vulnerable in our societies. That was just
one of the bills passed. MPs also approved measures on protecting mutuals, co-
ops and friendly societies, providing fair compensation for property owners
where infrastructure companies wanted to build across their land and on
improving services for military veterans. But one that didn't get through was
the Labour MP Sir Chris Bryant's bill to seize Russian assets to pay for the
rebuilding of Ukraine. It was too far down the agenda to be debated, so under
Commons rules it could only go forward if no single MP objected to it and a
government whip duly did object. Chris Bryant wasn't happy. I am genuinely
astounded by the way that the government has responded and called down this bill
today. To be frank, I'm not just astounded, I'm furious about it. Bryant brought
a rebuke from another Sir Chris, the Conservative MP Sir Christopher Chope. He's
expecting his bill to be able to take priority over all the other bills just
because he thinks a lot of himself and he thinks he's got a good cause. Lots of
us have got good causes, but we don't argue the toss with the rules. Rather
wearily, the Deputy Speaker said both points were now on the record and Sir
Chris Bryant, that is, predicted that the government would end up bringing in a
bill very like his. Mark Darcy, reporting on yesterday in Parliament, the time
is now 23 minutes past seven. Two brothers who were held by the United States
for more than 20 years, 19 of which they spent at Guantanamo Bay, have been
repatriated to Pakistan from Cuba. Arrested in 2002, they were accused of
helping al-Qaeda, but no formal proceedings were ever brought against them.
Their names are Ahmed and Abdul Rabbani and they have been represented by lawyer
Clive Stafford Smith for more than a decade. He's director of the human rights
organisation 3DC and is on the line now. Morning Clive. Good morning Michelle.
What made their release finally possible? I think it's the other way round. What
didn't make their release possible 15 years ago. Unfortunately, they've been
cleared for well over a year and a half to go home and the US just hasn't sent
them. But thankfully, they're there now and I'm headed down to see them. Did you
know how they are? Well, it's an incredibly traumatic thing of course. They both
spent 540 days being tortured in the dark prison in unspeakable ways. So I'd be
flip if I said that they're fine. They're facing a really long, difficult, tough
climb out of Guantanamo Bay. When you say tortured in a dark prison, do you mean
before they got to Guantanamo or were they tortured in Guantanamo? It's called
the dark prison and it was rather notorious in Guantanamo in Kabul, in
Afghanistan. We have a lot of information on that. Unfortunately now that's come
out through the Senate. It all happened because Ahmed Rabbani was sold for a
bounty, $5,000, with the tag saying that he was an evil terrorist called Hassan
Ghul who was quite notorious. What we discovered, I've been representing him now
15 years and it was about 12 years ago we discovered that actually the US
captured Hassan Ghul, brought him to the same dark prison and then because he
cooperated, unlike Ahmed who refused to say he was Hassan Ghul, they set him
free. He went back to his wicked ways and got drowned in 2012 and Ahmed went to
Guantanamo Bay. Can you be sure that neither of the brothers were ever involved
with Al-Qaeda? Well, yes, I can be sure. But on the other hand, it's not really
me you should be listening to. It took all six of the top US intelligence
agencies to clear them. The real problem is why they didn't do that years ago.
If you want me to speculate, I can't prove this, but it's really because they
were such an embarrassment that we'd held them there for 20 years, really when
they were total nobodies. I don't mean that in a disparaging way, whereas in
fact we'd let the real guy go. Do you think that they... You said you're going
to go to Pakistan, are you, to see them? Yes. Do you think they are eligible for
some kind of compensation? What normally happens when people are released from
Guantanamo in circumstances like this where it seems they were, from what you're
saying, they were in the wrong place at the wrong time? Well, it's terribly sad.
I think they won't get compensation from the US. We have a crowd vendor to try
to fund them a new house, a place to live and so forth. But really the issue
here is they'll never even get an apology. It always makes me think of Elton
John. That sorry seems to be the hardest word. But the US never says sorry. And
I've got an American passport, so I try to apologise to as many people as
possible. But they won't get anything official, I'm afraid to say, even though
we'll try. And where does it take the numbers in Guantanamo Bay to? And do you
have other clients still there? We're down to 34. Each of them are now costing
us as US taxpayers about $14 million a year, each of them. Of the 34, another 16
are cleared. Yes, I have some more clients there. And I brought the very first
case against Guantanamo back in February 2002. And I certainly intend to carry
on trying until we close that place down. It's a stain on the reputation of
America for human rights. Clive Stafford-Smith, thank you. It's 27 minutes past
seven. That means it's time for the sport. If we can hear from Sarah Orchard.
Morning, Sarah. A very good morning to you. Well, we're going to start with
cricket. And after the disappointment of England's women being knocked out of
the 2020 World Cup in the semifinals yesterday, there's different news from
England's men in New Zealand. Day two of the second test was halted by rain, but
the visitors were in control. I spoke with the BBC's Stephen Shemalt in
Wellington in the last hour. Yeah, England putting in probably their most
commanding performance of the winter, from 315 for three overnight. They crashed
120 runs in two hours this morning. It wasn't Harry Brooke who only added two to
his overnight, 184. But Joe Root, who did the damage, he moved from 101 to 153,
not out. He scored 52 runs in 42 balls. And when he went past 150, England
declared with some quite clever time in 435 for eight was the score. It meant
they had half an hour to bowl at New Zealand before lunch. And James Anderson
got to work. Evan Conway and Kane Williamson caught behind before the break. He
did the same to Will Young in the afternoon session. It was three for 37 for
Anderson. And there was also three wickets for Jack Leach, including two very
good catches underneath the helmet at Batpad by Olly Pope. We were starting to
think about the prospect of England being able to enforce the follow one. New
Zealand recovered slightly to 138 for seven when the rain came. It wiped out
about two hours at the back end of the day. The home side still need another 98
runs to avoid that follow on mark. And it would be interesting to see if England
do enforce it if they get the opportunity tomorrow. And Stefan, all the talk
yesterday was of the brilliant batting of young Harry Brooke. You mentioned him
a little bit earlier, just the seven balls to get him out today. Yeah, it's
unfortunate for Harry Brooke because there was actually a really nice story
bubbling under there. And Lehman spoke to us in the press last night. He was
184, not out overnight. He's been breaking loads of records, most runs by anyone
in test cricket history after nine innings, fastest England batter to four
centuries. And he said, no, no, no, I'm not worried about any of that. The
highest score in the Brooke household is the 210. My dad scored in club cricket.
I want to beat that. That's what's going to be in the back of my mind when I
walk out tomorrow morning and he didn't make it. I'm going to shout for 186. The
thing is, though, the way he started his test career, you would expect at some
point he will claim family bragging rights from his dad, David, and that 210
will go. That was Stefan Shemalt there for us in New Zealand. And you can follow
day three of the second test this evening on the BBC Sport website. In the
Premier League last night, it finished one all between Fulham and Wolverhampton.
Ahead of Chelsea's trip tomorrow to Tottenham, Blues boss Graham Potter says his
mental health has suffered after he and his family received anonymous abuse
following the club's poor run of form. Chelsea have now won just two of their
last 14 games. Meanwhile, there were wins in the Super League for Warrington
Hull and Wigan yesterday. Later today, unbeaten Ireland are in Italy for their
round three Six Nations game, while Wales against England after a week of
turmoil for the Welsh camp is on. And you can follow the match on BBC One and
Five Live. Kickoff is at £4.45. We'll have more on that in the next hour.
Finally, today's racing tips, both Kempton, first three o'clock, number five,
and Sam, then four ten, number four, Roya Mooney. Sara, thank you very much. You
can literally go anywhere at the snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC
has been making groundbreaking radio drama. Of course, a tired woman. But you
have to ask yourself what I'm tired of. The radio plays our voices in the dark.
Join me, Michael Simmons Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic form. It's
just a sheer amount of possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC radio drama. There's scope for so much more to happen on radio.
Dramatic beats on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, tonight at eight. And look at the
weather. Today's going to be colder, patchy cloud and sunny spells with a few
showers for eastern areas. We're also listening to today on Radio 4 with Martha
Carney, Michelle Hussein and Fidjalis with the news. There are signs that
discussions between the UK and the EU on a new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland
could be making progress. Downing Street has described the negotiations as
positive, but an announcement on changes to the Northern Ireland protocol has
been delayed repeatedly. It's not known whether the new deal will be accepted by
the Democratic Unionist Party, which has blocked the return of power sharing at
Stormont. The DUP opposes the current arrangement, which requires checks on
goods arriving in Northern Ireland from other parts of the UK. Health officials
in the UK are drawing up plans to deal with a threat posed to humans by bird
flu. An 11-year-old girl who contracted a strain of the disease has died in
Cambodia. The H5N1 variant has caused record numbers of bird deaths around the
world in recent months. A fifth person has been arrested in Northern Ireland in
connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma on Wednesday.
The man is being held under the Terrorism Act. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell remains critically ill in hospital after being targeted in front of his
son at a sports complex. Police say they are focusing their investigation on the
dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Nigerians are voting for a new
president. That race to succeed, Mohammedu Buhari, is the most competitive since
the end of military rule in 1999. The election campaign was marked by unrest
caused by the government's chaotic efforts to introduce new banknotes. The
defence secretary, Ben Wallace, says a £5.5bn programme to build the British
Army's new Ajax fighting vehicles back on track after a series of embarrassing
delays. The Ministry of Defence project to build 589 of the armoured carriers
has been running for nearly 13 years, but it's yet to provide a single
deployable vehicle. And objects discovered aboard a warship which sank off the
coast of Norfolk in 1682 are going on display in Norwich today for the first
time. Among the survivors of the Gloucester was the Duke of York, who went on to
become King James II. Vigey, thank you very much. It's nearly 25 to 8 and a
clean air zone is coming to Sheffield on Monday, similar to schemes already
brought in in Birmingham and Newcastle and Gateshead, London and elsewhere. This
one will not charge private cars, but it will cost £10 a day to drive diesel and
older petrol commercial vehicles into the zone. This is what BBC Radio Sheffield
heard at a recent protest against the scheme. I don't think that the council
have taken into account the wants and needs of the local businesses or the local
people. It's a tax on working man. If it isn't hard enough as it is, cost of
living has gone up, everything's gone up. Charging people money to make
pollution does not make the pollution go away. We know it's starting with
certain types of vehicles, but it's Mission Creek. It will roll out to everyone.
Well, the scheme is being brought in by Sheffield City Council. Oliver Coppod is
the Labour Mayor of South Yorkshire. Transport strategy in the region is within
his remit and he's in our Sheffield studio. Good morning. Good morning. Are you
backing this scheme? I am, yes, I am, because, frankly, pollution in South
Yorkshire is killing people. So we need to do something about it and we need to
do something about it urgently. The clean air zone is a proportionate response
to the threat that we face and I think it's important to say, you know, you hear
the people at the protest and I completely empathise with those people who are
worried about its introduction, who are concerned about the effect that it will
have on their businesses, but it will only impact on private businesses. It will
only affect cars which are below a certain level, generally about 2015 and
before, and it will hopefully help us have cleaner air in the whole of South
Yorkshire. Right, so that's why you feel it is proportionate. But can you
understand why businesses that work in the city then feel that it will remain
the case that people can drive in from the Peak District in their Range Rovers
and park in the city centre with no charge at all? Look, of course I can. Of
course I can understand the concerns that people have about a scheme which has
not yet been introduced. And what we've seen, though, from other areas where
this has happened is that we've seen quite dramatic reductions in air pollution.
In Birmingham, for instance, we saw, I think, a 13% reduction in nitrogen
dioxide. In Bath we saw a 21% reduction in nitrogen dioxide. And yet what we
didn't see was a whole dearth of businesses struggling. So I do think that
people are concerned. I understand that concern. But I also think that it's the
right thing to do because pollution is genuinely a significant health problem
and a disaster for South Yorkshire. Look, one in 20 deaths in South Yorkshire
can in some way be attributed to air pollution. That is a huge problem for us.
It doesn't just hold back our communities, it holds back our economy and we need
to do something to fix it. But why do you think businesses in Sheffield are not
going to struggle with the costs? If someone needs to replace their van or their
minibus with one that complies with the standards, that can cost £80,000. Well,
look, there are three reasons why I don't think that it's necessarily going to
have the impact that some people worry it will. I'm not saying it won't have any
impact at all. One of those is that Sheffield Council has done a great job. And
it's Sheffield Council Scheme, and I'm defending it, but it's Sheffield Council
Scheme. Sheffield have done a great job in getting exemptions from government in
places, in ways that we haven't seen elsewhere, so that it's actually only
impacting a smaller number of vehicles. So, we've got up to £20 million to give
to those businesses to support them to transition to cleaner vehicles. And like
I say... Just one, I just want to understand on those grants. Is it right that
they're between £3,000 and £5,000? No. So, the maximum that you're allowed to
apply for is up to £16,000. That's generally for a HGV. On average, though, I
think it's fair to say it's about £4,000 that you're able to get. £3,000, I
think, for a mini bus, if it's bought new, so you would get £3,000 off that
cost. But if you buy it secondhand, then you only get 30% of the £3,000, so
about £1,000. It's a small fraction, isn't it, of the cost of replacing a
vehicle for those businesses which are in that position? It may be a small
fraction, but... No, it is a small fraction. I don't think we can get away
from... If it's £16,000 potentially off the cost of a new HGV, £3,000 off the
cost of a new mini bus. Sure. Like I say, it could be a small fraction. But I
think what we're saying is that it needs to happen. We need to bring in a clean
A zone in South Yorkshire. That is something that's been mandated by government.
Now, I don't think we should resolve from that challenge, because, like I say,
South Yorkshire has an air pollution problem. There are a small number of
businesses that will be affected. We're stepping in and doing everything we can
to support those small businesses. But the air pollution problem that we face in
South Yorkshire affects everybody. If this were water, if this were poisonous
water coming out of our taps, there would be a national outrage if the water
that we drink was killing up to 500 people a year in South Yorkshire. But
because it's the air that we breathe, it is invidious, it is invisible, we don't
have that same outrage. So you'd be doing it even if it wasn't mandated by
government? I think you're referring to the legal directive that many councils
say there's the reason they're acting on this. But if you really believe in it,
you'd be doing it anyway, wouldn't you? Well, look, I was elected on a promise
to make South Yorkshire the healthiest region in the country. We have some of
the worst health outcomes in the whole of the UK. We are eight out of 10
combined authority areas for healthy life expectancy. We have a healthy life
expectancy gap of 20 years between the richest and poorest neighborhoods in our
region. I don't think it's OK for politicians like me to sit back and do nothing
when children, young people, older people, vulnerable people in our region are
dying as a result of air pollution. I simply don't think that's right. Oliver
Coppard, Mayor of South Yorkshire. Thank you. Time now is 21 minutes to eight
and we'll have a look at today's papers and news websites. And lots of them are
reporting that Rishi Sunak's on the verge of announcing a new Brexit deal. The
Guardian says the agreement would overhaul post-Brexit trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland, bringing to an end a two-year standoff with the European
Union. The Daily Telegraph reports that following positive breakthroughs in the
past week, a legal text could be presented to Parliament as soon as Monday. But
the paper says it's not yet known whether the deal will be accepted by the
Democratic Unionist Party. According to The Times, Rishi Sunak's preparing to
publish the agreement with or without the DUP's endorsement. The paper says the
Prime Minister is also facing a direct clash with Tory Eurosceptics, one of whom
has warned he risks civil war. And I think Chris Mason is going to be shedding
light on all of that through us, isn't he, Michelle? He will. Ten-pile State.
Yes. In the meantime, some of the front pages picture events held to mark the
first anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. The Financial Times shows
women paying their respects in a cemetery in the western city of Lviv in
Ukraine. The paper's main story focuses on more sanctions being announced
against Moscow amid what the Lviv FT says are mounting concerns about the role
China is playing in the Russian war economy. An editorial in The Daily Telegraph
strongly criticises a peace plan proposed by Beijing saying it all but calls on
western countries to stop supplying arms to Ukraine while overlooking and
excusing Russia's unprovoked aggression. A mother's plea for her daughter's
killer to be blocked from leaving prison is the main story for the Daily Mail.
The paper says the man, Robert Brown, is due for automatic release in November
after serving half of his 26-year jail term for manslaughter. Diana Parks tells
the Mail he still poses a risk to her family and to the public. And she wants
the Justice Secretary Dominic Raab to intervene. A Ministry of Justice spokesman
tells the Mail that Mr Raab will do everything in his power to keep the most
dangerous offenders behind bars. Daily Express credits the Queen consort with
forcing Roald Dahl's publisher to announce that the author's books will be
printed in their original form. The paper says Camilla was shocked and dismayed
about the removal of portions that could cause offence. An editorial in The Sun
bemoans the publisher's apparent U-turn one minute woke the next a joke. The
Daily Mail and The Daily Star say some shops have run out of turnips after the
Environment Secretary Theresa Coffey suggested them as a way of getting around
shortages of other fruit and veg. The Mirror pitches empty supermarket shelves
and says the minister's advice sparked a run on the root vegetable. While
calling the turnips with a favourite food of the Blackadder character Baldrick,
the star has the headline, not such a cunning plan, m'lady. Now I'm not bothered
about turnip shortages but I know someone who might be. Yes, I was planning to
get to grips with cooking a turnip recipe this weekend but yes I'll have to
source them first. I didn't think that would be the problem. And a school
cricket coach from Cumbria has spoken to The Times about his one regret from
teaching the rising England star Harry Brooke, who's thrilled the sport by
breaking batting records. Martin Spate confesses he told the school's head of
hockey that Brooke could one day make the England team the hockey coach swiftly
put a £100 bet at odds of 100 to 1. Unfortunately, he explains Spate, I did not.
The time now is 70 minutes to eight. 340 years ago the Gloucester was
shipwrecked off the coast of Norfolk. Hundreds died but the future King James II
survived. The wreck's been described as the most important discovery in the sea
since the Mary Rose. Now underwater footage of the ship has been unveiled for
the first time and an exhibition showing some of the things rescued from the sea
is going on display at the Castle Museum in Norwich. Well, we can talk now to
Professor Claire Jowett who's a maritime history expert at the University of
East Anglia and who's leading on the Gloucester project. Good morning. Good
morning. And tell us what this intriguing footage shows. It shows, as you said,
for the first time the wreck site, a compact wreck site. I'm a historian, not an
archaeologist, but Gary Momba of Maritime Archaeology Trust describes it as the
most important wreck site that he's ever dived on. There is a whole broad side
of cannons down there. It was a warship with 50 to 60 cannons. It's expected
that under the sand there is another broad side of cannons. There's been rescue
archaeology to date. About 450 to 500 artifacts have been recovered from the
seabed and they tell the amazing story of a luxurious royal journey by sea in
1682. Yes, and this royal journey, I guess, is what particularly interests you,
doesn't it? What does it give it any more insights into King James II? I think
it absolutely does. There was avoidable delay for James, Duke of York and Albany
at the time abandoning ship. The ship hit at 5.30am in the morning. It's
actually underwater very quickly, but James hoped that the ship could be saved
and didn't evacuate, didn't leave immediately. Of course, nobody could leave
before royalty. That led to a deeper tragedy than perhaps it would have been
otherwise. Looking at some of the other people on board, some of the passengers,
and these are the objects that people can see, can't they, in the Castle Museum
in Norwich today? And a particularly interesting chest. Absolutely. In 2015,
without a lid, a chest was discovered and there were over 100 artifacts brought
up over one dive season and there's textiles in them. There are shoes in them,
there's combs in them, there was a lignum vitae jar that contained a mustard-
based substance, probably an ointment. And you say textiles are even a silk
petticoat, it's incredible that survived. It is incredible. Textiles are so
fragile, so to have almost a complete suit of women's clothes in the luggage is
amazing. The spectacles there, it really is an amazing assemblage. And bottles
of wine which might help scientists investigating climate change. Absolutely. Of
the 450 artifacts, 500 artifacts rescued, 149 of them are wine bottles, 49 of
them with some contents, 29 of them with full contents, including the 17th
century air. So this pre-industrial air, which would, as you suggest, perhaps
tell us how our climate has changed in the intervening 341 years. And a bit of
interest I imagine also in the 17th century wine too. Thank you very much
indeed, Professor Claire Jart, for telling us about the findings in the
Gloucester on display at the Castle Museum in Norwich from today. It's now 13
minutes to wait. Time for thought for the day. And our speaker with us this
morning is the Catholic commentator, Catherine Pepinster. Morning, Catherine.
Good morning, Michelle. 50 years ago, I had one of the best moments of my life.
A glittable world round, a light show began, music from a clockwork orange
played, and onto the stage ran David Bowie. What a show it was, with costume
change after costume change, and of course amazing music. People then were
puzzled by his androgyny and have been intrigued by Bowie ever since. This week,
the Victoria and Albert Museum announced it to display 80,000 items from Bowie's
archive in a new museum. It's not the first link between the V&A and the singer.
In 2013, it showed David Bowie is, Drew record crowds. The exhibition's title
referred to how David Bowie appeared to be different people. During his life,
you could say, David Bowie is Ziggy Stardust, or is the Thin White Duke, as well
as many other personas. So who is anyone? The philosopher Descartes said of the
human person, I think, therefore I am. But his dualist approach, that people are
made up of a body and a separate mind, seems lacking today. Nowadays, body, mind
and soul are seen as more integrated. During the season of Lent, which began
this week, the importance of all three, body, mind and soul, becomes apparent.
As Christians prepare for Good Friday, when Christ's crucifixion is
commemorated, they engage in acts of penance which take different forms. Fasting
is about the body, praying about the soul, while reading inspiring text can be
good for the mind too. Another key part of Lent is arms-giving, which might be
about donations or giving of one's time, something that takes physical and
spiritual engagement. The other day I was reading about the kind of arms-giving
that involves the offer of one's time, and it was described as self-denial. But
is it? Later, I was talking to the chief executive of The Passage, the
homelessness charity in London that Princess Diana visited many times and
sometimes with her sons. Now William, the Prince of Wales, is its royal patron,
and this week opened its newly refurbished flats and bedrooms. Its chief
executive told me how important volunteers are to the work of the charity, but
also how important it is to them. Like Princess Diana, they find an affirmation
of themselves in engaging with others. It's a common experience of volunteering
that those who give actually gain. The same happens in Lent. Opt for focusing on
others through giving, and it seems enriching rather than denying yourself.
Somehow, the shifting of the spotlight to be on others and on God, to be on
service, can enable each of us to become more authentically ourselves. Thank
you. That was Thought for the Day with Katherine Pepinster, Catholic
commentator. The time now is 10 to 8. The shooting of Detective Chief Inspector
John Caldwell in Omer stirred painful memories, not just of the troubles, but
more recent violence. The young journalist Lyra McKee was fatally shot while
covering rioting in London area in 2019. Police have investigated links with
dissident Republicans in both the attacks. You may remember the powerful speech
made by Father Martin McGill at Lyra McKee's funeral. I commend our political
leaders for standing together in Cregan on Good Friday. My arm, however, left
with a question. Why in God's name does it take the death of a 29-year-old woman
with her whole life in front of her? Well, that was Father Martin McGill, a
parish priest on the Falls Road in Belfast, and he joins us now. Good morning.
Yes, good morning. So, like so many people, I imagine you must have been very
shocked to hear the news of the shooting of John Caldwell. Very much so shocked
and appalled, and my heart and indeed my prayer went out to, first of all, for
John's full recovery, and also for his family, and particularly for his young
child who witnessed this horrific event. With so many echoes of the troubles
when we used to hear again and again of off-duty police officers coming under
attack. So I went to school in the 1970s, and I have to say it brought me back
to those days very much so, but there's no sense if we are going back into that.
At this particular stage, I believe so many of us are determined to keep us
moving to the future that we are not going back to those days. And echoes too of
more recent violence. We just heard you speaking there at Lyra McKee's funeral.
Which was in a political vacuum when Stormont wasn't in operation. Stormont
isn't in operation. And yesterday, our political leaders were standing again
shoulder to shoulder, which I welcome, and they did so with the chief constable
showing support for our police service. Very good to see, but we need more
steps. Do you think the political vacuum is playing a part in this then? Well it
certainly isn't helping it, and I would very much welcome seeing an end to it. I
call it the start of your programme. I'm encouraged by what I hear, which is the
possibility of some sort of deal to resolve this ongoing issue around the
protocol. I welcome that. And I suppose one of the things that I would say is we
need to see politics working. And politics at times has worked and it's made a
difference. Our whole place, Northern Ireland has changed. The city of Belfast
has changed. So many other places have changed in the course of the last 25
years. But we're in the early stages and more needs to be done. Yes, it
certainly has. I know from visiting over many years. There is a very big
difference in the city. Absolutely. But still, why does this kind of political
violence persist, do you think? Well, the likes of a political vacuum doesn't
help. But there's more to it than that. I think we need to look at just some of
the conditions that people live in. And not for one minute I'm saying should
they justify violence. Nothing does, in my opinion. But if I take a look, I've
driven through a loyalist area and we still have those in the city of Belfast.
I'd like to see us move to integrated areas. I believe we're in integrated
housing, people living side by side. But I took a look at some of the shops
which have been closed in one of the areas close to the BBC here. Some of these
conditions need to be looked at. We talk about often the peace walls in Belfast.
But we've also got socioeconomic peace walls. And if I look back 25 years, not a
huge difference. In fact, maybe in some ways even worse. So some of those social
conditions need to be addressed. Certainly. But the idea of peace walls, in case
people may not realise what they are, those are the kind of divisions, often
quite fortified divisions that are put in place between communities. And
actually more of them have gone up, haven't they, since the Good Friday, since
the Belfast Agreement was signed? Well, with respect, of course, I say what
effect actually a number have gone down. But the small enough in number, and
there's work ongoing on that. But part of that is actually building the
confidence. And I suppose one of the mantras that I would have would be building
relationships so that we actually, you know, people can get to know one another.
I've certainly lived close to some of the peace walls in the past. And people
within quite a short distance didn't know one another. So, but work has been
done, more work needs to be done. That's why we need our politicians working
together. That's why we need them standing shoulder to shoulder. And what about
the dissident Republican groups? Because I know when I came to visit you at your
church on the Falls Road, you talked to me about your fears of about younger
people being caught up in them, because we think of them as maybe older people
who are spitting off from the provisional IRA. But there are younger people who
are attracted to this, aren't there? Yes, I'm going to raise some contentious
issues here. I'm going to raise the issue of grooming, of radicalization. And
one of the things is, so I went, for example, there are arrests for been
involved in paramilitary organizations or organized crime gangs, maybe to give
them their proper name. I would look at the age difference and there can be a
huge age disparity. So I think there are actually safeguarding questions being
asked more and more. And I welcome our former Justice Minister Naomi Long, for
example, who will regularly point out at times, are there issues of child abuse?
And she raised that issue in the sense of the young child, DCI Detective Chief
Inspector Caldwell's young child witnessing that. That's a form of child abuse.
The whole question of how young people are being radicalized and groomed, I
think there needs to be a focus on that. So we don't have young people getting
involved in organized crime gangs. And when you talk about this kind of
grooming, are you able to describe to us what you think is going on, in
practical terms? So the question is, is how are young people attracted into
this? So this whole sense of belonging, I don't know the finer details of how
some of these organized crime gangs work, but I would suspect in some ways, to
use the phrase, you're more common with these county lines, how do young people
get brought into that? And I think that really needs to be looked at. And I
suppose I would say especially our safeguarding board here would consider how
this is happening in the first place. I wouldn't have the finer details of how
it happens, but it's clearly happening. Father Martin McGill, thank you for
talking to us. Let's have a look at the weekend weather now. Louise Lear has the
details. Morning, Louise. Good morning, Michelle. Good morning, everybody at
home. What a quiet weekend of weather we have in store. But it is going to be on
the cold side, so don't be fooled if you have got sunshine. We've still got high
pressure dominating. It has been a very quiet and a very dry February. And it
looks likely that we're going to close out the month and a similar story. But
with a brisk north-easterly wind, it is driving in some cloud off the North Sea
and that will bring some showers as well with it. So some of those showers
pushed across the peaks and the Pennines could have a bit of a wintry flavour in
there with gusts of winds 30 to 40 miles an hour and coming from the cold
northeast. It's going to make it feel quite raw on those exposed coasts.
Sheltered western areas probably seeing the best of the sunshine, the best of
the warmth, temperatures perhaps likely to peak today between five and eight
degrees, let's say. That's about where they should be really for this time of
year. Now, as we go through the evening and overnight, the showers will fade
back to the northeast coast of England and with clearer skies temperatures are
likely to fall away. Low single figures in towns and city centres, below
freezing. So a frosty start to Sunday morning. But with slightly lighter winds
as we go into Sunday, perhaps a little more in the way of sunshine coming
through. Again, we still run the risk of a little more cloud across northeast
England. But generally speaking, it'll be a quiet day with sunny spells into
Sunday and a degree or so warmer highs of eight or nine degrees. The high
pressure is not going very far, very fast. So little change as we go into
Monday. Maybe more cloud around. And there is a question as we move through
Monday night into the early hours of Tuesday morning of some showers pushing
into the southeast, which could be wintry. That's your weather. Thanks, Louise.
Six Music. The year is 1978. Kate Bush releases his seminal debut album, The
Kick Inside. And on the record's 45th anniversary, we're celebrating the icon
that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep dive into the kick inside. You can find
archive interviews and exclusive performances as well as playlists and programs
featuring artists she's inspired. She was in her own world that she had created
a song. Way, way ahead of their time. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds,
click the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's artist icons collection. And
in the next hour of the programme, JK Rowling normally speaks on Twitter these
days rather than in interviews. But we will be hearing from the podcaster to
spoke to her at length, nine hours of interviews in all about her earlier life
and about the trans debate. And we'll also be hearing from Andrew Pollard, best
known for the Covid vaccine, who'll be talking to us about the precautions that
we in human life should take against bird flu.