TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to add an Oscar to his prize list and the latest on the Hancock emails. This is
today. It's eight o'clock on Wednesday the first of March. The headlines. The
former health secretary Matt Hancock has denied claims made by the Daily
Telegraph that he didn't follow advice to get all people entering care homes in
England tested for Covid. He says the allegation is flat wrong. Rishi Sunak says
the Democratic Unionists need to be given sufficient time to consider the new
post-Brexit trade deal. Police in Brighton are continuing to search for a
missing baby whose parents are under arrest and two trains have collided in
Greece killing more than 30 people. The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols.
The Daily Telegraph has obtained a huge collection of messages which were sent
or received by Matt Hancock at the height of the Covid crisis. The paper says
they show that Mr Hancock, who was the health secretary at the time, chose not
to follow advice from senior medical officials that all residents going into
care homes in England should be tested for the virus. A spokesperson for Matt
Hancock said the story was wrong and said the suggestion he'd overruled clinical
advice was categorically untrue. Here's our chief political correspondent Nick
Urdley. The Daily Telegraph has obtained 100,000 WhatsApp messages involving Mr
Hancock via the lockdown critical journalist Isabel Oakshott, who helped write
Mr Hancock's memoirs. The BBC has not seen the full exchanges and thus cannot
verify the context or full contents. But extracts printed by the newspaper
suggest that Mr Hancock was told in April 2020 that everyone going into a care
home should be tested with segregation of those waiting for the results. Over
the course of a day however, messages between Mr Hancock and a civil servant
show he arrived at a different conclusion, a commitment to test all those going
from hospital into care homes. The early decisions around entry to care homes
have been criticised by many with full testing introduced later. Mr Hancock this
morning issued a strong denial of the Telegraph's claims, saying the messages
had been stolen and doctored to create a false story. The statement from a
spokesperson said Mr Hancock had been advised in a meeting on the day the
messages were sent that testing everyone was not yet possible and that he had
concluded people leaving hospital should be prioritised. Rishi Sunak has said
the Democratic Unionist Party should be given time and space to consider the new
deal with the EU on trade in Northern Ireland. He spoke to a meeting of
Conservative backbenchers last night, saying there was no pressure for an
instant answer. The deal has been broadly welcomed at Westminster, but Lord
Frost, one of the negotiators of the Northern Ireland Protocol, which it
replaces, questioned whether any fundamental changes had been achieved. Here's
our political correspondent David Wallace-Lockhart. Rishi Sunak seems to be
making progress in convincing doubters in his own party. One Conservative MP
said they'd gone into last night's meeting opposing the new Windsor framework,
only to be converted by the Prime Minister. But other key groups aren't
convinced yet. The DUP, the main Unionist party in Northern Ireland, say they
need more time to look at the deal. Rishi Sunak seems willing to give them this
space. And the European Research Group of Eurosceptic Conservative MPs say it
will take two weeks for their lawyers to look through the small print. Some
disquiet is starting to surface. Boris Johnson's former Brexit negotiator, Lord
Frost, has warned in the Telegraph that EU laws will remain supreme in Northern
Ireland, calling parts of the agreement a bitter pill to swallow. But the
Northern Ireland Minister, Steve Baker, has made clear that this is the final
deal. Four men arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police
officer in County Tyrone have been released. Two men, one aged 71, the other 47,
are still being questioned about the attack on Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell in Oma a week ago. He remains critically ill in hospital. A search is
continuing for a missing baby amid mounting fears that the child may have come
to harm. Police arrested the baby's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon,
in Brighton on Monday. Vincent McAvinney reports. Hundreds of officers from the
Sussex Force and the Metropolitan Police have spent a second night searching for
the baby. Drones, a helicopter and specially trained dogs are being used and the
public has been asked to check sheds and outbuildings in the area. In freezing
temperatures, officers have been combing through a large allotment site to the
north of Brighton. Constance Martin and her partner Mark Gordon, a convicted
rapist and registered sex offender, disappeared in January when their baby was
just days old. The couple, who are now being held on suspicion of gross
negligence manslaughter, are refusing to assist the police in the search. Two
trains have collided in northern Greece, killing at least 32 people. A train
with 350 passengers on board and another carrying freight crashed between the
cities of Athens and Thessaloniki, causing several carriages to leave the
tracks. Dozens of people have been injured. Our Europe correspondent Nick Beke
reports. Survivors have been speaking of a nightmarish 10 seconds just before
midnight when their intercity service smashed into an oncoming freight train at
great speed. They described being thrown from their seats before their carriage
immediately caught fire. Many of the hundreds of passengers on board were able
to escape from the burning wreckage, but dozens were not. The governor of the
Thessaly region, where the crash took place, has reportedly confirmed that the
two trains were travelling on the same track. He said the first four carriages
of the passenger service were derailed and the first two were almost completely
destroyed by the fire. Rescuers were still finding bodies after hours of
searching. It's not yet clear if this was a signalling failure, driver error or
another human mistake, but it is the deadliest rail crash in Greece for many
years. Nigeria's election commission has declared the governing party's
candidate, Bola Tinabu, as the winner of Saturday's presidential election. He
won with almost nine million votes ahead of his main rival, Atiku Abubakar. Two
opposition parties have described the vote as a sham and have called for a new
election. Information uncovered by the BBC suggests UK police forces have lost
track of more than 700 sex offenders in the past three years. Campaigners for
tougher controls say most have changed their names to avoid detection and they
want legislation to stop this happening. The Home Office says the UK already has
some of the toughest laws in the world. Here's Phil Mackie. Sex offenders are
supposed to tell the authorities of any changes to their personal details and
failure to comply could result in a five-year prison sentence. But over the past
three years, 729 were recorded as missing or wanted for arrest by the 31 forces
who responded to freedom of information requests. The Safeguarding Alliance,
which represents survivors of sex abuse, believes most have been able to go
missing simply by changing their names. The Lucy Faithful Foundation, which has
successfully helped rehabilitate sex offenders for decades, said the majority of
those who'd changed their names had informed the authorities, with only about
one percent of all registered sex offenders failing to do so. The Home Office
has carried out two reviews but the findings haven't been published. New
analysis suggests that a brisk 11-minute walk a day could lower the risk of
diseases or early death. That's half the amount of daily exercise recommended by
the NHS. A detailed re-examination of previous research, led by Cambridge
University, concluded that one in ten premature deaths could be prevented. Our
health reporter, Philippa Roxby, has more details. Current NHS advice is to do
at least 150 minutes of moderate physical activity a week, such as riding a
bike, walking fast or playing tennis. But the analysis suggests only one out of
three people manage this. Looking at hundreds of previous studies, the
researchers discovered there were significant health benefits if people
exercised for even half the recommended time. They calculated that being active
for 75 minutes a week could help prevent one in 20 cases of cardiovascular
disease and one in 30 cases of cancer, and lower the chances of dying early. A
public hearing examining allegations of racism made by the former Yorkshire
player Azeem Rafiq is due to begin in London today. It's more than two years
since he first made claims of being abused at Yorkshire County Cricket Club. His
testimony will be a key part of the case being heard by an independent Cricket
Discipline Commission panel. Our sports editor, Dan Rowan, reports. In 2021,
Yorkshire sparked outrage by not disciplining anyone, despite its former spinner
Azeem Rafiq being found to have suffered racial harassment, plunging the county
into crisis. The scandal is now set to come to a head after the ECB brought
charges against the club and seven of its former players, with a disciplinary
hearing the first of its kind to be held in public. However, Yorkshire will not
attend after the club accepted their charges, and following a number of
withdrawals, the former England captain Michael Vaughan is set to be the only
defendant to appear in front of the panel in person. He is accused of making a
racist comment to Rafiq and three other Asian players during a Yorkshire match
14 years ago. Vaughan, who has repeatedly denied the claims, stepped back from
his broadcasting work with the BBC last year. Meanwhile, the pair's former
teammate and current England star Adeel Rashid is also expected to give evidence
via video link from Bangladesh, where the team is on tour, with the sport brazed
for the latest chapter in what has proved a hugely damaging saga. Dan Rowan
reporting. Thank you, Caroline. It's coming up to 10 minutes past eight. Did
people die of Covid in care homes in England because the Health Secretary
ignored advice to test all those entering those care homes, whether they came
from hospitals or from their homes or elsewhere in the community? That is just
one of the crucial questions that will be considered by the independent public
Covid inquiry, chaired by Baroness Hallett, which starts hearing evidence in
June. It is crucial because of this stark fact. More than 39,000 care home
residents died with the virus in England between the 10th of April 2020 and the
31st of March 2021. That is according to figures from the regulator. This
morning, the Daily Telegraph have printed the first in what they say will be a
series of stories based on 100,000 messages sent by Matt Hancock to officials,
advisers and ministers during the pandemic. What is in dispute is not those
messages themselves, but what they show or are claimed to show. The Telegraph
claims that they are proof that Mr Hancock ignored advice from the Chief Medical
Officer, Officer Sir Chris Whitty. In a statement issued in the last hour or so,
Mr Hancock says the messages have been doctored to create what he calls a false
story. We'll hear in a moment from the man who was his deputy for a long time
during the pandemic, a health minister during the pandemic, Lord Bethel, a man
who's still a friend of Mr Hancock. First though, let us get the context from
our political editor, Chris Mason. Morning to you, Chris. Morning. Just to be
clear, there is no doubt these messages are real, is there? What is in dispute
is what they reveal. Exactly. No doubt at all about their authenticity. The
battle here that we're seeing Nick playing out was always going to come, wasn't
it? The battle to learn lessons, the battle to defend reputations over Covid. It
was always going to be intense, it was always going to be angry, it was always
going to be passionate. The expectation was that the primary forum for that
would be the Covid inquiry, which is in its very, very early stages at the
moment and will really start generating, I suspect, news and debate come the
summer and come the autumn. Then along comes this huge cache of messages that
are going to be published by the Daily Telegraph in the coming days. This has
echoes of the MPs' expenses revelations of many years ago, also in the Daily
Telegraph, when they acquired that hard drive of information. Isabel Oakshot is
the journalist who was at the heart of all of this. She co-wrote a book with
Matt Hancock, his diaries around the time of his time as Health Secretary, and
came into possession of all of this information. And it's her argument, she sets
this out in the Daily Telegraph this morning, that it is in the public interest
to publish this detail. She acknowledges that she is a sceptic about lockdowns,
didn't like the fact that schools, for instance, were closed. She argues it's in
the public interest to publish them because such is the time frame of the
inquiry. It's going to take rather a long time and perhaps not all of these
messages would have seen the light of day. Speaking to Matt Hancock's team this
morning, his argument is this entire tranche of messages were handed over to the
inquiry. They think it is outrageous that she has breached his trust and indeed
they claim a non-disclosure agreement. Isabel Oakshot doesn't deny that there
was a non-disclosure agreement. And their view is that not only is this a
partial account because it's merely the text exchanges rather than the meetings
and the minutes that took place and the advice that was given away from WhatsApp
screens, but they also say, look, the proper forum for proper establishment of
the facts here is the public inquiry where all of the facts will be there rather
than those just from WhatsApp which they believe have been partially released to
suit an agenda. Chris, thank you. Stay on the line. We'll talk to Lord Bethel,
James Bethel, who's here in the studio and come back to you after we've done so.
Good morning to you, Lord Bethel. Just a quick one before we go into the
specifics, if I may. We're delighted to have you here, but shouldn't Matt
Hancock be answering these questions? Oh, that's a decision for Matt. I mean,
listen, it's a hell of a blow to have someone breach a confidence like that and
I would completely understand why he doesn't want to step up for that. But Matt
Hancock gave messages, gave, chose to give messages to a journalist, a
journalist whose views he knew. Now, she's now using them in a way he didn't
expect, but naive doesn't kind of do justice to it. It's a massive evidence of
poor judgment, isn't it? I think Isabelle is a terrific journalist. She's not a
very good friend. Well, let's turn to the specifics because that really is what
matters here to people who are listening to this programme. The Telegraph bases
its front page story this morning on one particular WhatsApp exchange between
Matt Hancock and one of his advisors from the 14th of April 2020. Now, just to
remind you, that is a few weeks after the start of the pandemic, which really
began to kick in in February of 2020. Just before we get your account, Lord
Bethel, what you think is and is not revealed, let's play to you, let's play to
the listeners, one of our producers reading out the context of those crucial
texts. Text from Matt Hancock, Health Secretary, on the 14th of April 2020.
Chris Whitty has done an evidence review and now recommends testing of all going
into care homes and segregation while awaiting result. This is obviously a good
positive step and we must put it into the dock. Text from Alan Nixon, Department
of Health Parliamentary Special Advisor, on the 14th of April 2020. I wasn't in
testing meeting. Just to check, officials are saying your steer is to remove the
commitment to testing on admission to care homes from the community but keep
commitment to testing on admission to care homes from hospital. Is that right?
Text from Matt Hancock about 40 minutes later. Fine, tell me if I'm wrong but
I'd rather leave it out and just commit to test and isolate all going into care
from hospital. I don't think the community commitment adds anything and it
muddies the waters. Have that for a Q&A response. Well, that's the context. Lord
Bethel, aren't the crucial phrases here is Matt Hancock's opinion that he
doesn't think it will add to anything to test people going into care homes from
the community and quotes that it muddies the waters. Shouldn't he have been
following the advice of the Chief Medical Officer rather than his view that it
muddies the waters? No, I think the key phrase here is this is obviously a good,
a positive step. Listen, it was absolutely crystal clear that we wanted to test
everyone who went into social care. That was the ambition. Getting the CMO to
put that into official advice was a progressive step. We welcomed it. The Chief
Medical Officer, sorry, just to remind people what those initials mean.
Professor Chris Whitty, who, by the way, always gave extremely clear and
sensible advice in these matters. So to be clear where we are, not in dispute,
is that Chris Whitty did advise, did want everybody going into care homes in
April to be tested. No, not in dispute is at that stage it was clear to everyone
that we wanted to move to a situation where many, many more people were tested
in the country, particularly those who are most vulnerable, like those going
into social care. But we were only doing a few thousand tests a day and that was
the practical problem. We were trying, like every other country in the world,
like every other health system, we were desperately trying to scale our testing
to meet this huge need for extra tests. And what we had to try to do in the
meantime was to prioritise who got tested first. So a decision was taken that
day and it was changed after a meeting. What these messages reveal is that the
Chief Medical Officer says all people going into care homes should be tested.
Matt Hancock appears to agree with that, but later in the day, after what he
says is a crucial meeting, he changes his view. You accept that version of
events, I think. Why did he change his view? Well, he changed his view because
there was an operational meeting to talk about how you were actually going to
test people and how many actual tests we had. The reality was there was a very,
very limited number of those tests. Now, people who were coming out of hospitals
had the highest rates of transmission. They were the people who had the highest
risk of having the disease because there was a lot of nosocomial infection from
other patients within the hospitals. So it was sensible and right to prioritise
those coming into social care first. And we were then going to move on to
covering absolutely everyone, which is what we went on to do. Weeks later,
months later. It took weeks to scale up our testing. The thing that held us back
was not a dispute about the clinical advice. It was simply the operational
ability to deliver tests. And that's why we agree with that. Were you in the
meeting? This crucial meeting? Was Chris Witty in this crucial meeting? I don't
have this is this is the floor in this whole debate. We only have a few scrappy
gossipy WhatsApps. This is not how he did his business. No, it's not. Absolutely
not. Nick, I absolutely reject that. Business was done very formally with
meeting notes, with policy recommendations, with a box. That is how the
machinery government works. There's a message. I'm not going to bore the
listeners. We're reading them. I've got one of yours here in which there is
detail of the sort you would expect to be put in formal meetings, long
paragraphs of detail. But little pieces of informal chat between people is very
common. Getting me onto this programme took a very many WhatsApp messages.
That's how people work these days. But the formal decision making is done
through the paperwork. And we don't have that in front of us. And that's why
this partial glimpse into the decision making is so unfortunate, because it
gives a misleading impression. Well, let's go to what I think are the two
underlying questions, charges or claims that are being made today and might be
on listeners minds as they listen to that. The first one, which the Telegraph
picks up, is that Matt Hancock was obsessed with meeting a public target that
he'd set for the number of tests that he did, a test of 100,000 tests a day.
Famously did it in a press conference. He was being derided for failing to
deliver. And there's a message from you on the same day, a WhatsApp message.
James Bethel, important heads up on the 100k target, had a call with Seb James.
He says we're not on course to hit the target, either on demand or capacity. So
claim one is that the reason or one reason people were not being tested in care
homes is you ministers have got your eye on the wrong ball. You were worried
about headlines. No, Nick, you've answered your own question here. The reason
why we were obsessed, and you're right, totally fanatically obsessed, and huge
thanks to all those people who helped. The reason why we were obsessed by
getting testing ramped up and used the 100,000 target as a galvanising mechanic
for getting focus on this was exactly because of this issue. Our lack of scale
meant we couldn't meet the clinical recommendations of the CMO. We wanted very
much to be testing people in hospitals, because we didn't even have enough
testing to do everyone in hospitals. We want to do people in care homes. And
ultimately, we wanted to do asymptomatic testing of the public. We had nowhere
near enough capacity. And that's why we lent in so heavily into ramping up
testing. Just briefly, before we widen out, the other charge I think that is
made is that you ignored the risks coming from the community, even though it
later turned out that the biggest problem in care homes was cases that were
coming from the community into the care homes. No, I don't think we ignored it.
It was just a practical question of the sheer number of tests. The number of
people coming in from hospitals was a containable, manageable number. The number
coming in from the community was a larger number. So it made sense to sequence
it in that way. Well, let's deal with two more wider issues, if we could. The
Telegraph justifies its decision to print all this on the fact that we're still
waiting for the inquiry to start, for goodness sake, whereas in some countries,
the inquiries started, heard evidence and finished. Have they not got a point
that it is ridiculous for those who are the victims of this pandemic, the
relatives, the loved ones of victims, to have to wait this long for the process
even to begin? Well, I have some sympathy with that, but it's really a question
for Lady Hallett. These are very, very complicated matters. There is a huge
amount of official documentation to go through. If you think these WhatsApps are
a big chunk of data, you should see the big pile of official papers that she has
to get through. I am very concerned that we haven't learnt the lessons from the
pandemic and that we're not doing enough as a country to prepare for the next
one that's coming down the line. You think we should be doing more now? I think
we should be doing a lot more. I am concerned about the 100-day vaccine push. I
think the resource is going into that and the ambition isn't there. AXA
screening and diagnostics, I think we're not doing enough to scale up our
capacity there. And in terms of the surveillance of avian flu, as a world and as
a country, there's not enough focus on that. One last subject that I should
raise with you. It is clear that the Telegraph will come to the issue of PPE and
how contracts were delivered and whether they were delivered on favourable terms
to chums of senior Tories who became millionaires or multi-millionaires, often
as a result of providing PPE that was unusable. Now, you've said you did
business properly, but in a court statement to the inquiry, you've said that you
deleted a whole series of WhatsApp messages that might reveal the truth. Is that
rather odd that you deleted those messages? No, I don't think that's odd.
Listen, I had an issue with capacity on my phone and there simply wasn't enough
space on my phone for all the WhatsApp messages and I clumsily deleted them. In
retrospect, I regret doing that, but that isn't the sign of a conspiracy. Nick,
there wasn't a great conspiracy behind these arrangements. Things were done
incredibly thoroughly. Officials did a really good job and I do worry about
people disappearing down rabbit holes on some of these matters. But they worry
about disappearing messages, Lord Bethel, and at one stage I read an account
saying you'd got a new phone. Well, WhatsApp messages don't disappear when you
get a new phone. As it happens, I got one yesterday, so I know that for a fact.
Isn't it rather odd, in the middle of an inquiry, to delete really important
messages about millions of pounds of public money, which it turns out was spent
in sort of appallingly, we will see whether it was corruptly. Nick, journalists
see politicians' WhatsApp messages and get the misleading impression that that
is how government is run. It just isn't. Decisions to spend £100 million or more
on a procurement is done incredibly thoroughly through the procurement
department by officials and ministers don't even get to see the contracts. The
WhatsApp messages that journalists often focus on really are beside the point.
Final question. We're grateful for you coming in today. You may not like what
the Telegraph are doing. You may think it is best left for the inquiry. But this
reminds me, as Chris Mason was saying, what happened in the MPs' expenses
scandal. Can you really, both of you, just sit there as they publish day after
day after day and say, wait for the inquiry? Well, it's not really up to us, I'm
afraid. We are victims of the system here. I certainly think Matt should just
publish his WhatsApps and get them out there. It's clearly that ship has sailed.
And I'm very proud of what's in many of those messages. I think the listeners
will see them and admire the effort and hard work that people put into our
pandemic response. James Bethel, Lord Bethel, former junior minister at the
Department of Health with Matt Hancock during the pandemic. Thank you very much
for taking the time to join us in the studio. Brief final word from Chris Mason.
Chris. The simple political truth, Nick, is the court of public opinion on Covid
and people's reputations and the decisions that they took at the time is opening
and it's hearing evidence now. We've heard that in your conversation over the
last 10 minutes or so. We see it on the front page of the Daily Telegraph. We'll
see it, I suspect, on every news outlet today and in the coming days. And it's a
fascinating insight, isn't it? Partial, though it clearly is, into how people
under the professional pressure of their lives dealt with these colossal issues
confronting them. The nature, the tone of their interactions, the rapidly
changing evidence, the facts and the deliverability. And then the debate about
the public interest, as the Daily Telegraph claims, in publishing these messages
versus that betrayal of trust between a journalist and a former health minister
in doing that now, without that wider context, when there is that public inquiry
coming down the track, albeit in its real detail and meat, if you like, many
months away and probably not concluding for quite a long time. Here we go. We're
going to hear plenty of this in the coming days. Nick. Here we go indeed, Chris
Mason. You've got a lot of reading to do. Thank you for joining us and Lord
Bethel too. Beth. Now, 27 minutes past eight, a really heartwarming story, at
least I think so anyway. The Irish Goodbye is the story of two brothers, one
with Down syndrome who lose their mother. This dark comedy has already won a
BAFTA and an Oscar nomination. A scene there, a moving scene from an Irish
Goodbye. I've been to meet the actor James Martin, one of the brothers you heard
singing there. We went to his home in South Belfast. He's off to the Oscars next
week. He has Down syndrome like the character Lorcan he plays. And I asked him
how the film came about. One of the directors, Tom, went to a football game with
his dad and seen these two lads, one with Down syndrome and his brother. He was
not just like a brother, but also a social worker to him. And he thought it'd be
nice to have an idea of a movie, an Irish Goodbye. And so he phoned his other
colleague, Ross Wright, and said, can we make this as a really nice movie, and a
short movie? And he said, yes, not a bother. And we filmed on different kinds of
areas and it went down a treat. It really did go down a treat. And you're right,
it's very funny, partly because the brothers are always arguing with each other,
swearing at each other. I'll tell you something, it's just nice to have that
heat. I mean, it was just nice to have that special bond with his brother, Tala
Clemenceau-Howard. Clemenceau-Howard's a nice fellow, great crack, really funny
lad. And as you say, great crack, and you helped each other learn your lines. We
did, yes. We've been in contact over FaceTime and read through the lines, and
it's not every day that something like that happens, really. And had you any
idea how well the film is going to do? I mean, congratulations, because it's won
a BAFTA. Well, to be honest, I just couldn't believe when you have your own
father, Ivan Martin, just saying, yes, with his hands up in the air, crying, and
the next minute you see a camera beside you. It's once in a lifetime to get a
BAFTA, and it's just fantastic how that really comes about. And did you meet any
stars when you were at the BAFTAs? I did, yes, and I got to meet, when I was,
when they were announcing the winner for the best short film, which was An Irish
Goodbye, and I walked in the steps, and the next minute this hand appealed and
stand up, and I was Brandon Frizio, and I'm thinking to myself, pinch me right
now, you know, really. And the next minute I was a bit late because of that, and
I walked down to the stage, but Brandon Gleeson and Colin Farrell stand up and
clapped, and it was actually really good. And I walked on the stage, and I
looked at the host. He looks lovely in his suit. But it was really nice just to
go up there and actually go, yes, we did it. Sounds like a fantastic night. And
then to top it, you've got an Oscar nomination, and you're off to Hollywood.
Yes, I just can't believe that it's going that far again, even though the Oscars
on the night itself was actually my birthday. Last period elsewhere, it would be
nice to have an Oscar on the icing of my birthday cake. It would be a perfect
way to celebrate my birthday. It really would be a perfect way. And how has the
stardom affected your everyday life? Are you carrying on with the day job? I'm
still carrying on with the day job, and it's really fantastic because it did a
big thing for me. Yesterday in Mancub was when the balloons beside me. I should
explain, you've got a gigantic gold balloon star and then another balloon saying
lights, camera, action of a movie camera sent to you by Mancub. It was really
nice with Mancub to actually do this especially for me. And you're still working
at Starbucks. I'm still working in Starbucks and Bob's Scalini's. That's a
restaurant, Scalini's, yeah. Yes, it is. And we know the family really well.
Now, I know as well as the acting and your day job, you're a great champion for
people with learning disabilities. And you've talked to the European Parliament,
you've talked to Northern Ireland Assembly. And what's the message that you want
to get on behalf of people with learning disabilities? Well, let's put it this
way, I'm the first person with Down syndrome can not just pick up a baffler, but
fingers crossed an Oscar. And you're someone who's very confident, you're able
to speak out for yourself. But not everybody with a learning disability can do
that. So what do you want people to understand about them? Listen, I always say
to people, never trust a big buyer's cover, because anybody can act. It doesn't
matter if you have Down syndrome or not if you have, if it's autism or hearing
impairment, they all can act. I mean, if we take Stephen Hawkins, he can act
too. But don't judge him as a person in a real show. Treat him as like an adult.
And he's a fantastic actor. I've seen him in The Simpsons. And I can tell you
what an actor he is, God bless me. But it was just nice. Very important message.
And look, best of luck with the Oscars. Thank you so much and fingers crossed.
And I think lots and lots of people here have their fingers crossed for James
Martin. And you can see more of this interview and our reporting from Northern
Ireland on our Instagram account at BBC Today programme. 26 minutes to nine
exciting morning in the cricket Rob is watching. Well, that's right. Last we
heard from the poor Nick was that after winning the toss, Bangladesh were 89 for
two against England in the first of three one day men's internationals. There
are three T20 matches to follow in a schedule that lasts no more than a
fortnight. But let's get a score update first on today's match from our cricket
reporter, Kevin Howells. Kevin. 150 for four now in the 35th over. So
Bangladesh, who decided to bat first this morning, have got a bit of rebuilding
work to be done here. And they're scoring runs. But they're scoring them from
their point of view a little bit too slowly. England have done a terrific job in
not only taking the four wickets, but also in squeezing the run certainly since
that opening 10 overs of power play. And right now it is absolutely beautiful to
watch Atul Rashid bowling. Absolute gem. He's picked up just the one wicket,
thought maybe he should have two. He's been bowling beautifully. And we also see
Mark Wood bowl at the moment. He's not bowled for a couple of months. He's
certainly not bowled in ODI cricket for near on two years. So terrific to see
him bowling 92 miles per hour. Got a wicket with his third ball. Yeah, you
mentioned Rashid, but there's also particular interest, I suspect, in Joffre
Archer. The subplot is whether he can force his way back into the test team, I
suppose. Yes, it is. I think people will be keener on being back in that team. I
mean, obviously, MS' Anderson and Broad have done a pretty decent job, backed up
by others in New Zealand over the last couple of weeks. And Pakistan, of course,
before Christmas as well. I think from Joffre Archer's point of view, I saw him
play in his last one, the international, which was in South Africa a few weeks
ago, and he got six wickets. And I think there was a huge amount of relief for
the fact that Joffre obviously has been out injured for quite a considerable
time. He's just making his way back really now. And it seemed to be one of
those, we get it in sport, in all sports, where just as he was getting fit, it
seemed everything was going well, he would break down again. So England support,
as we're looking at that and thinking, will we ever see Joffre Archer at his
best again? And when he took those six wickets in South Africa a few weeks ago,
people were thinking, yes. Now he went for 12 runs in his first over this
morning of the match here against Bangladesh. He's certainly tightened it up,
hasn't yet taken a wicket, but certainly looking good again. So fingers crossed
he will be OK. And England will need to mix a match a bit during the Ashes and
other series as well. And on the distant horizon, Kevin, the World Cup, seven
months away, but nevertheless, this is part of the preparation, I suppose. It's
a very important part of the preparation because whilst England really, from a
Wanda International perspective, have been playing catch up, I mean, this tour,
for example, really is being played now because of the disruption during the
Covid period. It's the same for South Africa as well. I don't want to follow the
England mantra of results don't matter. But what does matter here with an
understrength team and many people missing for many reasons is the fact that the
players who are there in Bangladesh get practice on the sort of pitches they
will be playing on when it comes to that World Cup in India. So obviously a lot
of learning to be done in conditions which are very much different from the ones
they lifted the trophy in England, the 50 overs. And of course, let's not
forget, they're also world champions in T20 cricket, but that was in Australia
as well. So yeah, the next couple of weeks are really important for them. Kevin
Howes, thank you. Blackburn Rovers, Manchester City, Fulham and Brighton through
to the FA Cup sixth round. Four more fifth round matches tonight. Manchester
United versus West Ham, arguably the box office fixture, but Tottenham have a
tough looking trip to Sheffield United, while the Premier League's bottom club,
Southampton, are playing Grimsby and Championship leaders Burnley, well, they're
at home to Fleetwood. That takes us to our tips. Lingfield, three o'clock,
number six, expert opinion. Wincanton, four fifteen, number two, Hititi. Thanks,
Rob. Now here's a programme that I really hope I never appear on. Tim Harford
with More or Less. This week on More or Less is five grams of cocaine a lot.
After the disgraced MP Jared O'Mara was reported to have a five gram a day
habit, as though everyone knew exactly what that meant, curious listeners have
been asking for a friend. And deaths in the UK have been stubbornly high
relative to the historical average, at least until the latest figures were
released showing an improvement. So have we finally turned a corner? You know
it's not that simple. That's the last in this series of More or Less, with me,
Tim Harford, on BBC Sound and Radio 4 in half an hour. The time now is twenty to
nine. Watching footage from the war in Ukraine, you may have seen soldiers
firing rockets at tanks from launchers on their shoulders. Many of those N-laws,
as they are called, were supplied to the Ukrainian military by the UK government
and manufactured here in Belfast, which has been a centre for arms factories for
many decades. I've been to visit the Talas plant, which is owned by a French
company and employs 800 people in Northern Ireland. We were the first
journalists to be allowed inside the factory since the start of the war in
Ukraine. The sound of the N-laws anti-tank weaponry which are manufactured here
in Talis in Northern Ireland and I'm standing in the lobby with Philip McBride,
who's Managing Director. Quite an array of weapons you've got in your front
hall. Yes indeed. What you're seeing here today are some of the weapons we have
in service, mainly with the United Kingdom, but also around the world. These
weapons are in service today with the Ukrainian forces as well. I think most
people wouldn't really have heard of N-laws until the war in Ukraine, but there
it's been used very effectively by the Ukrainian forces. Yes, N-law was one of
the first weapons sent by UKMOD into the conflict. Because of the nature of the
weapon, it's a one-person carry. It'll kill a main battle tank. It was used very
effectively to stop convoys coming across the Russian borders. Right, but let's
move on through to the next area of the building. Where are we heading now?
Sorry, we're going into our main factory. It's very interesting looking at it
because there's a series of small workshops, I suppose is how I'd describe them.
And is this literally where the rocket launches are made? Well, there are no
explosives on this site. So rocket motors, warheads, gas generators are all
assembled somewhere else in Northern Ireland. But what we do up here is we make
the launcher equipment. And I think because of our past, it has actually built
up our security systems in such a way we would never want to have the missile
and the launcher together at the same time. So the only time they come together
is when they're with a customer. Defence manufacturing has always played a
pretty big part in the Northern Ireland economy, I remember shorts. But why did
such a big French company decide to invest here? The business we had here, which
has grown since the 1950s, through Short Brothers, Bombardier, Thompson, CSF and
now Thales has meant that we have created a world class capability. What about
the workforce here? Was that one of the attractions? Oh, the education system in
Northern Ireland, and the people we get through Ulster University and Queen's
University are second to none. The vast majority of our workforce are Northern
Ireland based and have come through the university system. I'm just looking
through here on the right hand side and I can see there are a number of rocket
launchers all lined up. This is Enlaw production. So again, the canister, as we
call it, the launching mechanism is all built here right in front of you as
you're looking at it. Well, we're looking at the rocket now and it does look
like a mini space rocket. And that's that's the weapon. That's the weapon. That
is the Enlaw missile. And what we've got beside it is the canister. And that's
just the housing and the aiming mechanism for the soldier. That's a khaki metal
object about three foot, four foot high. Yeah, about three foot in height. Let's
move down now if we're allowed to some of the men who are working on the
launchers. Hi guys. So what are you up to today? I'm doing external parts on one
of the final launch tubes. What's it like the idea of you're making something
here that could well see service in Ukraine? I really, really go all over. I
really enjoy it. It's crazy to think, you know what you're doing actually can
make a difference, you know, and really enjoy seeing on TV and all actually got
all proud of it, you know. Space. So we're heading into space. That's what
you're heading into space. Probably six or seven years ago, the entire way of
keeping a satellite in space and in a particular orbit or moving around orbits
changed. We used to use something called chemical thrusters and the substance
you use, the chemical, it was a very nasty chemical to use. So most big
companies moved away from that into what they called electric propulsion. So the
site that you have behind us now, which has people in masks and little hats and
very much in a clean room environment is where we make our electric propulsion
systems. And I'm writing thinking that the UK is very good at satellites. It's
an important part of our economy. Oh, absolutely. It's a huge growth area. And
we're at the heart of that in Belfast. This is the only site in the United
Kingdom that makes in space propulsion systems. As a very important employer
here in Northern Ireland, I also wanted to ask you about the political vacuum
that there's been here, the government's efforts to bring back power sharing,
the new Windsor framework, as we're learning to call it. Well, I think that the
overriding message from industry is that we want stability in Northern Ireland.
We want our political parties back in government. And that is the best way by
far to ensure that the economy grows in Northern Ireland and that we create
sustainable jobs. So we're all very welcoming of the fact that the agreement is
there. A couple of years ago, defence experts, people planning might have said,
look, there isn't going to be a demand for this kind of weapons anymore. Anti-
tank missiles seem very old fashioned, but that's really changed. Oh, it's
changed significantly. I think there was a period of time when ground-based air
defence, which was our mainstay, was definitely in the background, because
anywhere that the UK went to for conflicts, we had air supremacy. And if you've
air supremacy, you don't need to have ground-based air defence in the main. We
never thought we'd be fighting a war, let's be honest, in Europe again. So our
air defence weapons and our anti-drone weapons systems have really come into
their own. And the anti-tank, as you've already mentioned, and this is the first
time that they've all been used in anger. So again, we're very proud of the fact
that despite the fact no one wants a war, they have all done exactly as they
were designed to do. Of course you say nobody wants a war, exactly that, but
it's a strange thing for your business that things are better when there is a
war. Yeah, I think there's always a rush after a conflict like this to ensure
that you have a suitable amount of war stock. The beauty of the systems we have
always designed and put into service is that they're really deterrents. So if
you have a star-stripped weapons system, enemies know not to come too close
because we're going to shoot you down. So the deterrent is a good threat in its
own right. Philip O'Bride, many thanks indeed for talking to us. Thank you very
much indeed. It's now 14 minutes to nine. Figures out this week showed that the
number of people sleeping rough has risen for the first time since 2017. More
than 3,000 people were found sleeping outside on a single night. Now a far
larger number than that are designated homeless, and others may not be forced to
sleep on the streets, but they have no permanent home. The figures are highest
in and around the capital, London, but Manchester is one of the cities with the
biggest homelessness problem. The figures for its homelessness rate far worse
than the national average, increasing over the last five years, and they've got
far more claims than, say, Birmingham or Leeds or Sheffield. So let's talk to
the Mayor of Manchester, Andy Burnham, who's taken a series of initiatives to
try to tackle this problem, but it is something of a struggle it seems. Morning
to you, Mr Burnham. Is that the story, trying but not quite succeeding yet? To
be honest, Nick, I don't think it is quite the story, to be honest, because
overall, Greater Manchester recorded a 9% increase, way below the England
average of 26%, and much lower than some of the bigger cities. So no is the
answer. It's a different story from our point of view, because we run a scheme
called A Bed Every Night, which looks after around 600 people every night. If
you like, that was the everyone in policy of the pandemic, and we're still doing
it, and that explains why our figures are different. But it's very hard to do
it, particularly in a climate where decisions at a national level are putting
more people onto the streets. And that's where we are again now. We're in a
spike phase of the rough sleeping cycle. We're heading towards a crisis, and
it's just as though we never, ever learn the lessons about what's working and
apply them properly. Let's talk about the solutions rather than trading stats.
But so you know, I was quoting from a Shelter report there about homelessness in
the North West, about opening more claims than in Birmingham and Leeds and
Sheffield. Your initiative, as you say, has been to, as it were, continue what
happened in the pandemic, but at a local level, because the government were no
longer doing it. What other fundamental changes do you think are required? Well,
I agree with you. We have a huge number of people, as I said, in emergency
accommodation, a bed every night, but then many, many more families and children
in temporary accommodation. And there is a single big, biggest driver of that,
and it's the freeze in local housing allowance. So this is the component of
people's benefits that cover their rent. It's been frozen since 2020, Nick.
Rents have carried on rising because there's been no rent freeze. So the gap
between what people get to cover their rent and what their actual rent is, has
got bigger and bigger. You add in the pressures of the cost of living crisis,
you can see why rough sleeping has increased by 25% across England. But it
actually makes no sense, because it costs more for somebody to sleep rough than
it does to put them in a simple scheme like a bed every night. It's about
£20,000, the cost of public services, because people end up in chaotic use of
A&E, GP services, mental health services, police services. It doesn't make
sense. Whitehall is not learning the lessons of what works. And unless the
government uprates local housing benefit in the coming local housing allowance,
I should say, in the coming budget, we will definitely be trapped in the cycle
of going towards a rough sleeping crisis. And that means the government will
break its manifesto pledge of ending rough sleeping in this parliament. Now,
you're clear that spending is part of the answer to this. You'll also be clear
that probably for the first time since you left Westminster, people are
beginning to contemplate seriously the prospect of a Labour government. In the
conversations you're having with the likes of the Shadow Chancellor and the
leader of the opposition, do you think this will be prioritised as against, for
example, the health service or pay increases for teachers or people working on
the railways? Can you convince your own party to prioritise this? Well, I was
with them on Monday and it was really good, actually, to have a session where we
talked all of these things through in detail. And what I would say to them, and
I did say this, is take a completely different approach to the way we support
people out of crisis. Give them time to recover. That's the way we go with our
bed every night scheme, because a bed every night ends up being the same bed
every night. Give them a foundation from which they can recover. It's also what
we've learned through our housing first scheme. I think the Westminster
approach, Nick, is sometimes to use the benefit system to send messages to swing
voters, adopt punitive policies. In my view, they don't work because people
suffering from homelessness have often had a traumatic event in their lives.
They need time and support to recover. And the evidence from Greater Manchester
is that schemes like a bed every night, housing first work. If you lift people
out of the kind of tyranny of the benefits rules, they will recover and that
will in the end save the state significant amounts of money. There is a much
better way of doing these things. And I would actually ask all Westminster
parties, please, we're at the beginnings of another rough sleeping crisis here.
Break the cycle, uprate local housing allowance in the forthcoming budget, but
take all of the learning from Greater Manchester, West Midlands, Liverpool on
housing first and apply it as a permanent national policy, because we can
actually break this cycle. Mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, thanks
very much indeed for taking the time to join us this morning. It's now eight
minutes to nine. Around 40,000 people could be offered apps and other digital
tools to help them deal with anxiety and depression. That's come out in new
recommendations from NICE, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence. I've been speaking to Professor Dame Till Weix. She's head of the
School of Mental Health and Psychological Services at King's College London. I
asked her if you use one of these apps, would you still be talking to a real
person? No, you're not. You're talking to a sort of a computerised system which
has artificial intelligence in it often. And you go through a programme of
cognitive behaviour therapy in a similar way to some of the things you might do
with a therapist, but it's not exactly the same. Now, is this anything more than
a stopgap because we can't afford to send people directly for counselling? I
think that's one of the ways in which the therapies can be used, but actually,
they may do other things as well. For instance, they give patients a lot more
flexibility in where they can actually use the treatment and they get to choose
what time they want to take part in treatment. But it also may reduce the amount
of time that if you need further face-to-face therapy, it might actually reduce
the time it takes to actually engage in that. Or it might mean that you don't
need the therapy at all. We don't know yet exactly how well they'll work. Well,
that's an interesting question. Is there any scientific study yet being carried
out into whether these are more than a comfort blanket? And of course, a comfort
blanket in the middle of the night may have real value. I think there is
definitely evidence that they have a great potential to be working. And these
are potential promising therapies where there's already some evidence, but we
really need to collect more within the NHS. So, they're going to be used in the
NHS's talking therapy service, where there will be supervision of the progress
of the patient through the app. So, that we'll know how well they're doing,
whether there's a need for the therapist to contact the patient, you know,
whether they can do anything to encourage more engagement with the therapy. But
we really do need to know much more about how the therapy should be used so that
we can start to tailor who gets the therapy and maybe some people who go just
directly to face-to-face care. But they'll still have a choice about whether
they use it or not. It's not something that the NHS is going to say, you've got
to use this now. So, they'll still have a choice about which care. They either
wait a bit longer for the face-to-face care or they can go immediately and use
the digital therapies. Professor Dame Till Wykes, Head of the School of Mental
Health and Psychological Services at King's College, London. Thanks for joining
us. Thank you very much. Time now is five to nine. You may remember our BBC
colleague, Sean Dilley, coming on the programme to talk about his guide dog,
Sammy, who's retired. There's been a big shortage in volunteers to train up the
puppies. But following Sean's coverage of their last walk together for the BBC,
there's been a peak in the number of applications. And there's a new documentary
out on BBC iPlayer today, where we're joined first of all by Sean himself, but
also by Evie Niblock from Suffolk, who signed up to the programme after seeing
Sean's coverage. Morning to you both. And Sean, always lovely to talk to you
about Sammy. We remember him very well when you used to bring him into the
studio. He's with me now. He's with me now. See, I'm going to be brief, other
than because I think actually the lovely person you need to speak to is Evie,
other than to say, you're quite right, iPlayer, a brilliant documentary. I'm an
impartial observer on these things as a filmmaker in it with many colleagues,
but you're definitely going to go and watch that 18 minute film later, because
it's different to breakfast. Evie, however, is one of the many who has come in
and filled the gap for puppy raisers, meaning they're now pushing for different
volunteers to look after their dogs when they're in advanced training in the
evenings and weekends. So Evie, tell us from Woodbridge and in Suffolk, as I
said, what prompted you to come forward as a volunteer? So we watched Sean's
clip with Sammy, with Sammy's last walk, and it just really moved us. And we had
a sort of discussion about it. We sort of thought, realistically, would we be
able to take on any of the volunteer roles? And then we decided to take on the
puppy raiser role. So we signed up sort of that evening after watching Sean's
clip. And yeah, we should be getting a puppy the end of March, beginning of
April. And as you say, it's important to work out whether you really do have the
time for this, because it's a commitment. Yes, definitely. I mean, I'm a
university student, but I'm living from home. I'm only in twice a week. And then
my mum, who's also signed up with me, she works part time and from home. So
we've both got the time for it. And Sean, you must be so pleased that more
people are coming forward because it makes such a big difference, doesn't it,
getting those guide dogs trained? Yes, I was asked about this on the BBC
Breakfast show for a short time ago. I'm aware that I have a dog in the race, or
more to the point is, I mean, I guess I don't, right? But because I've got a two
year wait, but I know that's a dreadful pun. So it is a terrible pun. But like,
yeah, I'll leave the puns to one side. I think for me, the key point is, if you
ask any serious journalists why we go into this, this game, it's to make an
impact. And that stuff that I've done that's changed the law on various things
such as mental health, story reporting and stuff. I always used to get hit by a
bus analogy. I don't wish to. It's eminently possible with a white stick,
believe me. But if I did get hit by a bus tomorrow, my goodness, what an
achievement this is. And it genuinely is down to the collaboration of the
excellent BBC cross platform teams, people like BBC Sounds with the Five Minutes
on Podcasts originally. That's not just a blatant plug, but also the iPlayer
team. Because I think if you've seen any of our coverage, the reason you should
watch iPlayer, Britain's guide dog shortage, it goes into much more depth. We
hear more about what the roles are, and we really kind of just get under the
skin. But I just get under the skin. But I defy you. I defy you to get through
it without sniffling and needing a tissue at the end. Well, I cry very easily.
So that's not too hard a challenge for me. But tell us, I mean, I know there's
been a rise in applications, but there's still a need for more dogs, more
volunteers, aren't there? Yes. The very brief figure summary is, as we know,
5000 guide dogs roughly before the pandemic, 3695 now. More than one in five
people who had a guide dog before the pandemic now does not. So there's your
problem. In terms of puppy raisers, there are now 1100 puppies placed with
families like Evie and Jess. So that's going to make a difference, but it's
going to take two years for them to get through that system. What they now have
is a very nice problem for them, I imagine, as a charity is they've got all
these dogs that are being puppy raised and they're ready to go for advanced
training. And they're now saying they urgently need all over the country, people
who can look after them. They almost drop them off to offices each and every
day. It's literally, they say, like dropping them off at school. Now,
personally, I think that's an even bigger commitment, but that's what they say
they have the urgent need for. And final brief word from Evie, how much are you
looking forward to getting the puppy? I'm super excited, not only just for a
puppy, but just to try and help make a difference to someone like Sean's life.
That's why we signed up. So yeah, just really looking forward to it. Great to
hear. Well, best of luck when it arrives in April. Evie Knibb-Lough and, of
course, Sean Dilley. Yes, and the dog. First from all of us, our editors today,
Laura Cooper and Victoria Gardner. The studio director was Nathan Chow.