TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 For the Shamima Begum story, series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC
Sounds. BBC News at nine o'clock. A man and a woman have been charged after the
remains of a baby were found in a wooded area near Brighton. Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon are due to appear before Brighton magistrates tomorrow. Here's
our correspondent John Donison. The Crown Prosecution Service said Constance
Martin and Mark Gordon had been charged with gross negligence manslaughter,
concealing the birth of a child and perverting the course of justice. This
afternoon police said it was too early to say when the infant died but said it
may have been some time ago. They said it was not yet possible to determine the
sex of the baby. Ms Martin, who's 35, and Mr Gordon, who's 48, were arrested in
Brighton on Monday after being missing for several weeks. The families of some
of the 22 victims of the Manchester Arena bombing have described as devastating
the finding that the UK's security service MI5 missed a significant opportunity
to prevent the attack. The chair of the inquiry, Sir John Saunders, found that
intelligence could have led to the suicide bomber Salman Abedi being stopped in
the days before the attack on the Ariana Grande concert in 2017. Boris Johnson's
criticised Ritchie Soonak's new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. The former
Prime Minister said he'd find it very difficult to vote for the Windsor
framework as he believed it would act as a drag anchor on divergence from the
EU. The former deputy commissioner of the Metropolitan Police has been referred
to the police watchdog after allegations that he spoke of some rape complaints
as regretful sex. Sir Stephen Howe strongly denies making the comments. The
number of people confirmed to have died after the train crash in Greece earlier
this week has risen to 57. Rail workers across the country have held a one-day
strike, blaming government neglect of the network for the disaster.
Archaeologists in Egypt have described finding a hidden corridor in the Great
Pyramid of Giza as the most important discovery of the century. They say the
30-foot corridor was likely to have been built to relieve some of the weight of
the pyramid or for another yet as yet undiscovered chamber. BBC News. Megaliths
is the topic on this week's Innerratime as Melvin Bragg and guests discuss what
we know about ancient stones placed in the landscape. That's coming up at half
past nine. First, here on BBC Radio 4, time for BBC Inside Science with Victoria
Gill. Hello. This week we are once again trying to work out how the COVID-19
pandemic actually started. And critically, how can we unpick the scientific
evidence from the political blame game? And we're weighing in on an attempt to
measure the mass of all the wild mammals on planet Earth, as well as asking why
on earth scientists have done that. But first, COVID is in the headlines again.
Not one journalist worth their salt would sit on a cache of information in such
an important matter, such a historic matter. This is our plan. First and
foremost, from the start, we've focused on the need to control the spread of
infection in social care settings. Former Health Minister Matt Hancock has been
accused of ignoring scientific advice from Chief Medical Officer Chris Whitty to
test everyone entering a care home for COVID-19. We all saw how the tragedy of
COVID affected care home residents who were particularly vulnerable. Mr. Hancock
has denied the claims that came to light amid a leak to the Daily Telegraph of
thousands of WhatsApp messages. Now we're not going to get into the who said or
WhatsAppped what, but focus on what this whole saga shows us about the role in
government of scientific advisors. Can their expert input simply be ignored?
Well, someone who has been looking at that issue and what it can teach us about
the response to the pandemic is science writer Phil Ball, who is a co-author of
a scientific paper looking at this very issue. Phil, first of all, have you seen
these now infamous WhatsApp messages? A hundred thousand of them, apparently.
Yes, I've read them all. They're incredible. No, I mean, who knows what is going
to be amongst them? No, I mean, of course, no one apart from some folks at the
Telegraph have seen them all. So, you know, we've yet to see what they contain.
But I noticed you were tweeting about the wider theme of what this says about
scientific advice and the role of scientific advisors and particularly the kind
of conspicuous silence of Chris Whitty in response to this. So on that point,
what do you think this shows us about that role and how kind of open and
transparent scientific advice to the government can be? Well, this to me is a
big part of the issue, certainly in terms of that initial debate about what
Chris Whitty advised Matt Hancock about testing in care homes and what Matt
Hancock then did. It seemed that that immediately was the thing that jumped out
about that. And we've heard nothing about that. You know, in all this debate,
the people we've heard nothing from so far in the media are the scientific
advisors like Whitty. And that to me speaks volumes. My interpretation of that
is that Chris Whitty and, you know, presumably Patrick Valance and the other
scientific advisors are taking the view that because they in particular are
civil servants, their responsibility has been to provide objective advice to the
government and to support the government. And so it's not for them to sort of
leap into the fray and start saying, well, I said this and you didn't do that.
And I think that's quite proper. The point seems to come down to the Telegraph
is suggesting that Matt Hancock disregarded Whitty's advice on testing in care
homes for some reasons, perhaps to do with politically motivated agenda. Hancock
has responded by saying, no, I made the decision that I did because I was told
in another meeting that there was insufficient testing capacity. Now, presumably
Chris Whitty knows the answer to that. And if he is taking the view that it's
not proper in his position to intervene, I fully understand that. But I think
one of the key considerations here has to be the right, the absolute right of
the very many people who lost loved ones and relatives in care homes because of
this situation. They have a right to know why the decisions that were made were
made, what was the basis for them. And so it seems to me a situation where we do
need to hear from the scientists what the situation was. There doesn't have to
be any judgment about the I mean, the politicians like Matt Hancock, of course,
have the right to disregard scientific advice, if that's what happened. And if
they have some reason to think that it's only one part of the equation. But if
that's so, we need to know why that was. And we need to know what the scientific
advice was. You know, is it the case that there was a shortcoming in testing?
And if so, then the question falls on that. Why was there this shortcoming? Why
wasn't there greater preparation earlier on when we saw what was coming? These
are things that the scientific advisors would be able to help with. And it seems
to me entirely proper, and in fact, important and necessary to have that input.
And if we have a situation where the scientific advisory system to government
that we have prevents them from clarifying in that way, then there is a problem
with that system that needs to be discussed. How do you think that the
relationship of scientific advisors to leaders and to the public can be
helpfully amended so that we do this better? I think it needs to be made more
explicit that transparency is crucial, that the scientific advisors have the
right and perhaps the duty to sometimes address the public directly, not to
contradict what ministers are doing, but simply to lay out the scientific advice
to them directly. But also that it needs to be made more clear for the advisors
themselves what their latitude and what their responsibilities are. I think part
of the problem here is that it seems it's been left to Chris Witty and Patrick
Vallance and others to try to figure out what they can and can't say. And I
think that puts them in an invidious position that perhaps has left them erring
on the side of caution. If it were made explicit what they can and can't say,
they wouldn't have to be wrestling with those decisions. Now, the question of
how this whole terrible pandemic started, where the virus that causes Covid-19
came from, is back in the headlines again too. Because the director of the FBI,
Christopher Wray, told Fox News this week that the origins of the pandemic are
most likely a potential lab incident. But the FBI has not published any evidence
they've seen that backs up this new conclusion. So we seem to have another
political firestorm that doesn't actually tell us anything else about the origin
of the virus itself. So we want to unpick what the science does tell us. Let's
have a quick look at what we do know. The lab leak or lab incident theory that
the FBI director was referring to centres on the Wuhan Institute of Virology, a
research centre that studies viruses in the Chinese city where the first human
cases of Covid-19 were detected. Jane Kui is the only science journalist to have
been inside the institute in recent years. She visited several times and even
went on a bat virus sampling mission with the scientists there. Jane is a former
microbiologist herself and as she told us last year, she was rather unimpressed
with the lab. It's quite ordinary. It's just the same as any molecular biology
labs everywhere. They have collected over 20,000 samples from bats in the past
18 years. I didn't really realise actually how difficult it is to get live
coronaviruses out of bats. After 18 years of really hard work, the team managed
to isolate only three coronaviruses. There are lots of misreportings about those
20,000 bat samples. I read articles saying that they have 20,000 bat viruses.
20,000, that is truly scary. I would really worry about if they're working on
20,000 viruses or even 2,000 viruses, how can they know that none of the 20,000
viruses are responsible for the pandemic? But they actually only have three
virus isolate and also they have created another three viruses based on the
genomic sequences, use synthetic biology. So they have six live viruses, all
close relatives of the SARS virus, the original SARS virus. Jane Kui there. And
to clarify, those virus samples she's talking about were related to the first
SARS virus outbreak, the virus that spread in 2002 and 2003, not the SARS-CoV-2
virus that caused the pandemic. So what conclusions have scientists reached
about how the virus that causes COVID-19 found its way into humans? We called on
virologist Marion Koopmans, who's one of the members of the World Health
Organization team that first visited China to investigate the origin of the
pandemic. While that mission was heavily criticized for not having enough access
or independence from Chinese handlers, they did manage to produce an
epidemiological map showing how and from where the virus first spread in the
city of Wuhan. First, though, what did she think about the FBI chief's
pronouncement on the lab leak theory? Well, I tried to find if there was any new
information and I couldn't find that. So when I yeah, when that was clear, I I
must say that was a deep sigh, because, of course, we've heard this before. It
is important. It does remain an important question. What exactly happened? How
did this pandemic start? But I think having these statements, which is not the
first time, but without providing evidence that is that people can look at, that
scientists can look at, that WHO can look at, I think it's increasingly
difficult to know what to think of it. What do we know now, like in terms of the
clues, the biological clues that we have about where the first human case came
from, how this all started? What more do we know? So an important new finding
was a publication that came out somewhere in June or July after our visit that
had surveyed what types of animals could be found on markets in Wuhan. And they
documented up until end of November 2019 that they had seen a range of wild
animals and farmed wild animals. So wild caught wild animals and farmed wild
animals. And that included several species that we know are susceptible to the
virus. So that was a new finding. We actually have a clip of Eddie Holmes, one
of the scientists that led the study into where the samples, the positive
samples were clustering. My colleague Roland Pease spoke to Eddie Holmes about
that study when it was published. So what happened was in early January 2020,
once the outbreak started, they closed it down. And the health officials went in
and they swabbed surfaces. They swabbed drains and door handles and tables and
cages, it turned out, and things like feather-removal machines for birds,
poultry. They swabbed all these and they tested them for the virus, for SARS-
CoV-2. What we then managed to get a hold of was then a map of where those
positive hits for the virus were in the market. So then we basically plot them
on to each store. And what we see, the cases are very strongly associated with
the west side of the market, very strongly concentrated to the southwestern
corner of the market. That's of huge significance because that's where the
wildlife were. And in fact, when I went to that market in 2014, I took
photographs of some of the animals there. And I took particularly raccoon dogs
because I knew that raccoon dogs were implicated in the emergence of SARS-1 back
in 2002, 2003. I took those exactly in the southwestern corner of the market.
And that's where most of these positive samples were actually found. Was that
where the China CDC were doing most of their swabbing? In other words, are you
just seeing where the swabs were taken? Lots of our statistical analyses try to
account for these sampling biases. There are sampling biases in there. But I
think we managed to account for that. So I think there really is a hot spot in
that southwestern corner. The main thing, I think most of all, is that there was
one store that they got five positive swabs from. One of them was inside a cage,
a metal cage. Lo and behold, that was exactly the store that I photographed the
raccoon dog in 2014, the very same one. The missing pieces of that puzzle, a bat
testing positive for a virus that matches exactly or another intermediate
species that might have been in that market. We've not got that exact match,
that missing link. Do you think those pieces of the puzzle could be filled in?
Will we ever get to the answer of what was the origin of this outbreak? If the
closest virus is indeed from bats, I think that's still possible, that we would
eventually find the right bat cave where that original virus came from. Question
is, where would you look? And in our initial recommendations, we had said the
best way of going forward would be to backtrack all the trade routes from the
animals that were introduced on the markets and go to the places where they were
farmed or caught and start your sampling there. As scientists, it's not a case
of wanting to kind of shut down different hypotheses, but we've seen the lab
leak theory is the thing that's in the headlines again, being directly pointed
to by a very powerful figure in the United States, the director of the FBI. What
evidence is there of a lab leak? I mean, it's still a hypothesis that's on the
table while we don't know how this started, isn't it? It is. And it is also very
difficult to prove a negative, right? So and that's why I must honestly say I'm
a little bit annoyed if they keep saying this without sharing the evidence with
an organization that can actually follow up with it. It doesn't have to be open
or public, but there's ways of sharing information confidentially with the WHO
and then they can compare the information and say, hmm, there's something to it
or not. I really think that's the process that needs to happen because if not,
this discussion is just not going anywhere. With all of the evidence that you've
seen and everything that we've learned over the last three years, what do you
think happened in late 2019 at the start of this outbreak? What do you think is
the most likely scenario? To me, the most likely still is that an uninfected
animal somehow entered the market chain. That was not in the month of December,
that was before that because the virus circulation started earlier. So it was in
the period when wild animals were documented on the market. So my best guess
would be one of those farmed wild animals, maybe with a temporary outbreak. We
know that, for instance, on mink farms that have been infected in Europe, we see
the virus burn through. So after a while, you don't find the virus anymore. So
that could have happened on, let's say, a raccoon farm. Somewhere in China. Do
you think we'll ever answer the question categorically, you know, how did this
start? So there has been additional bat screening work and there's been
interesting findings from bats outside of China in Southeast Asia that also were
quite closely related and also had the capacity to directly bind to human cells.
So that's been found. I think the most likely piece of the puzzle would be that
even closer viruses are found in bat surveys at some point in time. That really,
if you put them into a phylogenetic analysis together with all the viruses that
we know, that that really would be the closest ancestor. And that not with a big
time window in between. That's, I think, still possible. So if you look at all
the different animal species that could be involved and then look at what
samples of which animals have been tested, that clearly is not enough to rule
out an infection route of a farmed wild animal species. So that's still
possible. I think by now I'm more thinking of that it's been a temporary pass
through some kind of intermediate host. And the reason why I'm saying that is if
it was still circulating, let's say, in raccoon farms, raccoon dog farms, I
would think we would have seen new sparks, new introductions into people from
that. So we would have seen a lot of new outbreaks in China during its lockdown
and its closed borders with viruses that very much like the original strain in
Wuhan. And we haven't seen that. Marion Koopmans from Erasmus University in
Rotterdam there. And we also heard from Eddie Holmes from the University of
Sydney. But now for a lighter topic, helium. What is here, it's about 100 tonnes
of equipment. We've seen the vertical part, the heat exchangers, in the
horizontal part, the expansion turbines. So basically, this is a very big
fridge. It is exactly a very big fridge. Yes. Costing as well some money. Yes.
And how much helium do you look after here? In total for the LHC, we will have a
bit more than 120 tonnes of helium, about 10% of the European market per year.
So would that fill a swimming pool? I mean, not that you necessarily want to,
but is it that sort of amount? In liquid form, I've got to think a bit. OK. So
we have 400,000 litres. OK. And we have about 20,000 litres of helium. So we
have 400,000 litres of liquid helium. If the swimming pool is 10 by 20, by an
average of two metres, that's 400 cubic metres. So it's 1,000 of reasonable size
swimming pool. OK. 1,000 swimming pools. Yes. That, to put it scientifically, is
a lot of helium. And scientists at the University of Oxford say they've
uncovered a new way to help pinpoint hidden helium gas fields and avert what
they've called a global supply crisis. Because helium is in relatively short
supply, and it's extremely useful, as earth scientist Dr Anran Chang told me.
Helium is actually called inert gas, it's part of the noble gases. And in
Chinese, we actually call them lazy gas. So all those names are actually
describing the same properties that they do not involve in chemical reactions,
so they are a perfect choice for filling gas. And also, they are very small in
their size. So they are the second on the periodic table. They're perfect to
penetrate through tiny leaks, tiny areas. Therefore, they're perfect for leak
checking. And most importantly, they have the lowest boiling point that we know
so far, which is 4 Kelvin. That is minus 269 degrees C. That means we can
actually manipulate helium to achieve that temperature relatively quite easily
with the current technology. And because of all these properties, they are
widely used in a range of applications, but behind the scene. So for example,
medical applications like MRI. They're also used in industrial production of
fiber optics and semiconductor. And also, very important, scientific researches
of superconductors and the very famous Large Hadron Collider. And also, some
rocket engines uses helium to fuel the empty space left by fuel combustions to
control the pressure. In that medical setting, in MRI, in that manufacturing
setting, what is it about those properties? How is helium put to use? Why does
it need to be helium? MRI, in particular, it is using this low temperature that
it can achieve. So the temperature, the cooling ability of helium is actually
widely used. Right. So it's much more than balloons. But we are facing something
of a crisis of supply. What's happening in the world at the moment that has
caused that? So helium is actually all fund by accident. So during the drilling
of hydrocarbons like gas and oil, when there is successful drilling of oil and
gas system, then people would probably just test what it is in there as well and
find that there is enough helium to actually generate economically favorable
byproducts. And then helium is produced. But that had been enough to supply the
market in the past. But currently, as you can imagine, the global development
just increased the demand of helium quite a lot. So our lab, who is actually
trying to find helium, we received a letter before Christmas stating that as a
non-crucial user, we are restricted with our helium supply and we're still
restricted at the moment. So our lab manager is very cautious. We check our
helium tank every day to make sure that there's no people in the lab secretly
filling a birthday balloon or something. Tempting. Essentially, you want to,
you're figuring out where to find it on purpose. What are you looking for? What
provides those clues about where these sort of reservoirs of helium could be? In
our model, we have helium and nitrogen. The associated nitrogen produced both
from this crystalline basement. So the crystalline basement is a dense rock from
mantle to the near surface. And they are millions or billions years old and
likely to be more than that. 30 to 40 kilometers thick. They're basically a good
kitchen and a storage room for helium and nitrogen. And then they're both
produced and they are then dissolved in the water in this tiny pores between the
crystals. And they will slowly migrate up to the sediments that lay over the
basement. It's like layered cakes. So there are sponge cakes, which you can
imagine they have like bigger pore spaces and helium and nitrogen just can
travel through this basement. Can travel through this quite easily. And there
might be things like brownie cake layers. And then this helium and nitrogen just
takes a little while to transport through. And then there's the solid icing
units, which is just very hard. And they pretty much just slow down the helium
and nitrogen transport significantly. So to find the helium reservoir, we need
to have a right combination of these different layers, their deposition time.
And if that is right, we might accumulate a large amount of helium and nitrogen
in the deepest unit or units. And Ran Chang there. And finally, we want to end
today's program with a scientific countdown, because we can reveal to you the
world's top five wild mammals in terms of their collective mass. That's right.
Scientists have measured the collective weight of Earth's wild mammals. So here
it is, the top five. In at number five, weighing in at a collective 500,000
tons, it's mule deer. Just in front at number four at 600,000 tons, it's eastern
gray kangaroos. With just half a million individuals weighing in at an
extraordinary 1.3 million tons. At number three, it's the African savannah
elephant. At number two, it's wild boar, 1.9 million tons. But outweighing all
those at number one, it is not even close. With a total mass of 2.7 million
tons, it's white-tailed deer. Sorry, as a science journalist, I do have to live
my countdown DJing dream where I can. And the other enthusiastic voice you heard
there announcing the number one heaviest wild mammal species was Ron Milo from
the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel. He is a quantitative biologist, and
I spoke to him and his colleague, Lior Greenspoon, who led this study. So all
the wild land mammals combined, all the elephants and all the deer, all the
giraffes, all the rodents and bats, all together sum up to about 20 megatons, 20
million tons, whereas the domesticated are at 600 million tons. So that means 30
times more. If you look, for example, at cows, you know, they far outweigh all
of the other wild animals by far. And Lior, what surprised you? What numbers
really jumped out at you when you did this study? I think if you would have
asked me before approaching the study, I probably would have guessed the top
five were to be elephants, giraffes, maybe tigers, other things I know from
children's books that I read growing up. Definitely not something along the
lines of a few deer species. A few deer species. So the most surprising thing to
me were how much of an impact we also have on wild mammals. And most of the ones
that contribute most to the total biomass of wild land mammals are ones that
kind of enjoy our presence. We also hunt them sometimes, but they also go into
our backyards and eat some of our leftovers and eat some of the stuff we put in
our bins. And I found that very surprising. The fact that humans became so
abundant and dominant on Earth means that the type of mammals that enjoy our
presence, for example, coming and eating from our backyard, are also the ones
that are now number one in the chart of wild mammals. And this is now a
different type of wild. This is a wild that's really in a strong relationship
with humans. Presumably, in terms of biomass of mammals on Earth, we're probably
number one by a long stretch. Is that right? Do we know how much we outweigh the
biomass of wild mammals, humans? We weigh about 400 megatons in comparison to
the 20 megatons of all wild land mammals. So we outweigh all of the other wild
land mammals by about 20 fold. Ron Milo and Lior Greenspoon there, taking a new
measure of life on our planet. And that's all we have time for this week. BBC
Inside Science is produced in collaboration with the Open University and we'll
be counting down the days, all seven of them, until we're back with you,
weighing up more of the science that's shaping our view of the world. BBC Inside
Science is presented by Victoria Gill. It was produced by Julian Siddle. In our
time, discusses ancient stone monuments. That's coming up shortly. And at 10
o'clock, we'll have The World Tonight. Let's say good evening to James
Kamarasamy. And good evening to you, Neil. Good evening to you, Neil. The public
inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing has concluded the attack might have
been prevented if MI5 had acted sooner and communicated better. We get response
from a lawyer for one of the victims' families and from a former chair of the
UK's Joint Intelligence Committee. Also, why are Iranian schoolgirls getting
poisoned? A leading Nigerian novelist on her country's presidential election.
Steve Mackey, the bass player with the Sheffield band Pulp, has died. We'll have
a tribute and we'll speak to a cream tea completist, a woman who's sampled
scones at every National Trust property that serves them. All right, many
thanks. Now, here's Melvin Bragg with Innerrotime. Hello. In many parts of the
world, it's possible to see huge stones that have been placed in the landscape.
Often, they're visually striking and highly prominent. They're called megaliths,
and such stone monuments in Britain and Ireland, mostly date from the Neolithic
period. The oldest ones are up to 6,000 years old. In recent decades, scientific
advances have enabled archaeologists to learn large amounts about megalithic
structures and the people who built them. But much about these stones remains
unknown and mysterious. With me to discuss megaliths are Vicki Cummings,
Professor of Neolithic Archaeology at the University of Central Lancashire,
Julian Thomas, Professor of Archaeology at the University of Manchester, and
Susan Greeney, Lecturer in Archaeology at the University of Exeter. Susan
Greeney, how do we define what a megalith is? Well, the word megalith is formed
of two parts from the ancient Greek, mega, huge, and lith, from lithos, stone.
So they're just large stones. And the term gets applied to a whole range of
different monuments, mostly in Europe, dating from prehistory. But anything,
really, that's been built out of very, very large stones can be termed a
megalith. When you say mostly in Europe, are you implying that they're all
around the world? That's right. They're found in many different parts of the
world. And although they're prehistoric, generally in Europe, across the world,
in fact, in some places, they're still being built today. Can you briefly give
us an idea of the different stone monuments there are? In Britain, there are a
number of different types of monument that get built, which we call megaliths.
There are enclosed tombs, chambers of various types, passage tombs, long barrows
with large stone chambers. And we also get enclosures of different sizes and
shapes, so sort of freestanding stones, stone circles, standing stones just by
themselves, or in rows, sometimes in avenues, and a whole range of different
types. A lot of them seem to be burial monuments, but many of them are not
related to funerary activity. When did they start discovering them and deciding
that they were worth looking at, instead of being the great lumps of stone
lying, being covered with moss? The first records we have are really medieval,
particularly Stonehenge. It's Stonehenge that gets written about the earliest,
really. There are medieval manuscripts with images of Stonehenge, for example.
It's not really until the 17th century, 16th century, that people start to then
discover and write about other megalithic monuments. Avebury, for example, isn't
really known about until it gets rediscovered by John Albury when he's on a
hunting trip. Many of the studies really flourish in the Victorian period and
later, when people suddenly start to get interested in who built these monuments
and when, and start to ask the kind of questions that we're still trying to
answer now. Thank you. Julian and Julian Thomas, can you give us some idea of
the age of these monuments? They're of very different ages. So in Europe,
probably the earliest that we've got date back to about 4,700 BC in the west of
France, where you start to get the coming together of a whole series of ideas
about burial and stone to create what eventually emerge as characteristic
monuments like passage tombs. In Britain, 3,900 perhaps, shortly after the
beginning of the Neolithic, but in other places, very, very different. So in the
Caucasus, many of the tombs are around about 3,000 BC. In some places, they're
still building them today. So places like Madagascar and Indonesia. So can we go
back to the Neolithic? Can you give us some idea of what's going on in that
period? More importantly, well, as importantly, why it's going on in that
period? It's really quite important to recognise that it's not just a matter of
megaliths starting at a particular date and then continuing. They tend to very
often occur in waves of particular groups of monuments. And rather than just
being an attribute of a particular kind of people, I think they're likely to be
built preferentially at times when there's some kind of stress or dislocation or
enhanced competition going on. So at the beginning of the Neolithic, that's
certainly a period when there's a lot of population movement. What date would
you give us? Around about 4,000 BC in this country. So 6,000 years ago. Yeah, so
6,000 years ago. Shortly after that, we start to see lots of these monuments
starting to be created. Thank you. Vicki, where are they mostly set in Britain
and Ireland? And what does that tell you? So the vast majority of early
Neolithic chambered tombs are found in the west and the north of Britain, and
they're found right the way across Ireland. So they're built very commonly, and
there are many, many thousand monuments across Ireland. Why is that? It just
seems to be something that really articulated and meant a lot for those people.
Whatever was going on in those particular communities, whatever building a
monument meant to those people, they needed to do it again and again and across
the landscape. But it's much more sporadic throughout Britain. So there are
large areas of Britain where there are no megalithic monuments, even where there
is stone available for people to actually construct them. The variety was
briefly alluded to earlier in the program. Can you give listeners some idea of
the variety of different monuments which would come in the capacity of
megaliths? Yes. So in the early Neolithic, we've got a whole variety of
different types of chambered tomb. A chambered tomb is a monument that's built
out of stone, and there is a chamber area that's created out of upright stones
with a stone on top to create a sealed chamber, and then that's encased within
either stone or earth. So the chamber itself would be encased or enclosed within
a mound or a cairn. One of the types of chambered tomb that we get, particularly
in the Middle Neolithic, is something that we call a passage tomb or a passage
grave. And there's smaller numbers of these, but where they are constructed,
they're often absolutely spectacular, really, really large chambers. So you
could fit many tens of people, if not hundreds of people, within the chamber.
The reason they're called passage graves is that they have a long, thin passage
which runs from the chamber to the outside of the monument, and once again
they're encased within a large mound or cairn. Can you tell people what a dolmen
is? Well, a dolmen is a particular type of chambered tomb, and they are classed
as chambered tombs, but they are one of these that often don't actually have any
burials within them. And the distinctive thing about them is that they are a
chamber constructed out of stones, but they have an absolutely massive capstone
on the top, which is much larger than is actually needed to encase the chamber.
And the largest example is at a site called Brown's Hill in County Carlo, and
the capstone is 160 tons, so it's absolutely enormous. So it's something of a
little bit of a different type of megalith. I think we could pause here for a
second and say, how did they manage to, they built on the whole a place where
rock was available, but they tilted the cartage from A to B, or sometimes A to
Z. How did they do that? In the case of dolmens, it seems that they were
actually using glacial erratics, so stones that were already deposited in the
landscape after the last ice age, and all they're essentially doing is digging
around that stone and elevating it in situ. Once they're built, do you have any
information about how often they were used, how they were used, how they figured
in the landscape of people's daily life, for instance? There are some examples
where there are burials within them. The vast majority of dolmens are found in
Western Britain and in Ireland, and unfortunately in those places, for the most
part, there's very poor bone preservation because the soil is acidic. But there
is an example over in the west of Ireland, Paul Nabrone in County Clare, which
was built on top of limestone paving, and there was excellent bone preservation,
and in actual fact, they buried really quite a large number of people into the
monument. What do you know of the burial practices of the time? In chambered
tombs and long barrows, people were depositing the dead in a variety of
different ways, sometimes cremations, sometimes inhumations, and particularly
with long barrows, it wasn't just that somebody got buried and then was never
moved again. These were places where bones were circulating. People were
entering these tombs and adding new burials and moving older burials around.
Sometimes people were stacking up long bones and skulls in particular parts of
the chambers and sometimes arranging the burials by the age of the person or by
their gender. So it's a variety of things, and we can't think of these as being
kind of places where people lay undisturbed after they were deposited, but these
were places that people returned to time and time again to interact with the
bones, sometimes to remove them from the tombs altogether, sometimes to add new
burials. And so these are places where the dead were very much part of living
rituals and part of activities and ceremonies that were taking place. Was there
any sense that they were preparing them for the next life, as in Egyptian tombs,
for instance? There isn't a huge amount of evidence for grave goods in the early
Neolithic. We do get the odd things, some small stone beads, that kind of thing,
but they seem to be perhaps more personal items rather than being equipped to go
to the next world. That does change. In the later Neolithic, we get some
cremations that have got very fine objects with them, for example polished stone
mace heads, so sort of perforated stone items that seem to have been symbols of
status. For example, one of the cremations at Stonehenge is accompanied by one
of these mace heads. But it's fairly rare that we get people buried with food
and equipment and costume that we'd think that that would have meant an
afterlife. I mean, I think it's really important to point out that the vast
majority of people in the Neolithic weren't buried at all in any of these
monuments. So I think for the vast majority of people, they're probably being
buried perhaps in rivers, perhaps they're being deposited in different places.
So it does seem to be that only special people or particular sets of communities
were being picked out for burial in places like chambered tombs. Thank you,
Susan. Can you give us some examples of the connection between farmers and the
Megaliths? And these are on farming land, I presume. So what's going on there?
Yes, there's traditionally been a very strong connection between Megalithic
monuments and the arrival of farming. In fact, the 4000 BC date that we've been
talking about at the beginning of the Neolithic is when people come to Britain
with the first domestic crops and with the first domestic animals. Come from
where? Come from continental Europe, both the Iberian coast, Atlantic coast, and
also from the low countries in France. And these people bring with them
traditions of building monuments, which are then adapted and changed, but in
effect implemented in Britain. And it's long been thought that people to build
monuments have to be farmers, they have to have had enough time and surplus food
in order to supply the workers or to provide material for the feasts and things
that went with these monuments. And that's been a kind of long held idea. But
actually, we now know of a number of sites across the world where people are
building relatively large monuments, megalithic monuments, in some cases, who
are not farmers. They are hunter-gatherers, they are procuring their food by
gathering wild resources. And so we have some sites, for example, in Jomon,
Japan. So talking about kind of the Neolithic period, but in Japan, the Jomon
period, and also a site in modern day Turkey called Göbekli Tepe, where they are
just about on the cusp of developing farming, developing the first, using the
first domestic crops, but they are also hunting. But they're building
spectacular temples and stone, sanding stones. There's not a hard and fast link
between farming and the building of megaliths. So getting to the matter, as it
were, Julian, why, what are these people building these megaliths for? What do
they intend them to do? A whole range of different things, because... Well,
there we go. These are... So these are societies that clearly don't have the
state. They don't have the same kinds of institutions that we have to maintain
social order from one generation to the next. They don't probably have fully
instituted elites. There's probably a certain amount of jockeying for position
within these societies. So on the one hand, it's a way of increasing your
profile within society to be the person who's responsible for setting up or
inspiring... You build the monuments. Absolutely. Or you organize the people to
build the monument. So there's all sorts of social activity focused on these
monuments and the building of the monuments. But also, we've said that these are
early agricultural societies. They're probably at very low population densities.
And so bringing together dispersed populations at fixed places, I think, is also
very important. Having a place where you know other people are going to be at
particular times of year, being able to exchange gifts, to acquire marriage
partners, to acquire information. All of this is tremendously important. So on
the one hand, there's the aspect of increasing prestige and status. But on the
other hand, there's social integration. Does religion, any sort of religion,
play any sort of part in this? I'm sure it does. What is it? But I think we need
to think rather differently about religion because, again, we're used to the
great world religions, the religions of the book, the religions that have
written scripture and that have a liturgy. It's very unlikely that we have any
of that going on. It's far more likely that religion is quite fluid and varies
from one group to another. But because it's traditional or oral religion rather
than written religion, I think it's very likely that you don't have a kind of
presiding deity. It's very likely that you don't have an idea of different
realms like heaven or hell or an underworld. Instead, I think that it's likely
that spirits, deities, ancestors are understood as being imminent in the
landscape and that when people are actually constructing these monuments and
reorganising the landscape, it's as if they're engineering the cosmology at the
same time. Do they pray? I really don't know the answer to that. I would think
it's extremely likely that when you look at the way in which passage tombs, for
instance, are organised and the way that they seem to resonate with sound, that
they're certainly chanting. Being inside these monuments is going to be quite an
experience. Remember, there is very little in the way of architecture like these
monuments that people would have experienced before. And particularly with a
passage grave, you're entering into a dark space that's covered over. You crawl
down a low passage or crouch and then you open out into a big open area where
you're encountering the remains of the dead. All of this, I think, is going to
be an almost overwhelming experience for people. Vicki, did you want to come in?
It's important to remember that we're talking about megaliths being built over
about 1,500 years or so. And of course, beliefs will have changed in that
period. And we know that people are, for example, treating their dead in very,
very different ways at the beginning of the Neolithic to how they are at the end
of the Neolithic. And they're building different types of monuments. They're
building less enclosed spaces and more open stone circles and things like this.
So we can only assume that the religious beliefs changed. And for us as
archaeologists, it's very difficult to get inside the minds of people who lived
in that period. But we can only go on the evidence that we have. And for
example, tombs, at least we can at least infer that they were being used for
funerary purposes and other things. But later on, with stone circles and things,
excavations often don't find any artefacts at all. And these places seem to be
kept quite clean, quite separate from everyday life, perhaps sort of sacred
ritual spaces. So we can really only use our imaginations about what was
happening within those spaces. Yeah, thank you very much. Stone circles seem to
have appeared rather late in this chronology. When was that and why was it late?
So stone circles appeared for the first time in the British Isles around about
3,200 BC. That seems to be about the earliest occurrence of them. And that was
in Orkney. Why did it start in Orkney? That is one of the big questions. And I
think there's something very special going on in Orkney. There seems to be a
coming together of really quite a sort of a vibrant and lively Neolithic
culture. A whole series of different things are occurring in Orkney around about
that time. And it seems to be... Such as? So they have the very first appearance
of grooved ware pottery, which is a distinctive type of pottery that's flat
based. You've got people living in large conglomerated settlements for the first
time. So the most famous example is Skara Brae. And people seem to be also
constructing stone circles. We think that perhaps they're taking the outside of
a passage grave, which in Ireland was marked by a series of standing stones
around the outside, and they're removing the bit in the middle and just building
the circle on its own. Susan, back to you. Is there any particular reason why
people... why they move to stone circles? That's a really good question. I'm not
sure we know why they move. There's a shift to circular monuments that happens
around about that 3,200-3,000 BC date. We get stone circles, the earliest stone
circles, as Vicky's been describing, in Orkney and also in places like Cumbria.
Castle Rigg, that for instance. Exactly. Castle Rigg and another one which you
may know, Long Megan, her daughters, which seems to be a particularly early
example of a large stone circle. And probably the connection to Ireland is where
we kind of have to look for the origins of these circular passage tombs. The
largest ones are places like Newgrange, where you have enormous, great big
circular mounds surrounded by large kerb stones, and in fact itself surrounded
by a stone circle. So perhaps we have to look to Ireland for the ideas coming
across to other parts of Britain. But circular monuments were a fashion, really
became the favoured shape for monuments. Julian. That point about circular
structures is really important because at the same time you're seeing a change
towards circular houses, which seem to have their origin alongside a whole
series of other things up in Orkney, and as well as stone circles we're getting
timber circles, including concentric series of timber circles nested inside each
other. And I think all of these new forms of monumentality that are coming in
when you come to the start of the third millennium are in some way related to
houses, and you're getting a whole suite of structures from the very small to
the very large, and this is, I suggest, about the way in which you're
engineering newer and larger societies. So as you move towards the end of the
Neolithic, I think that you're finding new frameworks for mobilising larger and
larger groups of population in order to construct these huge structures like
Stonehenge, like Silbury Hill, like Avebury. Vicki, can you talk about the
scientific techniques which have come into archaeology to date the Megaliths? So
we're able to date Megaliths through radiocarbon dating, so we would need
something organic in order to get a radiocarbon date, so human bone would be
ideal or anything short-lived, and that's able to give us a date range for when
something was deposited there. So we're able to date often use of chambered
tombs, for example, through radiocarbon dating human remains. And that has led
to what? It gives us a precise chronology and an understanding. We've talked
throughout this about how actually it's quite a complex series of monuments
being built at different times in different places by different people, and if
we can pinpoint the exact dates we can start to create more nuanced narratives
about the arrival and spread of the Neolithic and people doing particular
practices like building Megaliths. Susan, do you have any idea of what people at
the time thought of what they were doing and why? One of the really interesting
things about the radiocarbon dating recently is that we've been able to get much
more precise dates, and for example for some of the long barrows, so some of the
chambered tombs, we know that they're being used for burial, and it used to be
thought that these were places that were open for centuries and people would
inter a few people every generation perhaps. The radiocarbon dating has shown us
that actually that's not the case, and these things are being used in certain
places at least, so for example in the Cotswolds, for a very short period of
time right at the very start of when they were constructed, and then they're not
used for burial after that. West Kennet Long Barrow for example, which is a very
famous tomb just near Avebury, was used then for many hundreds of years, people
depositing all kinds of things in there, some burials but also pottery and a
variety of different types of earth and materials until it was full, and that
took place over the next 1,000 years or so. So these are burial monuments at the
outset, but they don't necessarily continue as such throughout the history of
their youth. Do you want to go on Julia? I think the other point that follows on
from what you've just been saying is that these people who are being buried are
not, as you say, people who are being introduced over a continuous period of
time, and I think that very often we could see these people as founders, as the
people who established communities in particular areas. So we shouldn't see
these as the equivalents of country churchyards in which people are going to be
continuously buried for ever and ever. It's about the coming into being of
something new, and I think what we're seeing particularly in that period at the
start of the Neolithic is the way in which an entire way of life is being
established. I suppose what's fidgeting away at the back of what I can lovingly
call my mind is the idea of worship, the idea of the sun coming up at a certain
time and going down at a certain time, and these circles particularly having
some connection with that. Am I up a gum tree or what? There are some stone
circles that are very precisely aligned with the sun and also in the early
Bronze Age in Scotland, particularly with, we think, potentially the moon, and
that must mean that the sun and the changing seasons and the solstices in
particular, solstices and equinoxes to a certain extent, were important times of
the year, particularly in the late Neolithic when we have a large amount of
monuments that are being built with either precise alignments like Newgrange or
like Stonehenge, or with more general alignments in that they're orientating
them to certain principal kind of directions. Whether it's a deity, whether it's
something that's worshipped, whether it's something that it's just important to
align your monument with the principles of the cosmos and with your wider set of
beliefs, we don't know. In the past people have wanted to imagine that it's
almost a scientific inquiry into the movements of the heavenly bodies that
people in the past were interested in. I think it's far more about the way in
which you synchronise activity and you identify particular times, the equinoxes,
the midsummer and so on, because that's when people are going to be gathered in
order to conduct rituals and in order to engage in all these activities that
articulate society. And some of these megaliths are decorated with art. Now how
does that fit in? If you go down into Iberia you find that some of the standing
stones and some of the chambered tombs are painted, but for the most part
throughout Europe, where we have megalithic art, it's engraved or pecked onto
the surface of the stones. In Brittany some of this art is representational and
we have images of bows and arrows or of stone tools or of quadrupeds, but most
of the art, and this is particularly in the case of Britain and Ireland, is non-
representational, it's geometric, it's swirls and it's zigzags and it's
concentric circles and so on, and so it's very, very ambiguous. And you call it
the ambiguity? Well I think the ambiguity is the point of it. Is the point. Is
the point. So one of the things that people emphasise is that perhaps it's the
doing of the art that's more important than what it actually means, because it's
very often part of the process of constructing the monument. You're actually
decorating stones and sometimes some of the art is actually hidden away inside
the monument and not visible. Also sometimes you find that the most complex
combinations of motifs are at significant points within the monument, so within
passage tombs it may be portals, entrances, or the backs of the chambers where
the remains of the dead are being deposited. But I think that draws our
attention to the experiential quality of this art, that it's part of the
saturation of your senses as you enter these monuments when they're being used,
alongside the remains of the dead, alongside portable artefacts, alongside
chanting. All of these things I think form a ritual symbolism. We're coming to
the end of the programme now, Bikubeta, and I'd like to get some idea about the
community. Is there a connection between the community and the circle? Yes, I
think there is. I don't think they're living there permanently. I think they're
quite mobile people in the late Neolithic. I think they're moving off at
particular times of the year, but they're coming together and it's very much
their place, their communal circle. So I think they have an affinity to that
place. Susan, do we have any idea of the size of any one community? Can you give
us a guide on the size of communities? I was talking about 40 people, 400
people, what are we talking about? It's very difficult to estimate community
sizes from the settlement evidence, just because the settlement evidence is very
rare. But to give one example from recent research, the Haslott and North Long
Barrow, which is in the Cotswolds near Gloucestershire, there's been some recent
work done on the burials from that site, looking at the ancient DNA from those
individuals. And it's been shown that they are three and four generations of the
same interrelated family and some other people. So that suggests to us that
there's a quite close-knit family relationship that relates to who gets buried
in that tomb. Now, we don't know if those people lived together and we don't
know if those people lived next to the tomb or dispersed across the landscape,
but they were certainly buried together, which suggests that that family group
was important for the identity of those people and was important in the way that
they thought about themselves as a community. With the new techniques, do you
get any idea of the lifespan of these people, for instance? Not from DNA, but we
can estimate that from the skeletal remains. You can look at things like teeth
wear and instances of arthritis and things to estimate ages. Many people think
that life was very short in this period. Actually, we have people from... What's
very short? Perhaps people say, you know, people didn't live much past 30, but
actually we do have relatively elderly people buried in these tombs, at least in
their 50s and 60s. So it's not that life was nasty, brutish and short. People
had relatively long lives. Do you want to go on, May? I mean, one of the things
that we can tell about burial deposits like Hazelton North is we can look at
isotopic analysis and that can actually tell us which parts of the landscape
people were living in. And in the case of Hazelton, we know that actually people
weren't spending all of their time in the immediate area. They were actually
moving around the landscape up to 40 kilometres away. And that tells us that
actually people were quite mobile, but they were still coming back and being
deposited at this particular place in the landscape. Last word from you, Julia?
Well, and a consequence of that mobility is that when we're talking about the
size of populations, there may be a degree of flux about that. It may be that
you have groups of people who are coming together seasonally and then splitting
apart at other times. We're fascinated and drawn to these monuments today. And
I'm sure in the past, in prehistory, people held them in equally, if not
greater, significance. We've lost so many of these monuments and we kind of
prize the ones we have that have lasted well, like Stonehenge, and we make them
into World Heritage sites. I think that moving stones, building things out of
stone and creating these monuments was a fundamental part of the lives of these
people. And we can really only understand them if we investigate them
thoroughly. They had to do this to be the civilization they were. Yes, it was
their identity. They were the monument builders. Well, thank you all very much.
Thanks, Susan Greeney, Vicki Cummings and Julian Thomas and our studio engineer,
Emma Harth. Next week, the Ramayana, the ancient Hindu epic that tells the story
of the legendary prince and princess Rama and Sita. Thanks for listening. That
was Innerretime with Melvin Bragg. The World Tonight is coming up shortly, but
first, let's take a quick look at the weather. Tonight, Northern Ireland,
Southern Scotland and most of England will be cloudy and largely dry with just
the odd light shower. Wales and South West England will start clear, but cloud
will move in from the east by dawn. Northern Scotland will see increasingly
clear skies. Tomorrow, Northern Scotland will remain largely bright, but the
Northern Isles will be cloudier with the odd shower. Elsewhere will be largely
cloudy and dry, although Northern and Eastern England and Southern Scotland will
have brighter spells later. On Saturday, western parts will see early bright
spells, but it will cloud over for most later. The far north will see some light
rain on Saturday. And on Friday, near and at itting winds will blow, though that
pressure