TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Radio 4 and in our slow radio will go to where the Indian and the Atlantic
oceans meet. It's nine o'clock, this is BH Broadcasting House. Hello, I'm patio
Connell. The headlines. Dozens of bodies believed to be migrants have washed up
on a southern Italian beach. The Prime Minister says Northern Ireland is
unfinished business after Brexit and he is trying everything to get a deal with
the EU. Conservationists say the world's biggest species of frog, which is
threatened with extinction, is making a comeback. Before ten. Fruit and veg
shortages in the UK are the tip of the iceberg, say growers, but the Dutch
shells heave with the things so says the BBC's newest correspondent. Wow! Lots
and lots and lots and lots of tomatoes. Jealous? We'll speak to British farmers
and we've also got live cooking with Radio 4 favourite Michelle Hussain and her
family's turnip recipe. Martin Lewis, the founder of Money Saving Expert warns
us that some people's energy bills could rise by 40% in April. The price of
energy is directly set by the government and the government is planning to
increase it, which I think is a mistake at this time. The boss of Ukrainian
Railways is our guest. He's apologised for delays to the schedule after
President Biden's journey through the country aboard Rail Force One during a
war. You can imagine it for top level of secrecy because no leakage happens
until the President Biden arrives to keep. Our headliners will be Charles
Spencer the Earl, Irene Tracy, the Queen of Pain and Alva Ray, podcast princess.
It's Sunday the 26th of February. Reading the news is Lisa Costello. Good
morning Lisa. Good morning Paddy. A boat carrying migrants has sunk off the
coast of southern Italy. There are reports that 27 bodies have been washed up
off the coast of Calabria. Danny Eberhard reports. The Italian authorities have
mounted a large search and rescue operation on land and at sea, involving the
coast guard and the police. It's not yet been confirmed what happened to the
boat, but one local news agency has reported that it was overcrowded and broke
in two in heavy seas. Another Italian news agency says that about 50 people have
been rescued, but adds that the boat could have been carrying more than 100
migrants. It reports that people from Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan were
aboard. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it everything to reach a deal with the
EU on trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. Speculation has been mounting
that an agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow. The Prime Minister
will have to satisfy the Democratic Unionist Party who are strongly opposed to
the current arrangements, which include checks on goods coming from Great
Britain. Here's our political correspondent, Ian Watson. A deal is tantalisingly
close, but it's not there yet. The Prime Minister has said that work is still to
be done. In what might be seen as a swipe at Boris Johnson, who is Prime
Minister signed up to the Northern Ireland Protocol, Mr Sunak has described it
as the unfinished business of Brexit and has pledged that he will get the job
done. Much of the heavy lifting with the EU appears to have been concluded, but
the bigger prize is to convince the largest Unionist Party, the DUP, to return
to a power-sharing government at dormant. Its leader, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson,
has warned that the wrong deal would deepen divisions. Police investigating the
attempted murder of a senior officer in County Tyrone have arrested a 71-year-
old man under the Terrorism Act. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell remains
critically ill after he was shot in Omer on Wednesday. Police say they're
focusing on the dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Five other men remain
in custody. The Union for Senior Civil Servants, the FDA, has asked the health
and safety executive to conduct an investigation into allegations of bullying by
government ministers. The Union claims the problem is widespread across
Whitehall. The government says it does not tolerate bullying harassment or
discrimination. Conservationists in West Africa say their efforts to save the
world's biggest frog are paying off. The Goliath frog, which can grow up to a
foot long, has made a comeback in its native Cameroon. Our science correspondent
Helen Briggs reports. The Goliath frog lives up to its name, growing to the size
of a large cat. It can jump up to 10 feet. But the world's biggest living frog,
which is found only in Cameroon, a neighbouring equatorial Guinea, is threatened
with extinction and is classed as endangered. But five years ago,
conservationists in Cameroon set out to save the species by encouraging local
people to stop hunting the frog and report sightings of it instead. They
suggested snail farming as an alternative food source. Their scheme appears to
be working and new nesting sites have been discovered in rivers and streams.
Judges at one of Europe's leading film festivals, the Berlinale, have awarded
the top prize to a French documentary. On the Adamant is about a floating
daycare centre for people with mental illness. In another surprise, the award
for the best leading actor went to an eight-year-old, Sophia Otero, who plays a
transgender child in the film 20,000 Species of Bees. Cricket and England have
been made to work hard on the third day of the second test against New Zealand
in Wellington. The black caps had to follow on for the first time at home since
2010 but reached 202 for three, 24 runs behind the tourists' first innings
total. Our sports reporter, Stefan Shamilt, is in Wellington. England might have
hoped for victory inside three days and it was still a possibility on Sunday
morning despite Tim Southey blasting 73 in New Zealand's first innings, 209 all
out. The black caps were 226 behind and made to follow on. They dug in on a
pitch with a reputation for getting better to bat on. Tom Latham made 83, Devon
Conway 61 and though the home side lost three wickets for 18 runs, Kane
Williamson and Henry Nichols dropped anchor. England will return on Monday with
a second new ball that is only three overs old. They are still favourites but
it's not out of the question they become the first England team to lose a test
after enforcing the follow-on. Stefan Shamilt reporting. Lisa Costello reading
the news. Our news wicket keeper. Gloves of glue. Hello. We're live on BBC Radio
4 with live cooking in this half hour. Michelle Hessen's turnips. Say no more.
Fruit and veg shortages could last until May and British leek supplies could dry
up before then according to growers speaking to the BBC. Tesco, Oldie, Asda,
Morrisons of rationed tomatoes, cucumbers and more, blaming unseasoned weather
in Spain and Morocco. This morning we'll hear there's an ongoing issue about
supply not linked to the rain in Spain. Rising energy costs and rule changes
post Brexit are in the mix. So says our live guest and she's a third generation
farmer. We've a turnip recipe as well but let's start with the front line of
shopping with these people venting about veg. Have you seen a shortage of
tomatoes? Yes I have. Especially since they made the announcement. Are you a big
fan of a tomato in your cooking? I do cook quite a lot with tomatoes, yes. With
fresh tomatoes so I probably will miss it but I'm okay to hold on for a few
weeks. And are you a fan of the cuke as well? Cuke. Cucumber. Not a big fan no.
And you've bought some lovely tulips. Yes thank you. You won't be eating that by
hope. Anytime I go shopping, groceries, there's just not enough on the shelves
really. What's the main things in shortage? Like vegetables, canned tomatoes,
fruits as well. Sometimes when I go into Tesco's or you know I see like there's
loads of shortage of fruits on the shelves and you know it's quite sad really. I
can't see them I thought oh I can't see tomatoes anywhere. I've been two, four,
five places a day to get some tomatoes I can't find them. You've come out with
some lovely oranges. Oranges yeah absolutely. What do you think is going on? I
don't know maybe to do with the weather in North Africa. That's what I heard.
North Africa or in Spain or wherever they come from. I don't eat tomatoes I
don't want that bothered really. A plague on the tomatoes. I don't really care I
can't stand tomatoes. So this is your season? It is yeah. And with that he left.
Bye bye. Well there's one happy customer. Our ministers get very cross if you
say that Brexit's got anything to do with this. So you would expect the shelves
to be empty elsewhere. We sent our Netherlands correspondent Anna Holigan and
her six year old daughter Zina to visit their local supermarket in The Hague
last night by bike. We're going to the supermarket let's see if we find some
tomatoes. Zina do you know where the tomatoes are? Yes. Okay show me. I'm
following you. Here are the tomatoes. How many crates of tomatoes do we have?
Wow there are a lot of tomatoes. Where do they actually come from? So these ones
are from Spain. What does this say? Where are these ones from? Netherlands. Yeah
those ones are from Netherlands. These ones are from oh Belgium. Which ones
would you like sweetheart? The ginormous ones. The ginormous ones? Okay let's
grab some. You pop them in the basket. And then another bag of tomatoes. There
are so many bag of tomatoes. So many bags. Wow. Okay let's take our tomatoes
home. What are we going to do with all these tomatoes? Maybe we make tomato
soup. Or just eat a lot of tomatoes. Let's make tomato everything. So the
message is yes they have got tomatoes over there. Live to Wales and the farm of
Abbey Reader. She farms dairy, beef, sheep and arable and somehow finds time to
be the deputy president of NFU Cymru, the National Farmers Union in Wales. Abbey
Reader welcome to BH. Good morning. Can I start with the difference between the
Netherlands and the UK? I've read that one thing that could explain this is the
length of the contract between suppliers and the supermarket. We have a long
contract making it harder for producers to pass price rises on and over on the
continent they have shorter ones so you can keep supply because you shove the
prices up. Well that's a good start. I mean contracts generally in the UK will
tend to hold back a lot of producers. It can be very complicated to try and get
a good flow of money back from the end point of that product that we've sold
back to the farmer producer and unfortunately if you've got a contract in place
that doesn't offer fair terms to the farmer then by the time that money reaches
them there's very little left to go around and what that means is farmers lose
confidence in production. And that's explaining the decline in egg production to
a nine year low because I visited an egg producer for BH. He said it's just too
uncertain you'll never make any money on an egg. That's right. Unfortunately
farmers have lost confidence so we have got empty sheds throughout the country
and this would be similar for horticulture where we've got empty greenhouses
because the cost of production exceeds the return that they're getting for the
product that they're selling. Now President Putin has launched a murderous war
which has put the energy prices up. Is that in the mix when I look at all of the
supply problems across the board? Is the war in the mix? Yeah the war is quite a
large player in the system. Energy prices being a key one but also access to
fertilizer. Russia and the Ukraine are both quite significant suppliers of
fertilizer so that's having an impact. But then we've got other issues so we've
got labour shortages and you said just now that the government isn't keen on it
being blamed on Brexit. Well if we can't blame Brexit I'm afraid we're going to
have to blame the government because we do not have enough labour to pick our
crops to make sure that that food is getting from the farm to the supermarket
and that is letting consumers down. But you are speaking for farmers and I've
explained your role at NFU Cymru. What's your answer to this straightforward
question? Is Brexit in the mix? Brexit is definitely in the mix. Largely just
because it's caused complete turmoil of the market we're still waiting for it to
settle down but particularly when we look at labour and access to casual labour
that used to come into this country very skilled labour to be able to pick our
fruit and our veg as quickly and efficiently as possible and get it to the
market. So that's a huge one. What we're asking government to do is get behind
British food production with confidence of farmers on the floor. They are not
going to invest in production. They're not going to increase production but even
more than that they're not even going to sustain the current levels of
production. We've screened off farmers and a lot of them are looking at scaling
back. Okay now I mean I know that the farming minister addressed the NFU
conference and promised millions in new measures but because I can't get into
the full detail of support for agriculture at the moment can you just tell the
shoppers listening to expect for more shortages all the way through to the
summer? Unless we see a change in attitude from our government which helps to
support farmers and give them that confidence to produce then I can't see this
getting any better at the moment. Okay Abby Reader thank you very much indeed
we'll let you go back to your work. Deputy President of NFU Cymru. The
environment secretary to raise coffee sparked headlines for pushing homegrown
turnips over imported veg out of season. It's important to make sure that we
cherish the specialisms that we have in this country. A lot of people would be
eating turnips right now rather than thinking necessarily about aspects of
lettuce and and tomatoes and similar but I'm conscious that consumers at once
are year-round choice and that is what our supermarkets and food and growers
food producers and growers around the world try to satisfy. There was some
mockery. Tories in a stew over turnips screamed the mirror. The times my wheat
column went full I'm the turnip guy. The guy whose job it is to persuade Britain
to eat turnips and it's a hard job because they're turnips. In the telegraph the
cartoonist Matt drew a man at a bar asking for gin and tonic. The bomb replies
ice and a slice of turnip but titty not. There are fans of the nip. On Instagram
Michelle Assane posted a family recipe for turnip burta. She's here with her
aunt and cookbook author Samin Rushdie to cook it. Michelle welcome back. Many
listeners loved you on our Christmas Day programme and here you are back with a
turnip. It is lovely to be back. Back with quite a lot of turnips which I'll get
to in just a second Paddy. Good morning. The recipe for turnip burta shaljam ka
burta an urdu. It is in my aunt Samin Rushdie's book Indian Cookery but as I
looked at it I realised I'd never eaten it let alone cooked it. So I'm here in
her kitchen this morning with her to put that right. Samin thank you for having
us in at this at this early hour and to do this live on Radio 4. Lovely yes. Now
turnips are probably not a vegetable people associate with the food of South
Asia. How popular is this dish? It is popular certainly in India turnip is used.
It's a much maligned vegetable. It's been really shabbily treated I feel.
Treated as animal fodder or just as a discreetly to bulk up a soup. But in the
north of India in Kashmir especially you'll often find it on a table at a big
feast cooked with lamb slow cooked with lamb. It's absolutely delicious. So the
burta is a mashed vegetable. Let's get started. You've done some of the
preparation already. So here we're doing a turnip as a vegetarian dish a burta.
You've got some onions here already which you've started. There's quite a lot of
onions for the amount of for the amount of of turnip. So you're going to you're
they're sort of half cooked. What are you going to try and get the onions to
before the turnip go in? The onions need to get golden. The turnips what I've
done with the turnips is that they because they take so long. I've done some of
it before we were on air. Thank you. They're boiled in salty water really
discreetly spiced. So you have a bit of cinnamon a stick of cinnamon a large
cardamom if you have one to hand. Just in the water while they're boiling. In
the water and the flesh of the turnip will absorb it. I quartered them because
the turnips in Europe and England are really large. Indian turnips are quite
small. So you don't often have to cut them and winter turnips can have a very
fine skin. Don't bother with peeling them before. Don't bother with peeling
them. Not before you boil them. It's hard it's so easy. The skin just comes away
once they're boiled. So now we've got our onions which are gently going to about
to turn golden. So while they're boiling chop your onions begin to fry them. So
you've got everything happening at the same time. The turnips don't overcook
them. They're not nice overcooked. So rather than getting them soft enough to
mash with a fork just get them cooked so that you can mash them up because
they're not mashed potato as we know mashed potato to be a creamy mash. Yes we
should say something about this. So here's a couple of turnips in front of me
here which I'm going to go. I mean you you you sort of chop it's sort of
chopping them up finely rather than mashing with a with a flat fork. Yes just
chop chop chop with a knife and they will get softer when they when they are
folded in with the caramelized onions then they will become more of a mash but
they'll be more like a broken potato like a hash brown rather than okay. Yeah
all right. So now what color of our onions got to. So now our onions are about
to turn. You can see that they're beginning to get golden and in another 30
seconds maybe I can wrap in the um the turnips and what else is going to go in
with them? At this stage nothing. So the turnips you could taste them they were
boiled in salty water so don't add any salt until you tasted it. In another
minute or two that they fried let them fry with the onions let them absorb each
other's flavors and then we sprinkle it with either chili flakes or chili powder
to taste depending how hot you like your vegetables and some fresh ginger
freshly chopped peeled grated or finely chopped ginger. Yes which you've got
here on the side. Yes big enough so that you can taste the ginger when you eat
it. I see so we won't. So not that fine. Not that fine. So actually there are
not very many spices in this compared to to many dishes of India and Pakistan
this is really quite lightly spiced. Actually a lot of Indian food in our family
we really believe that restraint and spice is is really important and a lot of
the food that you eat in restaurants and from different regions I to my mind is
really heavily spiced and you lose the flavor of the vegetable or the meat so
we've grown up eating very lightly spiced food. And that's how we're going to do
it this morning and we're going to celebrate the vegetable the turnip the
shuljum so they're going in now. I'm now adding the turnip stirring it all in
together. I hope you're enjoying this from afar. No I am. So do you smell it
because now you as you hear it sizzle the caramelized onions have a really sweet
smell and turnips are also really quite sweet and but the cinnamon and the
pepper cones and the cardamom that you boiled it with that's the genius of this
dish it's so discreet but you begin to smell some of those flavors gently
wafting up as they fry. Well as it's all mixed in and the ginger is about to go
in in a minute and then the turnips will cook for a few minutes longer and you
can come back to us Paddy sadly not to taste it yourself but I will I'm taking
the bullet I will do the tasting and I will report back later on. It's a hit
thank you so much and it's we'll be publishing the recipe on Michelle's social
media and ours and what a tip don't peel the turnip that's I've heard the same
about beetroot actually take the skin off afterwards. Now Brian Waters has sent
us some slow radio from the southernmost tip of Africa listening you'll fall
into one of two categories you either know the name of the Cape concerned or you
don't so I'm not going to tell you the name till we hear the end of what we now
hear. Brian says I'm here on Cape blank on the trip of a lifetime with my
lifelong friend James who's turning 60. You hear the point where the Indian and
Atlantic oceans meet and the combined waters rush into the rock pools at my
feet. Slow radio the southernmost tip of Africa here we go. So The southernmost
point of Africa is Cape Agulhas. Many of us got that wrong in the office. Brian
suggests that others might want to send us some slow radio from intriguing
places here in the UK or anywhere, but we're all ears for whatever you send us
and your comments on the programme to the normal email address. It's 22 minutes
past nine. There's a fresh warning over energy bills with the financial
campaigner Martin Lewis telling us some could rise by 40% in April. Wholesale
gas prices have fallen since their peak and lower bills are expected later this
year. Tomorrow the regulator Ofgem will make a new announcement on the latest
energy price cap. But Martin told me to look for another figure, this time from
the government, on its energy price guarantee. The real big issue coming in
April and the one I have been campaigning about is at the start of April, the
energy price guarantee, which is the subsidised tariff, is going to rise by 20%.
And it is not the regulator Ofgem. It is not energy firms who are putting the
price up by 20%. On the 1st of April, it is the government who are putting
prices up for almost every house in England, Scotland and Wales. And we talk
about the cost of living crisis. Most things are not in direct government
control. The price of energy is directly set by the government and the
government is planning to increase it by 20%, which I think is a mistake at this
time. I mean, of course, there are many arguments about the billions that the
government has written checks for. We live in an age where the government is
paying your and my gas bill. What are you now expecting to happen to the £67 a
month subsidy from the government? Remember, there are two subsidies at the
moment. One is the energy price guarantee subsidy. Now it's probably worth
before I go on to the £67 a month me explaining that before October last year,
our energy prices were set by the regulator. And that was the price cap, which
is based on a timed lag assessment of wholesale prices, the rates that energy
retailers pay last October, because that was due to skyrocket. The government
put in place this thing called the energy price guarantee, where it set prices
from last October until April 2024 with the caveat that if the price cap was
ever lower than the energy price guarantee, we would pay the lower price. The
current situation is from April, even though wholesale rates have dropped very
substantially, the price cap will still be above the energy price guarantee
because there's a big time lag before that drop in wholesale rates comes into
effect. So the energy price guarantee is what we will pay. And that is due to
rise 20%. So everyone's bills will be rising 20%. From July, it's predicted,
very strongly predicted, the price cap will be lower than the energy price
guarantee, not lower than the 20% increased price guarantee, actually lower than
the current energy price guarantee, which means from July, the energy price
guarantee, the government subsidy will disappear, which is why I have been
written to the Chancellor and I have the support of 80 major charities asking
him to postpone the increase of 20% until July, because then in practice, it
won't matter, we'll be back onto the energy price cap. And what the government
thought it would be paying on the energy price guarantee and provision to be
paying the many tens of billions of pounds, because wholesale rates have
dropped, it's going to be saving a lot of money compared to what it would have
paid, which is why I would argue it doesn't need to put prices up by 20%, which
is damaging to people's finances. And that letter saying the prices are going up
again is damaging to mental health. As for the 66, 67 pounds a month, or the 400
pounds over winter subsidy, that's gone. And that goes at the same time as they
put the energy price guarantee up at the start of April, which means the net
effect for those people who are not pensioners and not on benefits, and do not
have a disability who have targeted packages is actually a pro rata equivalent
of a 40% rise in April. Again, which pushes my argument of the government does
not need to put prices up in April, it's the government putting prices up and it
shouldn't do it. That's the views of Martin. There will be an announcement
tomorrow, and that will be from off gem, and that will be on its cap. And based
on that briefing, you'll know that the news here on Radiofall will explore the
bills rising because of the other impacts that Martin has outlined for us there.
Now what's coming up on Radiofall? The marvellous Miriam Margulies joins the
team on the Museum of Curiosity at midday. An hour later, the dazzling Johnny
Diamond will have the world this weekend and is here with a preview. Johnny,
before we preview, would you have identified the southernmost tip of Africa? If
I'd asked you just in an unrehearsed way? No, not in an unrehearsed way. We
didn't. How did you get Michel Hussein on your programme? Well, it's basically
turnips. It certainly was. Good to hear. Look, Paddy, we're going to turn to
Israel, to what is ceaseless turmoil there, it feels like, and a new coalition
in place. Last night, some of the biggest demonstrations yet with the country's
president warning of catastrophe, violence between Israelis and Palestinians
claiming dozens of lives this year. We ask a former US special envoy of
Palestinian statehood is now just an empty dream. And we hear from the brilliant
Alan Little on Scotland without sturgeon for his voice alone. Tune in at one
o'clock to the wonderful World This Weekend. Yes. And I've also been reading his
long read on the BBC website. Oh, I must check it out. Well, I think it's linked
to the work he's doing for you. Well, except it doesn't have his lovely voice on
it. That's true. Johnny, thank you. We'll join you at one. Patricia Purbrik is
our listener. Just to be clear, the turnips everyone is talking about are
Swedes. Turnips are completely different to Swedes. But for some reason, Swedes
are sometimes called turnips. Now this has all the look of derailing the
program, this sort of thing. And Liz Keeley says re-cooking turnips, they should
only ever be served mash with lots of black pepper with meals that include
gravy. Delicious regards says Elizabeth. And you're asking us for some means
recipe which we will be posting. But we don't want this to attract all the
attention. Coming up in the next half hour, we'll talk about 15-minute cities.
Our guest will be the man who runs Ukraine Railways. We're very proud to hear
from him. And reviewing the news, Earl Spencer, Irene Tracy and Alva Ray. It's
29 minutes past nine. It's BBC Radio 4. It's Sunday the 26th of February. This
is BH. I'm patio Connell. Here with the headlines is Lisa. A boat carrying
migrants has sunk off the southern coast of Italy. Local reports suggest that at
least 27 bodies have been washed up on beaches. A search and rescue operation
has been launched. The Deputy Prime Minister, Dominic Raab, says a new deal with
the EU about post-Brexit trading rules in Northern Ireland is just days away. He
said Parliament would have a chance to express its views. The Civil Servants
Union, the FDA, is calling for an investigation into what it describes as
widespread ministerial bullying in White Hall. The government says it doesn't
tolerate bullying and complaints are handled with sensitivity and fairness. A
sixth person has been arrested by detectives investigating the attempted murder
of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in County Tyrone on Wednesday. The
police officer remains in a critical condition after being shot in front of his
son outside a sports centre in Omer. Police Scotland, looking for a walker who
went missing last weekend, say they found a body. Carl Sandbroek, who's 33, was
last seen with his dog in the Lost Valley area of Glencoe. His family have been
informed. When the US President Joe Biden slipped secretly into Ukraine aboard a
shuttered train, it was inevitable it would become known as Rail Force One. The
journey a week ago tonight was masterminded by Alexander Kamishin, head of
Ukraine's railways. He is our guest this morning and when we called, he told me
he'd continue with our interview despite the air-raid sirens behind him. You can
imagine it was top level of secrecy because no leakage happened until President
Biden arrived to keep. So we managed to keep it silent together with our
partners. And did you have to move scheduled services aside so that this train
could travel with the US President in secrecy? Yes, we had to delay few dozens
of trains. It was really painful for me and my team because we usually fight for
being on schedule. But this time we had to do it on purpose. And I really
apologize for that happening next day to my passengers. But we had to do it
because we had to bring Rail Force One safe and smooth to give in the back. And
we've done it. It's humbling for me to hear you say you're apologizing for
running a rail service during a war. What kind of symbolism and importance do
your railways have in this war? Well, speaking about this visit, you remember
that President Putin said that we'll take even three days. Finally, on the
second day of the war, President Biden walks across Kiev together with my
President Zelensky. So you can imagine that it was really important to show that
even though the US President can come to Kiev, as well as many other honoured
guests of the Iran diplomacy programme we do, and I believe that's one of the
signs that we're winning this war. Do you feel as a rail man like a soldier?
Finally, yes, because we stand since day one of this war. We are the largest
company in Ukraine. We've got 200 to 1000 people behind me and we perform. And
with respect to more than 300 of your colleagues who left the railway to work in
the armed forces and have died, do you feel that this work is symbolic for
Ukrainians? There's a war on, but the trains are running. Well, you know, people
should get at least something reliable during the war and railways is one of the
important things that should be reliable because people should know that if the
shell and the enquisses, they should get an opportunity to leave the city for
some time, then get back and it should be affordable and it should be
comfortable enough. So railways is that kind of transportation. You talk about
iron diplomacy, which is the system of ferrying VIPs and world leaders on your
railways. And I'm wondering about other humans that you have to carry. Is it
right that you're carrying the bodies of many Russians who've died in the war
back home to their homeland? Indeed, since the first day of the war, we've seen
that Russians leave their dead bodies and they don't care. We are human beings.
We remain human beings even in this awful war. That's why we started collecting
those bodies and putting them in the rail car of bridges, hundreds and hundreds
of them. And what kind of respect is paid to the fallen Russian soldiers? We
don't pay respect to fallen Russians, but we pay respect to ourselves. We want
to remain human beings even during the war. And this means treating these bodies
with dignity? Yeah, it's about us. It's not about them. This train was called
Rail Force One. Is there any humour in this situation for you? Do you find
moments to laugh? It is a very famous transport system, Air Force One. And
you've now got Rail Force One. Do you allow yourself time to laugh at all? Well,
indeed, we called this train together with our partners from the US, Rail Force
One, because it brought President Biden successfully in and out. And finally,
that was one of just few pieces in his history when he was travelling, not with
his own transport, not with his own motorcade. And indeed, our train done the
job. So it's really Rail Force One. You sound very proud of your team. Yes, I
am. And finally, you are now one of the most famous rail men in the world. Where
did your love of trains begin? Are you listening to a man who fell in love with
trains as a boy? Well, I don't feel myself like that. As you said, I just feel
myself like doing what I have to do, doing my job. I didn't have any special
love to trains before. The Russian scheme started killing my people and I had to
do what I'm doing now. Railman Alexander Kamishin with thanks for being our
guest this morning on Rail Force One. Back home there's fresh argument over the
planning goal known as the 15-minute city. The concept proposes that city
dwellers could enjoy the most essential parts of life within a short walk or
bike drive, say 15 minutes. But it's now started to attract conspiracy theorists
who argue it's all about creeping state control and they link it to those
controversial LTNs or low-traffic neighbourhoods. It seems that a new front has
opened in the culture wars, as the BBC's Russell Newlove reports. The bike down
Broad Street is to live in the postcard picture of Oxford. It's humming with
students, sat outside the coffee shops despite the chilly weather and until
about a year ago this was a car park. Last week it was filled with protesters
objecting to Oxford's low-traffic neighbourhoods. These LTNs discourage driving
and encourage walking, a car principle of the 15-minute city. This is
restricting our freedom of movement and you can just see this salami-sliding of
what we can and cannot do all the time. It's slightly absurd and obscene that
I've stood here in Oxford defending our rights, your rights to move around
within the city. We're not talking about freedom of movement between nations
here, we're talking within a city or a town. Tom Seawood is a reporter for the
Oxford Mail and followed the protest that day. It was large, the police think
that there are approximately 2,000 people there. There's an incredible mix of
people, there were lots of Oxford people there as you would expect, protesting
against the impact that the low-traffic neighbourhoods are having on them as
residents or as business people. And then there were lots of other people who
were coming from across the country. I think I spoke to somebody here in Bond
Square who had driven four and a half hours from Newcastle that morning and they
were complaining about all sorts of things, handing out flyers about cashless
society. There were concerns about the Covid vaccine. I think there was one sign
perhaps that was accusing Professor Chris Whitty, accusing him of being a
traitor. There was one man that was walking around his chest, I think was a car
registration plate rather than the usual collection of letters and numbers, it
just simply said dystopia. What can you do in 15 minutes? Empty the washing
machine and hang up your fresh laundry? Well, creepy local authority bureaucrats
would like to see your entire existence boiled down to the duration of a quarter
of an hour. That's Mark Darlan on GB News offering his take on 15 Minute Cities.
Liz Lefman is the Lib Dem leader of Oxfordshire County Council. Previous
demonstrations, she says, have attracted similar groups, seemingly with no
connection to the issue at hand. What we've noticed, and if you actually look at
the placards that some of those people were holding, it wasn't about low traffic
neighbourhoods specifically, it was about all sorts of very, well, I mean,
they've conflated a number of things. So for instance, some people will be
protesting about lack of freedom, which covers all sorts of things, including
vaccination programmes, including Covid and including this idea that we're
dividing the city into 15 minute neighbourhoods and preventing people from
moving out of those neighbourhoods, which is absolute nonsense. And this has
been stoked by a number of media outlets, including GB News, including people
like Katie Hopkins, who have simply published things that are not true. And a
lot of those people that came in on Saturday believed what they were being told.
And I think that's entirely regrettable. And it's not just the media that has
amplified these concerns. Here's MP for the Don Valley, Nick Fletcher, talking
about 15 minute cities in Parliament in February. Will the leader please set
aside some time in this house for a debate on the international socialist
concept of so-called 15 minute cities and 20 minute neighbourhoods? Sheffield is
already on this journey and I do not want Doncaster, which is also a labour-run
socialist council, to do the same. Low emission zones cost a taxpayer money,
simple as. However, 15 minute cities will cost us our personal freedom and that
cannot be right. The very centre of Oxford was pedestrianised some 20 years ago.
Some streets allowing bus only access are even older. So why have restrictions
on traffic movement now, in 2023, become such an issue? All good conspiracy
theories have a grain of truth. In this particular case in Oxford, there are
plans for people to need permits to drive down certain roads, which has given
rise to the idea that people would be confined to just one area. Jenny King is a
disinformation expert at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue. What's happened
in Oxford is that a very legitimate debate between residents of the local area
and the local council about this particular traffic calming measure and whether
or not it's the right policy and is going to have the intended effects has
become completely distorted by this much more diverse set of actors, both
domestically within the UK and transnationally who viewed it as an opportunity
to talk about government overreach, civil liberties, and a whole range of
conspiracies that are ultimately distrustful of institutions and the role that
they play in public life. Cities, like the people in them, change and evolve
through time. But Oxford won't be the last place to find the debate around how
this change happens skewed by this kind of misinformation. Russell Newlove on 15
minute cities and what people say about them. Let's go back to Misha Hussain,
who's back with her art and cookbook author, Samin Rushdie. Misha, it's lovely
to have you back. How has the cooking been going? Well, Paddy, the turnips have
been sizzling away and Samin has got them to the point where the dish is pretty
much ready to eat, barring a couple more ingredients, a few more ingredients,
you'll add? Yes, we'll only now add all the fresh ingredients, generous squeeze
of lemon, lemon juice, and the sourness of the lemon counteracts very well with
because both the caramelized onions and the turnips are sweet. So having that
lemon juice is really important. And then just moments before you serve it so
that they still look fresh and green is a handful of green chilies. Now, not
these are not the fine Indian green chili, the deadly ones, which are very hot.
And even if you seed them, they remain hot. I'm glad you clarified, Cassine, the
amount you put in, I was a bit worried about what level of fire we were getting,
but these are the Spanish green chilies. These are the Spanish, yes, they're
just the fatter green chilies that you get in all supermarkets. And then
generous, generous helpings of mint and fresh coriander. Stir it all together,
literally just and then as soon as you folded them in and you and they released
their aroma, you're going to now begin to smell a mix of the lemon, the lemons
bringing out the sweetness as well. I'm wondering if I should see this as a
turnip base because there's so many different nuances of flavours going in here
that the humble turnip really seems to me to be the building block of it. What
do you both think of my ridiculous description of your work? Well, in that
sense, any main ingredient when you add the spices, you build on that. I can
tell you, Paddy, looking at it, that it's while the quantity of onion is large
compared to the quantity of turnip, the turnip is still very much the main
ingredient. But it's interesting to me that you've garnished, but you've then
sort of slightly cooked in the herbs. It's now ready to put into your dish and
take to your table. Or just dig straight into with a fork as I'm doing it.
That's not too indelicate. All right, here I go. You should have said turnips.
You might need to add some salt. I didn't add salt yet. I don't think it needs
salt. It doesn't taste turnipy. Not that I think I have had enough turnips in my
life to really know. I actually eat very little salt. And so for me, the salt,
the salty water in which it was cooked is enough. Okay. Turnips have absorbed
what it means. Everything from Samin is discreet with all the big, no, because
it's interesting. You want lower spice, you want lower sugar, you want the
natural flavors to come out. And that's a great message for any of us cooking on
a Sunday. Don't clobber your nosh. Yes. And especially with Indian food, people
have this idea that the more spices you put in, the more Indian it will be. Yes.
But really it's not what we were brought up to eat. You can cook other
vegetables this way. Samin, potatoes, I have had this way in a burtha. What
else? Mouli. It's got, I think even in England now, people call it mouli. It's a
large white radish. Chinese cooking uses it quite a lot. Again, you'd boil it.
You can mash it. Yes. And mash it in this way, not English. Often, often then
likely fried with onions. With the mouli, I usually use some garlic, which we
haven't used. We haven't used, either. Well, we're going to leave you
reluctantly, but Samin, thanks to you. And Michelle, has it changed your view of
the humble turnip? I will definitely be cooking this again. And it has a
fabulous sweet, sour combination, actually. It's not, it's not what I was
expecting at all, but it is rather lovely. And marrow, according to Samin, is
another vegetable you can do this way. So, probably also another quite unloved
vegetable, which we can start to put right. Well, look, you have done a lot to
put it right. Thank you so much for brightening our morning. Thanks to you,
Michelle. We'll hear you on the Today programme and hopefully meet Samin Rushdie
again. It's quarter to 10. Here with the news is Professor Irene Tracy, Vice
Chancellor at the University of Oxford, a neuroscientist. She was dubbed the
Queen of Pain by the New Yorker. Is it right that people with different hair
colours feel pain differently? Yeah, there is some anecdotal reports,
particularly people with ginger hair. They have a particular sort of variation
in their gene that changes their threshold. But these are hard experiments to
sort of prove. But no, there's a lot of work looking at the genetics of how
people experience pain differently. And we've got a lot more work to do, which
you're doing. A lot of work to do. Yes, indeed. Well, not now in this role as
Vice Chancellor, but the work is continuing in Oxford to understand pain,
particularly for those who suffer in chronic pain and what we can do to try and
fix it. Alva Ray is here. She writes for the New Statesman and hosts the
Polisco's Westminster Insider podcast. Welcome to you, Alva. Thank you. I'm also
ginger, so I'm guessing that means my pain threshold is higher or lower. You're
more blonde to me than you do, Alva. Well, it's good to see you. And we know
Charles Spencer as the Earl and brother of Princess Diana, and now we meet him
as host of a new history podcast, The Rabbit Hole Detectives. And I was a
ginger, but now is hardly no longer. Well, I think we could say you're blonde. I
regret not bringing my pain equipment in. Yours is a history podcast. Yes. It's
an excuse, really, to get together with friend, Reverend Richard Coles. Never
heard of him. No, no, I know he's such a shrinking violet. He's been in
everything, even celebrity cash in the attic, which I think is as bad as low as
it can go. And then- Well, always high, depending. Always high, yes. Well, look,
congratulations on the launch. I see it's been well reviewed in The Guardian,
among others. This is a surprise. Yes. I did say you were very posh. I know.
Anyway, off we go. Let's get underway. Why don't you start with a subject that
listeners are very interested in, which is what's happening in the world of
books. There's a lot of sensitivity reading going on. And this is from the
newspaper, The Sunday Telegraph, How Council Culture Told World Book Day Into a
Minefield for Parents. Yes. So, I mean, obviously the whole question of what's
allowed to be included or not, or excluded now from books that we've loved is
part of this. But for parents who are struggling with the anneal conundrum or
what to dress their children in for World Book Day, this is a red flag, really,
because you're told, understandably, that Peter Pan is offensive to indigenous
Americans. It says here, Peter Rabbit. This is slightly more confusing to me.
Mr. McGregor's violent behavior could be triggering. And anyway, it's always so
difficult. It used to be endless people dressed as Harry Potter characters.
That's no longer the case. I was very proud of my daughter for going last year
as the moon child from the Never Ending Story. I thought that was pretty good.
And this year she'll be going with her best friend as Tweedledee and Tweedledum.
But it's just so dangerous now. Council culture is so terrifying for so many
people that they, you know, now it's down to what your child wears. It's very
interesting. If you're a regular listener, you'll know that we had a different
nuance on this from our guests last week who say that words count. And this
article says the annual parental punishment has just got a whole lot worse. It's
now not about just the costume, but something that's politically correct too.
Professor, you are the vice chancellor of University of Oxford. Should we censor
books? Well, no, I mean, I'm a passionate believer for free speech and people
should be able to express themselves. I mean, just going back to the World Book
Day, though, I have to say our triumphant win was finally at our third child
having failed to win each year. The competition in Captain Underpants stormed it
and we finally got it over the line having done kindles and all sorts of what we
thought were very imaginative renditions of it. Is this a humble brag? This is a
humble brag. Farfan did a switcheroo saying that there will be children's
version of doll, but adults will be published under penguins, classic doll.
Could we be looking at Alva at a compromise there? Well, it sounds like it, but
I was saying to Irene before we came on air, I think that this has been framed
slightly wrong as something sort of being driven by woke millennials when it
actually looks to me much more like sort of capitalistic boomers who have sort
of preemptively rewritten bits of doll to in the hope that these books will sell
better and to ensure longevity for Roald Dahl books. Well, I would say also I
find all this quite bizarre because if there is offensive material in Roald
Dahl, he was a famously offensive man. And so you're cutting out the character
of the author. Yeah. And the stories were pretty, you know, they're pretty blunt
stories as well and pretty, yeah, you know, out there in terms of that, you
know, how graphic they are for children. But Alva is correct. You know, the
people who are now republishing the vintage version will make a killing,
actually. But I'm just skeptical as to whether really any parents are being
counseled for dressing their children as Peter Pan. Where are these schools or
where are these other parents who are counseling each other? I mean, is this a
hazard that's just been invented in the minds of the author? Where is the
council? Who's doing the counseling is what I'm wondering. OK, we'll leave you
wondering. That's a very good way to be on a Sunday. But what we will do is turn
the page, we just get my glasses on the same paper, force cars to drive slower
so scooters can be safe. The Sunday Telegraph, Professor. Yeah, this is a story
that caught my eye. I can hear my children groaning because I do complain a lot
about the complete lack of safety that people whizz about on these scooters, no
helmets, far too fast, congested traffic. Anyway, this article is it's actually
really interesting and it's saying, you know, rightly there have been, you know,
really tragic fatalities with scooters. Obviously, we have a problem with, you
know, traffic and and, you know, cars going too fast. I say that as a person
that has picked up the odd speeding find myself. So what are we going to do? You
know, it's great. There's this rise of the use of scooters and that's very
popular. You know, they note in the article that when the train strikes hit, you
know, there was a sort of huge uplift of 43 percent people using them because it
helped them get to work. However, we just haven't really developed the
infrastructure to cope with them. And we've got to do something about it. And
it's not just to level the blame at the cars. I know. And there's not an
accepted safety code. It is extraordinary. People are allowed to use these
things without helmets. That's right. And I get the use for people that they can
hop on and hop off, but it's not fair on everyone else. I am partial to an old
scooter around London when I'm in a rush, when I'm on foot. Do you wear a
helmet? Do you wear a helmet? Well, you can't carry it. Well, if you're just
renting them, if you're renting a lime or whatever, then you don't have a helmet
to hand. There's an interview with a boss of lime in the paper. I think that's
if you want more reading on this. And there's that. So we're recommending
everyone buys a paper if they want to and supports journalism. So that's where
we're getting our material from filling our program, in which case that Sunday
Times is making the news of with its interview. With the prime minister, he's
out on maneuvers. He's written for many papers. But tell us what the Sunday
Times interview with him says. Yes. So the Sunday Times has an interview with
him. And then there is the the legendary political long read on page eight by
Tim Shipman and Caroline Wheeler, which always has the inside track. So this is
a big long spread on what Rishi Sunak has said sort of in his interview saying
that he's the man to get Brexit done. But there's also a lot of sort of the
behind the scenes intrigue and all the different groups who might make that a
bit difficult for the prime minister. So Tim Shipman has some sort of lovely
color about Boris Johnson, who is refusing to play ball, apparently, you know,
urged by a colleague to row in behind Rishi Sunak and support whatever deal he
gets to. The colleague explained to Boris Johnson, this was important to get the
Americans on side. And Boris Johnson was overheard saying F the Americans. He's
he's he used the full word which rhymes with duck in the House of Parliament,
according to this. He did. And that would have had to be quite well sourced to
make it into the paper. A source close to Boris Johnson says that that was meant
in jest. But I don't think there's any denial there. Okay, let's just look in
the interview. He's the prime minister says I'm a conservative, I'm a Brexiteer
and I'm a unionist. And anything that we do will tick all those boxes. Does that
is that important commentary from the Prime Minister for you Irene, as you read
this story? Well, yeah, I mean, we were talking before, when we have a nice
thing, you know, obviously, as a scientist, one of the things that we're very
interested, obviously, notwithstanding, this needs to be, you know, sorted for
the for the, you know, for the country and for the people of Northern Ireland.
But of course, there is this luck coupling to the access to horizon Europe
funding. So this is quite a very important component for many of us in in higher
education, because there's a terrific amount of money and those collaborations
that we forged with Europe over many years, which has been made contingent on
resolution of this Northern Ireland agreement. So we're waiting to see this
resolution. And then we know whether we're going to be in or whether we're going
to be continuing with a plan B option. And in the big picture, Charles, is this
the argument rerun? It's the Rishi Sunak deal, we had the Boris Johnson deal,
and we're arguing over Brexit, we're arguing over sovereignty, the democratic
deficit, the joining with Europe. And this article is called Back to the Future,
because it feels that in this condensed timeframe waiting for the deal, we're
refreshing all these arguments. I know, I suppose the one thing I get out of
this is a reassurance that there is going to be a sensible conclusion, finally,
and that this can be put to bed. But I, I always hate the real extremists are
raising their head in this and you feel they're not really looking at the issue,
they're looking at a wider cause. And I always think that's regrettable. There's
another article here, which is the inside story of the mini budget meltdown by
Quattain's right hand woman and that's written by Alva Ray. So you've very
kindly not mentioned it. I will mention it. If you want to read in the same
paper, she's found the special advisor to Quazi Quattain and its eye watering
detail, which we won't go into now because we must move subjects with you Irene
knitting. Yeah, this is a lovely heartwarming story, which is in the Daily Mail.
Actually, it came out yesterday by Jane Fryer. And for those of you who haven't
seen the banshees of Inna Sharon, the film that's hopefully going to do quite
well at the Oscars, it's a beautiful movie. But what you might not have noticed
in there is just how splendid the knitted jumpers were that Colin Farrell and
Barry Kin and Brendan Gleason were wearing. So this story is about this
wonderful woman called Delia Barry, who's 83 years old. She's from County
Wicklow. And she's always been a knitter, but she decided after her husband
suddenly died after 49 years of marriage in 2010, that knitting was going to be
her salvation. And she joined her local knitting group and has become just this
incredible person in this community knitting these amazing jumpers. So she was
asked to knit these jumpers for this film. And she's now the toast of Hollywood
and is producing these at a rate and obviously produce them for the film. And
it's just this wonderful story that I think also as a neuroscientist, I think
touches on the importance of that moment of absolute grief and how reaching out
to be with people to have a community to do a craft, which is obviously quite
mentally flexible keeps your arthritic fingers going as well, just the joys and
the really good mental health benefits of that knitting. But it's a really cute
story. And there's a QR code and you can see the live interview as well. It is
interesting, the joy of craft. So I had a terrifying grandfather who was never
known to smile. He was known as Jolly Jack as a result. But he was a fellow of
the Royal College of Needlework. And that was his outlet for his more gentle
side. Was it something that you took to? I mean, I saw in your Twitter, you were
enjoying the pandemic seemed to fall in love with the estate, you know, which
you live on pictures of trees. You were taking pictures of flora and fauna. I
mean, privileged person, there you are. You went back to nature, it seemed to me
a bit. I think so. I think, well, they say you get God or gardening at a certain
age. I got the gardening thing, I think. Just for you who likes knitting and we
celebrate all listeners who like knitting. In particular, says the article Colin
Farrell's dark red fisherman's jump over stockinette panels with moss stitch
diamond and pearl stitch crisscross line motifs separated by narrow columns of
moss stitch. Not forgetting the long pointy collar. Exactly. I mean, another
beautiful line in there is when she realized that the jump was she did for
Brendan Gleason was an inch too short and she had to do it all again. She said
she she swore she took a glass of gemstone whiskey and she just pulled the whole
thing apart and started all over again. So what a woman. What a woman. How do we
make this programme? Getting many evil on your ails from the observer, Charles.
Yes, this is a fascinating thing. I'm treading on dangerous ground here, having
a leading scientist next to me. But the gist of this article by Amelia Tate is
that people are going back to the ancient ways, the medieval ways of curing
using leeches and maggots. I'm delighted to see that the flies eggs are
disinfected before they're brought in. But then there the newborn leeches are
fed on sheep's blood. It all sounds very sort of game of thrones. But apparently
there is some beneficial effect and and it says that the National Health Service
has had the use of leeches in every part of Britain apart from one postcode.
Should we be back to the future for some health? Well, we discussed this a
little bit before. I mean, you've always got to be careful of the anecdote. And
again, you know, one needs to do the rigorous science. But generally when
something has been around and used for, you know, hundreds or thousands of
years. So I think about acupuncture in the area of pain, there is something in
it. And so what one needs to do is bring modern science technologies to actually
do the correct trials to see whether there's something that is credible in there
as opposed to just changing people's expectations and outcomes. Alva, has Oxford
really burst the Bullingdon bubble from the Sunday Times? What does this say? So
I thought this was very interesting given the present company. This is I mean,
it's less about the Bullingdon Club. I'm more just about the balance between
private and state educated students at Oxford asking whether that has has really
changed asking is social engineering endangering two of our world class
institutions as someone who went to a state school and then to Oxford. I
actually don't have very much time for articles like this that sort of panic
about the lowering the proportion of private school pupils. I mean, 93% of the
of children in the UK go to state school is nowhere near like that at Oxford or
Cambridge. And I mean, I think it'd be great if we had even more state educated
students at Oxford and and everyone on this panel. The point of the article, the
only thing I'm really proud of about Oxford is that I came back to my room
trashed one day and I'd apparently been elected to the Bullingdon but wisely
turned it down. I hope that's not the only thing you're proud of. So, you know,
guess what? We've got 30 seconds in a massive We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC sounds. We ask a lot of our guests talking so
brilliantly in such a short time. Love you all to come back. Thank you so much.