TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 reef on a wrecked one, the fish think it's the real thing and swim back in.
This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. Hello and welcome to
Newsday on the BBC World Service with Katherine Biaunganga and Bola Mosul. The
world's top diplomats have been meeting in India at the G20 summit. Little
progress made on the issue of Ukraine, but now India, Australia, Japan and the
US will sit down to discuss their common interests, with China at the top of the
agenda. Emmanuel Macron continues his tour of Africa. He says he wants to reset
his relationship with the continent, with long-standing economic connections.
What does this mean for business? Following the tragic accident off the coast of
Italy when at least 67 migrants died, we follow the story of one Pakistani woman
who lost her life. And Cambodian democracy campaigner Kem Sokha is sentenced to
27 years in prison. The trial has been condemned by the West. That and more in
the latest world news. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The Cambodian
opposition leader Kem Sokha has been banned from politics and sentenced to 27
years in detention for treason. Kem Sokha was once considered the main
challenger to the long-term Prime Minister Hun Sen. Here's Jonathan Head. The
Cambodian courts are widely seen as being firmly under the control of Hun Sen,
the man who's ruled Cambodia for 38 years. So few will be surprised by this
verdict. Kem Sokha, a former human rights advocate, led the main opposition
party through a series of increasingly strong election performances to a point
where it seemed poised to unseat Hun Sen from power. In September 2017, he was
arrested in his home and charged with conspiring with the United States to
overthrow the government. His Cambodian National Rescue Party was dissolved and
most of its leaders either prosecuted or forced to flee into exile. Clashes
between protesters and the security forces outside an oil field in southern
Colombia have led to the deaths of a policeman and a civilian. Community leaders
took more than 80 police officers and oilfield workers as hostage. Leonardo
Rocha reports. The violence happened after days of protests by residents who'd
blocked access to the oil field in Kakhetar province in Colombia's Amazon
rainforest region. The protesters have been demanding that a company exploring
for oil there carry out work to improve conditions on a local road. The
situation remains tense in an area where dissident members of the FARC rebel
group are known to operate. President Gustavo Petro has sent a team to negotiate
with community leaders. He has also ordered the deployment of the armed forces
in the province. The US Justice Department has told a federal appeals court that
the former president, Donald Trump, should not be immune from prosecution over
civil lawsuits relating to the attack on the US Capitol two years ago. It said
the lawsuits brought by injured police officers and by Democrats were an
exception to the general practice that a president cannot be sued over official
duties. A prominent lawyer in the United States has been found guilty of killing
his wife and son at their mansion. Alex Murdoch showed little emotion as he was
convicted of shooting the pair at their family property in South Carolina in
June 2021. David Willis has more details. Alex Murdoch admitted embezzling
millions of dollars from his clients in order to feed an addiction to
prescription painkillers, but he denied killing his wife Maggie and son Paul in
an attempt to conceal his financial crimes. Despite the absence of a murder
weapon or DNA evidence linking Murdoch to the deaths, the jury found him guilty
of all charges after less than three hours of deliberation. Sentence has been
deferred until Friday. Alex Murdoch faces the possibility of life in prison.
World News from the BBC. The Tunisian authorities have banned a protest that was
due to take place on Sunday because they say leaders of the opposition coalition
that called it are suspected of crimes against the state. The National Salvation
Front said it planned to go ahead with the demonstration regardless. Some of its
leaders are among more than a dozen opponents of President Kai's side who've
been arrested over the past month in the biggest crackdown since he seized power
in 2021. The Scottish government has become the first in the world to ban an
anaesthetic gas named desfluorane from hospitals because of its contribution to
global warming. Smita Muntasat has the details. Over the last decade desfluorane
gas has been used widely in hospitals across the UK to help keep people
unconscious during operations but there's growing recognition that it can be
harmful to the environment and many British hospitals have already decided to
phase it out. Different anaesthetics are being used as alternatives. In Scotland
experts say eliminating the gas entirely from its peak use in 2017 will save
emissions equivalent to powering 1,700 homes a year. A similar ban is coming in
in England next year. The head of Britain's domestic intelligence service Ken
McCallum has made an unprecedented public apology for MI5's failure to prevent a
terrorist attack in Manchester in 2017. His expression of deep regret came after
an official report found that the suicide attack that killed 22 people might
have been avoided if intelligence officers had acted more promptly on
information they received. A new study says fires in the boreal forests of North
America and Eurasia are a ticking time bomb with greenhouse gas emissions
increasing over the last 20 years. Wildfires in the forests around the Arctic
Circle are increasingly frequent and have been linked to regional warming which
is the fastest in the world. Live from London that's the latest BBC News. Thanks
for that news Gareth and welcome to Newsday with Catherine Biarrahanga and Bola
Mosoro. Coming up this half hour we will head to Delhi where after Russia's
aggression in Ukraine the focus is now on China's influence in the region. That
will be the topic of discussion between the US and its allies. We'll also hear
about the people caught up in the tragic migrant boat accident in the
Mediterranean. We start in India where as I speak leaders of four of the most
powerful nations are meeting. The G20 meeting collapsed yesterday without a
final statement and while the quad namely the US, Japan, India and Australia
seem to have deepened in cooperation tensions over the situation in Ukraine has
created fractured diplomatic relations between some of the major powers. The US
Secretary of State Antony Blinken did meet with his Russian counterpart Sergey
Lavrov on Thursday but afterwards his State Department spokesperson Ned Price
reiterated the US's support for Ukraine's demand for an end to the war.
Countries around the world have stood up for the UN Charter. Ukraine has put
forward a proposal for a new UN Charter. The UN Charter is a UN document that is
a document that is a document that has a lot to do with peace. It's a document
that is a document that will be continued for all the UN Charter. Ukraine has
put forward a proposal for a just and durable peace to this. Secretary Blinken
wanted to convey to Foreign Minister Lavrov very directly, very clearly that
we're going to continue to support Ukraine but no one wants to see this war end
more quickly than Ukraine and we're right there with them. We are ready, willing
to support any diplomatic initiative that Ukraine sees fit to bring about that
just and durable conclusion. with the foreign ministers of the Quad and all
share concern about China's expanding influence. Joining us now is Alan Bem,
who's the director of the International and Security Affairs Program at the
Australia Institute in Canberra. Greetings to you. Can you tell us more about
the Quad and how they work in tandem and this kind of growing alliance of the
four nations? Yes, well, good morning to you and to your listeners too. The Quad
is a rather strange beast. It represents the four leading democracies that
impact on the Indo-Pacific region, the United States, Japan, India, and
Australia. And these are rule of law countries which have quite a lot of common
interest in the way in which they operate themselves and in the general
direction that they pursue in matters of regional economic and military
security. So they got together because, of course, there is a very, very big
change in the strategic balance going on right at the moment in Asia with the
inevitable rise of China, both as an economic and a strategic force. So they've
been brought together because they're interested in how that works, what's going
to happen. They're joined through common interests, and they're usually rather
reluctant to say what the real focus is, which, of course, is China. Yes, and in
this case, what are we likely to see in terms of cooperation and what they may
agree in terms of how to quell the influence of China? Well, it's an interesting
thing, I think, to many commentators that what the Quad focuses on is less the
causes of China's rise and the causes of competition with the United States. And
it deals, at least in public, with the consequences of that radical change. So
their focus has tended to be on things like cybersecurity, cooperation around
new protocols in communications, the things that are obviously worrying a great
number of countries in the world, and the Quad not least among them. But they
are also thinking very deeply about how they are able to manage the consequences
of China's rise, but without impacting on the overall security of the Indo-
Pacific region. And are they, I mean, in a way, they're being quite overt in
their, let's say, how they're unified in opposition against China. But do they
also have to balance this with diplomatic concerns and without kind of shaking
things too much? Oh, look, absolutely. I think that they are concerned, but they
do steer away from anything which might be taken as a provocation. And there is,
of course, a difference between being concerned about how China is going to
express its newfound power and then provoking China in actually having to
express that power. And so what they are more inclined to do is to make sure
that they present the four countries a united front in being able to talk to
China about the things that matter to them, China's role in the region. You
would note, for example, that at the G20, the Australian foreign minister, at
the very least, had a conversation with the Chinese foreign minister and said,
well, it is a good thing that China has come up with a peace proposal for
Ukraine, but let's see how you're going to go about doing it. Now, that is a
welcoming gesture. It's not a provocative one, but it is one I think that all of
the countries in Southeast Asia would be very interested to see how China
carries its recommendation forward. So that's the sort of thing that the Quad
does talk about and in which it is, of course, interested. Trying to find that
fine balance. Alan Bem, thank you very much for joining us today. He's the
director of the International and Security Affairs Programme at the Australia
Institute in Canberra. There's still a lot of soul-searching and questions being
asked following the shipwreck off the coast of Italy on Sunday, which led to the
deaths of at least 67 people. Those on board are believed to have been migrants
from Afghanistan, Somalia, Iran, and Pakistan, who were on the vessel, which was
clearly not seaworthy. Well, while Italian authorities are blaming human
traffickers, others are calling for reform of asylum laws. Now, faces are being
put to some of the victims, and it's believed one of those who perished was the
Pakistani professional hockey player, Shahida Raza. The 27-year-old mother was
trying to reach Italy to get medical treatment for her three-year-old son. Well,
we're now joined by the BBC's Caroline Davis, who is in Islamabad. Caroline,
tell us, what do we know about Shahida's story? Well, Catherine, yesterday I
spoke to Shahida Raza, who is Shahida's younger sister. And she told me a little
bit about her sister, the determination her sister had, how she used to always
make the family laugh, and of course, the fact that she was a professional
hockey player, but she was also a professional football player who played
nationally for Pakistan as well. And she told me a little bit about what they
knew about what had happened to their sister. The last time they spoke to her
was on a Sunday morning. They said it was around 7 o'clock in the morning when
they received a phone call from her. She was on board the ship, and she told
them that she had nearly reached Italy. She was praising God and sounding
incredibly relieved. She was saying that she was very worried about what might
have happened to her at sea. And so now she finally felt she was on the final
stages. But of course, that was the last time they heard from her. The call
dropped off. They weren't able to speak to her again. And they believe, and
they've heard through different sources, that they now believe that Shaheeda was
one of those who died when the ship was wrecked on the coastline in Italy. And
just tell us why she made this journey. What did they tell you about the reasons
why she really made this treacherous journey to try to get to Italy? They were
really clear about exactly the reasons why she did this. And they say that was
entirely down to trying to help her son. Now, according to Shaheeda, her sister,
Shaheeda had a three-year-old boy who, when he was 40 days old, suffered a
stroke which left him partially paralysed. And despite having taken him to
hospitals here in Pakistan, Shaheeda says that her sister was told, there's
nothing further in terms of treatment that we can offer you here, but maybe
perhaps if you went abroad, there might be something there. And that after the
years of trying and seeing her son not able to walk properly, she was desperate
to do something to try to help him. And so this was the decision that she had
made, that they think that's the only reason she decided to do this journey.
Now, that still leaves quite a few questions. The family don't know whether or
not Shaheeda tried to do this through legal routes first and then went down this
different path. What we do know is that quite often, human traffickers convince
the people that they're trying to take abroad that this is going to be one of
the easier ways of doing it, that it means that they're able to get settled
faster, that they're able to bypass the system faster than if they were doing it
through legal routes. We've got no idea why Shaheeda decided that this was the
path that she was going to take to try to find the treatment for her son. But
that is the reason the family solely believe that she decided to do this. Some
family members have been able to go to southern Italy to identify their loved
ones. What does Shaheeda's family hope to happen next? Do they think they can go
to Italy to try and bring her body back? They didn't mention that when we were
speaking to them. In fact, they said that the main thing that they really wanted
was for her body to be sent back. And that was their main request, is that at
this stage, they obviously know that their sister is gone, that they want to
simply be able to have a body that they are able to bury and to have that final
resting place for her. And are we seeing more Pakistanis making similar
journeys, Caroline? That's a question that we've been asking. It's very
difficult to get to the bottom of, because of course, all of these routes are
illegal. And so finding any sort of figures to see whether this is changing is
really difficult to know. We've obviously heard about this story that happened
on Sunday. But during our investigations into this, we also found out that only
a few days before, there was another shipwreck that happened that involved
several Pakistanis. And that was off the coast of Libya, trying to get to Italy
as well. Now, it's really difficult to say exactly the reasons why everybody
makes these journeys. Of course, everyone will have their own story about why
they're doing it. But there is a very difficult economic situation here in
Pakistan. Inflation reached over 30% just a few days ago. And we know that the
youth unemployment here has been rising as well, nearly tenfold in the course of
the last 10 years. And so some people that we have spoken to, families who've
lost loved ones in these sorts of incidents, have said that they think that
their loved ones decided to make these journeys because they didn't feel that
there was an economic future for them here in Pakistan. And they hope that there
might be something better if they went abroad. Thank you. The BBC's Caroline
Dave is there with the story of Shahid Araza, one of the six or seven people
killed there off the coast of Italy. He's heard indeed. Now let's get all the
latest sports news with Rebecca Adams. Thank you, Bala. Well, former England
cricket captain Michael Vaughan is to give evidence later on day three of the
public hearing into allegations of racism made by former teammate Azeem Rafiq.
Rafiq first made the claims of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket in 2020, which
Vaughan denies. In football, FIFA could change the World Cup format for the 2026
tournament back to four team groups. The expanded competition in the US, Mexico
and Canada was due to feature 16 groups of three. Barcelona beat Real Madrid 1-0
in the Copa del Rey semi-final first leg. They triumphed after an own goal from
Real defender Eder Militao in the first half. The Formula One season gets
underway later today with first practice for the Bahrain Grand Prix ahead of
Sunday's race. And in golf, world number one Jan Ramm shot an opening round 65
to lead the Arnold Palmer Invitational by two strokes. And there's more sport in
half an hour. Thank you very much, Rebecca. Yes, you're listening to Newsday
from the BBC with Bala and Catherine. Our top headlines this morning, Cambodia's
most prominent opposition leader, Kem Sokha, has been barred from politics and
jailed for 27 years for treason. More than 80 police officers and oil workers
have been taken hostage by protesters at an oil field in Colombia's Amazon
region. One police officer and one civilian have been killed in the incident.
The US Justice Department has said that former President Donald Trump should not
be immune from prosecution in civil lawsuits over his supporters' attacks on
Congress two years ago. The number of people confirmed dead in Tuesday's train
crash in Greece has risen to 57. You're listening to Newsday on the BBC World
Service. And that's where we leave our colleagues at the BBC World Service and
ready ourselves for Friday's programmes here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning, this
is Jane Steel. Filming today, here's from a co-op of fruit and salad growers
from Belgium at quarter to six, and that's followed by a bird that can descend
headfirst down a tree and hang upside down beneath twigs and branches. You can
hear the call of this little gymnast just before six. The Shipping Bulletin and
News Briefing are coming up next, but first we leap ahead to 11.30 this morning.
Lem Sisse is a one-off. Are you the poet a woman said to me in the street? Lem
Sisse isn't anyone else. Now I can say, she said, that I finally met Benjamin
Zephaniah. Lem Sisse explores uniqueness. You are a visible original, a pinnacle
of miracle. We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room.
You just said you failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem Sisse is the
one and only. Are you that poet, Tony Walsh? On Friday mornings at 11.30 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Our usual news briefing is just under 10 minutes away,
but first we join Helen Willets. Jane, thank you very much. Good morning. It's
time for the Shipping Forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the
Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0505 on today, Friday, the 3rd of March,
2023. The general synopsis at midnight. High Faroes, 1035. Expected Baily, 1034
by midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking, north at
zero. Northerly or northwesterly, four or five. Increasing five to seven.
Perhaps gale eight later in north at zero. Wintry showers later. Good.
Occasionally poor later. South at zero. Northwestly, five or six. Increasing
seven later. Perhaps gale eight later. Showers later. Good. Forties. North or
northwest, four to six. Showers later. Good. Cromarty. Northwest, three to five.
Showers later. Good. Fourth, Tyne. North, two to four. Backing northwest, three
to five. Showers. Good. Dogger. Northerly or northeasterly, four or five.
Occasionally six later in the east. Showers later. Good. Fisher. Northwest, five
to seven. Perhaps gale eight later. Showers later. Good. Gemminbyte. North or
northwest, three to five. Increasing five to seven later. Fair. Good. Humber.
North backing northwest later, three to five. Fair. Good. Thames. Northeast,
four or five. Backing north, three to five. Fair. Good. Dover, White, Portland.
Northeast, four or five. Occasionally six at first. Fair. Good. Plymouth.
Northeast, three to five. Fair. Good. Biscay. Northerly, veering northeasterly,
three or four. Occasionally five in north. Showers. Good. Fitzroy. East or
northeast, three to five. Occasionally six later near Iberia. Showers. Good.
Seoul. East or northeast, three or four. Occasionally five later. Showers. Good.
Lundy, Fasnet. Northeast, three or four. Decreasing two at times later in Lundy.
Fair. Good. Irish Sea. East, becoming variable two to four. Showers. Good.
Shannon. East, two to four. Fair. Good. Rockall. East, two to four. Becoming
variable three or less. Showers. Good. Hebrides. Sorry, Malin. Hebrides.
Variable two to four. Fair. Good. Bailey. Variable three or less. Showers. Good.
Farrell. Northwest, veering north, four to six. Showers. Good. Faroes.
Northwest, four to six. Becoming variable two to four later. Showers. Good. And
finally, southeast Iceland. Northwesterly, becoming cyclonic, three to five.
Showers. Good. The weather reports now from coastal stations for 0400 on today,
the 3rd of March, 2023. Tari Automatic. East by north, one. Slight rain, 22
miles, 1,033 now falling. Stornoway. Southeast by east, one. 24 miles, 1,033
falling slowly. Lerwick. Northwest by west, three. 27 miles, 1,031 falling
slowly. Lucas. North by east, two. 19 miles, 1,032 steady. Bridlington.
Northwest by north, two. 1,029 falling slowly. Sandeti Light Vessel Automatic.
Northeast, six. 11 miles, 1,026. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast,
six. Five miles, 1,025. Jersey. Northeast, three. 12 miles, 1,025 falling
slowly. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. Northeast by east, five. 1,026. Scilly
Automatic. Northeast by north, four. Eight miles, 1,027 falling slowly.
Valencia. Northeast by north, two. 27 miles, 1,029 falling slowly. Ronaldsway.
East by north, three. 1,030 rising slowly. And Mallinhead. Southeast by east,
three. 27 miles, 1,032 falling slowly. And here is the weather forecast for the
inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24
hours and issued by the Met Office at 0500 on today, Friday the 3rd of March,
2023. The general situation, high pressure will remain centred to the northwest
of Scotland, giving a predominantly slack northerly or northeasterly flow. So
let's start with Cape Wrath to Raptory Head, including Orkney. Northwesterly,
three to five, becoming variable two to four later. Showers later, good. Raptory
Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. Northerly or northwesterly, three or four,
occasionally five in the north, becoming variable two to four for a time in the
south. Showers later, good. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. Northerly backing
northwesterly later, three or four, fair, good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point.
Northerly, three or four, occasionally five later, backing northwesterly four or
five later, fair, good. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Northerly or
northeasterly, backing northwesterly later, three to five, fair, good. North
Forland to Celseybill. Northeasterly, four or five, backing northerly three or
four later, fair, good. Celseybill to Lime Regis. Northeasterly, three to five,
fair, good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly.
Northeasterly, three to five, fair, good. Land's End to St David's Head,
including the Bristol Channel. Easterly or northeasterly, two to four, fair,
good. St David's Head to Great Orm Head, including the St George's Channel,
variable, mainly easterly or northeasterly, two to four, fair, good. Great Orm
Head to the Mull of Galloway, variable, two to four, showers at first, good. The
Isle of Man. Easterly or northeasterly, backing northerly later, two to four,
mainly fair, good. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Lock. Easterly, two to four,
becoming variable three or less, then northerly or northwesterly, two to four
later, showers at first, good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including
the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Easterly, two to four, becoming variable
three or less, then northwesterly three or four later, in the North Channel.
Fair, good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenmouth and Poitiers. Mull of Kintyre to
Ardenmouth and Poitiers. Easterly, two to four, becoming variable three or less,
then northerly three or four later, fair, good. Ardenmouth and Poitiers to Cape
Brath. Variable three or less, becoming northerly or northwesterly, two to four,
fair, good. And finally, the Shetland Isles. Northwesterly, varying northerly,
three to five, occasionally six in the east, the weather with showers, the
visibility, good. And that completes this year's Shipping Bulletin, a very quiet
weather picture with that high pressure in charge. I'll bring you the detail of
the cloud in a few minutes. Jane. Thanks, Helen. This is BBC Radio 4. It's half
past five on Friday, the 3rd of March. Good morning. This is News Briefing with
Jane Steel. There are indications that the government could extend its support
for household energy bills beyond next month. Labour's decision to offer a job
to the civil servant who carried out the Partygate inquiry has sparked anger
among some Tory MPs. A couple are due to appear in court after the body of a
baby was found in woodland. In business, there are concerns that the UK's stock
market is losing out to overseas rivals, after a British technology giant chose
to list in the US instead. And in sport, the former England cricket captain
Michael Vaughan is expected to appear before a panel looking into the racism
scandal at Yorkshire County Cricket Club. The BBC understands that a number of
energy companies are preparing for the government to maintain some level of
support for home energy bills beyond next month. Typical households are due to
see their energy costs rise from April as government help is scaled back. But
some suppliers are assuming that it will continue in some form as ministers face
intense pressure to support those struggling. The Treasury said it was reviewing
the situation but wouldn't respond to speculation. Allies of Boris Johnson have
reacted angrily to the news that the senior civil servant Sue Gray has been
offered a job as Chief of Staff to the Labour leader Sikir Stalmer. The former
senior civil servant led the investigation into lockdown parties in Downing
Street, which was highly critical of Mr Johnson, who was Prime Minister then.
The Conservative peer Lord Greenhouse said the job offer called into question Ms
Gray's impartiality. You do not hire someone so close to you without having
considerable engagement. To what extent do we think that she wasn't informally
briefing him? She's in the Cabinet Office in Duloc. She's right at the heart in
the engine room of government. To what extent do we think that she wasn't having
conversations about things in government? I mean, the idea that hasn't been
happening is patently ludicrous. A man and a woman will appear in court later
today after the body of a baby was found in woodland near Brighton. Constance
Martin and Mark Gordon have been charged with gross negligence manslaughter and
concealing the birth of a child. Police said a post-mortem examination would be
carried out today. The chief executive of HS2 has told the BBC that various
options are being considered to control the spiralling cost of the high-speed
rail project. Mark Thurston said these could include delaying its completion.
One estimate has previously suggested the final price could exceed £100 billion.
The government says it's committed to delivering HS2 from London Euston to
Manchester and regular reviews are conducted to ensure it represents value for
money. Mr Thurston said various possibilities were being considered. We're
looking at the timing of the project, the phasing of the project. We're looking
at where we can use our supply chain to secure a lot of those things that are
costing us more through inflation. Are there smarter ways of buying our energy,
for example? How can we engineer a job in a different way? A prominent US lawyer
has been found guilty of killing his wife and son. Alex Murdoch shot the pair at
their family mansion in South Carolina in June 2021. Prosecutors said he wanted
to distract attention from his theft of millions of dollars from clients, which
he used to fund an expensive drug habit. The guilty verdict was read out in
court. The State v. Richard Alexander Murdoch defendant, indictment for murder,
SC code 16-3-0010, CDR code 0116, verdict guilty, signed by the forelady. The
Scottish government has become the first in the world to ban an anaesthetic gas
named Desfluorine from hospitals because of its contribution to global warming.
Desfluorine has been widely used for more than a decade, but there's growing
recognition that it can be harmful to the environment. Now, Helen Willets is
back with today's weather. Thank you, Jane. Well, it's high pressure again, as
yesterday, but there will be subtle differences on where we see the sunshine and
where we don't. So it's a chilly start all round, even where we have the cloud,
because it's just inherently cold air, which will be with us for the best part
of a week now. So a little bit of early frost, particularly where the cloud
stays broken, has stayed broken through the night in the far north of Scotland
and in parts of the southeast, and also just a little bit of patchy mist and
fog. The detail for England and Wales sees a little more cloud, though, today,
notably more for the Midlands East Anglia and Southern England compared with
yesterday, but there's a bit more breeze as well coming in off the North Sea. So
hopefully we'll see a few more breaks in the cloud developing come this
afternoon across eastern parts of England, East Anglia and the southeast. But on
the whole, there's going to be quite a bit of cloud, and actually it's thick
enough for the odd light shower in Northern England right now. So as a
consequence, with a little bit more breeze and more cloud in those areas that
were sunny yesterday, it will feel a bit chillier and temperatures will be a
little bit lower, around about seven or eight generally. But where we do see the
sun coming out locally, we could get up to 10 degrees Celsius. For Northern
Ireland, also a lot of cloud this morning, and we do have some showers around
here, and they'll tend to come and go through the day. We do keep a lot of
cloud. I suppose the best chance of some sunshine breaking through may well be
towards the north coast later on, but temperatures here too around about six or
seven. Now for Scotland, we have got a bit more cloud as well across the north
of Scotland today compared with yesterday. But here we still have the best
chance of some sunshine breaking through to survive the brisk breeze, but still
a few showers under that thicker cloud further south. Jane, highs today around
six or seven. Helen Willetts, thank you. Time for a look at the papers. Is this
proof the Partigate probe was a Labour plot? asked the Daily Mail. It says
there's outrage among Conservative MPs over what it calls Sir Keir Starmer's
plum job offer to Sue Gray. It says allies of Boris Johnson believe it shows the
senior civil servant's investigation into Downing Street lockdown parties was a
stitch-up. The Guardian reports that they've launched an all-out effort to
scupper a parliamentary inquiry into the scandal. According to The Times, the
Prime Minister is concerned Ms Gray could use privileged information to benefit
Labour. The Financial Times says Rishi Sunak may intervene to block her from
taking up the role for months. The latest instalment of the so-called lockdown
files in the Daily Telegraph suggests that during the pandemic, senior police
officers were summoned to Downing Street and told to be strict in enforcing
Covid rules. Leaked WhatsApp messages reveal that then Health Secretary Matt
Hancock gave them what he called marching orders and suggested ministers needed
to get heavy with the police. The paper says the messaging suggests a worrying
erosion of the police's operational independence. The Telegraph also reports
that officials joked about locking up travellers in what they called shoebox
rooms when they returned from holidays. It quotes WhatsApp messages from when
the UK introduced quarantine hotels to reduce the risk of spreading coronavirus.
In the Daily Mirror, teachers respond to the messages in which Mr Hancock and
the former Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson criticised them and their
unions. One teacher tells the paper they were beyond angry and frankly
disgusted. Another described the comments as repugnant. The paper's leader
column says teachers were absolute heroes during the pandemic, while the two
ministers sent puerile messages like silly schoolboys. Mr Hancock says the
messages are a partial account spun with an agenda. Sir Gavin insists he was
referring to some unions and not teachers. MI5 could have stopped him, says the
front page of the digital-only Independent, as it reports on the findings of the
inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing. Failed is the Daily Mirror's take on
the story. The Guardian focuses on what it calls the fury of the victims'
families. The Sun says the bomber, Salman Abadi, had been freed to murder
angels. Its headline is, 22 who should be alive. The Mirror reports that the
Duke and Duchess of Sussex were evicted from their UK home after the King
learned of Harry's accusations against the Queen Consort. Sources tell the paper
that the King was outraged by the Duke's claims, including that Camilla had
leaked stories to the press. They say the monarch believed his son had crossed a
line. According to the Eye, Wales employ a vocal technique similar to one used
by humans to help them track and catch their prey. It says a study has found
that when hunting, sperm whales, dolphins and porpoises use a vocal fry, which
involves dropping the voice to its lowest natural register. The paper compares
their singing with that of Mick Jagger and Britney Spears. Now, with the latest
business news, here's Katie Silver. The British technology giant Arm has
confirmed it will list in the United States, not in London, adding to concerns
that the UK's stock market is losing out to overseas rivals. The chip designer
was listed in London until it was bought by Japanese conglomerate SoftBank in
2016. The announcement comes a day after building materials giant CRH announced
it would move its main share listing from the UK to New York. Data shared with
the BBC by the property portal Rightmove suggests that all-inclusive rents,
which include bills in the monthly price, have risen up the priority list among
tenants. The acceptance of pets in rental properties remains the biggest concern
among tenants looking for a new home, but whether bills are included in the rent
has moved up to second on the list, having been fourth a year ago. A single bill
may be attractive during periods of uncertainty, but tenants' groups warn it
removes their power to cut back energy use to save money. The boss of one of
Europe's biggest energy suppliers, Germany's E.ON, has warned Europe may have to
get used to paying higher prices. Leonard Birnbaum has told the BBC that the
move away from Russian gas has meant a shift to more expensive liquid natural
gas, or LNG, which has to be shipped to the continent. And that is not going to
change. Clearly we have lost competitiveness. So the European industry in total
now has a higher energy level than it has seen in the past, and this will not go
away. On the markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones finished up more
than 1% at 33,004, and the FTSE 100 ended up 29 points at 7,944. In Japan a
short time ago, the Nikkei 225 was up almost 1.5% at 27,898. On the currency
markets, the pound is trading at $1.20. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.13.
That makes a euro 89 pence. Sport Now and the former England cricket captain
Michael Vaughan is expected to give evidence to the Commission examining the
racism scandal surrounding Yorkshire County Cricket Club today. With news of
that and the rest of the headlines is Paul Serres. Vaughan is the only one of
seven individuals charged who has chosen to participate in the process. He
categorically denies racism allegations made by the former Yorkshire player,
Azim Rafiq. Meanwhile, England face Bangladesh in the second one-day
international later this morning in Mirpur. The tourists lead the three-match
series 1-0. The Formula One season gets underway this afternoon with first
practice at the Bahrain Grand Prix ahead of Sunday's race. Golf's world number
one John Rahm shot an opening round 65 to lead the Arnold Palmer Invitational by
two strokes. Aaron Rye is the best placed Briton on four under par, three
strokes back. Britain's Keely Hodgkinson began the defence of her 800-metre
title by reaching the semi-finals at the European Indoor Athletics Championships
in Istanbul. The Olympic silver medallist, who turns 21 today, will race
alongside fellow Brit Isabel Boffi tomorrow. And Warrington Wolves came from
behind to beat Salford Red Devils 36-20 and continue their perfect start to the
Super League season. Finally, a glance back at some of the stories that were
making news on this date in earlier years. In 2019, Elon Musk's SpaceX Dragon
capsule successfully docked with the International Space Station during an
unmanned demonstration run. On this day in 2014, Ukraine said its forces in
Crimea had been told by Russia to surrender or face a full military assault. The
Russian Black Fleet denied there were plans to launch an attack. After a car
chase through Los Angeles, police brutally beat a black driver, Rodney King, in
1991. The attack was videoed by a witness who sold the film to a television
station. The police officers were charged with assault, but their acquittal on
most charges the next year would spark the Los Angeles riots in which more than
60 people died. Leaders of the NUM voted to end the year-long miners' strike in
1985. The industrial action, the longest in British history, ended without a
deal over pit closures. The Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, said her personal
feelings were of overwhelming relief. I want a prosperous coal industry,
obviously, but the privations that some of those families have been through and
that have been back earlier had it not been kept going by intimidation, and I'm
very glad now that they can go back. In 1969, the Apollo 9 space mission was
launched from Cape Kennedy in Florida. The 10-day mission, orbiting Earth, was
designed to test the lunar landing craft and module for an eventual landing on
the Moon. The BBC announced plans to begin broadcasting television programmes in
colour in 1966. The first colour pictures were from Wimbledon the following
year. And in 1938, American engineers struck oil in Saudi Arabia on this day.
The discovery marked the beginning of an era of extraordinary wealth for the
Gulf state. And that completes this morning's news briefing. This is BBC Radio
4, where it's time for Prayer for the Day with the Rev Dr Sarah Rowland-Jones,
the Dean of St David's Cathedral in Pembrokeshire. Good morning. Today is the
last of our week of prayer celebrating St David, Dewi Sand, which began with me
in Jerusalem. I'm now back in St David's, and today we consider how words can
move mountains. The best known of the miracle stories developed around David's
life relates to the Synod of Brevi. Known as a holy man and wise teacher, he was
called upon to settle theological disagreement. It is said that as he spoke, the
ground rose under him, so all could see him, and a dove, symbolising the Holy
Spirit, settled on his shoulder, demonstrating God's approval. His words carried
the day, and the church at Thlandewi Brevi indeed stands atop a small hill.
Other words attributed to David have had lasting influence. On the final Sunday
before his death, it is said he preached, Be joyful, keep the faith, and do the
little things that you have seen and heard from me. Be joyful. It's a call to be
optimistic, constructive, generous and open-hearted, to encourage and bring out
the best in one another. Keep the faith. We should live with integrity and
honesty, be trustworthy, and help one another uphold high standards, values and
principles. And do the little things. Be diligent, keep our promises, persevere
in all that is good and right and true. Our patron saint provides a moral
compass not only for Wales, or for Christians. These are wise words for people
of every faith and none, that we know that God will help all those who aspire to
live by them. Lord God, we thank you for St David Dewey Saint. Help us in our
day also to be joyful, keep the faith, and do the little things you set before
us. Amen. Prayer for the Day was presented by the Rev. Dr. Sarah Rowland-Jones,
the Dean of St David's Cathedral in Pembrokeshire. Now on Radio 4, Farming Today
with Charlotte Smith. Good morning. Today, prices and cooperatives, the European
tomato growers visiting the UK. There's a race to the bottom price-wise. And
when there's a shortage and you want to have cheap supply, this will not mix. So
that's the reason I think you are now a little bit in trouble. If the customer
is willing to pay the price, we have produce available. More from them later.
First, all this week we're focusing on the pig industry and some of the
challenges farmers face, quite apart from those of markets and finances that
have dominated the agenda for the past couple of years. Welfare, and
particularly the problem of tailbiting in groups of pigs, has long plagued the
industry. So why does it happen and what solutions are being investigated to try
to minimise what is a painful and costly issue? Nancy Nicholson has been to a
research farm owned by SRUC, Scotland's rural college, where she changed into
overalls and wellingtons and joined Professor of Animal Welfare, Richard Deeth,
in the pig shed. Pigs evolved to live in forests where they dig up and root to
get their food. And when they're provided with straw like this, they can spend
quite a lot of time interacting with it. But on other farms, they don't have as
much loose material. And in those situations, they may turn to biting tails.
There can also be other stresses, so changes in temperature or disease. In the
past, farmers were able to routinely dock a pig's tail when it was born, but
that's no longer standard practice, is it? Docking the tail to about half its
length is an effective way of reducing the problem of tail biting. But some
years ago now, the routine use of that practice has been banned. But it still,
unfortunately, is the case that on many farms, the vets will recommend that
that's the best thing to do for the pigs. So probably more than half the pigs in
the UK are still docked. So what we're looking at here is a pen of pigs on
straw, looking pretty happy with themselves and rolling over there. They've all
got long tails. So you're clearly not docking them. What's the project here? The
main thing that we're interested in here is monitoring the position of the pig's
tails. And that's because some earlier research showed that when tail biting
begins in a pen, the pigs start to hold their tails down more. So in this pen,
we've got 3D camera technology, and these 3D cameras are able to automatically
record the posture of the tails that come underneath the camera. Right, so they
look a wee bit like ordinary security cameras from my perspective, but also with
us in here, Wellington's on, like the rest of us, is David Barclay from InnoVent
Technology. What's your role in this? Is it the technical one? Yes, so we're the
3D camera component of the project. The 3D cameras sit above the feeder or
drinker in the pen. Every time a pig comes underneath, we take a picture, we do
some analysis on that picture, we can measure the posture of the tail, and the
hypothesis is that the tail angle can predict tail biting. So do you think that
cameras can be better than a good stocks person, keeping a good eye on that pen?
No, no, definitely not. A good stocks person is a rare thing. And we use the
cameras to document those people, give them more tools in their inventory to try
and understand what's going on, earlier predictions, better management, more
data. It is a difficult time for the pig industry to be investing. They've
obviously, as you know, gone through some pretty tough times. Are you seeing
farmers taking this technology up? Yes, definitely. What we're looking at with
these cameras is developing the growth curve and layering on different sensor
technologies to help these guys understand what's going on, increase efficiency.
And Rick, would it be better all round if pigs could be in an environment where
they don't get stressed in the first place and tail biting doesn't happen? It
would, yeah, but there's a certain demand out there for pork products at a
reasonable price. You know, in the Middle Ages, we used to keep pigs in forests
and a boy from the village would walk around with a stick and they would eat the
acorns and the beech nuts and we didn't need to cut their tails then. Yeah,
there's a trade-off between the sort of ideal, natural, idealistic vision of a
pig in a forest compared to the realities of modern commercial production. But
we've not given up on tails. There's lots of different approaches to try and
improve this problem. Professor Rich Deeth there. Now, with rather good timing,
a group of Belgian salad and fruit growers have arrived for a tour of UK farms
and retailers. With shortages continuing on supermarket shelves here, blamed by
retailers on bad weather in Morocco and Spain, and by growers on retailers'
refusal to pay a realistic price for homegrown produce, it's going to be an
interesting visit. The visiting growers are all members of the Belgian grower
cooperative Belorta, which has a thousand members and exports to the UK and
across Europe. Philipp Appeltans is the CEO and started by giving his
perspective of our current shortages. What we have seen after Brexit, that also
retailers, if I look to tomatoes, cucumbers, even strawberries, they made a
shift also to the Moroccan suppliers and they were suffering from cold, all the
bad growing conditions, and they have less produce available. When they have to
choose where to send it, you still, of course, Brexit you, you have all the
custom declarations, we have the supply issues, also for the sanitary
certificates, it's adding costs, it's adding red tape, so they prefer to send it
somewhere else. On the other hand also, we have a feeling, especially on retail
side, not on wholesaler side, but there's a race to the bottom price-wise. And
yeah, of course, when there's a shortage and you want to have cheap supply, this
will not mix. So that's the reason I think you are now a little bit in trouble,
if I see from a Belgian point of view. We hope that the coming weeks, also when
our tomato quantities, our eggplants and so on are increasing, that we can help
to solve the problem. But anyway, this cannot be at the cheapest price as
retailers are expecting. We have inflation, inflation means also our production
costs, our logistic costs, they are much higher. Also, our growers, they need to
earn a decent income, they need to give a fair and a decent price. So even with
the extra cost because of Brexit, you're happy to export here if you can get the
price. And if you can't, you'll just export to somewhere else. I think this is
the right conclusion. This is the right conclusion. But what I've seen, not
looking back to the last two months with the problems you have over here, after
Brexit, even from a Belgian point of view, we have exported more instead of
less. Can you get a better deal in Europe because both European retailers and
consumers are happy, well, not happy, are prepared to pay more? I think they
have to, but this is also, we have a typical market approach. Let's say for
really fresh produce, I'm not speaking about apples and pears because you can
store them for a longer time. We make contracts, let's say up to 30% of what we
have available. And the other volume price will be based on the week price from
last week or from daily prices. So when they're ready to pay this price, we can
offer and we will supply you. You're a big cooperative. We don't tend to have
cooperatives in this sector here in the UK. What advantages do you think it
gives you? It gives you bargaining power. You will have a better place in the
supply chain, in the value chain. But also for us as growers, we have also huge
quantities available. I think as Balorta, we have one and a half times the offer
of tomato than the whole UK production of tomatoes. So you're a reliable
supplier with huge quantities, which is interesting from a retail point of view.
Also, our growers, they can focus what they're good on and they can focus on
growing top quality tomatoes, cucumber, whatever. And we take care of the
marketing, the sales, food safety regulations. And this is also a win-win also
for our customers because if our people do the quality checks, there's no need
that they double the quality checks. So also you can save costs in the chain.
And at the end, there will be more money available for the growers. So my advice
to the UK growers is, please set up producer organisations, come together and
also then you have some power. Also, you have the resources to innovate, all the
new varieties to innovate, packaging-wise to innovate, marketing concepts and so
on. You need a certain scale, that's for sure. This year, have you produced less
because of the costs of heating and so on? Yes, but it's only related to
tomatoes and a little bit of cucumbers and strawberries. But the next week, we
will have a lot of normal harvest again. Energy prices, it's still, I think,
five times as we used to have. But it's reflected in the price. If I look to
Ballorta, today and yesterday, we sold around loose tomatoes, I think growers'
price, three euros a kilogram. But also when we have our special tomatoes,
tomatoes on the vine, example, Ruby Red, they are sold at six euros a kilogram.
So, and if the customer is willing to pay the price, we have produce available.
Philip Appeltons there. Now, three euros is about two pounds 66. So, to put that
in context, we've been ringing round UK tomato growers. Most of them refuse to
talk to us about prices at all. But we eventually gathered that for the loose
round ones that Philip talked about, they're paid between one pound 50 and one
pound 60 a kilo. And that includes packing them too. If you look at the prices
we pay in the supermarkets, Sainsbury's and Tesco will sell salad tomatoes for
one pound 75 a kilo, while in the Belgian supermarket delays, the standard
tomatoes are about four pounds 66 a kilo. Well, one of the Belgian growers, Wim
Vertoman, who produces three million kilos of tomatoes a year, told me inflation
has had a significant impact on his business. Minimum 20 percent and maybe 30
percent basic cost price is higher for the moment. And that's part energy, but
the wages of the people that work is in Belgium. We have an automatic index
system. It's already 10 percent higher, only the work. And all the products you
buy, nutrients, everything is going up very fast. Have you carried on producing
the same amount of tomatoes or are you producing... We are traditional. We don't
have artificial lights in our company, so we did exactly the same like the year
before. So next week we start producing the first curb above. If your costs have
gone up by about 30 percent, what about the price that you're selling for? Has
that also gone up by 30 percent? We try to negotiate, but we have also the
system with the cooperative that we put an amount of tomatoes for the auction
and then it's the market that decides. Sometimes we will not reach maybe our
cost price, but we hope because all Europe have all the same problem. So we hope
a little bit less production, so the price will go up with this system. Growers
here in the UK have had problems finding people to come and work in greenhouses.
How are you finding staff? Not so much problems, but we have a little bit of
problem in Belgium also. There is a shortness of people that want to work. So
this is a little bit of competition. So we have a lot of people from East Europe
and of course that in England is a little bit more difficult for the moment with
these people. So this amount of people are looking now at our side. We have a
lot of people that work in England that now say, Wim, can we come with you for a
season? So that's not the biggest problem. Flemish tomato grower Wim Vertoman
there. That's it from us. I'm Charlotte Smith. The studio manager is Michael
Harrison and the producer in Bristol is Heather Symons. And our Tweet of the
Day, Maya Rose Craig recalls the first bird that caught her eye, the nuthatch.
My first really striking encounter with a bird was probably when I was four and
I had just started primary school. I was birdwatching in the garden and I saw
this amazing flash of grey-blue and as soon as I came home I was really excited,
telling my parents all about how I'd seen this nuthatch at school and how
beautiful it was and I was very pleased. And it took me a while to realise that
they didn't believe me at the time. And it wasn't until a few weeks later when
there was a sudden snow and we went for a walk and I heard a call and I said,
hey, look, it's a nuthatch. Again, they were like, oh, that's lovely, Maya, and
then a bird flew down onto the tree and it was, sure enough, it was a nuthatch.
I think that's the first time that they realised that I was going to be a child
that was truly interested and passionate about birds. The nuthatch is the only
bird in Britain that goes down a tree head first instead of kind of edging down
backwards. They're actually very uncommon in the area which I live, just south
of Bristol, so it was really unusual for me to see one.