TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Coming up next it's business matters right here on the BBC World Service. Today
just why is the Governor of Florida picking a fight with this firm? Or how Ron
DeSantis became something of the Jafar in Disney's Kingdom to come after the
news. Also today another country bans its government workers from using video
app TikTok. We'll ask why Canada has joined that particular club. And just why
is it proving so hard for countries to create their own electric vehicle battery
supplies and could it run the electric car revolution off the road? All that and
much more with our guests on business matters after the latest world news. Hello
I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. President Biden has welcomed a deal between
Britain and the European Union over post Brexit trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland. He called it an essential step to preserve the Good Friday
Agreement which ended years of sectarian violence. Under the deal goods from the
British mainland destined for use in Northern Ireland will no longer be subject
to customs checks. This was a key demand of pro-British Northern Irish Unionist
politicians. But the Democratic Unionist Party politician Sammy Wilson told the
BBC Unionist support could not be guaranteed. President Biden more than anyone
should understand that people should not have things imposed on them if they
don't have a say in them. After all his own country originated because they
refused to have taxation without representation and Northern Ireland will still
continue to have foreign law imposed on it without proper representation. The
future of our country within the United Kingdom is at stake. The framework
announced by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and the European Commission President
Ursula von der Leyen marks a notable easing of tensions between London and
Brussels. Here's Jonathan Blake. To cheers from his backbenchers Rishi Sunak
said the Windsor framework achieved what many said couldn't be done. The Prime
Minister set out some of the details of the deal telling MPs a green lane for
goods staying in Northern Ireland had been created by a legally binding
amendment to the existing treaty that permanently removed the border in the
Irish Sea. The only checks required would be those needed to stop people
smugglers and criminals he said. The Labour leader Sakir Starmer said the
protocol was a compromise that would never be perfect but again pledged his
support. Nigeria's two main opposition parties have alleged fraud in Saturday's
presidential election following technical problems in the counting process.
Miani Jones is in Lagos. Polling station agents should have uploaded their
results onto the Electoral Commission's website straight after counting ended.
But that didn't happen. Voters reported issues with the voting machines and poor
connectivity. It took more than 24 hours for the first results to be announced,
fuelling speculation or foul play in a country with a history of vote buying and
rigging. Now the opposition says it has evidence the machines malfunctioned in
several states. The head of the Electoral Commission has denied this and stands
by the results. This is adding to an already fiercely contested election. Saudi
activists say prosecutors have charged 10 senior judges with high treason, which
means they could face the death penalty if found guilty. A US-based Dawn group
says the first hearing of the case was held in secret this month. The judges
have been held incommunicado since being arrested almost a year ago. This is the
World News from the BBC. Ukraine's President Zelensky has warned that the
situation around the embattled eastern town of Bakhmut is becoming increasingly
difficult. He said the invading Russians were destroying everything that could
be used by Ukrainian troops as fortification or defence. Much of Bakhmut has
been reduced to rubble. Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to normalising ties
through a European Union-brokered peace plan. After hosting talks in Brussels
with Kosovo's Prime Minister and the Serbian President, the EU's foreign policy
chief Josep Borrell said they had agreed to endorse the plan but more talks were
needed on its implementation. The Italian Prime Minister, Giorgia Maloney, says
she has written to EU leaders urging immediate action to stop migrant boat
departures a day after more than 60 people drowned when their boat sank in the
south of her country. The details now from Danny Eberhard. This tragedy is
causing political repercussions. For Prime Minister Maloney, whose right-wing
coalition aims to curtail irregular migration, the solution is stopping migrant
boat departures. Others criticise her approach. Those arguments will continue
across the EU. But today, individual grief was on display, with relatives from a
group of about 80 survivors visiting a makeshift morgue to try to identify dead
loved ones. Nearby, local residents had placed flowers, candles and messages,
one reading, Enough to Deaths at Sea. The Republican Governor of Florida, Ron
DeSantis, has approved legislation taking control of public services in the
special tax district surrounding Walt Disney World's vast theme park. Signing
the bill, he said, today the corporate kingdom finally comes to an end. Mr
DeSantis, who is widely expected to run for President, said Disney's half-
century of autonomy gave it an unfair advantage. BBC News. Hello and welcome to
Business Matters on the BBC World Service. Will Bain with you today. Great to
have you back with us. In a moment, just why has one of the world's biggest
entertainment firms fallen out with a potential Republican presidential
candidate? It's also a night of falling outs, isn't it? Because Canada has
become the latest country to fall out with this firm. We're making the decision
that for government employees, for government equipment, it is better to not
have them access TikTok because of the concerns that people have in terms of
safety. Yeah, much more on TikTok's latest woes before we leave you here on
Business Matters. As always, joined by two guests, hopefully no falling out
between them or with us, Jessica Kain, Corporate Advisor for Asteris Advisory in
Japan, a financial advisory firm. You're in Penang, Malaysia though, aren't you,
Jessica? Indeed, I'm based slightly separately from the headquarters. Yeah,
absolutely. Great to have you back with us though, even in a new role, I
believe, or certainly a new role since you were last on the show. Indeed, Will.
Lovely to be back with you and looking forward to contributing with your other
contributor. Is it Hayley? It is indeed. Yeah. It's Hayley Woodin, Editor-in-
Chief of Business in Vancouver, joining us from, yep, you guessed it, Vancouver,
Canada. Hayley, always great to have you back on the program as well. Thanks for
being with us. Great to be here. Thanks, Will. Yeah. Plenty for us to get to and
we're going to get to it. As you probably heard Neil mentioning in the news
there, we're going to start asking just how this firm drove the governor of the
US state of Florida to this. Today, the corporate kingdom finally comes to an
end. There's a new sheriff in town and accountability will be the order of the
day. Yeah, cheers and applause. As the Republican governor of Florida, Ron
DeSantis took aim at Disney and more specifically the special tax status Walt
Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida has, or perhaps had until now. Our North
America correspondent, Peter Bowes is with us. Peter, great to have you back on
Business Matters as well. Hi there. An extraordinary row. Run us through what's
been announced today or what Governor DeSantis was talking about today. Yes,
what he was talking about and historically, really for more than 50 years,
Disney's really this sprawling complex they have in Orlando, this theme park
over 100 square kilometres. It's operated as a self-governing area, as you've
just been reporting. That meant that it had control of local utilities, it had
its own fire department. And in fact, the creation of this self-governing
district was a big part of Disney's decision to build in that area near Orlando
back in the 1960s. And the justification was that it saved local taxpayers from
large infrastructure and other costs that are needed to operate a vast property
like this with millions of visitors every year. Now, Republicans have more
recently argued that the district gives Disney a commercial advantage that's not
available to other businesses. So under this new law, it means that Disney is
now subject to additional layers of external oversight through a state-appointed
five-member board. It's called the Central Florida Tourism Oversight District.
And it means, according to the governor, that Disney will be treated the same as
other theme parks. It won't be exempt from certain state regulations anymore,
including building and fire prevention codes. Yeah. So a bit of a headache for
Disney. The timing, Peter, as always with some of these things, not without a
little bit of backdrop too. Yes. And there are political ramifications to this.
There've been frictions, we should say, between Disney and the governor over the
last year, really dating back to this controversial bill, now a law signed by
Mr. DeSantis last April, which banned gender and sexuality education in Florida
schools for pupils aged nine and under. Now, supporters said the bill would
protect children from what they said was inappropriate content. It was dubbed
the Don't Say Gay Law. Disney opposed it, saying that it would isolate and
stigmatize LGBT youth. Now, Rhonda Santos responded to that opposition by, it
seems, calling on local lawmakers to strip Disney of what we've just been
talking about, its special governing power. So this action really is being seen
by many as the governor punishing Disney for taking that stance. And of course,
all of it a year out from a presidential run that many people think Governor
DeSantis might be a pretty strong candidate to chuck his hat into the ring if
and when he does chuck his hat into the ring. Yes, very much so. A lot of people
talking about Rhonda Santos, a possible opponent to Donald Trump to try to get
the Republican nomination. And clearly this move, at least on this very specific
issue, elevates his status, at least through the eyes of some Republicans, some
conservatives. Yeah, absolutely. And he clearly thinks that, doesn't he? The
clip that we played in the top is from Governor DeSantis' own Twitter account,
seconds after he made the speech. He clearly thinks he's onto something in terms
of, as he likes to phrase a lot of these things, anti-woke statements, rolling
back the tide of what he describes as too much woke culture spreading into
Florida, in his case, but he thinks across America as well. Yeah, exactly. And I
think that is the key, across America as well, because this has been an issue, a
political issue in this country for a number of years. It's an issue that Donald
Trump himself talked about many times. And clearly, for Ron DeSantis to put a
dividing line between himself and Donald Trump, clearly his main opponent at the
moment as things stand, he wants to highlight some of those issues that he knows
he is automatically going to get support from, from a certain section of the
Republican Party. I've got to stress, not all Republicans will go along with
this, but a large section on the right of the party, the Conservative wing of
the party, will go along with this. Yeah, he seems to hedge his bets a bit on
that as well. I've seen some great quotes from him that are on the BBC website,
if people want to see them, bbc.com.news, where Ron DeSantis says, in spite of
all the stuff that's happened over the past couple of years, I've always been
very proud of our parks, and also said he was a fan of Mickey Mouse. So maybe a
chance, Peter, for some reconciliation down the line, because we haven't heard
from Disney yet, have we? But I guess for both sides, certainly for the company,
we've had you on the programme a few times before talking about this, it's been
a bumpy few years, post pandemic, very difficult, cinemas closed, change of CEO,
old CEOs back again, the last thing they need is a very public row with a very
public politician, isn't it? Yeah, I think this is absolutely right. That's
certainly Disney at this time, as you say, very difficult economic times for
this huge company. They could well do without this row, not leaving aside the
practical implications, which I think we still need to see how they unfold over
the coming weeks. But clearly, just in terms of global publicity for them, it's
not what they want. Yeah, plenty of interesting developments there. Peter Bowes,
as always, thanks so much for coming on Business Matters. And bringing everybody
up to speed on that, Jessica and Hayley, listening in on that. Hayley, first of
all, you've been working, you were working and studying in the US in the past
year. You've seen a lot of this bubbling up, a heck of a lot of politics behind
this, isn't it? Oh, absolutely. And even though DeSantis doesn't always talk
about this in the context of the cultural consequences, it certainly I think the
timing of it, and that he's pushing back on Disney, it really was seen as a
cultural move. And that pushback, as you were discussing of being anti-anti-woke
or however he likes to phrase it. Yeah. Do you get a sense of that? I mean, you
spend a lot of time in the US, as I mentioned, in the last couple of years, do
you get a sense that that's kind of a winning ticket in a way? Can you see why
he's doing that? Are there enough people when you've been out reporting and out
working where you think, actually, people agree with Ron DeSantis and all of
this stuff? I do. I think he knows his audience. Obviously, there's quite a few
differences between, say, someone who's working and living in New York City
versus maybe a suburb in Florida. So being where I was based in New York City, a
lot of folks, I think, empathized with Disney, felt that the company was getting
some unfair treatment, really lauded the fact that the company did, even though
it took some time, did come out and speak up against this bill. But I think
there are a lot of Republican or right-leaning voters who feel that this is a
bit of a rallying cry. I think they are maybe themselves experiencing some
challenges or things they don't agree with in the school system, whether it's
right or not, whether it's overblown or sensationalized or not. So I think
DeSantis is picking up on that. Politically, I think it makes a lot of sense,
although it's a bit risky in that it will divide people more. Right. And there's
plenty of fans of Disney, aren't there, who probably don't want the park to
start if the park starts looking messier or the upkeep doesn't look as smart as
it did before. I guess people will start voting with their feet around that.
Jessica Cline, just stepping back from the US politics, which is clearly a big
part of this story, kind of extraordinary that a company was able to wield this
kind of power over some of those kinds of things. I mean, basically running
itself like a local government. Yes, I think the phrase, a self-governing
district kind of terrifies me. How was it allowed to happen? Right. You wouldn't
want to live in a place where Mickey Mouse is running the show? And now, telling
me that DeSantis is fond of the little fella, but not really. And all I was
going to say was that the fact that Disney has said no comment is very telling,
but importantly for our backdrop, I think his own DeSantis' presidential run and
the fact that he has a new book coming out today, all of these must go into the
melting pot when we are considering the development that is taking place. Yeah,
it's difficult to strip the politics away, isn't it? Just sticking with a bit of
the business, though, given the name of our programme. In terms of this sort of
special district and the things that Disney are losing, I mean, we do hear
governments all around the world, don't we, Jessica, offering some kind of
incentives to big firms and big employers to be there. I mean, could this
potentially backfire on Governor DeSantis? You know, Disney decides, maybe not
obviously this year because it's an expensive thing to do, but down the track
that it's not worth the hassle. It's got other parks in other parts of the
world, Tokyo, Paris, California. It just puts more effort, more emphasis, more
money there, and you see people move and then the money move. That could well
happen. It could turn into a trend if they feel that they're getting crimped and
cramped. But remember, in somewhere like the north of Myanmar, Chinese casino
operators have built a little mini Macau in an area called Mung La in Shan
State. Chinese customers go, Hong Kong customers go for gambling. There's hardly
any Burmese, but mysteriously, it's in Burmese territory. So I think there's
many, many situations like that around the world that can take place under the
umbrella called business. Right. So you think they could kind of carry on making
money regardless of whatever the political backdrop is, whatever Disney decides
to do kind of thing? Yeah. If there's something cosy, if there's something that
is easy to exploit, some businesses will do that, right? And Hayley, a final
thought. I mean, where does the row end? I guess it doesn't end until post 2024,
right? No, it doesn't end. I think DeSantis can use this to his advantage as
long as he feels that it advantages him. And I think this panel that's going to
oversee Disney could cause a lot of headaches for the park if DeSantis wants
them to cause headaches and wants to sort of make a point and example of the
company. Yeah. Bumpy ride ahead for Disney. It's a price unmoved today, though,
on it, so investors certainly are pretty sanguine right now. Another area where
investors have been keeping a watchful eye is, of course, Brexit. And there's
been big news, as I'm sure you've been hearing throughout the day here on the
BBC World Service, because ever since the Brexit vote here in the UK almost
seven years ago, there's been a couple of major questions hanging over it, one
of them in particular, just what should the trading relationship look like
between the UK's only land border with the European Union? That became more
complicated, of course, when you factor in the history of Ireland in the UK and
as a result, the sensitivity of that border between Northern Ireland in the UK
still and the Republic of Ireland in the EU still. Well, today, both sides think
they've upgraded what everyone admitted was a bit of a holding job known as the
Northern Ireland Protocol. Bit more on what's been agreed in a moment. But first
of all, if you needed a reminder, a useful one from Lianna Byrne here. It's been
three years since Britain left the EU. So you may have thought I got away
without knowing what this whole protocol thing is. Wrong. The protocol is back
in the news. So listen and learn and have a look at the map of the UK and
Ireland. It might help. Before Brexit, it was easy to transport goods across the
border between Northern Ireland and Ireland because both were in the EU. After
Brexit, the UK, including Northern Ireland, left the EU while Ireland did not.
The EU has strict food rules and requires border checks when certain goods, such
as milk and eggs, arrive from non-EU countries. To solve this problem, the
Northern Ireland Protocol was created. Under the protocol, goods wouldn't be
checked at the Irish border. Instead, checks would be done between Great Britain
and Northern Ireland. Problem solved, right? Wrong again. Land borders are a
sensitive issue because Northern Ireland's troubled political history. Some
argue that the protocol is ruining the region's economy. They say the checks on
goods entering Northern Ireland is disrupting trade, increasing prices and
bankrupting businesses. Some businesses have had to hire extra staff or hire
consultants to deal with all the paperwork. Some manufacturers from Great
Britain aren't willing to send goods to Northern Ireland anymore. The businesses
that are feeling it badly are the ones that import components from Great
Britain, make the finished product in Northern Ireland and then sell it back to
the UK market. It's a lot of borders, which means a lot of paperwork. Others
say, actually, Northern Ireland has adapted well and has even started to profit
from its new situation of having access to both the EU single market and the UK.
But it doesn't matter what side of the argument you sit on. If you're a business
in Northern Ireland, importer or exporter, you would like a reduction in
bureaucracy, less paperwork, more easy trading. So that was the problem. Here's
the new deal. The UK Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, announced... I've spent a lot
of time listening to communities, their businesses, their the unionist community
as well, understanding their concerns. And I believe that today's framework
addresses them. It ensures that we can move goods freely around our UK internal
market. It protects Northern Ireland's place in the union and it safeguards
sovereignty for Northern Ireland's people. So how exactly does it do that and
resolve some of those problems? We asked our business correspondent, Theo
Leggett. Well, we learned, first of all, that the two sides have come to an
agreement, which, considering the verbal jousting and the political shenanigans
that have been going on for the past couple of years, already looks significant.
And what this deal, which is an adjustment or a modification of the Northern
Ireland Protocol, does is it's designed to ease trade between specifically Great
Britain, the island of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Now, the Northern
Ireland Protocol, which was an essential part of the deal that saw Britain
leaving the European Union, was designed to do one thing. It was designed to
prevent a land border between Ireland and Northern Ireland. And it did that by
kind of creating an artificial border for some products in the Irish Sea. And
that meant that Northern Ireland remained part of the EU single market for
goods, not for services and other things, but for goods. And it did create
friction and it created problems for trade between Great Britain and Ireland.
Well, what we're going to see now is those arrangements changed. So when
consignments of goods come over from Great Britain to Northern Ireland, if
they're meant to stay in Northern Ireland, they'll go through a green lane and
have a minimum of cheques. If they're supposed to be taken onwards into Ireland,
the Republic of Ireland, then they'll go through a red lane and they'll be
subject to border cheques. So already there's going to be a big distinction
between trade that's going directly to Northern Ireland and staying there and
trade which is moving on. And that should simplify things a lot. Other problems
with the Northern Ireland Protocol which are addressed here is that medicines
approved for use in Great Britain will now be automatically approved for use in
Northern Ireland. So that's another issue. And food made according to UK rules
will be allowed to be freely sold in Northern Ireland. The original protocol did
create something of a problem here. It could have led to a lot of new cheques
and bureaucracy for animal products, sausages for example. And this has been
avoided so far by the UK unilaterally deciding not to impose cheques once a
grace period had expired, something which triggered legal action from the EU.
That was known as the Sausage Wars. Well the Sausage Wars under this agreement
would now be over. One of the things that Northern Irish politicians,
particularly the unionist side, so Democratic Unionist Party, a big supporter of
the Britain's ruling Conservative Party and one of those by their name who have
ties to seeing the United Kingdom remain as intact as they feel possible. One of
the things they were worried about was any changes to European Union law going
forward. And we've got this thing called the Stormont Break, Stormont, the seat
of power in Northern Ireland where devolved powers go. Just try and explain to
people. I mean I'm not done it very well in our question have I? But where this
sort of handbrake on any new EU law, how that might work. Right, the Stormont
Break is key to this agreement. But as part of the agreement, the clear
implication is this it'll never actually be used. This is something designed to
ensure that if the EU decides to change the trade rules that apply in Northern
Ireland, the single market rules, that the Northern Ireland Assembly will have a
say over it and can reject those changes if necessary. So what would happen is
if the EU decides to change its rules in a way that the Northern Ireland
Assembly does not like, then if 30 members of that Assembly decided to, they
could trigger the break, which would then set off a process of consultation
between the UK government and the EU to try to find a solution. And the UK
government ultimately would have a veto. An awful lot in Theo Leggett's
interview there and through that sequence. So if you do want to read it at your
own pace, head to bbc.com forward slash news. It's right at the top of the
website there. Jessica Kine, it's always difficult isn't it when we talk Brexit
because it's very much a European story at its heart, especially when we talk
about individual trading minutiae like this. But just from afar, does it kind
of, you're in the investment world, does an agreement between two major economic
blocks like one today give kind of investors like yourself a bit more confidence
about what's going forward and the picture for investment here in Europe going
forward? I wouldn't like to detract from the fact that this Windsor framework
looks as if it might settle. I think these kind of procedures are necessary to
rectify the original mistakes and I think it's the best we can expect from this
situation. You know, how long have we discussed this Northern Ireland protocol
business? I think the UK is happy because they can still have their VAT and
taxation systems in place and I think even the DUP leader, is it Sir Geoffrey
Donaldson, he seems to be sort of assessing this as a significant breakthrough,
which I think is not bad. I just wonder sort of anecdotally, Jessica, as well,
you know, you work with investors and often investing in different things in
different parts of Asia is normally your role, but how often, just, you know,
around a cup of coffee or over a beer at the end of the day, does Brexit come
up? Is it discussed? I think it won't come up that often because it was touted
as a done deal, but what might not impress most people is that they're still
having to tweak it and express, you know, lament and regret. I think that
definitely comes up. So it's kind of, you know, like a fast changing chimera,
right? Oh, Brexit done, done and dusted. Oh, actually, no, we need to tweak this
bit. Oh, sorry, we've got to do that one. So it's a little bit sad in that
sense. Hayley, you look at a lot of trade, just sort of briefly, I mean, what's
your assessment? It seems there's a lot of things that everybody seems to agree
with in here, both sides. It does, and I think any time you can bring some
consistency, you can reduce barriers where they're not needed, you can
streamline trade and economic activity. That's a good thing for the businesses
involved. It makes good policy sense, and it certainly is a good thing for
investors. The key is, I think, doing that legwork to get everyone on side and
then sticking to what is agreed to, to Jessica's point, that there aren't then
going to be multiple iterations. There's no more changes to this. There's not
yet another deal to be done. That's right. Absolutely. Yeah, well, we will see
whether that is borne out for investors, obviously, as this story moves along.
But it certainly seems like there's a bit of a Brexit breakthrough for now.
Plenty more in the second half from Hayley and Jessica. We're going to be
chatting electric vehicles and also why TikTok has got itself in another pickle
with a foreign government. But first, we're going to get you right up to speed
with the latest world news. This is the BBC World Service with the winner of the
English as a Second Language prize for the International Radio Playwriting
Competition. My name is Ainur Karim. I am a writer from Kazakhstan and my play.
It's a funny story about a student who finds someone else's passport and wants
to give it back to its owner. I thought I'd better take it to the police station
myself. It's on my way. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Show me the
passport. I felt a little bit like I was limited in the way how I can express
myself. But then I like it even more because you close your eyes and you just
need to imagine. Ruslan Agdarov, not a Kazakh? Why isn't the nationality stated
in the passport? Why do you say he's not a Kazakh? He is a Kazakh, absolutely. I
would be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The man lost his passport. We
must give it back. What a face. The passport at BBCWorldService.com. You're
listening to Business Matters from the BBC World Service with me, Will Bain, and
our guests, Jessica Kyne in Penang, Malaysia, and Hayley Wooden in Vancouver,
Canada. Still to come in the next half hour, the mystery of the missing Chinese
tech billionaire that seems to deepen with every day, and just why has Canada
become the latest country to ban an app most famous for people copying dances
from its government workers' phones. We'll explain all after the latest. BBC
News with Neil Nunes. President Biden has welcomed a deal between Britain and
the European Union over post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland.
He said it would help protect the peace secured by the US-backed Good Friday
agreement 25 years ago. The largest pro-British party in Northern Ireland has
accepted that the deal marks progress but says they are still issues of concern.
It's been boycotting power-sharing government with Ireland-oriented parties
because of current friction in trade between Northern Ireland and the British
mainland. Saudi activists say prosecutors have charged 10 senior judges with
high treason. They are pietly accused of being too lenient in their judgments.
Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to normalising ties. The EU says both will
endorse a Brussels-brokered peace plan that would see Serbia accepting official
documents issued in Kosovo, its former breakaway province. President Zelensky of
Ukraine has warned of an increasingly difficult situation around the besieged
town of Bakhmut. Russian bombardments have reduced much of it to rubble. As vote
counting continues after Saturday's presidential election in Nigeria, the
governing party's candidate is leading, but the two main opposition parties have
alleged fraud amid technical problems in tallying. The Republican Governor of
Florida Ron DeSantis has seized control of a special tax district that includes
the Walt Disney World theme park. It had been largely self-governing. There have
been demonstrations in Israeli cities against a riot by Jewish settlers in the
occupied West Bank. On Sunday, the protesters denounced the right-wing
government's backing for settlement expansion. And reports from Mexico say
Washington has asked for the son of the jailed cartel leader Joaquin Guzman to
be extradited, a video Guzman was arrested in January. Welcome back to Business
Matters on the BBC World Service where we are going to kick this half out
looking at the beleaguered British battery manufacturer British Volt. Once it
was a great hope for not only the domestic supply of critical batteries for new
electric vehicles but it was also hoped the factory it was going to build would
bring much needed jobs and regeneration to a part of the UK that was in need of
both. When it collapsed those hopes in the north east of England went with it
too but also for the British government with its hopes to be a leader in
domestic battery supplies. Big news today then, an Australian firm, a start-up,
has bought British Volt out of administration as our business editor Simon Jack
reports. British Volt's downfall was blamed on a lack of battery experience,
unproven technology and no customers or revenue. The new owner looks similar in
some ways. Recharge Industries is owned and run by a New York based investment
fund with no automotive background. The new owners will keep the British Volt
brand name but have very different plans for the future. The company intends to
start by focusing on batteries for energy storage and hopes to have those
products ready by the end of 2025. It then intends to produce batteries for high
performance sports cars. The prospect of a much needed plant that can produce
batteries for high volume car makers in the UK still looks many years off. So
given what Simon's given us there in terms of the context, why does an
Australian firm want to invest in this business? Natalie Thompson, Senior Policy
Officer at Electric Vehicle Council in Sydney is with us. Natalie, morning to
you. Morning, pleasure to be there. No, thanks so much for having you, for
coming on with us. First of all, we don't know a lot about Recharge Industries.
Do you know much about them? We're not directly familiar with this company or
the acquisition itself, but we're obviously very interested in any developments
in the space given the need for batteries of all shapes and sizes to fund the
energy transition going forward. So not particularly experts on this specific
acquisition. No, but Australia being a leader in this field, hasn't it? Yeah,
and I think it's very important that supply chain diversification does happen.
So I think in terms of battery technologies, we don't have significant
industries in producing batteries at scale in Australia. It's something that the
government is planning to work on. So with the development of a new battery
strategy, which is going to be completed sometime in this year, what's important
is obviously understanding the different challenges that exist across
diversifying battery supply chains. So obviously, we know that currently, you
know, China is leading the space and they will continue to lead and they'll be
looking to supply more than 70% of batteries through to 2030. And that's why
projects like British Volt have got Western countries, that's why there's a lot
of hope in them, isn't it? Because there's been a sense through the pandemic,
particularly around things like semiconductor manufacturing, that perhaps China
has too much control over the next phase of what industry and development might
look like. And people want a bit of security that's outside of China in terms of
having manufacturing that they can perhaps rely on around these things, right?
Absolutely. And I think it is important to understand, you know, following the
pandemic, there is that need for supply chain diversification to reduce risks
associated with geopolitical conflicts or with, you know, supply chain
disruption. So obviously, while the battery supply chain is currently
concentrated in a very few select number of countries, we've seen massive waves
of investment across, you know, the EU, in the US, the Inflation Reduction Act
is throwing billions and billions of dollars at this to try and build
diversified battery industries. And so there's obviously a lot of opportunity
here. It's obviously about getting the policy settings right to attract
investment into these sectors to produce a future industry. What do you think
some of those are, Natalie? What are those best case scenarios for some of these
firms? What are those conditions? So I think de-risking investment is going to
be one of the key obstacles to address. Does that look like government support?
It does. It does require a level of government support, which is what we've seen
with the US and the Inflation Reduction Act and the number of different measures
to spread the battery manufacturing capacity and really, really capitalise on
the opportunity. We haven't been able to see an opportunity where that can occur
on its own. So I think what happened with the British Volt, obviously, there was
significant level of government interest and investment there. And I think that
is still going to be, you know, a necessary precondition to the success of the
new ownership. So having policy certainty provided through downstream demand, so
having manufacturing supply chains also for vehicles or for other sort of
manufacturing industries is also critically important. So that is something that
the UK does have with its EV manufacturing. But it's important to know that
across the entire value chain, there's a very complex supply chains that
require, you know, a very sort of concentrated level of knowledge across
different areas. So I think ensuring that government does play a role in
providing whether that's tax relief, providing regulatory harmonisation with
other jurisdictions to provide that ease of cross-border trading and
facilitation there and developing public and private partnerships are going to
be really, really crucial to make sure that countries like UK and Australia can
capitalise on those opportunities. Particularly if we want to do it at the pace
that all of these governments are talking about. Natalie Thompson, Senior Policy
Officer, Electric Vehicle Council in Sydney, thank you so much for your time.
Jessica Kine, listening to that in Malaysia, put the ears up of everybody in the
studio when Natalie talked about de-risking investments. I'm guessing that's
exactly what your clients would like to hear about. How is that going to happen?
That's a tricky one. I think quite clearly even this acquisition might make
sense for scale facilitation, the final owner in New York, but it's not a
solution for the UK battery industry, right? There's just no scale. And then the
only manufacturer I think currently is one Chinese battery plant next to the
Nissan factory in Sunderland. So maybe a sort of a mini rescue scenario for
Volt, for British Volt, I'm sorry, but longer term for the UK and the battery
space, because they're only going to not make it a high volume game, concentrate
on high performance sports cars and initially only storage batteries. It's
slightly mixed news, I'm afraid, as far as the investing public might be
concerned. Absolutely. I want to take us a little bit away from British Volt
themselves, if I can, because the reason we kind of the team earlier when we
were chatting about this story, and I don't know whether you guys both agree,
was we just thought this is just a really interesting case study, really.
Everywhere in the world is trying to speed up, aren't they, the transition to
electric vehicles, because we know we need to do it to meet all the Paris
climate targets. But also, as Natalie Thompson was just saying to us there, it's
about security. People have seen the war in Ukraine around energy supply.
They've seen the pandemic around what's happened with semiconductors or other
supply chains that have got stuck and they think, hmm, actually, we need more of
these things in our own countries. And this company happens to be British in the
British Volt case, but it could be anywhere in as much as everywhere is trying
to do this, aren't they? And it feels, Hayley Woodin, a bit of a disaster for
that transition if some of these startups can't really get off the ground and as
Jessica says, can't seem to win over investors. That's right. I think that the
investment case needs to be made clear. I think the policy environment needs to
be right. I think governments have a large role to play, not just in
establishing their climate change related targets, but then backing that up with
how they're going to foster public-private partnerships, how they're going to
incentivize industry, how they're going to lay out not just a one or two year
framework, but a multi-decade framework that allows investors to come on board.
Canada has such a complicated history with this and in trying to develop, say,
mining projects or projects that would get critical minerals and resources to
market faster. They get hung up in regulatory red tape, investors eventually
pull out, and that leaves a pretty bitter taste in the mouths of anyone who's a
serious investor. They need that certainty. So I think it's challenging,
especially for startups to navigate an environment where they don't have a lot
of control over some of those macro economic factors. That's a very interesting
issue, isn't it, in terms of getting the critical metals. And we heard Natalie
Thompson mention the Inflation Reduction Act in the United States, which has a
lot of rules and regs and tax breaks around where those minerals come from. So I
can imagine why it's a big boom time in Canada. But some of those bits of red
tape, as you referred to them Hayley, are people's genuine concerns about what
impact it's having on the environment digging this stuff up? Absolutely. And I
think for a lot of people, it feels counterintuitive. You're thinking of clean
green technology. But at the end of the day, it's built with stuff that we pull
out of the ground and mining has gotten a lot cleaner. And often in vital areas,
right? There's a particular area in Canada where we've got very specific peat
bogs, isn't it, that we know are good carbon sinks. And those, unfortunately,
are the places where all these minerals are too. We seem to be in a couple of
catch-22s. Absolutely. It's delicate an environment because we're doing this to
help protect the environment and protect the planet. It needs to be top of mind.
But there also needs to be, I think, a little give and take and more of a
holistic understanding of what it means to totally electrify vehicle fleets,
what that's going to mean from an energy point of view and the massive energy
infrastructure that needs to be built. Canada's blessed with a lot of renewable
clean energy, but our grid wouldn't be able to withstand everyone plugging in an
electric vehicle at 5pm after they're done their shift. So there's a lot that
needs to be thought through and you can't just have a lot of nimbyism, people
saying, no, not in my backyard, but still saying, well, but I want everyone to
have an electric vehicle and I want us to meet our climate goals. There has to
be some compromise there. Jessica Haley's spot on there, isn't she? The pace
versus the downsides, that's something we're all going to have to work through
everywhere in the world. Jessica, are you hearing us still? No, definitely, I
think. And then just to be devil's advocate, if I throw into the mix, changing
administrations, instability on policy, you know, lack of clarity, as Haley
says, you know, multi-decade plan. No, a great point. I mean, do you think there
should be pan-government moves on this? Do you think, I don't know, something at
a UN level or a G20 level, do you think that we need kind of agreements like
that where people are in lockstep together to try and stop some of that
divergence? Absolutely. I think that kind of cooperation and that framework is
necessary or else everyone's just going to go off in their own little direction
and then it'll turn into a bun fight. I mean, you're in a part of the world,
Jessica, and you work in a part of the world where a lot of this transition is
happening quicker than anywhere else. I mean, when you look at it, in terms of
adoption and how governments there are working around that, I mean, do you have
hope that governments can step up and companies can step up and meet the
challenge that Haley sets out? I think the pandemics pretty much kind of
deferred all honourable intentions. I wonder if I can say that. So I think
people might have had some fairly pure intentions and, you know, the will to
act, but there's been a few distractions that have happened along the way. And
now it's kind of, you know, revenge travel, revenge this, revenge whatever. So
people have been very, very fed up over the last three years. And some may have
lost their way as to the ultimate aim in terms of protecting climate change
agreements, acting honourably and abiding by them. But hopefully, we get back on
track. Yeah, well, tech investment is something we're going to stick with now.
But of an unusual kind regular listeners to the programme will know this is a
story we've been following for the last couple of weeks. But it's the case of
the missing billionaire technology dealmaker in China, Bao Fan. It does read a
little bit like the plot of a detective novel at the moment. Unfortunately, for
both Mr. Fan and his family, it's true. He's the chief executive and founder of
China Renaissance Holdings. He was reported missing 11 days ago by his firm.
Now, the latest twist, the bank says he's cooperating with Chinese authorities
conducting an investigation. The bank shares have been yo-yoing throughout all
of this period too. They were up on Monday. Howard Zhang, the BBC's Chinese
service editor, told us a bit more about the story. I guess his nickname
probably will tell a little bit more than what we can. He's known in Chinese
finance field as Mr. Big. So anything to do with tech, mergers, acquisitions,
financing, big deals, all had something to do with him. And the likes of
Meituan, Didi, DJ.com for anybody who follows Chinese stocks, and all of them,
raising finance, had something to do with Bao Fan. Do we know where he is at the
moment, and what he's doing at this moment in time? It is quite interesting that
his company, China Renaissance, finally, after about 10 days of him being
reported as disappeared, come openly commented to the media that he's
cooperating with the government over investigations. That's a code language in
Chinese, meaning he's been detained somewhere to be investigated by, not
necessarily the police, but people belonging to the Communist Party's
disciplinary division, which is a law unto itself. We've seen a crackdown on the
tech sect, haven't we, from the Chinese authorities over the past few years,
most visibly in the case of Jack Ma. Does this show that that crackdown may be
set to increase once again? You're completely correct. Not only the tech sector,
anything that's privately or semi-privately owned, the entire Chinese economy
that's non-state, it's in some type of a crackdown. And whether this is a
continuation of that crackdown, I think we still have to wait and see. And
because the new five-year Congress will start their first meeting, major
conference, in March, and also the Chinese equivalent of a new parliament. So
they will lay out more new policies. But the omens are not good, because just
very recently, we've seen both the party central committee as well as the State
Department, the Chinese equivalents of the Prime Minister's office, issue a
joint statement condemning or rejecting firmly any suggestion that China should
move towards constitutional rule or democracy or the separation of powers.
They're saying these are capitalist misconceptions we should absolutely reject.
So if that's any indication, I think, you know, people's hope for more rule of
law or at least change towards that direction should look less hopeful now.
That's Howard Zhang, the editor of the BBC's Chinese service. And I should have
mentioned he was speaking to Rahul Tandon a little bit earlier on, on the 1530
GMT edition of World Business Report. Jessica Kine, listening to that in
Malaysia, as we've said throughout the programme, you invest and work with
investors in China and Japan, right across East Asia. I mean, how much of a
chilling effect has what the Chinese government has been doing around some of
its big tech firms had on clients you work with investing in firms exactly like
that? I think it's resulted in a very major outflow of assets benefiting our
neighbour, the lovely state of Singapore, sovereign state of Singapore. I think
they are keen to get their assets out and the Singaporean Monetary Authority and
their development board, Economic Development Board, cooperated actively to show
a very friendly stance towards an entity called Family Offices, where many, many
Chinese families, either on a sole basis or on a multi-family basis have
succeeded in transferring wealth. And we understand that was something that Bao
Fan, certainly his family have confirmed, haven't they, that Bao Fan was trying
to do in Singapore? Correct. So there are now 1500 family offices having been
zero in 2018. Can you just explain to listeners what they are, how they work?
The family that wants to open it comes to Singapore, kind of displays their
assets. You don't have to live there to open the family office. But once you
succeed in getting the authorities to rubber stamp your office, you're free to
invest your assets as you wish. And what other benefits do you get? We're not
bound by investor rules. For example, most financial entities have to have rules
that will protect an investor because there are public products and some
investors are not that sophisticated. This entity would not need to have that
kind of rule binding them. So that's why they're growing in a sort of a mushroom
fashion. And so why is that in particular attractive though? I think they don't
want to keep the assets on shore. What it's done for Singapore, certainly short
term, is distort values so that rents are sky high, hotel rates have doubled,
actual residential properties have probably pretty much close to jumped 70% to
100%, almost doubled. It's quite a distortion on the Singapore picture. But some
other Chinese billionaires, you mentioned Jack Ma earlier yourself, he went to
hide in Japan for three years. Okay. And now he's just said he's divesting of
Ant Group, right? He's stepping away. So they're having to do all sorts of
mechanisms. Who don't know or need reminding, obviously, the boss of and the
founder of Alibaba, one of the biggest of all the Chinese tech firms. Jessica's
line just coming and going a little bit. But Jessica, just... Sorry about that.
No, no, no problem at all. We're hearing you and it's interesting insight on
what's been a huge issue, as you say. I mean, Chinese Renaissance holdings, I
think it's always worth stressing quite how influential they are, not just for
Chinese firms, but any tech firm wanting to try and do business in China, right?
Yeah, I think so. I think it's pretty much the preeminent name. It's the quality
house for tech sector, the tech sector. They helped kind of bankroll investment
for Western firms, not just Chinese firms. I think they should have had their
fingers in that pot as well, if I'm not wrong. Yeah. And I think it's a warning
that... Sorry, Jessica, finish your point. I was only to say that Baofan has
been put into this situation and is at a bit of a crossroads. That's why
definitely alarm bells ringing for a few more folks. Hayley, alarm bells
certainly ringing about Chinese firms in Canada, aren't they? Yes, absolutely.
There's been quite a bit happening in Canada on this front. Relations between
Canada and China have been quite tense. But in the last number of weeks, there
was the spy balloon and other sightings of that over Canada and the US, as well
as some intelligence documents showing or claiming that China was influencing
Canada's federal elections just a couple of years ago. And then, of course,
TikTok and Canada banning the use of the app on the devices of federal
officials. So quite a bit of concern about what China's up to and that right now
is really sort of in the governmental space. But you can expect that for
business leaders watching this, we do a lot of trade with China. I think a lot
of concern about what that future holds. Yeah, absolutely. Well, let's hear from
the Canadian Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, on that TikTok decision right now.
Obviously, we take very seriously the freedom of expression, the freedom of
Canadians to engage how they want online. But we also have very important
principles around protection of data, protection of Canadians' safety and
security that we will always step up for. Like many countries around the world,
we're looking carefully at how to ensure Canadians are kept safe online. And
we're making the decision that for government employees, for government
equipment, it is better to not have them access TikTok because of the concerns
that people have in terms of safety. This may be a first step. It may be the
only step we need to take. But every step of the way, we're going to be making
sure we're keeping Canadians safe. And certainly, I suspect that as government
takes the significant step of telling all federal employees that they can no
longer use TikTok on their work phones, many Canadians, from businesses to
private individuals, will reflect on the security of their own data and perhaps
make choices in consequence. But I'm always a fan of giving Canadians the
information for them to make the right decisions for them. Hayley, I'm sure most
Canadians don't care whether MP is doing TikTok videos anymore. But given Justin
Trudeau saying people will make up their own mind, I mean, what do you think
their minds will be made up on? Oh, my goodness. Well, I think so many people
are actually addicted to TikTok that I'm not sure this is really going to lead
to many Canadians deciding to turn off the app. Because the concerns about
potential data breaches and security concerns have been around quite prominently
for years now. I mean, the US went through that whole rigmarole of requiring a
US company to essentially operate TikTok in the US. We followed that so closely.
And it isn't until now that Canada has sort of come out with its first decision
against the company and speaking about how it's concerned and how, you know,
sort of signalling to Canadians that they perhaps too also ought to be
concerned. The timing's a bit odd. If it was that concerning, why is it only now
that there's a ban on and only for federal employees? Well, do you think it will
go beyond that? Because we hear a lot of that talk in Europe. The European Union
has done a similar thing in terms of members of the European Parliament and
officials having it on official phones or phones within the Parliament
buildings. But there's a lot of people here would like to see it banned
outright. I mean, is there any sense that that's what's happening in Canada too?
I would be very surprised if we came out with an outright ban of TikTok. I think
because every time we come out with a move like this, and I would describe it as
a fairly small scale move, right, it's limited to a very small number of
Canadians. Same thing with not that long ago, Canada made the decision, Chinese
companies are not allowed to invest in critical minerals projects in Canada.
These are all pretty quiet moves, but there's always a response from Beijing or
the company in question. And I think Canadian officials are following very
closely what that response is and not wanting to rock the boat of that
relationship too, too much. We are reliant on China's economy. If China decided
enough's enough, I don't like what you're doing, you're taking shots at us,
everything you say is false and they turned off the tap, so to speak, and
stopped sending us goods, we would be sent into an economic shock. So I think
Canada would have to think very, very carefully. Does TikTok have such a
significant place? Does it have enough users in Canada that that really would
come to that? Do you think that it would be such a blow to the company that they
would see it as an offence of that level? I don't think it would be offensive in
the sense that it's a numbers thing. I mean, Canada's population is so small, so
it's probably a bit of a drop in the bucket. I think it's more what that would
signal politically, just given that, you know, any company in China is sort of
synonymous with China itself. And it's not just Canada talking about TikTok per
se, they're talking about security concerns related to how China as a state, as
a foreign entity might be using that data. So I think it could be viewed by
Beijing as a political move and that might warrant some kind of response.
Absolutely. Either of you addicted to TikTok? Hayley says everybody is. I
actually don't have it. Not a chance for me, Will. Not a chance. Jessica, I
could imagine you being spectacular with some of the dances on there. We've run
out of time here, though, so we can't play them out. And also, you know, it's
the radio. So unlucky for our listeners, but thanks so much to Jessica Kine and
to Hayley Wooden. And thanks to you for listening to Business Matters. This is
the BBC World Service and here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next
World Book Club. It's the story of a lovely young woman who desperately in need
of work submits to the sexual demands of the director of a perfume company. Her
body gradually begins to change, growing more and more like the body of a pig.
World Book Club with Marie Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. In 30 minutes, the
documentary. They're exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull
Project. They bring the magic and joy of the circus to vulnerable kids around
the world. Kids in orphanages and refugee camps. The Newsroom is next. This is
the BBC World Service.