TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and on BBC Sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. It's ten o'clock, good evening. This is
The World Tonight with Ritala Shah. Two presidents, two cities, two versions of
events. President Putin chose this war. Every day the war continues is his
choice. Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict for its escalation and
for the growing number of victims lies fully with the West. President Putin also
said Russia would suspend its involvement in a key nuclear weapons treaty with
the United States. This should not need to be said, but it needs to be said. A
world without nuclear arms control is a far more dangerous and unstable one with
potentially catastrophic consequences. So what chance of de-escalation? We speak
to the diplomat who negotiated the treaty on behalf of the US. And later in the
programme. My approach is to defend to the hilt your right to live and love free
of harassment and fear in the hope that you would afford me the same right as a
person of faith. The SNP leadership candidate Kate Forbes is losing support over
her religious views. We'll hear from the former head of her church, the Free
Church of Scotland. That's all after the BBC News read tonight by Tina Ritchie.
Russia's President Vladimir Putin has announced the suspension of a nuclear arms
agreement with the United States during a lengthy State of the Nation address.
The new START treaty limits the number of warheads the two superpowers can have
and allows for inspections of nuclear facilities. It had previously been
extended for five years in 2021. Our reporter in Moscow, Will Vernon, was
listening. Mr Putin's speech was full of patriotic bluster. The Kremlin leader
once again portrayed his country as the victim, claiming it was the West and not
Russia that had started the war in Ukraine. He reeled off a long list of
historical grievances before announcing that Russia would be suspending its
participation in a key nuclear weapons agreement with America. Mr Putin
threatened to restart nuclear testing if America did the same. The Kremlin
leader hailed what he called Russia's new territories for Ukrainian regions that
Moscow illegally annexed in September last year. Unsurprisingly, there was no
mention of Russian troops being driven out of the city of Herson by Ukrainian
forces, one of a string of embarrassing defeats on the battlefield for Russia in
recent months. President Joe Biden has used a speech in the Polish capital
Warsaw to challenge Vladimir Putin's narrative on Ukraine. Mr Biden said
Ukraine's allies had grown stronger, while the Russian president had grown
weaker as a result of his invasion. Jenny Hill reports from Warsaw. The crowd
cheered as a smiling Joe Biden took to the stage. This was a rousing speech in
the historic setting of Warsaw's royal castle. The American president said that
when Vladimir Putin ordered his tanks into Ukraine, he thought the country would
roll over. But he was wrong. It's Mr Biden's second visit to Poland in a year,
in what many here believe is a recognition of Poland's growing importance as a
strategic ally in Europe. Earlier, over a working lunch with the Polish
president, Mr Biden described the relationship between their countries as
critical, critical, critical. The Royal College of Nursing says it will pause
strike action planned for next week and hold pay talks with the government
tomorrow. Thousands of its members in England were due to walk out for 48 hours
from Wednesday next week. The General Secretary of the RCN, Pat Cullen, believes
a deal can be reached. I think this is a significant step forward. Every nurse
in England today can breathe a sigh of relief and more importantly our patients
can. So let's get round the table tomorrow. I'm very confident with the move
from government and certainly we will do our very best to make sure that a fair
pay deal is obtained. The National Education Union has refused a call from the
government to abandon teachers' strikes next week across the north of England.
The Education Secretary Gillian Keegan had written to teaching unions, telling
them to suspend the planned action if they wanted to enter formal talks about
pay conditions and reforms. Meanwhile, the government has recommended offering
millions of public sector workers below inflation pay increases this year.
Judges, police officers, teachers, nurses, doctors and dentists in England will
be offered a 3.5% rise pay increase under their proposals, which will now be
considered by independent pay review bodies. One of the contenders in the
Scottish leadership contest, Kate Forbes, has defended controversial comments
she made about gay marriage, saying that people wanted politicians to give
straight answers. The Finance Secretary is a member of the Evangelical Free
Church of Scotland and has faced questions about her views on various social
issues. More from our Scotland correspondent James Shaw. Kate Forbes has said
that like many people in Scotland, she is a person of faith and adheres to what
she calls fairly mainstream Christian teaching. She says she would not have
voted for gay marriage when it became law in Scotland in 2014, but would defend
people's rights under the law as it exists now. That position prompted a strong
reaction on social media, with a number of leading members of the party saying
they were withdrawing their support. Ms Forbes has suggested she thinks much of
the outrage at her views is confined to social media. She says it will be up to
members whether she or one of the other candidates becomes the new leader of the
SNP. Supermarkets are limiting the sale of some fruit and vegetables, including
tomatoes, cucumbers and lettuces because of shortages. ASDA is restricting
customers to just three of each such product, and Morrisons will introduce
similar measures tomorrow. The supply issues have been caused by poor weather in
the Mediterranean and compounded by a lack of domestic production. Germany says
it will double the amount of money it sends to Turkey and Syria after the recent
devastating earthquakes. The Berlin government has announced an additional £44
billion in aid. Last night a second series of tremors killed several people when
buildings that had been weakened in the first disaster collapsed. Scientists
have criticised the Treasury for taking back more than £1 billion, which had
been earmarked for research. The UK was meant to be involved in the EU's Horizon
programme, but its participation has been held up because of arguments around
the Northern Ireland Protocol. Here's our science correspondent, Pallab Goshe.
The Treasury had allocated the money for the UK's membership of the Horizon
programme, or for a British alternative, if the dispute of the Northern Ireland
Protocol could not be resolved, which had been a stumbling block to membership
of the EU research programme. But on page 300 of a Treasury document, it was
revealed that the money had been taken back despite promises that it would
remain available for research, even if membership of the Horizon programme was
not possible. The move has led to an angry reaction among the research community
with the President of the Royal Society, which represents the UK's leading
scientists, questioning the government's commitment to making the country into a
science superpower. Pallab Goshe reporting. Thank you, Tina. You're listening to
The World Tonight with Rithal Asha. Two presidents on opposing sides of a
conflict speaking in two capitals on one day. This morning, President Putin
delivered a lengthy State of the Nation address ahead of the first anniversary
of his decision to invade Ukraine. Once again, he accused the West of seeking to
destroy Russia, and he made a move away from a key plank of the post-Cold War
arms control regime. I'm forced to announce today, said President Putin, that
Russia is suspending its participation in New START. That's a treaty which
limits the number of strategic or long-range nuclear warheads the US and Russia
can deploy. It also gives each country the power to inspect the other's
compliance with it. The Russian president went on to clarify that he wasn't
withdrawing from the treaty, but suspending participation. And he added that
before there could be a return to discussions with the US, Russia needs to
understand the intentions of NATO countries like France and Britain. We'll talk
about President Putin's speech in more detail in a moment, but his American
counterpart Joe Biden was in Poland after his brief visit to Ukraine yesterday.
Speaking in Warsaw this afternoon, President Biden didn't directly address
Vladimir Putin's move away from the treaty, but he rejected the idea that the
West was planning to attack Russia and pledged his unwavering support for Kiev.
Would we stand up for the sovereignty of nations? Would we stand up for the
right of people to live free from naked aggression? Would we stand up for
democracy? One year later, we know the answers. Yes, we would stand up for
sovereignty, and we did. Yes, we would stand up for the right of people to live
free from aggression, and we did. And we would stand up for democracy, and we
did. President Biden's rhetoric seemed to have been designed to counteract those
in the US and perhaps in Europe who might doubt the wisdom of continuing to
spend money and diplomacy on the war, but also to assure the Ukrainians that
while he was in the White House, they could count on American backing. But
Moscow's suspension of its participation in the New START Treaty introduces yet
another element of unpredictability in Russia's relations with the West. Downing
Street called it a rash decision and said this was another example of Putin
jeopardizing global security for political gain. Rose Gottmiller was the chief
US negotiator of the New START Treaty with Russia and is a former Deputy
Secretary General of NATO. The treaty tradition began with the first Strategic
Arms Limitation Agreement in 1972, so we can see that this tradition is now 50
years old. And I must say that it's concerning that Vladimir Putin apparently
has decided to block the tradition going forward. I hope that that is not a
permanent situation. But these treaties have limited and controlled Russian and
US strategic nuclear forces for 50 years. These are the larger systems that
travel to intercontinental ranges and are the means by which the United States
and Russia target each other. As horrific as that sound, they target each other
with nuclear weapons. The treaties allow for inspections, notifications of
changes and so on. These conversations, the treaty itself, that has been in
trouble for a little while now, hasn't it? Actually the New START Treaty has
continued to be implemented on a rather smooth basis and that continued even
after the invasion of Ukraine last February, 24th of 2022. For many months, the
Russians were continuing to fulfill their responsibilities to provide
notifications to the United States about the movement of their strategic forces.
And that was an extremely important predictability measure under the treaty.
They had suspended on-site inspections and so had the United States by mutual
agreement because of the COVID pandemic. And it was in August of this past year
that Russia, when the United States pressed it to return to on-site inspections,
began to raise concerns and began to talk about suspending on-site inspection
under the treaty. So the troubles really began, I would say, in August of 2022.
But even following the invasion last February, the Russians were doing a good
job, I would say, implementing the treaty. So why would President Putin choose
to do this now? He has decided that he can lever the New START Treaty for what
he wants on Ukraine. And when he got into this invasion last February, he was
making some rather outrageous demands, for example, that Ukraine should be
demilitarized and that NATO should withdraw itself to its 1997 borders before
the former Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe had entered into full
membership of the NATO Alliance. So these were demands, obviously, that the
United States and its NATO allies were not going to respond to. But now he has
decided that he wants to try to lever New START in order to get progress on his
demands, and it's simply not going to happen. And so for that reason, I think
that he's backed himself into a corner where he's losing out on a treaty that's
very much in Russia's interests as the United States begins to modernize its
nuclear force structure, and definitely, I think, affecting Russia's national
security interests. But should the United States and NATO allies be concerned
that as Russia appears to strengthen its ties to China, China appears to be
playing along with that, with that visit this week of Wang Yi and so on, is the
possibility that Russia is actually depending on that relationship, again, to
put the pressure on Washington, to put the pressure on NATO? I think that it's a
marriage of convenience, to be honest with you. The Russians need help. They
need help with semiconductors. They need help with chips. And I think that's one
of the important conversations that Washington and Beijing have been having
recently with the Biden administration, most recently, State Secretary Anthony
Blinken warning Wang Yi at the Munich Security Conference about helping the
Russians under the table with these high technology products that Russia is
after. So I think that there is an effort of foot, of course, for the Russians
to try to get the Chinese to help them more. But I continue to believe that
China will be quite cautious in this regard. What, if anything, can the United
States do now? I think for the United States, the most important thing is to
continue to, first of all, assure the Russians that all the concerns they've had
about New START implementation, that in fact the United States is hearing those
concerns and ready to resolve the Russian concerns. They've had a few concerns
about US implementation of the treaty. The United States is ready to talk about
those concerns and resolve them for the Russians. I think the other thing the
United States needs to do, though, is continue to message front and center how
important this treaty is for the national security interests of Russia, as they
are for the United States. The Russians are seeing a US nuclear force
modernization unfolding that will become more and more unpredictable if it is
not limited by the New START treaty. And so it's in the Russians' interest to
return to full implementation of this treaty. Are you suggesting then tonight
the world is a less safe place than it was yesterday? I'm suggesting that this
trajectory, I shouldn't talk about trajectories where missiles are concerned,
but the trajectory that we are on is indeed a less safe one and that we have a
50-year tradition of controlling and constraining these weapons. We need to get
back to that focus. Rose Gutmer, the former chief US negotiator of the New START
treaty with Russia. It has been quite a day for presidential speechifying. We'll
come back to that in a moment. But let's think about President Putin's words,
first of all. Was this an address intended for a domestic audience as much as a
Western one? Francis Gar from BBC Monitoring has been watching Russian reaction
to President Putin's speech. I think today's speech from Putin in many ways
provided an opportunity to take stock of where the Kremlin sits one year on from
its invasion of Ukraine. And the commentary we saw on Russian state TV today
offered us a window into what the Kremlin wants ordinary Russians to think about
this war and how it's going. About two-thirds of people in Russia get their news
from TV and the messaging there is tightly controlled by the Kremlin. So earlier
today, Olga Skibeva, who is known as one of the faces of Russian TV, began her
talk show 60 Minutes. President of Russia, I am very happy to be here with you.
You are very happy. And I think this is a real attempt to double down on these
war aims, even though it's very rare to hear any attempt to scrutinize what
those aims actually are. And indeed Putin himself didn't really address this in
any substance today. Given how things have panned out and how the so-called
special military operation has ended up lasting a whole year rather than the
days or weeks that it was clearly meant to last judging by the approach made by
Putin at the beginning, I think it's telling that the Kremlin and its media
machine feel it's better not to mention the real specific aims of this conflict.
The second main conclusion that Russian TV wants people to draw today is that
this state of conflict is the new normal for the country. Multiple voices on
television in Russia today made it very clear that the country needed to prepare
for a lengthy war and that they were in this for the long haul. This was
military pundit Alexander Artomonov on Time Will Tell, another one of Russian
state TV's copious talk shows. And what he was saying there is that it's clear
that Russia won't enter any talks that it considers disadvantageous, but rather
will continue to expand its arms industry. He said that the fact Putin had spent
a lot of time speaking about the defence industry showed that Russia was only
beginning to arm itself and that it was preparing for a lengthy confrontation
with the West and had no intention of laying down arms. This of course marks a
huge change from Putin's announcement just short of a year ago when the invasion
was framed as a so-called special military operation fought by professional
soldiers and the messaging that accompanied it on state TV told ordinary people
that really this was something being fought far away and that they didn't need
to be too concerned by it. It wouldn't affect their lives at home. BBC
monitoring's Francis Scar. It's worth mentioning that Vladimir Putin spoke for
almost two hours out talking Joe Biden by some distance. Well, let's weigh up
those words with a pair of BBC editors. We're hoping to speak to Jeremy Bowen,
our international affairs editor, who's in Kiev, but on the line is our US
editor Sarah Smith who's in Warsaw covering President Biden's visit. But Joe
Biden's speech was big on rhetoric and fatigue in his backing for Ukraine. How
much do you think it was aimed at doubters in the US and Europe? Oh, for sure.
It was aimed at shoring up anybody who is concerned about how long this war is
going to drag on and how long both American and other NATO allies' support can
persist. And in that he's talking to the American people. Back in the US, polls
suggest that support for the war is slipping. People haven't turned against it,
but there are concerns about what it's costing. There are voices in Congress,
mostly on the far right and far left, but people raising more and more concerns
about how long America can afford to continue to be supporting Ukraine. And
during the Munich Security Conference over this last weekend, we started to hear
from other allies' expressions of concern. So Joe Biden is inordinately proud of
the way in which he was able to coordinate a united and unified Western and NATO
response to Russia's aggression. And he repeats quite frequently and did again
in this speech that Putin thought that he would find the West weak and divided
and uninterested and therefore be able to take advantage of Ukraine. And of
course he found entirely the opposite. That is a real point of pride for Joe
Biden and it's something he wants to try to maintain over what he is hinting is
going to be a seriously long haul. Well, that's something I was going to bring
up because it has been really striking over the last couple of days. Ukrainians
saying very clearly that they want this war to finish very quickly. They don't
want there to be a second anniversary in for friend, but actually many
diplomats, including Joe Biden, suggesting that actually this is now a long haul
event. What is it do you think that is making them say that the president and
other diplomats? If you talk to security officials in the US and people in the
White House, they tell you that there's a practical stalemate on the ground at
the moment and there's no incentive for either side to enter any kind of talks
or negotiations. So there's no point in even suggesting it at the moment. Both
sides, of course, will try and launch a spring offensive, but American
intelligence doesn't seem to suggest that that is going to make any huge or
material difference. If you think about some of the bigger commitments in
weaponry that the US have made to Ukraine, the most recent one was promising
them M1 Abrams tanks, which Ukraine had been asking for for months and the US
eventually agreed to. They're not going to arrive this year. It doesn't look
like if they're going to be there for a spring offensive, it will be a spring
offensive in 2024. And the fact that the US is procuring and commissioning tanks
to send to Ukraine on that kind of timescale tells you that they're looking at
this lasting for a considerable length of time. Jeremy Bowen, I think you are
now up on the line from Kiev. What do you make of the fact that there is this
piecemeal, if you like, delivery of weapons going on? While there was much to
reassure the Ukrainians in what Joe Biden said today, was there really any
evidence of a real defence strategy as far as the war is concerned? Well, the
Ukrainians would say no, because what they would have liked straight off is this
is what you need to beat the Russians. Let's get it to you as soon as possible.
Instead, the Americans have set these various red lines and one by one they've
been broken. The Ukrainians have pressured them. The Americans have worked out
that, yeah, OK, we can do that. And of course, that's because this old idea of
deterrence is working. The Americans are deterred by the fear of what the
Russians might do if they feel that the US is getting very, very directly
involved in what's going on, maybe even short of deploying its own troops, but
in terms of the volume of stuff that's coming in. But, you know, right now it's
clear that this is very much a proxy war between the Americans and the Russians,
because without the American contribution and the rest of NATO, but it's
overwhelmingly American, without that, the Ukrainians could not be able to
continue. And what did you make of the fact that from President Putin there was
no sense at all that he might be backing down? Well, I think that while Putin's
in the Kremlin, this isn't going to end. I think that even if his army was
defeated, he'd still have designs on Ukraine because this is something which
he's very much committed to. That's why the time frame here is looking really
quite long. You know, if we're back here a year from now talking about this, I
wouldn't be surprised, maybe even after that, because both sides have staked out
these maximal positions. Putin has said this is a fight against the West, which
is out to get us. They've expanded NATO and now look what they're doing in
Ukraine. The Ukrainians have also got their own maximal position, which is we
want everything back down to our 1991 boundaries. We are borders, which includes
Crimea, which the Russians have had since 2014. Jeremy Bowen, Sarah Smith, a
conversation to be continued. Thank you both very much. Nurses in England have
called off next week's 48-hour strike to restart intensive negotiations with the
government overpay. Ministers, officials and Royal College of Nursing leaders
will meet on Wednesday. The government's also published its recommendations for
public sector pay for next year, which will now be considered by the independent
pay review bodies. The BBC's employment correspond that Zoe Conway is on the
line. Zoe, first of all, let's talk about those health talks. What more do we
know about them? Well, I think it's really interesting what has happened this
evening. The Royal College of Nursing are going in for pay talks with the
government. Now the reason why that's interesting is that up until now, the RCN
has said that they will not enter pay negotiations unless there is a
conversation, a negotiation about this year's pay, this year's pay settlement.
The fact that they're going in for these talks suggests that there is some
movement there. I think it's also interesting that Pat Cullen, the head of the
RCN, has said that these talks are thanks to the Prime Minister. Those were the
words she used to the health editor, Hugh Pym. And it does suggest, there are
certainly hints tonight, that there is movement by the Prime Minister when it
comes to public sector pay. So more money? I do think, well, yes, because not
only is there this question of are they now going to come up with more money for
this year's pay settlement. At the moment, health workers have been offered on
average 4.75%. And this is what this current dispute is about, is about getting
that up. But there's also some very fuzzy language that the Health Department
has used today in its submission to what's called a pay review body. Now, that's
what they call an independent body that comes up with a recommendation for what
health workers should be paid for next year, so starting in April. Now, the
language that the government submitted is very fuzzy. It's not saying we
recommend 3.5%. It's saying that's what we currently think is affordable. But
it's just it's interesting. I spoke to a government official who said, well,
constructive ambiguity is always helpful in negotiations, isn't it? There is a
suggestion here of two things going on. Could the government be now ready to
shift position on this year's paid ill for nurses? And could it be ready to
shift position on what it's about to offer for next year? That's just for health
workers, not necessarily for the public sector across the board. Not necessarily
for other, no. And at the moment, the only people who have been called in is the
nurses. And that's interesting as well, because the other health unions have
been completely blindsided by this. And they are surprised they have not been
called in. So it's kind of odd what's going on, given the fact that unison, for
example, they represent thousands of nurses. And briefly, Zoe, the teachers
strike action from them still on the cards? Still on the cards, they're not
calling it off because they say that there isn't a substantial nothing
substantial has been offered. So they're not calling off their strikes, but they
are happy to go in and talk. I mean, it's interesting. It just it suggests at
the moment that the government has not been signaling to them in private the way
they have to the nurses that there's more money on the table. But they're
currently suggesting, which is around three percent for teachers for next year,
the union are saying, you know, that's not enough. We're not calling off our
strikes. So it's kind of interesting that there's a bit of a mixed approach
going on at the moment. Watch this space. Zoe Conway, thanks very much. Last
night on the programme, we discussed the often awkward mix of religion and
politics. Our conversation was prompted by the fact that the Scottish finance
minister, Kate Forbes, had decided to join the context to be the next leader of
the S.N.P. Miss Forbes is a member of the Evangelical Free Church of Scotland,
and she said that she would have voted against gay marriage laws. She's also
said that having children outside of marriage is wrong, according to her faith.
But since she made those comments, a number of high profile backers have
withdrawn their support for her and there's speculation that her campaign may be
over before it's ever even really begun. Others, though, continue to back her.
Just before we came on air, Nicola Sturgeon was asked whether she thought the
party was tearing itself apart. Internal democracy just isn't the case for
country democracy. You know, debate is important and, you know, the S.N.P. has
many times been accused wrongly, in my view, of not embracing debate on issues.
So we're perhaps seeing the opposite of that right now. People look to the
S.N.P. as the government of Scotland to be very clear in its values about the
kind of Scotland we are, fair, inclusive, open and tolerant country. And also
people look to the S.N.P. and how we conduct ourselves to make judgments about
what an independent Scotland would look like. And I think that's a
responsibility people in the S.N.P. carry. I'm joined now by David Robertson, a
former moderator of the Free Church of Scotland, who's now working for Sydney
Anglicans in Australia. Good morning, I think I should be saying to you, David
Robertson. Yeah, good morning. Nice to talk to you. I'm talking to you
recovering from Covid. So please forgive me if my voice is not that great. Well,
thank you very much for speaking to us. Kate Forbes has made it plain that she's
simply expressing her religious views. There's clearly been a very strong
reaction to that. She says it won't affect legislation that's already been
passed. What do you make of the reaction to her openness? Let's call it that.
Yeah, I think the more interesting thing here is that she wasn't standing up and
saying these things. She was being asked them and she's being asked them
continually by journalists and I think prompted by the establishment, shall I
put it, within the S.N.P. who are horrified at the prospect of her replacing
Nicola Sturgeon. So she basically gets asked gotcha questions. And unlike many,
many Christians in the UK today in politics feel they have to avoid. She'd been
advised to lie. And she said, no, I'll just be honest. And what she. But what
are they horrified by? Are they horrified by the fact that they see her as
illiberal? Are they horrified by the fact that they feel she may threaten the
established order? What is it that you think they're horrified by? After all,
many people thought she was the front runner. Yeah, it's the latter. And what is
the front runner? And that's why they've gone for it with such viciousness. I
mean, I don't know if you've been following, but it's it's even Joanna Cherry
has been forced to say, look, call off the hounds. It really is quite
ridiculous. They're horrified at the prospect of the establishment having gone,
but they're not horrified at her being illiberal. There is no one more
illiberal, I think, in the UK at the moment than the Scottish government. I
mean, the current the person whom people now expect to be elected to use past
hate crime laws, which amongst other things meant that parents could be
penalized for what they said at their kitchen table to their own kids. But
that's a narrow political point. And people will argue over that. The politics
here is about her religious views. Are you surprised that that in a sense she
did she didn't have to choose to be so open about her religious views? She could
have dodged these questions. She could have answered them differently. Well, she
could have lied and she could have dodged them and they would have persisted
because every single person knew. Now, the people, the MSPs who are withdrawing
from her at this moment are doing so out of sheer cowardness, not because
they've suddenly realized her views. They know our church. They know what we
teach. By the way, we teach the same as the Catholic Church and as the Muslims.
I'm intrigued that nobody has asked whom's a use of about the Koran or some of
the passages in it. And incidentally, none of them have asked him about his
personal views are on same sex marriage. He was asked about his views on faith,
I think, by BBC reporter yesterday. And so that those questions have come up and
no doubt that they will now, I imagine, come up again. But do you think then
Kate Forbes, it will become impossible for her to stand as leader given that
these views, these chasms have opened up on these specific issues? No, I think
first of all, let me just go back a little bit, humps the use of was asked about
faith in general. And he said it didn't affect his policies, which if the
journalist had pushed on that doesn't make any sense at all. But you could ask
about specific things. Kate Forbes is being asked about every specific detail
about social liberal policies that people don't agree with her views. She's not
being asked about poverty, which for me is a much more important issue or
independence or the NHS. Why is that the case? Because they're trying to get
her. So I think that we've got an irony here, the national, which is the kind of
Pravda of the SNP newspaper, is running a poll at the moment, which I think
they're beginning to regret, because every day, in fact, every hour they've run
an anti Kate Forbes piece. And yet despite that, asking SNP supporters, who
would you vote for? Humza Yousaf, 19%, Reagan, 44%, and Forbes 36%. So you think
this is about her... If Forbes holds on to the debates, she'll win. You think
this is about her popularity, but what do you say to those who'd argue it's
simply that the party believes that her views are out of step with mainstream
public opinion? Well, you see, the trouble is, you're right using the phrase the
party. What the party says is true. It is extremely Orwellian. I don't think
that the... I think we keep getting told what mainstream public opinion is. And
I want to know who determines that opinion. I personally think that most people
admire a politician who's willing to speak the truth. See, the point is here,
we're arguing about an issue, same sex marriage, which is not going to come up
for a debate. And we're ignoring issues like the failure of the NHS, which Humza
Yousaf is currently in charge of, which is in reality right now. And it seems to
me that this is absolutely an anti-Christian getcha. And if she is forced out,
then I would suggest this is a sign of an illiberal, intolerant society, not of
a tolerant society. David Robertson, former moderator of the Free Church of
Scotland. Thank you very much. Let's speak to someone now who can give us some
thoughts on where Scottish public opinion might be. Sir John Curtis is a
political analyst and professor of politics at Strathclyde University. Sir John
Curtis, what do you make of all of this? Is Kate Forbes the victim of a sort of
an attack by people who see her leadership campaign as being strong? Or is there
a real divide between people who think that her faith actually makes her
unsuitable to be leader of the party? Well, there are two bits of backdrop to
this. The first, of course, is that a social issue is the legislation on gender
recognition that would enable trans people in Scotland to self-identify has been
the subject of very considerable controversy before and after Christmas. Indeed,
that legislation has been vetoed by the UK government. So that almost inevitably
meant that social issues were going to have a prominence in this leadership
campaign that perhaps in other circumstances they wouldn't have done. The second
is that whereas, for example, we've long since known that Tony Blair was deeply
religious but Alistair Campbell always protected him by saying, we don't do
religion. In contrast, Kate Forbes in an interview, I mean, two, a couple of
years ago now with Nick Robinson, the former BBC political editor, was very
upfront about her evangelical Christian views. And therefore, as a result, I
think she, as a result of that interview, and given also the other
circumstances, it was always likely she was going to be asked about them. Now,
one can argue about what's popular and what isn't popular. Certainly if she had
confined her remarks to being critical of the Gender Recognition Act, well,
that's an issue where public opinion in Scotland is for the most part opposed
what the Scottish Parliament passed, and even amongst SMP supporters, opinion is
the best evenly divided and some polling suggests that they are against. But
when it came to the issue of gay marriage, of course, this is an issue where,
frankly, social attitudes have been through a revolution, not just in Scotland
but throughout the UK for the last 20 years. So I think what you're saying is
that her views might well be out of step with mainstream opinion briefly in
Scotland. On the issue of gay marriage, which I think is the one that really
gave the journalists then where to start then to pursue other aspects of her
views. Yes, I mean, the last time the question was asked by Scottish Social
Health Tube was in 2014 when the law was being changed. That played time, 68% of
people in Scotland said that people of the same sex should be able to marry,
only 16% disagreed. I don't really say, even amongst those who identified as
Christians, 59% supported the change of law. The truth is the Christian
community itself is not united on this issue. And to that extent, these Cape
Forks perhaps doesn't realise how relatively unpopular I stand on that issue
actually happens to be. Sir John Curtis, thank you very much. Well, as we've
been hearing on tonight's programme, President Putin shows no remorse or regret
for his decision to invade Ukraine. For many of those who found themselves on
the front line of the war, that's meant the destruction of their homes and
dealing with the death of close family and friends in horrific circumstances.
According to the UN Human Rights Office, at least 8,006 civilians have been
killed in Ukraine and more than 13,000 have been injured. All this week, we're
taking the opportunity to honour and get to know just a handful of those who've
lost their lives. The Russian journalist Oksana Baulina was killed in Kiev last
month, last March, while covering the war. Her friend and former colleague,
Alexei Kovalev, has been telling the world tonight's James Kumeris army about
her. Alexei began by recalling his first impressions when he met Oksana at the
Time Out Moscow office back in 2007. Oksana's desk was next to mine and she ran
the fashion desk. She always would come incredibly, immaculately fashionable.
She always had the latest dresses and she had a full head of red hair, a very
striking appearance. And she was incredibly energetic and she would always be
the one to spark the craziest Friday night parties in the office. She would
always be the one dancing on the tables. And what were those days like in
Moscow? It seems like such a distant past, almost imaginary. So that was at an
age 2006, 2007, the time of political stability. So the oil prices were as high
as ever in Russia's recent history. And at Time Out we were one of the few
magazines that were explaining that how to make use of all that sudden
prosperity that just appeared out of nowhere. So Oksana was very much part of
this new internationally minded middle class that had grown up in Russia in the
early 2000s. Yeah, precisely. And she would teach the Moscow white women what to
wear at which season, what is the latest nail polish color. And at that time,
neither me nor her nor anyone else I knew actually with the exception of a few
political activists had any real interest in politics. So what is it that turned
Oksana from an apolitical fashion writer more interested in telling women what
nail polish color to wear into someone who was politically engaged and more
active? As far as I remember, the first time she had a sort of political
awakening was in 2010, a month of unprecedented wildfires. So the entire Moscow
was enveloped in this thick, white, milkish, small, which was deadly. It killed
a few hundred people. And for the first time in 10 years since Putin became
president first, many Russians, it just dawned on them that there was just no
infrastructure at all to deal with this kind of crisis. And people realized that
it was up to them. So people crowdfunded for firefighting equipment for their
own volunteer teams. And Oksana was there. She had some sort of epiphany about
this. And she became more and more involved in the political activism. She
earnestly believed that change was possible and she was ready to sacrifice
anything to achieve that goal. Her turning point for quitting was one of these
fashion mangs tried to run a fluff piece about tourism in Crimea as a new
Russian region. She objected to this and then quit in protest. And then from now
on, she went to full-time political activism. So she made that choice and she
never looked back. So for a while she joined Oksina Navalny's organization. It's
a media producer for his YouTube Live television show. And how then did she go
from that to being in Ukraine at the beginning of the war? What's the journey
that took her to Ukraine? So Oksana was one of the first people of that
political immigration from Russia. She immigrated in 2020, I think. And she
worked for this Belarusian exile media organization based in Poland called
Bilsat. And then she briefly before going to the war, she joined this
investigative outlet, The Insider, who then sent her an assignment to Ukraine,
which sent her an assignment isn't really the right term because she was so
eager to go there herself. When you were communicating with her on Telegram,
when she said she was going to Kiev, what kind of communications did you have
with her? Did you, you didn't try and tell her not to go or? No, that was the
first week of the war. And it was clear to me already that no, she's not going
to stay behind. She didn't have any more war reporting experience or hostile
environment training, nothing of the kind. But of course, I mean, it wasn't even
a choice for her. How did you find out she'd been killed? It was in March 23rd.
I had a message from a stranger on Telegram who said, do you know any relatives
of Oksana Baulina? And my heart really sank at that moment because there's, you
know, there's not too many different reasons for someone to ask a stranger that.
We still don't know how or why. So it was presumably a stray water shell fired
from the Hosotunal Airport, which was at the time had still been occupied by the
Russian troops. That was Aleksei Kovalev and his memories of his friend Oksana
Baulina who died in Ukraine last March. And just before we leave you, while many
of us here may have been flipping pancakes, in some cities, Fat Tuesday is of
course a much bigger event, perhaps nowhere more so than in New Orleans, where
the jazz musician Professor Longhair is responsible for one of the city's most
famous carnival songs, Big Chief. His daughter now says he hasn't been properly
recognised by the city and she's taking her campaign to the mayor and the local
governor. So before we go, we leave you with a Louisiana taste of one of his
songs, appropriately, Go to the Mardi Gras. That's the world tonight. I'm Rithal
Asha. Good night. The studio engineers bringing a lyrical end to the world
tonight were Alison Purcell-Davis and Miss Santa Holly Palmer, the editor Emily
Craig. On Yegen is bored of St Petersburg and has moved to his country estate in
tonight's Book at Bedtime by Alexander Pushkin. That's in a moment. Nearly a
year on, how can peace be restored in Europe? This will end when there is enough
progress on the battlefield by Ukraine. A war that has to be won or a broke at
peace. This is James Nokhti and in Europe and the United States I've been
talking to negotiators about the lessons from the past. You've had a 70 year
armistice in Korea, but what you've not had is 70 years of a quiet, calm border.
Every war is different. So how might understanding old conflict help Ukraine
where both sides speak of nothing but victory? How wars end on BBC Radio 4,
available now on BBC sounds. Well, now on Radio 4 we continue our reading of
Alexander Pushkin's novel in verse, Eugene On Yegen. Tired of St Petersburg
society, On Yegen has moved to his newly inherited country estate. For two full
days he was enchanted by lonely fields and burbling brook, by silvan shade that
lay implanted within a cool and leafy nook. But by the third he couldn't stick
it. The grove, the hill, the field, the thicket quite ceased to tempt him any
more and presently induced a snore. And then he saw that country byways, with no
great palaces, no streets, no cards, no walls, no poet's feet, were just as dull
as city highways. And spleen, he saw, would dog his life like shadow or a
faithful wife. The ancient manse had been erected for placid comfort and to
last, and all its solid form reflected the sense and taste of ages past. At the
house the ceilings towered, from walls ancestral portraits glowered. The
drawing-room had rich brocades and stoves of tile in many shades. All this today
seems antiquated. I don't know why, but in the end it hardly mattered to my
friend, for he'd become so fully jaded. He yawned alike wheree'er he sat, in
ancient hall or modern flat. Soon amid his new possessions, and merely as an
idle scheme, Eugene devised a few concessions and introduced a new regime. A
backwards genius, he commuted the old corvée and substituted a quit-rent at a
modest rate. His peasants thanked their lucky fate, but thrifty neighbours waxed
indignant and in their dens bewailed as one the dreadful harm of what he'd done.
Still others sneered or turned malignant, and everyone who chose to speak called
him a menace and a freak. At first the neighbours' calls were steady, but when
they learned that in the rear Onegin kept his stallion ready so he could quickly
disappear the moment one of them was sighted or heard approaching uninvited,
they took offence, and one and all they dropped him, cold and ceased to call.
The man's a bore, he's off his rocker. Must be a mason. Drinks, they say. Red
wine by tumbler, night and day. Won't kiss a lady's hand, the mocker. Won't call
me Sir the way he should. The general verdict wasn't good. Another squire chose
this season to reappear as his estate, and gave the neighbours equal reason for
scrutiny, no less irate. Vladimir Lenski, just returning from Göttingen with
soulful yearning, was in his prime. A handsome youth and poet filled with
Kantian truth. From misty Germany our squire had carried back the fruits of art,
a freedom-loving, noble heart. A spirit strange but full of fire, an always bold
impassioned speech and raven locks of shoulder reach. Throughout that barren dim
dominion, Eugene alone could see his worth. And Lenski formed a low opinion of
neighbours' feasts and rounds of mirth. He fled their noisy congregations and
found their solemn conversations of liquor and of hay brought in, of kennels and
of distant kin devoid of any spark of feeling, or hint of inner lyric grace.
Both wit and brains were out of place, as were the arts of social dealing, but
then their charming wives, he found at talk, were even less profound. And
Lenski, having no desire for marriage bonds or wedding bell, had cordial hopes
that he'd acquire the chance to know Onegin well. And so they met, like wave
with mountain, like verse with prose, like flame with fountain. Their natures
distant and apart, at first their differences of heart made meetings dull at one
another's, but then their friendship grew, and soon they'd meet on horse each
afternoon, and in the end were close as brothers. Thus people, so it seems to
me, become good friends from sheer ennui. He smiled at Lenski's conversation.
Indeed, the poet's fervent speech, his gaze of constant inspiration, his mind
still vassalant in reach, all these were new and unexpected. And so, for once,
Eugene elected to keep his wicked tongue in check, and thought, what
foolishness, to wreck the young man's blissful, brief infection. Its time will
pass without my knife, so let him meanwhile live his life, believing in the
world's perfection. Let's grant to fevered youthful days, their youthful
ravings, and their blaze. Ah, yes, he loved. In such a fashion as men today no
longer do, as only poets, mad with passion, still love, because they're fated
to. He knew one constant source of dreaming, one constant wish for ever
gleaming, one ever present cause for pain, and neither distance, nor the chain
of endless years of separation, nor pleasures rounds, nor learnings well, nor
foreign beauties' magic spell, nor yet the muse, his true vocation, could alter
Lenski's deep desire, his soul aflame with virgin fire. When Scarsaboy, and not
yet knowing the torment of her heart in flames, he'd been entranced by Olga
growing, and fondly watched her girlhood games. Beneath his shady parks'
protection, he'd shared her frolics with affection. Their fathers, who were
friends, had plans to read one day their marriage bands, and deep within her
rustic bower, beneath her parents' loving gaze, she blossomed in a maiden's
ways. A valley lily come to flower, off where the grass grows dense and high,
unseen by bee or butterfly. Forever modest, meek in bearing, as gay as morning's
rosy dress, like any poet, open, caring, as sweet as love's own soft caress, her
sky-blue eyes, devoid of guile, her flaxen curls, her lovely smile, her voice,
her form, her graceful stance, Olga's every trait. But glance in any novel,
you'll discover her portraits there, it's charming, true, I liked it once no
less than you, but round it boredom seems to hover, and so dear reader grant me
pause to plead her elder sister's cause. So she was called Tatiana, reader. She
lacked that fresh and rosy tone that made her sister's beauty sweeter, and drew
all eyes to her alone. A wild creature, sad and pensive, shy as a doe, and
apprehensive, Tatiana seemed among her kin a stranger who had wandered in. She
never learned to show affection, to hug her parents, either one. Her child
herself, for children's fun, she lacked the slightest predilection, and
oftentimes she'd sit all day in silence at the window-bay. Ah, me, these poets,
such a hurry. Goodbye, O'Niegan, time I went. Well, I won't keep you, have no
worry, but where are all your evenings spent? The Laren place. What reckless
daring. Good God, man, don't you find it wearing, just killing time that way
each night? Why not at all? Well, serves you right. I've got the scene in mind
so clearly. For starters, tell me if I'm wrong, a simple Russian family throng,
the guests all treated so sincerely, with lots of jam and talk to spare, on rain
and flax and cattle care. Well, where's the harm? The evening passes. The
boredom, brother, there's the harm. Well, I despise your upper classes and like
the family circle's charm. It's where I find more pastoral singing. Enough, old
boy, my ears are ringing. And so you're off. Forgive me, then. But tell me,
Lensky, how and when I'll see this phyllis so provoking who haunts your thoughts
and writers quill. Your tears and rhymes and what you will. Present me. Do. You
must be joking. I'm not. Well, then, why not tonight? They'll welcome us with
great delight. Let's go. And so the friends departed. And on arrival, duly meet
that sometimes heavy but good-hearted, old-fashioned Russian welcome treat. The
social ritual never changes. The hostess artfully arranges on little dishes her
preserves and on her cupboard table serves a drink of lingonberry flavour. With
folded arms along the hall, the maids have gathered, one and all, to glimpse the
laryn's brand new neighbour. While in the yard, their men reproach on Yegen's
taste in horse and coach. Now, Holmes, our hero's destination, as down the
shortest road they fly, let's listen to their conversation and use a furtive ear
to spy. Why all these yawns, oh, Yegen, really? Mere habbit, Lensky. But you're
clearly more bored than usual. No, the same. The fields are dark now. What a
shame. Come on, Andriuska. Faster, matey. These stupid woods and fields and
streams. Oh, by the way, Dame Laryn seems a simple but a nice old lady. I fear
that lingonberry brew may do me in before it's through. But tell me, which one
was Tatyana? Why, she, who with a wistful air, all sad and silent like Svetlana
came in and took the window chair. And really, you prefer the other? Why not?
For I, the poet brother, I'd choose the elder one instead. Your Olga's look is
cold and dead, as in some dull Van Dyke Madonna. So round and fairer face is
she. She's like that stupid moon you see up in that stupid sky you honor.
Vladimir gave a curt reply and let the conversation die. Meanwhile, Oh, Yegen's
presentation at Madame Laryn's country seat produced at large a great sensation
and gave the neighbours quite a treat. They all began to gossip slyly, to joke
and comment rather wryly, and soon the general verdict ran that Tanyad finally
found a man. Some even knowingly conceded that wedding plans had long been set
and then postponed till they could get the stylish rings the couple needed. As
far as Lenski's wedding stood, they knew they'd settled that for good. Tatyana
listened with vexation to all this gossip, but it's true that with a secret
exultation despite herself, she wondered too. And in her heart the thought was
planted. Until at last her fate was granted, she fell in love. For thus indeed
does spring awake the buried seed. Long since her keen imagination with
tenderness and pain imbued had hungered for the fatal food, long since her
heart's sweet agitation had choked her maiden breast too much. Her soul awaited
someone's touch.