TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 thousand people were killed. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Up next on Outlook, Mariam and Mohammed would go through a lot, time,
distance, and then the beginning of a war before finally deciding to get married
in the capital city of Yemen. The world felt like it was ending and for us to do
this under bullets, literally under bullets, and for our families not to worry
about risking their lives and being there, we were on top of a roof under war,
like what were we thinking? And Mohammed, you said it's your favorite night of
your life. Without question, that's the start of my life being the better half,
the person I love the most. As a couple, they shared so much, but when something
unspeakably painful came between them, they needed to find a way to break the
silence. At the beginning, I was against the idea of making a film about us
because it's not easy, but the moment we saw how people reacted to it and I
witnessed firsthand the power of telling stories. Their great love story after
the headlines. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. The fire service in
Greece says a late night train crash near the central city of Larissa has left
at least 26 people dead and 85 injured. Rescue workers are scarring the severely
damaged carriages of a passenger train. It collided with a cargo train derailed
and initially went up in flames. This passenger managed to escape and described
what happened. The passengers were all relaxed. Some were asleep and suddenly
there was a sudden boom. Suitcases started falling, many windows broke, but we
in carriage number five were lucky because somehow the doors opened and we
managed to get out. We could see in the other carriages passengers were breaking
the windows to escape. Conditions for the rescuers are described as very
difficult. The army has been mobilized to help and dozens of fire and ambulance
staff are at the scene. The governing party candidate has won the most votes in
Nigeria's disputed presidential election, but the electoral commission has yet
to confirm Bola Tinubu's win, as he must also pass the benchmark of 25 percent
of votes in all of Nigeria's states. He has a total of almost nine million
votes, far ahead of his main rival Atiku Abubakar. Here's Mayeni Jones. The head
of the electoral commission hasn't yet announced a winner, but results from all
36 Nigerian states and the capital Abuja have been announced. Mr. Tinubu appears
to have won with 36 percent of the votes. There's been frustration with the slow
pace at which the results were announced. The electoral commission says this was
because of technical issues with the new electronic system that has only been
used nationally in these polls. The two main opposition parties have called the
process a sham and called for new elections. The UN's nuclear watchdog says it's
discussing with Iran the issue of highly enriched uranium particles recently
discovered at the country's Fordow enrichment plant. Bethany Bell reports from
Vienna. In the report, the IAEA said it has asked Iran to explain the origin of
the particles of uranium, which were enriched up to 83.7 percent purity.
Weapons-grade uranium is 90 percent. The particles were found earlier this year
at the Fordow nuclear site, which is dug into a mountain. The report said Iran
had informed the agency that unintended fluctuations in enrichment levels may
have occurred. The coffins of 65 victims of a migrant shipwreck in southern
Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in Crotone in Calabria region. They
died when the boat they were traveling in hit rocks and broke up in a storm on
Sunday. About 80 people survived. Others are still missing. This is the latest
world news from the BBC. President Zelensky of Ukraine has said that the
International Criminal Court has a historic role to play in bringing about
justice for crimes committed in Ukraine since Russia's invasion. He was speaking
after meeting the ICC's top prosecutor, Karim Khan. He's been visiting Ukraine
to look into Russia's attacks on energy and other infrastructure, which have
killed hundreds of civilians. Mr Khan said Moscow will be held to account if
these are found to be war crimes. Generally, we see clearly a pattern, I think,
in terms of the number, scale and breadth of attacks against the power grids of
Ukraine, and we need to look at why that's taking place. Are they legitimate
targets or not, and or whether or not they are targeted for other reasons. It
may well be that it's part of a policy or part of a plan, and we need to get to
the bottom of it and see whether or not there's criminal responsibility. And if
there is, we have an International Criminal Court that has jurisdiction to look
into it. The US Supreme Court has heard arguments over the legitimacy of
President Biden's plan to give loan relief to millions of students. Six
Republican-controlled states have brought the case, arguing Mr Biden is
exceeding his powers. He promised to cancel $430 billion worth of student loans
after the COVID pandemic. President Putin has signed an amended language law
which will ban the use of non-Russian words in official situations and
government publications. Words much used include blogger, meeting, talk show and
face control. Police in southeast Peru have discovered a mummy believed to be at
least 600 years old inside the cool bag of a food delivery worker. The man,
Julio Bermejo, said he had been sharing a room with the bandaged body, which he
said he considered to be a spiritual girlfriend. He denied trying to sell the
mummy, saying his father had brought it home nearly 30 years ago. BBC World
News. Hi and welcome to Outlook, the programme where we meet some truly
extraordinary people and hear their stories. I'm India Raxan. Today we're
speaking with Mariam Aldobani and Mohamed Aljabri. They've known each other for
over 12 years. They met in Yemen, starting out as friends, getting married and
then eventually making award-winning films together. Mohamed, was it obvious to
you always that Mariam had a love of film? It was obvious for me that Mariam is
extremely a creative and talented person, either in making films, writing songs,
singing and that's what makes her who she is. And that's one of the reasons I
fell in love with and I chose her to be my partner in life. I was holding my
emotions because he's just being fantastic. I'm trying not to tear up, but yeah,
I haven't heard him say that before. So thank you for asking him this question.
Have you never told her that, Mohamed? I think we are always very much tied into
in the in the production, in the let's make a film, wearing different hats. And
so to reflect and sit down on our roles and what we do and what makes us who we
are, we don't talk much about it. Okay guys, we're only a few minutes into the
interview. Don't well up yet. They're quite a young couple, but already Mariam
and Mohamed's relationship has withstood time, distance, conflict and an
incredibly difficult loss. And when they work together, they cover difficult
topics, usually focusing on the conflict in Yemen. But when I speak to them from
their home in Doha in Qatar, they're full of laughter and keen to explain to me
that like any couple working together, they've got their different roles. You
know, the number of times, at least in my case, I thought I was pressing record,
but it wasn't for audio. And the number of times I was bullied by Mohamed. What
when you're making a film together? Yep. Because it's usually just us two. We go
in in two places where it's not safe to bring a large crew. So he's the
cinematographer and I'm the audio person by default. And Mohamed, how does that
make you feel? Well, I always put the producer hat because I'm also the producer
and she's the director. And so sometimes I have to be tough. We cannot record
again. Who's the tough guy in your filming relationship? We play bad cop, good
cop to the outside. But I think we're both bad cops to each other. Oh, no. I
don't second that. Careful, you might never work together again. I hope not. I
hope not. And you're both sitting in different rooms at the moment. Yeah. Nice.
Okay. Why? To ensure the quality of sound, we have to put headsets and we cannot
connect two headsets at the same time. So that's why we have to speak from two
different rooms and two different devices. It's going to be interesting because
you're going to be sort of talking about each other and your relationship and
from the other side of the wall. Yeah, be very careful. You're just a daughter
away. I just want to say that in this interview, we're going to talk about an
important part of Mariam and Mohamed's life, which formed the basis of Mariam's
first film. It confronts the heartbreaking loss she feels after enduring a
miscarriage. So please do take care while listening to the second part of the
programme. Now, film and TV has sort of always been there on the horizon for
Mariam. Exploring language and storytelling has been a big part of her life,
beginning when she was very little and growing up in the 90s in Sanaa, Yemen's
capital city. So Mariam, take me back to when you were very, very little. When
did your love of film begin? I grew up in a household that I'm very
multicultural. My mama is from Russia, my dad is Yemeni, I grew up in Yemen. And
I kind of taught myself English through listening to music and trying to write
the lyrics, looking through the dictionary for words that are slang and don't
exist in Oxford dictionary. It was very, very challenging. What sort of songs
were you listening to? Do you remember the band Blue? I was very innocent. I
love them so much. Yes, of course. Yeah, there I was, because it's repetitive.
So it's easy to... Wait, what was their big song? All Rise. All Rise. All Rise.
Yes, yes. What a shame. Yeah, yeah, no, I love their song. And then movies, I
was trying to understand without reading the translations. And I think there
became my kind of obsession of how do people do that? It's very magical. How do
you put words into a visual way, into a rhythm, into a melody, whether it's
music or film? It's such a fascinating medium. And I do sometimes, which Mohamed
doesn't believe and think it's crazy, I do dream of films, like films that I
haven't seen before with end credits. Wow, you either have like a beginning, a
middle and some end credits. Yeah, yeah, it's insane. It's insane. I don't know
how. It's just, I think I've immersed myself so much into them that I just
consume them even in my sleep. Tell me about watching TV at home then when you
were little. What sort of things would you guys watch? It was usually in the
living room. And we had, well, in the Arab world, we had only a few TV channels
that showed foreign films or Hollywood films. It was like Sabrina the Witch.
Sabrina the Teenage Witch. Yes, Buffy the Vampire Slayer. I feel like we had the
same childhood, Mariam. A lot of blue and a lot of skin. Exactly. Friends, all
of the shows that were basically popular at the time. Were you quite into Oprah?
Oprah Winfrey. I love her. I love her so much. Yeah, yeah. I get trolled a lot
by Mohamed for this, but I really grew up idealising her so much. What was it
you were drawn to? What sang to you about it? I remember watching or starting to
watch her show when I was in sixth grade. And it was just fascinating how she
was always raising big issues and discussing family issues that nobody did at
the time. She kind of sparked something that I want to do. I want to raise these
issues. I want to make people excited about things as well. And I don't know,
make a change. Amazing. And when you were 11, you started keeping a journal and
I think probably most people, I don't know, I feel like most people would kind
of hate to look back at the journals of their 11 year old selves. But yours
actually sounds like it might be worth a read. Tell me about your diaries. It
wasn't diary as in today this happened or today this person did this to me. It
was more of writing my feelings in a poem or in a song or in just thoughts.
Later on, I started writing ideas that are as films, like short films. I would
dream in films, but I would write them as stories. Did you know that you wanted
to make them when you were little? No. Can you believe it? I never thought I'd
be able to. I never thought there is a possibility of doing so because no one
from my surrounding was in film or in any creative sphere. Was it okay when you
did decide that that's probably something that you might like to do? How did
that go down? Well, I really wanted to study something in the media when I was
still in Sana'a, like before I graduated high school. But my dad didn't take it
seriously. And I understand why, because we don't have proper media education in
Yemen. So I pursued something in the medical field for him, just for him to have
a peace of mind at first. From 2011, me and a group of friends, literally just
from learning from YouTube, learning by doing, we started making short short
films. And this was while you were at university? Yeah. Yeah. You're studying
pharmacy. Is that right? Exactly. Yeah. I can't believe it. It was crazy. It was
torture. And all the time you were, you started to make films on the side. Yeah,
but it was an escape. I wanted to fill my time doing anything else to be able to
bear what I'm forced to do. So from the start, filmmaking was both a love and an
escape for Mariam. But before she really started focusing on film, she was
working as an intern while she was studying for her pharmacy degree. And that's
when Mohamed, very literally, walked into her life. Tell me about Mohamed. When
did you first meet him? I think he is better in telling our story than me. He
remembers the dates and like the exact moment. That's because he's the producer
and you're the director, right? Exactly. He's got the details. He manages the
details. First of all, I mean, she's making me sound like a bully and someone
who teases her about everything. You do, you do. I'm calling you out. I
challenge you. Let's put it that way. Challenge, Lord of Oz. So about how we
met, we met on the 24th of December 2010. See what I mean? Yeah, it's very
exact. That's quite impressive. He will tell you the time as well if you allow
him. What time is it? It was around 11.30 in the morning. Wow. That's wonderful.
So I on the 24th of December 2010, I was invited to speak about my experience
living with an American family as an exchange student. So I go there, I see this
very attractive girl at the reception. And she caught my eye from the beginning
and kind of had a crush from the first moment I saw her. And then I think a week
later, I'm offered to intern as well in the same center. And so then I
discovered that she was an intern. And so we worked together for some time. Our
relationship grows, we move from colleagues to friends. To best friends. Excuse
me. That's going to come up. We were best friends. Best friends later, because
dates are important. And so I traveled to live in France around 10 months later,
then we met and I'm going there to study and I go there. And always in my mind,
there was that girl that got away, the girl back in Sanaa. And we touch bases
and we become really best friends, very close to one another. And then in
November of 2012, I asked her, would you like to date or? No, he proposed. Oh,
you just proposed? Straight off? He didn't ask me to date, he proposed. He
proposed on Skype. It's not proposing. I feel like there's a real big difference
and we should figure out which one happened. Did you ask her out on a date? Or
did you ask her to marry you? Let me tell you exactly what he said. He was like,
if my family will come and ask your hand from your family, would you agree? What
does that mean? Is this dating or is it proposing? It's proposing. I mean, OK,
we need a lot of cultural studies to be explained here before. We were very
close to one another. I really, I mean, I thought for years that she was out of
my league. She comes from a richer family and I really wanted to be
straightforward. And our way in Yemen is you cannot play around the bush. And I
told her, it's not proposing. It's, you know, if we start something. And it took
me a whole year to convince my family, actually, that I want to be with a girl
from the north because we come from the south. And for that year, we were
dating. What kind of things did you do together? What was dating like? When we
kind of started being together, together, it was him being in France. So he was
still studying. He was still far. Like I would see him sometimes a week in a
year, like for one week in a year when he comes to visit his family and then he
finds an excuse to come to Sana'a to see me. Indeed, it was long distance.
Thinking about it now, it was horrible. I would have loved to be close to her
and with her. We were each other's refuge in a way. For me, I was, you know, I
was in a very horrible experience in France. I was depressed and, and at the
time, I think, I don't know, there was an app, a calling app. It was on 24-7. We
were talking and being together throughout the day. So tell me about getting
engaged. Yeah, it was long distance as well. He wasn't here, can you imagine? He
wasn't in Sana'a. He was in France. So his family came. They spoke, the family
spoke. I think the most unique part of it is I got to hug my father-in-law,
basically, which was really, really sweet because it felt like an extension of
hugging Mohamed. And of course, we've been remote for so long. So it felt, it
was the sweetest memory I have from that day. After you got engaged, Mohamed,
you came back to Yemen, didn't you? So we got engaged in November 2013, and I
came back to Yemen end of 2014. So it was almost a year apart. So this time,
Mohamed did actually ask Mariam to marry him. And he moved back to Aden in the
south of Yemen, only hundreds of miles apart from each other now, rather than
thousands. And all seemed okay. Until news started spreading of fighting,
breaking out between rebel groups and government forces. It was insane. We
didn't think that thing will escalate more than that. We thought the rebels will
be pushed back, but not to the point where the whole country would be in war.
And that escalated and the war broke out. And there started to be explosions and
attacks in the capital in Sana'a. We live in the outskirts of Sana'a, so we're
not in the heart of Sana'a, we're kind of a little bit far. So we would hear the
explosions, especially on the mountains. And our home, we're surrounded by
mountains. So all of these explosions, we would hear, but the fact didn't hit
us. It hit like nearby houses, but not us. We were kind of fortunate enough to
be safe until the largest explosion happened. It was insane. It was the wave.
I'll never forget seeing that wave coming. It was during the day. And it was a
series of explosions, small ones, building to the big explosion. And you would
see the wave coming slowly. There is something in the air. When you open an oven
and there is this heat, and you see air is moving, it was a huge wave coming to
us. And sound comes after. Our home, the third floor, is all glass. And it just
shattered completely. The whole house just shook. And I think that was the
moment I realized nowhere is really safe. And I was like, what is going to
happen after this? There is no return. That was kind of the point of no return.
Most of the time, there's no even cooking gas. All the resources were at halt.
People didn't know it was happening. No electricity, meaning you can't really
hear news. It was madness. It was literally trying to climb walls, not knowing
what's going to happen tomorrow. Are you going to wake up or not? Are these
glasses going to shatter and cut you up? And it was just a lot of these glasses
going to shatter and cut you up. And you're not going to, there is no tomorrow,
basically. And you and you, Mohamed, you were not living together at this point.
You must have been in constant contact, I imagine. We were trying our best to
stay in touch, whether on the phone or Facebook, if the internet was on and the
electricity was available for both of us. Yeah. But the thing is, when they fled
the house, they went to a remote village where there was no proper connection. I
would go mad trying to reach him. There was no cell phone coverage, no internet.
So it was constant fear of, is he okay? Where is he? And we went from talking
constantly. Yes, it was long distance, but we were constantly in each other's
ear. We were constantly talking, checking up on each other, texting to nothing,
to nothing. And then the war is happening. All you hear is no news or awful
news. It was very difficult. It all escalated quickly. Mariam and Mohamed felt
worlds apart. And now their lives and the lives of their families and friends
were at risk. They needed to find a way to be together. And then Mohamed got
accepted to study international politics in Qatar. Mariam knew it was her chance
to leave Yemen with him, and she managed to get a visa in time. But before they
hugged their families goodbye, one more important memory needed to be made. With
all of this turmoil and this fear around you, you decide to get married. How did
that decision come about? It was, looking back, it was, you know, when things
just align, I feel like it was meant to be. It was insane. Like everything
happened very, very quickly. It wasn't perfect. We had to plan everything. Like
I had to plan everything in less than two weeks. Everything means nothing,
basically, because everything was closed. It was the beginning of the war.
Nobody was really doing any ceremonies. So we had to plan, I'm not going to say
a wedding, I'll say like a small celebration, a ceremony that included basically
just my family and his family and his family and three of my close friends.
There were no venues open. So a friend of mine literally just helped me out by
having the hotel that he was managing. It wasn't really open, open, but he
opened it for Mohamed's family to be there and for us to have like a small
celebration on the roof. And we got the most horrible cake you can ever imagine
seeing. Which we have photos of, unfortunately. Why was it so? What was so
horrible about the cake? Oh my goodness. Mohamed, do you want to describe the
cake? Because it's just, yeah, I can't. I almost had a nervous breakdown when I
saw it. And he was like, just smile, just smile. It's okay. So our wedding
ceremony, between parentheses, is the best night of my life. And so details of
the cake and the dress and who was there, was not there, really, you know, for
me are secondary. But the cake, Mariam was promised with a white cake that looks
like it has pearls made out of sugar or fondant. And the reality, they were like
sugar balls. Someone did it with their hands and they were sticked on the side.
And so it looks kind of, you know, a big, ugly kind of a cake. It's somebody's
kid who did an art project that looked like a, you know, like an edible cake,
but it wasn't really. So the ceremony was all planned out. And the only thing
that was missing was the groom. Mohamed had to cross from the south of Yemen to
the north. And he would have to risk his life to get to the wedding. And he
would have to risk his life to get to Sana'a and marry Mariam. I drove the car
that was, you know, full of holes from shrapnel that resulted from the mortar
attack. And I had about 100 litres of gas in the back of the car because it was
a shortage. So we didn't know driving around. And so we were driving through the
front line, going to Sana'a. And now I'm thinking about it, it's like, what have
I done? The amount of risk I put my family through to go get married and travel
the country. They clearly wanted to be there with you, though. Yes, indeed. It
was an important moment for the family. It was very stressful for me because,
you know, I didn't really necessarily want a big wedding or whatever. I just
wanted a very fairy tale-y small celebration that never really happened. And
looking back, I'm so happy that both of our families were there, especially our
parents, regardless of the... The world felt like it was ending. It was a very,
very difficult time. And for us to do this amidst under bullets, literally under
bullets, it was insane. And for our families to not to worry about risking their
lives and being there, we were on top of a roof, under water. What were we
thinking? Like, looking back, even when Mohamed said, like, driving that car
with his family across the front line, I don't know what we were thinking. But
at the time, it made sense. And it was something that was supposed to happen.
And I'm so happy it did. It might not have been the wedding that Mariam and
Mohamed pictured when they were little, but they were finally together and ready
to start their new lives in Doha. But there, far from the war raging in Yemen,
they would face a loss they hadn't imagined. Distance from friends and family,
it would test the strength of their love. Stay with us. But I'm not telling you
what to think, I hope. It's the story of a lovely young woman who submits to the
sexual demands of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins
to change, growing more and more like the body of a pig. At some points, she's
very animal. At some other points, she's very human. She oscillates according to
the level of aggression against her. She's not stable. Nobody's. It's a story of
that, you know. World Book Club with Marie Daria Seck. Saturday at 12 GMT. On
Outlook, the couple whose journey through war and loss inspired them to become
filmmakers. What was it like showing the film to people? Oh my goodness, I will
never forget that that evening, a room full of strangers connected with
something that was very difficult for you to deal with and you kept away for so
long. It just clicked and it became like, OK, then this is what we're going to
do. How rolling the camera helped Mariam and Mohamed through grief. Coming up
after the news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. At least 29 people have been killed in
a late night train crash in Greece. Fire officials said 85 more were injured.
Rescue workers are still scouring the severely damaged carriages of a passenger
train. It derailed when it collided with a cargo train and caught fire. In the
past few minutes, the Nigerian Electoral Commission has announced the governing
party candidate, Molletinebu, as the winner of Saturday's disputed presidential
election. He won with almost nine million votes. Opposition parties have alleged
fraud. The UN's nuclear watchdog has asked Iran to explain the origin of highly
enriched uranium particles discovered at the country's Fordow plant. It says
there may have been unintended fluctuations in its enrichment levels. The
coffins of 65 victims of a migrant shipwreck in southern Italy have been laid
out in a sports hall in Calabria. They died when the boat they were traveling in
broke up in a storm on Sunday. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last
remaining independent media outlets, Mada Mossa, are to be tried. They are
charged with offending legislators from a party supporting President Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi. President Putin has banned the use of non-Russian words in
official situations and government publications. Words much used include
blogger, meeting, talk show, and face control. Researchers in Russia say they've
discovered the earliest known insects covered in pollen, dating from about 280
million years ago. They found the fossils of earwig-like insects at the bottom
of a lagoon. Police in southeast Peru have discovered a mummy believed to be at
least 600 years old inside the cool bag of a food delivery worker. He denied
trying to sell the mummy, saying his father had brought it home nearly 30 years
ago. BBC World News. Welcome back to Outlook. I'm India Raksin. And today I'm
with filmmakers Mariam Aldabani and Mohamed Al-Jabari. They're a young couple
from Yemen who fell in love right before war tore apart their country. They both
had an opportunity to leave for Qatar together. But before they flew away, they
decided to bring their families together on a rooftop in Sana'a. And in a
quickly planned ceremony, they finally got married. And Mohamed, you said it's
your favorite night of your life. Without question. That's the start of my life
being with the better half, the person I love the most. And so details don't
matter. We can recreate them in the future. What details do matter from that
day? How beautiful she looked like. You know, dating in a conservative country
like Yemen, it's extremely difficult. And even publicly, you cannot say you're
dating someone because there are a lot of questions that come up to people's
minds. And so to be with that someone, to be, you know, in the same place, in
the same room, to touch their hands, to be with them as your partner for life.
That makes it the best night of my life. I have to say this, though. Mohamed is
not an expressive person. He doesn't tell me these things. So thank you for
getting them out. It's nice to hear that. And the recording, that's fantastic.
I'm like, I'm on cloud nine right now. It's nice to hear these things. Yeah. And
to have all your families together as well, when you're about to leave, you're
about to leave the country must have been quite important. Yeah. For me,
especially, I've never been this far from my family. We always celebrated all
birthdays together. We're very close. Mom and Dad and my siblings were very,
very close. And the first time I celebrate my birthday, but I will miss all of
their birthdays is when I left. And so in August 2015, Mariam and Mohamed left
for Doha in Qatar, saying goodbye to their home and all of the people they knew
best and loved most. What was it like for you both arriving in Doha? For me, the
first year was extremely difficult, extremely difficult. I did. I felt like a
tree, like a plant when you move it from one soil to the other, and my roots
weren't taking, like I wasn't fitting in. And it was so many things happening at
the same time that were not processed. And we were under the stress of you need
to be grateful, you need to have, you know, things together because you're in a
safe space. You don't get to complain. And that survival skills really torments
you. And that is when we also figured out that we were pregnant. How did you
both feel about it when you found out? We did not have a sustainable income. I
was a student. And so it was the wrong moment, the wrong time. But the whole
notion of creating a family was appealing at the time. You're about to hear
Mariam and Mohamed talk about pregnancy loss and how filmmaking unexpectedly
helped them process it. Some listeners might find this difficult to hear. And
then six months after leaving Yemen, your world was shaken again. Tell me, tell
me about that day. Tell me what happened, Mariam. I wasn't sure what was
happening. I just started bleeding. It was extremely painful. The doctors
couldn't even say anything. You just saw it happens, you know. Nobody did
anything and I had to leave and look for an alternative, for an alternative
place or a doctor to check on me and to tell me what was happening. So this
lasted for like 13 days since it started until I finally understood that the
fetus is just, there's no baby. And I need to now, my body needs to let go of
this bit that was growing in me. I don't know. I don't know how, how there is
this constant understanding, like a code of, it happens to women. It's fine. You
don't dwell on it. Just move on. And I couldn't really talk to my mom because I
will just make her worry. And she's far away. She's in a war zone. She's not in
a good place to support me. I'm supposed to comfort her. I'm not supposed to
make her feel worried, you know. So I'm not supposed to comfort her. I'm
worried, you know, so who am I supposed to talk to? I'm here. I know no one. It
was extremely difficult. Mohamed, what was it like for you watching Mariam go
through this? I felt very much unhelpful. I felt restrained. For some reason, I
was not able to do anything for her. And I remember the night where she had to
endure the miscarriage after 13 or 14 days. It's just a very horrible
experience. The only way to survive is to keep going. Keep going means to numb
ourselves emotionally, to numb ourselves to talking about it. So it becomes,
okay, let's focus on what we need to do. Let's focus on paying the rent of the
small room we have rented on the roof of a house. And that's it. And so I don't
know, sometimes I think it was also a phase that I blocked out of my mind. I
mean, you were this sort of on the phone 24-7, always in contact couple. After
the miscarriage happened, did you talk about it at all? Were you able to talk
about it? No, not even one time. Not one? Not at all. Did you try? Mariam, what
was it like for you? I didn't want to talk about it. There was nothing to talk
about. For me at the time, there was nothing to talk about. He will never
understand my physical pain. And there's nothing he can do to make me feel
better. So there was no point. I decided to put it in a box and shelve it and
just keep going. And that feeling stays in a box. It stays on a shelf until
filmmaking comes back into your life and you sign up for a filmmaking course at
the Doha Film Institute. How did that come about? I really wanted to take a
documentary course and this possibility came about. And Mohamed was the one who
encouraged me to sign up. So I went in with an idea of working on a documentary
about Yemeni diaspora in Doha. How are we coping, knowing that our families are
back home and how do we as a community kind of come together? When I presented
this idea to my mentor, who I genuinely think of as my godfather in film, he's
an amazing filmmaker, Reti Pan. He's Cambodian-French. And he was running the
course, is that right? Yes. And when I presented to him the idea, I was like,
this is not good. What is this? What is the story? Where's the film? I didn't
know what cinema and film was. I come from Yemen. We don't have cinema
education. And I didn't have that understanding. So I kept trying to understand,
OK, what does he want? And I'm a teacher's pet, so I need to please him. I need
to find something that, you know. And it's just from the films he showed us and
from the things that he's doing. The next day, I just remember myself going to
him and I had this small pouch, like a small bag, a red one, that I put my my
mama's wedding ring that she gave it to me in it, along with the ultrasound of
the baby and some Polaroids of Mohamed and me. And I just opened it. It was just
me and Reti in the room. I asked him to speak to him privately and I was like,
this is what I have and this is something that I want to tell. So how do I do
it? Do you think he was the first person you talked to about the miscarriage
after it happened? Oh, my goodness. Yeah, I think so. He forced me to start
talking about it in the course. I don't know how to speak about it because I
didn't for two years. And these are strangers to me. I didn't know them from
before. And now I'm telling them things I didn't tell my mom or my husband. What
was it like opening up those cracks and letting the light in? To that event for
you is such a huge event in your life. During the work, I didn't realize how
kind of important it would be. I knew that I was doing it for myself. I didn't
think I'll share the film with anyone. And I didn't tell Mohamed what I was
doing. He knows I'm working on a film about the diaspora and Doha. But what
exactly is it? What was the story? You just didn't tell him you kept it. You
kept it from him. I didn't know how. I didn't know how until Ratty insisted
that, okay, Mohamed needs to be part of this. You're not gonna fully have be
able to tell the story without him, which was absolutely true, but I didn't know
how to ask. So Mohamed, when did you find out that actually, Mariam was making a
film about the loss that you both went through? I think after she started
already, I think, I was in the middle of the process of making the film. I think
she started already filming. So she had the cinematographer and producer and
audio person would come to the house and they were filming in the house. And
then I think day two or two, three, she tells me about it. And I was very
reluctant. And I said, first, no. And then she insisted. And then for her, she
kept talking about it as it's the thing that she needs to do to feel better. And
that was a priority. It's very interesting hearing you both talk about it
because the film does start almost like it could be a film about Yemeni diaspora
in Doha and that experience, but it sort of subtly really moves into this idea
of baby loss and miscarriage. And it's interesting because you almost talk about
it on camera, don't you? You talk about it together very briefly. Did you have a
longer conversation? To be honest, I don't really remember it. I remember the
moment I started breaking down and crying because it went to the film, but also
the notion for me to cry in front of two strangers. What I remember of it is
that I was trying to comfort Mariam that it will be another memory and that's
how the name of the film came. Just another memory. Yeah. Was it difficult? Do
you remember it being uncomfortable? It was extremely uncomfortable to talk
about it for the first time when you are programming yourself not to talk about
it. Mariam, what do you remember of it? I remember how lucky I was to have
Mohamed by my side and how he's the one who is feeding me and preparing food.
He's the one who makes sure that I'm okay even before something happens. And he
is always there to support me. Did the conversations help you to process it? It
did break the silence, which was a big thing. Because even when I saw a topic
of, and it's usually depicted in series or in films, it's always like it happens
and it's gone. Nobody really talks about it. And I start bawling. I start crying
because that doesn't represent me. And I don't know if it really represents
anybody. Growing up, Mama had to suffer from so many miscarriages and there is a
huge gap between me and my younger sister because of that. And I've lived the
trauma with her over and over. And I know this is not okay. And this is not how
it happens in real life. What was it like showing the film to people, having it
viewed and having your experience and your life viewed by a whole room full of
strangers? Oh, my goodness. It was, I will never forget that evening. I was so
emotional. It was, I will never forget that evening. I will never forget it. The
first viewing was in Doha in the Ajihan Film Festival. It was the first Yemeni
film to be viewed ever. We were sitting on the left side, second row, and
looking at this huge screen. I was crying. My tears are very near my eyes. So I
cry always. But I don't cry as much as I do. So it was a very surreal experience
to see ourselves on this huge screen. And throughout the film, I couldn't sit
still. I kept leaving to the restroom, like telling Mohamed, I'll be back. He's
like, don't leave. I'll be back. Because we were holding hands throughout the
whole time, crying, bawling and be like, God, please don't make it that it's
just us that are crying about a film that we made about ourselves. How awful
would that be? We're in our own bubble, but nobody really understands or
connects or it doesn't make sense to anyone else. So we're like, it was nerve
wracking. Once the film was over, we just see people standing up and coming to
hug us out of nowhere with them also having tears and being emotional about it,
only to end up having the film win the category as the best short documentary.
It is just surreal. I went up to the stage crying. I was crying, barely
standing. And it's just like such a surreal moment that I'll never forget. And
it made me realize the power of cinema where a room full of strangers connected
with you that never knew you before and something that was very difficult for
you to deal with. And you kept away for so long to have an impact is just
clicked and it became like, OK, then this is what we're going to do. For me, it
was the beginning of the journey. Yeah. And did you, Mariam's talked about this
feeling of watching that film going, no, this is what we should do. We should
make films and tell stories. So you two both now make films together, don't you?
Yes. At the beginning, I was against the idea of making film with us because
it's such a daunting experience to expose yourself to the world. It's not easy.
But the moment we saw how people reacted to it and I witnessed firsthand the
power of telling stories and it became a passion. And Mariam, what sort of
topics do you choose, both of you choose to focus on in your filmmaking? We kind
of gravitate again back to telling stories from home because, again, we've been
very blessed and lucky and fortunate to be able to be in a place where we have
some sort of stability and some sort of safety. So we do have this duty of what
can we give back? We're not politicians. We don't have any actual power of
changing things. But what we can do is we can tell stories and own our own
narrative, because otherwise we just remain as the headline in the news and we
become numbers and figures and, you know, this unlivable place. But this
unlivable place has people and these people need hope for us to have a better
tomorrow. When we turn the mics off and you press stop on your recorders and you
open the doors and you go through to the other room where the other person is,
what are you going to do? I'm going to hug him. Me too, I'll hug her. This has
been a therapy session slash, you know, a couple therapy session for a TV
interview, which... It's radio, babe. It's radio. Sorry, radio, I'm sorry. It's
radio, babe. Mariam Aldabani and Mohamed Al-Jabri were speaking to me from Doha,
Qatar. Mariam's award-winning film about her experience with pregnancy loss and
war is called Just Another Memory. If you've been affected by anything you've
heard in this episode, there is support available at bbc.com forward slash
action line. Thank you so much for joining us on Outlook. I'm India Rakesh. The
producer today was Gaia Karamatza. We'll be back at the same time tomorrow with
the extraordinary story of an Indian marine engineer whose ship was hijacked by
pirates and how he survived months at sea. Don't miss it. BBC World Service and
now Witness History with me, Reena Stanton-Sharma. This programme contains
details listeners may find distressing. We're going back to 2009 when one of the
last known survivors of the Pink Triangles, who was imprisoned in a Nazi
concentration camp because he was gay, returned to the scene where more than
55,000 people were killed. So I saw it in the distance, how they shot the
Russians, how they carried the bodies outside and piled them up, all that blood.
That's Rudolf Brasda. He was sent to Buchenwald concentration camp in 1942 after
spending 14 months in jail for being a gay man in Nazi Germany. The recording of
Rudolf has never been broadcast and was taped by Jean-Luc Schwab, who travelled
with him in 2009 to where the camp once stood. Jean-Luc wrote Rudolf's biography
and recorded his reaction to returning as a 95-year-old. He told Jean-Luc about
the horrifying scenes he'd witnessed as a young man. There was a place in the
camp where Nazis had organised some mass killing of Russian prisoners and that
was done by stealth. So they had to undress and then go through some sort of
medical assessment. And at the very end, when they were scaled for their height,
behind the scale was a small slot and it opened and someone shot the prisoner
from behind without them noticing. And Rudolf was witness of that because as a
roofer he could move around relatively freely during the day within the camp's
precincts. Jean-Luc and Rudolf met in the last few years of Rudolf's life and he
told Jean-Luc about arriving at the camp. We were driven inside the place. Then
we had to get off the lorry and we were then taken into the bathing house. He
would then be taken to disinfection room where he would be completely shaved,
all the body parts, and then dunked into a tub filled with disinfectant
substance. Then we were issued our prisoner outfits and then we got dispatched
into various huts. It must have been like that wherever they had space available
in this, that or the other hut we were then taken to. I got thrown into one with
four others. I can't remember now if there was another gay man with me in that
hut. It was all mixed up, criminals and political inmates. Gay inmates had to
wear pink cloth triangles on their uniforms to distinguish them from other
prisoners. They gave you stuff and you had to stitch it yourself. And so we
went, sat there on the bench. I remember the material lying on the table. We got
it and stitched it on the uniform. The uniform was made of strong stuff, more
pale blue, white and striped, but in the final days I didn't wear it any longer
because towards the end of the war they couldn't produce them anymore. They used
the clothes they had taken from Jews they had murdered, such as a jacket and
trousers I had. On the back it had been cut open and a different piece of cloth
stitched in. This was to distinguish them as prisoners of concentration. This
was to distinguish them as prisoners of concentration camps if they escaped. In
Buchenwald there were prisoners of war, persecuted Jews, Jehovah's Witnesses and
ex-convicts. Criminals were marked with green inverted triangles and Jehovah's
Witnesses with purple ones. Two triangles made up the yellow star that Jews had
to wear. The triangles would both be yellow unless a Jewish prisoner was also
classed in another category. Hitler believed gay men were infectious and wanted
to get rid of them to accomplish his pure German master race. They were
tortured, castrated and some were subjected to gruesome, so-called medical
research. The majority died in concentration camps, often from exhaustion or
were killed. Physicians were researching antidotes. And for their experiments
they used homosexuals, gave them a poison shot. I mean, they infected them with
typhoid. They suffered so much from fever and the doctors always tried new
things out, other antidotes. Yes, so many of them died of it. Rudolf had spent
almost three years living in barbaric conditions. By April 1945, the war was
coming to an end. US allied forces were approaching the camp. The SS, the Nazi
paramilitary group, forced inmates on marches out of Buchenwald. They didn't
want the savage conditions the prisoners had been subjected to, to be exposed.
These became known as death marches. When Rudolf discovered that the prisoners
were being killed, he was forced to go on the marches. When Rudolf discovered he
was going to be marched out, he hid. When he returned in 2009, he remembered
where this happened. Good heavens, now I remember, when I see it all. Pigsty,
where I went hiding. And down there, it was the exit where I was hiding. Down
there. On the 11th of April 1945, the US army released the emaciated prisoners.
But hidden in the pigsty, Rudolf was none the wiser. He wasn't aware of the
camps being liberated until he heard that huge clamour that came from other
inmates when they got confirmation that they had been freed. That victorious
clamour was the sound of freedom. 21,000 prisoners were freed, but more than
55,000 had died over eight years. Rudolf had been left with deep scars. He was
plagued by nightmares. He would be very jumpy when coming out of sleep, if some
unexpected noises were to be heard or if he were to be touched while he
slumbered. Rudolf felt conflicted about returning to Buchanwald. It reminded him
of unpleasant memories, also considering that he was very confident in the fact
that Europe that developed after World War II would then prevent these things
from happening. As a free man, Rudolf settled in Alsace in France, where he
began to rebuild his life, returning to work as a roofer. He met his partner
Eddie in the early 1950s, and they were together until Eddie died in 2003.
Rudolf refused to let the horrors he'd experienced define his future. He
wouldn't let anyone be in the way to his personal happiness and love after what
he went through. And, well, he was always up for a laugh, and he could have
become a very unbittered man considering what he went through, and yet he
wasn't. Rudolf Brasda died in August 2011 at the age of 98. Jean-Luc Schwab's
biography, Rudolf Brasda, Itinerary of a Pink Triangle, was published that year.
He was talking to me, Rina Stanton-Sharma, for that edition of Witness History.
to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and
platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working
by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing
this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or
mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.