TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The
giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway
closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at
11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm
on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on
Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday
18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th
March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March
2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023.
Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good
luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The
giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway
closes at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at
11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm
on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. Do you mean to say you were going to ask
Brad and not me? I um... Uh... So that's a yes then? I just didn't think it
would be your sort of thing Chelsea. Why's that then? Well you'd have to learn
an awful lot about the history of Lower Loxley for a start. Names, dates,
facts... Yeah that's what the training's all about though isn't it? Well partly
but you've seen our tour groups. Some of them are quite elderly. So? Well I mean
they come with certain expectations. What do you mean expectations? Well just
that things will be done in a certain way. They like to take their time walking
round. You're more of a fast person. I think you might find it frustrating.
Actually Freddie I like old people don't I Brad? She does as it happens. Yeah
one of my besie mates is Jim Lloyd and you don't get much more historic than
him. No but... And I'm great with all sorts. Ask any of my hairdressing clients
they'll tell you. This is different. Is it really though? These tour groups,
they're just the same people as come in the orangery aren't they? Well yes I
suppose there is some overlap. Yeah and I've been handling them for what? How
long is it Brad? Nine months, 16 days. Which is way longer than Brad has. By two
months, 12 days. How do you do that? Dunno, just can. And I could totally make
all the boring bits of Laura Loxley sound interesting. Ah now you see Chelsea
that's actually the problem. If you think Laura Loxley is boring then it really
wouldn't be the role for you. You think I'm thick don't you? No. And common?
Absolutely not. It's just a case of tone and fit. Well there you are then. What?
I'm perfectly toned and everyone says I'm well fit. So you can put my name down.
I'll do it. Huh, you again is it? It is yeah, Ben. I remember. I need to help
you back into bed so you can have an afternoon nap is that right? That's what it
says on your little list is it? Look I know I'm new to this but I am doing my
best. I'm sorry I was slow yesterday but everyone's got to start somewhere
wouldn't you agree? Yeah, yeah, fair enough. I promise you I will get quicker.
I'm a hard worker. In fact today I worked through my break to catch up. And I'll
soon get to know what you need and when. I know, you've got a job to do. You
might just need to bear with me a bit while I find my feet. What you're saying
is don't be such a grumpy old git. I wouldn't put it exactly like that. Ah,
don't you worry. I know I've got a bit of a gob on me. I gave you a hard time
about that exercise class didn't I? And the rest. You didn't mean any harm by
it. No, quite the opposite. But I did hard manual work all my life and now I
just want to sit on my backside and watch the telly. I do understand. And what
was it that you did... Oh, sorry I better... Oh, someone else picked it up.
Yeah. So what did you used to do for a living? Farm worker. Really? I come from
a farming family. Do you? Yeah, Brookfield, not far from here. Phil Archer's
place. Yeah, that's right. He was my grandad. Well, you might know my nephew,
Teddy Hodge. In Edgeley, Paradise Farm. That's the one. He's in the same lamb
co-op as my mum and dad, Hassett Hills. Well, that's someone you should know.
Well, that side of the family got all the money and all the land, so I just,
well, drove tractors and shoveled muck for 50 years. Right. Fair play to Terry,
though. He's topping up the council funding so I can stay in this fancy place.
That's good of him. Yeah. He's looked after his uncle, Sykesy. Sorry, uncle...
Sykesy. Can't stand being called William. Never have done, never will do. So,
would you prefer... Yeah, yeah. Call me Sykesy. Okay, great. So, let's get you
back into that bed, then, Sykesy. I'll just move the bedclothes out the way.
PHONE RINGS Oh, sorry. I'd better... Fill your boots. Hello, this is Ben. What
can I... Sorry, could you say that again? I'm really sorry, I can't understand
what you're saying. Better go there, Ben. Are you sure? I'll be back as soon as
I'm done. Don't worry about me. I can keep in me chair if needs be. Just go,
lad. You think I'd be good at it, don't you? I'm really just here to deliver
eggs, Chelsea. Oh, no, no, no, no. But go on. What do you reckon? What was it
again? Me being a tour guide. What, here at Lower Locksley? No, at the Tower of
London, you narner. Of course here. Well, I suppose if Freddie thinks you'd be
okay at it... Oh, yeah. He practically begged me to sign up. In that case, I'm
sure you could do anything you put your mind to. Yeah, totally, Josh. You just
wait. I'll show him. Of course, they'll have to do something about the uniform,
but I got plenty of ideas to zhuzh it up. Are you still talking about that tour
guide stuff? Yeah. Why not? I'm just really surprised, that's all. I'm just
trying to better myself. I don't get why you'd want to do the job, though, given
that it's unpaid. You what? There's no money in it. That's one of the reasons I
wasn't interested. No, that can't be right. It is. You mean, what, all those
people putting in all those hours? Yes. Prancing around in them polyester
jackets? Yes. For nothing? No money, any road. I don't believe it. No, Brad's
right. Bert Fry was a guide here for years, and he never got a penny in pay.
What is wrong with people? They get the odd thank you gift. And there's a social
economy, and they're all about the same. And there's a social a couple of times
a year, but it's a voluntary role. You might have got a clue from Freddy's new
job title. What is his new job title? Volunteer Coordinator. I never knew that.
I thought it'd be some type of promotion. I wondered why you were so keen. Why
do they do it, then? Satisfaction. Being part of a team. Helping to support
something historical. Gets them out of the house. What a sad bunch of losers.
Can you imagine doing that just for fun? So you'll be telling Freddy he won't be
available after all? No way. What? After I practically had to throw myself at
him to get him to say yes. I thought you said he begged you. He'd think I was a
right bozo. So? He obviously reckoned I weren't capable. Well, I'm going to
prove him wrong. Tony and Lillian have something important to discuss when we
return to Ambridge at 7 tonight. Idealism and revolutionary politics in our
drama medias next and then in 45 minutes it's Moneybox Live and here to tell us
more is Felicity Hanna. If you're over 50 and out of work then you are in the
spotlight just now, with the government hoping you could help fill record levels
of vacancies. Today on Moneybox Live we're talking about returning to work after
50, the finances and the practicalities. So get in touch. Maybe you're over 50,
unemployed and you'd like to tell us why. Maybe you're in your 50s and you've
got no plans to retire for another 20 years. Or maybe you have a question for
our experts. Email moneybox at bbc.co.uk and please include a phone number. Then
listen to Moneybox Live on work after 50. Just after three. Now on Radio 4 we
continue David Edgar's political drama May Days. As imprisoned dissident Pavel
Lermontov flies to London from a Soviet labour camp, the left-wing defector
Martin Glass confronts the reality of his new life on the die-hard political
right. 4th of November 1956. At the request of the Hungarian workers and
peasants, the Soviet army extends temporary help to the Hungarian government.
Call me, what is your name? Clara Ivanovna. Clara Ivanovna, summon for me.
Parlotti Miklos. Today Soviet troops attacked our capital with the obvious
intent of overthrowing the legal Hungarian government. My name is Lieutenant
Lermontov. You were arrested at three o'clock this morning in charge of a radio
transmitter broadcasting illegally. Where's the young man? He was here before.
He wasn't who we thought he was. It was a mix-up. A leading Soviet dissident,
Pavel Lermontov, has been sentenced to three years in a labour camp for
discrediting the system. 14th of January. Miners strike ballot 80% in favour.
James! Ah, Martin. James, I need to talk to you. What about? Socialist
vanguards, feel the revolutionary moment! You mean you're purging me? Well, if
you like. So what did you expect? And now he's dumped us both. We thought it
wasn't us. We weren't purges, Kronstadt's objectively. We were a new left. We
were different. Why did you give this book to me? It's the things that happened
in the world, in my life, that made me the person who I am. Thursday, 1st of
May, 1975. The war in Vietnam is over. They say that every generation has its
Kronstadt moment. Well, today's mine. Maydays, human dust by David Edgar. It's
eight o'clock on Friday, the 15th of December, 1978. After nine years in the
gulag, the Soviet dissident Pavel Lermontov has been exchanged for a convicted
Soviet spy on the Glinika Bridge in Berlin. Mr Lermontov, when were you
released? What does it feel like to be in the West? Mr Lermontov, just turn your
head, please. Please, please, ladies. Mr Lermontov, do you have any plans left
in Russia? Mr Lermontov is very tired. He will make a short statement. I have
come here as a witness from a totalitarian society to a free one. I come with
joy but also with a warning that unless you guard your freedom from the forces
which now threaten it from without and from within, you may end up living in a
country like my country. Thank you. What do you mean by totalitarian society? Do
you think Britain is like Russia? You're not going to believe this. Jeremy, the
University of Loughborough is planning to spend £30,000 researching something
they describe as pinball art. PHONE RINGS Hello? Yes, this is room 261.
Apparently it's been proposed that the Inner London Education Authority provide
free creche facilities for schoolgirl mothers. As of right. What? Reporters?
Actually in the hotel lobby? Free in the sense of on the rates, of course. No,
Mr Lermontov is already booked for the interview. The Sunday Times. Today,
exclusively. Sometimes I think they print these things deliberately, just to
outrage me. Jeremy, could you answer that? Of course. And now please hold all
calls. Martin. They wouldn't let me in. Well, it's a very superior hotel. What
do you mean? Perhaps Professor Crowder is referring to the scarf. And the jeans.
So there's a dress code. I am Miklosz Palacy, founder of the Free Pavel
Lermontov Campaign. Well, hi. Forgive me. I have overslept. The towels! Pavel.
No, these are... Now, Pavel meet... Mr Crowder. Jeremy. And Martin. Martin and
Jeremy are old friends. Well, we are old friends now. Yes. Do you want to hear
about them? Please. It's such a novelty. Well, there's a group based at London
School of Economics. Campaigning against psychiatric torture. They want you to
address them, and I said yes. Good. Good. And the BBC World Service people rang.
They want you for an interview. They tried to fob us off with a man called
Andrey Yushkin, but I told them where they can put that. They're calling back.
What's wrong with Andrey Yushkin? He's a bit arms-control, detente. He was very
weak on Vietnam. Uh-huh. And there were a lot of papers, but I said Sunday
Times. And various cranks and crazies whom you needn't bother with. I'm sorry.
Cranks and crazies? Well, now, Jeremy, Miklos informs me you are interviewing
me. No, actually. In fact, it's me. The Sunday Times. Correct. And you're a
former Trotskyist. Is that unusual? Well, Martin, obviously... Please. After
all, you could say we are both defectors. Look, I became a revolutionary
socialist to set the people free from state authority until I realized that
authority and power was what the left was all about. In your country and in
ours. I'm still with the malcontents and the subversives. I don't think I've
changed. But do you think they really want it? Freedom? Who? The people. Well, I
think... Because you see, I detect complete contentment with the national lot.
The supine masses slumped before the television or down the pub cashing their
gyrochecks with their darts and dogs and pinball. What's wrong with pinball? And
of course, in power, union bullyboys. And with that, too, the masses blissfully
content. Oh, do you think so? I think if you really set the people free from the
union bosses and the state, you'd be amazed how many Michelangelos could bloom.
Michelangelos? Now, in fact, the table's booked for half-past. I did say no
calls. Hello. And may I ask, when you change your political opinion, is the
reaction from your former comrades... Oh, yes, of course. Yes, Martin was
subject to considerable abuse. Traitor, Judas... Turncoat? Turncoat? Renegade.
Yes, certainly. Ah, the words of C.I. Kaminskaya. Who is that? Another
journalist, but for Zvezdya. Responsible for my imprisonment. Yes, in fact, he
is here. But obviously not remotely comparable, but still. Of course. Look, let
me call you back. Pavel. There is a body called Center for the National
Interest. They want to give you an award. A big ceremony in London. That was the
chairman. He's a former member of the government, now the provost of a Cambridge
college. Then, of course, I'd be most privileged. No doubt you'll have to make a
speech. No doubt you'll write it for me. If you like. And now, with my fellow
renegade, to lunch? Of course. Come on. Jeremy. Yes, what? Who is that man?
Miklos Palotsi. I mean, who is he? What's he doing? Well, what he's done is to
spend eight years campaigning for our friend to be released. What in God's name
is the Center for the National Interest? It's a pressure group. I'm on its
council. And this provost? Sir Hugh Trelawney. Gentlemen, Hugh Trelawney. I'm
sorry, in a way. Poor man got kicked upstairs. There was some, well,
unpleasantness surrounding the enactment of some act of parliament. The housing
bill, I know. But more importantly, he has disagreements about the direction of
his party. The Conservative Party? Yes. Hence his issuing an invitation to his
college. What, to Lermontov? No, to you. Good evening. It's ten o'clock, and
this is The World Tonight on Monday the 22nd of January. Tens of thousands of
public sector workers have taken part in a day of action, the biggest mass
stoppage since the general strike of 1926, in support of a claim for more pay.
Now, Mr Glass? That's right. Martin Meath, Sir Hugh Trelawney. How do you do?
Welcome to Simeon. Delighted you could make it. May I take your seat? Thanks.
Filthy weather. Please. I read with interest your piece on Lermontov. Where was
it? Sunday Times. Great interest. Um, Martin, Hugh was saying... Hugh will say.
In fact, Hugh thought of offering you a job with our little institute. What kind
of job? We had in mind the preparation of a new kind of manifesto. For? To
outline what, in our view, the priorities of the next government should be.
Which might represent a change of strategy. Perspective. Hugh also thought you
might make a contribution to proceedings at the ceremony. You first. It's an
outworn phrase, of course, but the next election will, in my view, be the most
important for the future of the country. In my view, be the most important since
the war. The showdown, if you like. The polity, a pyramid, the electorate, a
silver ball, perched on the top, unsteady, could roll either way. A pyramid has
several sides. Of course. And the side that you are on, the side that you are
now on, is very clear. Unless we want to end up in the gulag, stop the clicking
ratchet of state power. That's right. Health warnings off the packets, nanny off
our backs. Free adult men and women in a free grown-up society. Correct. And if
people want to buy pornography or drugs, and if they're offered on the market at
a price they are prepared to pay, then nobody, and least of all the state,
should interfere. I'm glad that you agree. I think about your article. The word
I used was interesting. Go on. Well, the fact is, on a cursory inspection of
your output, I have noticed that the word right, as in human right, has graced
your columns oh, a hundred times, but I've only seen the word duty once. What's
wrong with human rights? That so often they're not balanced by a corresponding
consciousness of obligation. Well, I'm not that interested in duty. While I am
very interested in what happens in its absence. Well? The triumph of the
spoiled, the petulant, the infantile. The idea that every appetite is an
entitlement. Society an open mouth, the state a ladle. Students, strikers, I
want, always gets. A debility which is now our party's task to purge. What
antidote do you prescribe? Well, in a word, authority. Well, I'm sorry, but I
think I've spent too long believing that the choir of humankind sounds best in
unison. I'm really very sorry. Not unison, so much as harmony. Well, even so.
Look, I do, I think I understand how hard it is. How hard what is? What you have
had to do. Remake your life. To spend its second half reneging on its first.
Well, I wouldn't say entirely remake. And of course I understand old loyalty.
Please don't call my commitment into question. I know all about commitment. I
once had a friend, for instance, committed to assassinating you. Precisely. Do
you agree with this, Jeremy? With what? Duty, authority. Yes, I think so. I'm
with the malcontents I haven't changed. Well, that does depend, of course, on
which malcontents you mean. There's no of course about it, Jeremy. Look, we all
agree about the monolithic, bloated state failing to run the steelworks or the
schools. We're all for the brisk, chill wind of competition. That's the means.
But it's not the end. And what's that? Oh, a loyalty to something greater than
the church. A loyalty to something greater than the self. Those things we owe it
to the dead to pass on to the yet unborn. What the mystic oneness of our island
race. I vow to thee, my country, send the darkies home. Now, please. Look, I
shouldn't be here. I should go. Martin, you're the judge. I'm sorry to miss
dinner, but I have decided no. Of course it is the hardest place. The pit stop
on the road to Damascus. When you don't know if you're going forward or still
looking back. I know exactly where I'm going. But I suppose it all depends. On
what? On how serious you are. How serious I am? About the necessary consequences
of what you want to bring about. What necessary consequences? The dustmen are on
strike. The porters in the hospitals. The gritters of the roads. The grave
diggers. And you really think the problem in this country is too much authority?
I didn't say... And at present, we've a Labour government. Yes. Oh, Martin, this
is just the start. What do you think will happen when the free market is let rip
and the little firms go bankrupt and unemployment rises and the welfare teat is
pulled away and the plate glass is thrown up as promised as of right? I listen
to the future and I'm hearing broken glass. I look into my crystal ball and I
see London burning. And if that happens, when that happens, what would you
advise a British government to do? Surrender? No, obviously not. No, you would
advise it to defend the people it was elected to defend. The ordinary people who
don't strike or riot. Who even now are wondering how they will get to work
tomorrow. Or on the day after, what will happen to their savings and their homes
if not their country. Who have taken down the tree and packed away the
decorations and wondered if there'll ever be another Christmas. And if we elect
a government that is not prepared to speak for them, to take on the enemy within
with the full force of the state and its authority, then yes, I would call its
commitment into question. It is, after all, commitment that we are honouring in
Mr Lermontov. So, who else is speaking at this ceremony? We are hoping that the
actual presentation will be undertaken by Phyllis Viner of Americans Against
Surrender. Like you, a former radical, but on her own admission, moving
rightward steadily since 1952. So, three defectors. Whose testimony is thereby
uniquely credible, having seen the future and knowing where it leads. And thus
the urgency of stopping it. And who's this message for? Who are you speaking to?
Well, we hope, the next government of Britain. Look, I won't write your
manifesto and I'll say exactly what I think and feel. Of course. But, as you
say, for Lermontov. I am delighted. But, Martin, do you understand the full
enormity of what is being asked of you? What do you mean? The ceremony is black
tie. As strikes by National Health Service and local authority workers continue,
hospitals are refusing to treat all except emergencies. And rat-infested rubbish
is piling up in London's Leicester Square. It is estimated that nearly 30
million days have been lost to strikes so far this year. The religious leader
Ayatollah Khomeini returns to Iran after 15 years in exile. Sherry? Sherry,
madam. Sure, why not? Look, I'm so sorry we have completely lost the star
attraction. A present company accepted naturally, Professor Viner. I'm Hugh
Trelawney. Do you have a drink? I have a glass of sherry. Excellent. Hugh! I've
had this at Bush House. It's over two hours. I had to go and pick him up and
change him in the cab. Mr. Lermontov, I'm Phyllis Viner. It's a privilege. I did
an interview today for the BBC Russian service. The interviewer was a man called
Griboyedov. Very strange. He seemed to think we fought on the wrong side in the
war. Who's we? You are? He said nothing of that kind, Pavel. He wasn't talking
about Germany. He was talking about siding with fascist states. He was talking
about supporting governments of Chile and Brazil against the insurgents. And
they're not fascists? Ask Professor Viner. She has written quite extensively on
that very subject. Perhaps she could explain. Well, in these times, I don't
believe the West can afford to be too... well, fastidious about its choice of
friends. Objectively. If we are not to end up living in a country like your
country, Mr. Lermontov... PHONE RINGS Hello? Apparently, there's someone in the
lobby who needs to speak to Mr. Lermontov. Hello. Now, what is this? No, I'm not
Lermontov. Mr. Lermontov is about to go into dinner. People are so slow and
stupid in this country. Now, perhaps we should go in. Please, Professor Viner,
this way. Hello, front desk. This is PM Lermontov. I would like the person who
has come to see me sent up, please. Where are we now? The Jacobian suite. I...
The Jacobian suite. Thank you. Please, start without me. I will miss the soup.
Do I have to spell it out in semaphore? Please, go away. Thanks for the drink.
You're welcome, Edna. And I think we're finished here. Of course, sir. It's just
through here. We didn't have enough time in the taxi. We should look through
your notes. Thank you. Come in. Good evening. I am Lermontov. I'm sorry to
disturb you. It was in the paper you were here tonight. Oh, you speak Russian.
I've only got a moment, I'm afraid. My name is Kaminskaya. What? I work for TAS
in London. Formerly, I wrote things for Izvestia. Izvestia? That's right. And
formerly to that, attached to the military intelligence division of the Soviet
army. Stationed in Budapest. Uh... Clara Ivanovna. You are C.I. Kaminskaya.
You're the girl in Budapest. Yes. You're in London. Yes. I wanted a new job.
That work I was doing on Izvestia. There is only so long you can do that stuff.
This is preposterous. The man is in there. Who's in there? The boy who I
released in Budapest, who threw the hand grenade. Hand grenade? I am aware that
there are grades. Levels of invective. Childish, scurrilous and egotistical for
signing a petition. Horse malicious and unsavoury for an interview with western
correspondents. But what you visited on me, broke all the rules. That wasn't
from some well-thumbed manual. That wasn't faceless. It was sharp and real and
personal. Yes. It was personal. Then if it wasn't the boy with the grenade, then
why? Because... Why did you come here? Because you were coming here. I was
released into the camp of the most bellicose Cold War imperialists. And I did
want to know... The camp of the most bellicose... Yes, the language is a little
coarse and arch. It's the vocabulary, in fact, of people who until quite
recently were stupid peasants, working with wooden ploughs, until they were all
sent off to school. Unless they starved to death. One of the great achievements,
you may think, of the great October Revolution. God, please. I think often of my
father. He was a member of the Komsomol detachment in the early 30s, laying
pipelines across Russia's freezing wastes. He remembered it as among the best
and most heroic times. While at the same time millions... You see, it isn't true
that the only way to get people to do anything is at the point of a bayonet.
There are times when it isn't true. This is absurd. What is absurd? I am
standing in a suite in a hotel in London with a woman who put me in a labour
camp. Now I have a face. You knew I had a face. You're right, I'd seen it. But
you still... I'd seen it, sneering in contempt! At a stupid girl from a Russian
village who knew nothing about music, who had never seen a city, and who didn't
always understand when people shouted at her very loud. Do I have to spell it
out in semaphore? I see. Nine years. And you wanted me to see your face. No. I
wanted to apologise. Why? Because it seems I have done something terrible.
What's that? I have driven a good communist into the arms of those who think of
others what I thought of you. Velvet cannot wait any longer. Oh, there he is.
The boy who I released, to whom I gave a hand grenade. Goodbye. Who was that
woman? Who is this man? What do you mean? I mean that since I came here I have
asked myself, what happened to the brave young revolutionary who understood why
peasants brought free food to feed the cities, out of their hearts, not
threatened by a bayonet? Velvet, you asked a crucial question. Did I? What? How
long do you think they'll last? And I think you see the answer all around you.
Yes, of course. The supermasses. It isn't very difficult. What happened to a man
who came here from a country which has not possessed a real border for a
thousand years? Quite simple. God save Hungary. That wasn't what you said. It
wasn't what I thought, but it was what I felt. I'm sorry. Look, am I very late?
Martin, no, no. There's been a slight delay. Please, let's go into dinner.
Professor Weiner. Ladies and gentlemen, a story. It's about my folks who, like
so many others, fled Tsarist Russia with its pogroms and its secret police at
the beginning of the century for the promised land of New York City. Worked
hard, built up businesses, lost everything in the Great Depression, and looked
to us, their children, to avenge their misery and suffering, which we did by
fighting for a better world, a world we thought was being built in the very
country which our folks had fled from, a new promised land, while in fact it was
already mounting trials and building camps and killing millions, which
eventually, at last, too late, we admitted to the world and to ourselves,
thinking that if we bore witness to our terrible mistake, our children would not
follow us into the darkness. But what happened was the opposite. A new
generation of apologists for tyranny. The campus radicals, the progressive
intelligentsia, marching for American surrender in Vietnam, marching for
surrender now. And yes, many of them were and are our children. So it behooves
us once again to tell it how it is, to affirm that agitation is agitation, even
if it's published quarterly in learned periodicals, and that subversion is
subversion, even if the subverters of our culture are distinguished film
directors, poets, writers, and musicians, and that mobs of hooligans are mobs of
hooligans, even if they happen to consist of college students and professors.
And worst of all, to admit that it's our fault that we have spawned a generation
so soft in defeat that they have lost the most important thing of all, I mean a
sense of who they really are. I mean that it has taken me some time, it has
taken me the best part of a lifetime to admit without embarrassment or
hesitation that I belong to the nation of my birth. And if I may say so, Pavel
Mikhailovich, it has taken you and people like you, voices issuing from the
darkness of a nationhood suppressed, to convince me of that fact. APPLAUSE Thank
you. May I say, first of all, how good it is to spend an evening discussing
freedom, particularly as in my country, no one is free to hold such a
discussion. May I also thank the organisers for providing such a... What's this?
Sumptuous? Sumptuous repast. And to Professor Weiner for such a generous and
indeed inspiring speech. I think the phrase is, follow that. And I must thank
those gentlemen who selected me as a recipient of this award. I am most
honoured. But I must say that I do not view this award as mine alone. I view it
as being for all the Zeks, Idova camps, the living and dead. For the violators,
great and small, of the criminal code of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist
Republic. For the agitators and subversives, violators of the public order,
hooligans and parasites and traitors of the Soviet corrective labour colonies.
Yes. Who, up until their sentences, of course, were writers, poets, actors, film
directors and musicians, workers and trade union officials, students and
professors. I'm not sure, of course, it's quite... No, no, of course, it's not
the same. It is not... What is the word? To be compared with. Comparable, of
course. You have no camps. Your dissidents are free. It is no way comparable.
And yet, if you really want to see a nation strong and tough and virile,
marching to a single rhythm, banged out with a hammer on a rail, then please,
come to my country. It's not the same. It's just that it does appear to be the
same variety of people who condemn it on the other side, but applaud it on their
own, and who, in less fastidious times, might do to others what was done to me.
So, I am most honoured. But I have decided... No. You will, I hope. Forgive me.
Ladies and gentlemen, the next speaker is Mr Martin Glass. Um... I... I'm sorry.
I'm sorry. Or not. Martin, he's wrong. Just because he's suffered, just because
he's brave, a hero, doesn't mean he can't be wrong. I mean, come on, Jeremy.
With hand on heart, do you really want a man like that to run the country?
Martin... We ditch the welfare, but we arm the state. She's got to do this. Her
job? To round up all the parasites and agitators. Her motto? Heed the mystic
voices of our ancestors. Martin, Hugh Trelawney is like he is because the enemy
we face is like you were. So, ultimately, actually, it's not about liberty at
all. He said it. The market just the means. The end, authority and hierarchy and
the country of our birth. And who can belong to it, and who can't, objectively?
In the same way. The supi masses, petulant and spoilt. The kings, the kings.
Martin, you watch the... The human dust! I didn't say that. No, no. But I think
it's what you feel. Why does this matter quite so much to you? Because you're
right. Well, glory be. In a way, yes, I do wish I'd been a Red at Trinity. Wish
that instead of having to betray my class, I could have merely come in from the
cold. If I can sacrifice that way-faced child who thought the toiling masses
were about to rise and forge the new Jerusalem, then why the hell can't you?
It's odd. You come to realise it's really not the flags and fanfares. It's the
little things. The sensual things. The smell of wood smoke. Mulled wine,
warming, chilly fingers. The family's wellingtons all lined up in the hall. But
there'd come the crunch. Yes, you would take up arms. You'd maim and kill to
keep those things. The part of you you value most. The part that you rejected
but I never had, you see? What are you saying? Take the last step, Martin. No
more pretense. Be who you are. Go home. Friday 5th May 1979. The Conservative
Party has won the general election, making Mrs Margaret Thatcher Britain's first
woman Prime Minister. On the steps of Number 10, Mrs Thatcher quoted from St
Francis of Assisi. Where there is discord, may we bring harmony. Where there is
error, may we bring truth. Tuesday 6th March 1984. The National Coal Board has
announced plans to close 20 coal mines, with a loss of at least 20,000 jobs.
Yesterday, Newbury District Council, the Ministry of Defence, and local police
combined forces to evict peace camps in Berkshire, set up to protest against the
deployment of nuclear weapons at US Air Force bases in the UK. That's her.
That's Tanya. Yep. Left of picture, with the spiky hair and the cop's arm across
her throat. And have they charged her? Yep. Again, with threatening behaviour.
On my land? Not on your land, Martin. So, Amanda, let me get this straight. The
land was common. The land between your house, this house, and the perimeter of
the US Air Force base. Last week, the council repossessed the land. Surely they
told you? And sold it to the base? So, yesterday, at dawn, the women were
ejected, Tanya was arrested, and that fence was built. So, hence, today... I
have fairies at the bottom of my garden. Apparently, to get rid of them, I have
to file a formal complaint. And will you? Show me that again. You know, there's
this little stained glass in Cecilia, in the lady chapel of our church. The
spit. That is, without the spiky hair. You go to church? I'm the anchor of the
baritones. So, what's your present bag, then? Apart, that is, from battered
lesbians against the bomb. I run a resources centre. Here, have a leaflet. Well,
well, well. I run an XJ12. So, there's gold in them, the Tory think-tanks, then?
Well, silver, certainly. Look, I'm sorry, do you want a drink? No, thanks. A
fag? You haven't given up? Not that, at least. So, what in God's name is
alternative technology? From whom does who wish to reclaim the night? I'm sorry,
I can't do this. Please. Please. They're clearing space around the hangers.
Apparently that usually means there's an alert. That always means there's an
alert. Go on. Five minutes. Why the hell not? And so, presumably you were
unflinchingly opposed to our rescuing our kith and kin on the Falklands Islands?
I didn't quite see why we had to mount a war. And equally implacable in your
support for the striking miners? And you're all right with what the police are
doing to prevent them by any means necessary? Be if necessary. And so all the
Falklands flag waving and the pigs fanning out across the country like an army.
An invading army. And the reassertion of our imperial... National pride. I was
going to say imperial spirit. All to make the nation safe, the private
enterprise. Well, no, not just for private... No, because actually, to make it
safe for the police, for tradition, discipline and order. Freed of
permissiveness and women being uppity and being swamped by alien cultures and
the enemy within. Not how it could be, how it was. And don't you think that's
how people want it? Martin... I once told you how I used to cry. Did you? Me and
my child, our noses pressed against the lighted windows, watching the 2.4 kids
playing round the Christmas tree, thinking, why me? Why couldn't I accept things
as they were? Why did I have to feel it was all wrong and that I was put into
the world to set it right? Well, you know as well as I do. All those
opportunities, those bold, bright hospitals and schools and universities that
our folks never had themselves, but have been through a slump and then a war to
win for us. And if we don't protect that, if we don't complete the building of
the new Jerusalem for them, for us, then yes, maybe they'll turn back to faith
and flag and send them back. And we'll deserve it. And of course I never felt
like that, being what I am. Well, did you? Look, I'm sorry, but I've got to go.
Support the sisterhood. Exactly. The alert, which I'd expect any... Hey, is that
your book? What book? Your scrapbook. Um, yes, I suppose it is. You kept it? In
a way. I gave it to my mother. I haven't written in it for nine years. So can I
borrow it? Well, if you like. Um, why? Ah, I have a dream, says Martin Luther
King in Washington. So are you going to call the police? Don't know. I thought
this might be interesting. For Tanya. Scorcher. We have Scorcher. I repeat, we
have a Scorcher. Crestor Run. We are going for Crestor Run. Kiss. We are Kiss.
Repeat, all units, we are Kiss. Three civil rights workers murdered in
Mississippi. 1964. Me, blocking troop train, Northern California, June 1967.
Seize the time. 5th of March, 1984. Me, being arrested. Martin's garden. Martin
will remain a conservative pundit and will become active in the Countryside
Alliance. He will eventually give up smoking. Jeremy Crowther will write a major
study of the works of A.E. Hausman, during which his opinion of the poet will
decline. His opinions on all other matters will remain the same. In 1985, Amanda
will start training as a psychotherapist. Lord Trelawney of Tintagel will
produce a book entitled, Albion Redux. He will die on the same day as Princess
Diana. Pavel Lermontov will support the anti-communist revolutions in Eastern
Europe and Russia, but will express concern about the speed and corruption of
the subsequent market reforms. Klara Kaminskaya will oppose the Gorbachev
reforms and the breakup of her country. She will set up a small museum devoted
to the Soviet space program. James Grain will participate in the planning of the
2003 demonstration against the invasion of Iraq. Miklos Polotsi will return to
Hungary and become an advisor to its government on issues relating to
immigration and nationality. Phyllis Viner will strive to persuade her party not
to select Donald Trump, but will vote for him in the 2016 presidential election.
Phil Mandrell will set up a housing campaign group called Rufrite and will
receive an MBE. He will return it in protest against the Grenfell fire. Martin
will support the invasion of Iraq, but will be troubled by the lack of planning
for its post-war future. In 2015, he will visit the Calais jungle. He will spend
a week in Hungary. Amanda will write an influential report on self-harm amongst
teenage girls. She and Martin will not have spoken since 1985. But she and Tanya
will sometimes receive a Christmas card. Tanya will become a priest in the
Church of England. She will vote Remain in 2016, Liberal Democrat in 2017, and
Green in 2021. Her daughter, Cecilia, will become an LGBT activist, live in
France, and participate in protests at the University of Nanterre. Next year,
they will both join a Europe-wide campaign called A Future Without Frontiers.
Tanya will recruit her mother. And she will write to Martin. Mayday. Mayday.
Mayday. Mayday. James was played by Jonathan Forbes, Phil by Colin Ryan, and the
newsreader by Roger Ringrose. The director was Toby Swift. Maydays was a BBC
Audio production for Radio 4. And you can hear David Edgar's solo show exploring
the autobiographical background to Maydays on Saturday afternoon at 2.45pm.