TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 talking to the journalist Isabel Oakeshott. You're listening to Today on Radio
4 with Amol Rajan and Nick Robinson. Good morning. It's seven o'clock on
Thursday, the 2nd of March. The headlines this morning, WhatsApp messages
written by the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock reveal that he fought to
have schools in England closed as Covid cases rose in 2020, despite opposition
from the then Education Secretary Gavin Williamson. Mr Hancock described the
messages as partial accounts spun with an agenda. Police are continuing to
question a couple after the discovery of a baby's body near Brighton and the
final report on the Manchester Arena bombing will be published today. The BBC
News is read by Jane Steel. Newly released WhatsApp messages involving the
former Health Secretary Matt Hancock suggest he sought to have schools in
England closed as the number of Covid cases rose towards the end of 2020. In the
latest messages published by the Daily Telegraph, Mr Hancock told an aide they
needed to fight a rearguard action to overturn the government's decision
supported by the Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson to keep them open.
Here's our political correspondent, David Wallace-Lockhart. In December 2020,
Matt Hancock was pushing behind the scenes for schools in England to be closed
for most pupils due to concerns about Covid cases. The Education Secretary Sir
Gavin Williamson disagreed. WhatsApp messages published by the Daily Telegraph
appear to show Matt Hancock telling his adviser that Sir Gavin had won the day,
but he still hoped to prevent what he called a policy car crash with pupils
spreading the virus. He said it was time to fight a rearguard action for a
rational policy. On January the 5th, 2021, schools in England were closed as
part of a lockdown. In a piece for the Daily Telegraph today, Sir Gavin
Williamson has said this closure wasn't done for the right reasons. He now
questions if he should have resigned in protest. A spokesperson for Matt Hancock
called the latest leaked messages, partial accounts, obviously spun with an
agenda and stressed that Mr Hancock's focus was saving lives. The Daily
Telegraph and Isabel Oakeshott, the journalists who obtained the thousands of
messages sent and received by Matt Hancock and currently being published by the
paper, have been long-standing critics of lockdowns. The latest messages also
contain an exchange between Matt Hancock and Sir Gavin Williamson in which they
criticised teaching unions. The messages were sent in May 2020 when schools in
England were preparing to reopen following the first Covid lockdown. More
details from our education editor, Bramwyn Jefferies. The leak of an apparent
exchange from May 2020 between the then Health Secretary and Education Secretary
is emerging at a highly sensitive time. In it, Matt Hancock is reported as
describing the teaching unions as absolute arses, with Sir Gavin Williamson
replying saying they just hate work. The Telegraph says this followed a
discussion about whether PPE could be supplied to schools. Sir Gavin has
responded to the publication by saying the messages were about some unions, not
teachers, for whom he says he has the utmost respect. Jeff Barton from the head
teachers' union, ASCL, described the messages as snide insults at the heart of
an utter shambles. The top team in government has changed, but these leaks are
emerging in the middle of a dispute over teachers' pay and workload. There is
currently a standoff with strikes in England due to continue until mid-March. A
post-mortem examination is to be carried out on the body of a baby found by
police searching for the missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The
remains were discovered in an area of woodland near Brighton, close to where the
couple were detained on Monday. Frankie McCamley reports from Brighton. The
development was announced at an urgent news conference yesterday evening,
shortly after police said there had been a significant update. Officers
confirmed a baby's remains had been found in woodland in Brighton, close to
where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday. Local residents
have left candles next to a police cordon where searches were carried out
earlier in the week. In the woodland nearby, a police tent has been erected as
the investigation continues to find out exactly what happened to the infant. Ms
Martin and Mr Gordon remain in police custody after being arrested on suspicion
of gross negligence manslaughter. The final report from the public inquiry into
the Manchester Arena bombing will be published this afternoon and will
concentrate on the role of the security services. 22 people were killed in the
blast, which happened after a concert by the singer Ariana Grande in 2017. From
Manchester, Nick Garnett reports. The first two reports into the bombing almost
six years ago concentrated on the events immediately surrounding the terrorist
attack, the planning, policing and preparation for the concert, and the response
of the emergency services immediately afterwards. But this third and final
report by the inquiry chairman Sir John Saunders will focus on what the
intelligence and counter-terrorism services knew about the attacker Salman
Abedi. Much of the evidence was heard behind closed doors. Only the chairman and
his legal team were allowed to hear what was said by MI5 officers who were
called to give evidence. The key question is straightforward. Could the bombing
have been prevented? Those injured and the relatives of the men, women and
children who were killed hope the report will go some way to answering that. 43
people are now confirmed to have died in Greece's worst rail crash. A passenger
train collided head-on with one carrying freight near the city of Larissa. Our
Europe correspondent Nick Beek is there. Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has
angered many Greeks with his swift assessment given at the scene of the
country's worst ever rail disaster that it can be blamed on tragic human error.
A 59-year-old station master has been charged with manslaughter by negligence.
But there were repeated warnings over many years about the safety of the rail
network. Outside one of the hospitals where the bodies of victims have been
brought hangs a banner claiming that any systemic failings will be covered up in
the official investigation now underway. Inside the wards, families have been
arriving to give DNA samples so that their missing loved ones may be identified.
The government has published long-awaited plans to improve help for children
with special educational needs and disabilities in England. They include more
schools and qualified staff. Here's our education correspondent Elaine Dunkley.
The government has announced new national standards across England and plans to
train 5,000 early years special educational needs coordinators and 400
educational psychologists to help earlier diagnosis in mainstream schools. 33
more free special schools will be built across England, in addition to 49
already approved. The Department for Education says £2.6 billion will be
invested over the next three years to deliver new places in special schools and
high needs funding will be increased to over £10 billion by 2024. Teaching
unions have welcomed the plans but criticised the length of time it will take to
implement some of the policies, particularly around building new special
schools. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed they've been asked to
vacate their home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle
was given to the couple by the Queen in 2019. Our Royal Correspondent Sarah
Campbell reports. Frogmore Cottage is where Prince Harry, Meghan and their
children have stayed on their infrequent trips back to the UK. Sources close to
the couple say they thought of it as their forever home, a gift from the late
Queen. That they've been asked to leave is, the BBC understands, a source of
disappointment. One concern of theirs is understood to be safety and security.
Where now will the Prince stay with his family when visiting the UK? The
logistics are still being sorted out, with financial issues to be resolved, not
least that the couple paid £2.4 million back to the Treasury to cover renovation
costs and rent. Buckingham Palace says this is a private family matter. The
Supreme Court is to begin hearing a case that will decide whether or not
artificial intelligences can patent inventions. Experts say it is an important
test as AI becomes increasingly more powerful. But lower courts have so far
disagreed. Our reporter Chris Valance has more. The case five Supreme Court
justices have to decide pits the technologist Dr Stephen Tarler against the
Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks. Dr Tarler is the creator
of AI software called Dabus, which he said invented a food or drink container
and a light beacon. But his attempt to have Dabus listed as an inventor on both
patents was rejected by the Intellectual Property Office, which said only
persons could be listed as inventors. The High Court and Court of Appeal upheld
the decision. Now he's asking the Supreme Court to reverse that ruling and to
decide that an AI can be an inventor and that the AI's creator owns the
patentable inventions it produces. Lawyers say how the court decides could have
significant repercussions. Chris Valance reporting. Jane, thank you very much.
It's nine minutes past seven. He says his messages were stolen and their
contents distorted by a woman with an agenda. She says she's acting in the
national interest to find answers to questions that need to be addressed before
the next pandemic. He is Matt Hancock. She is the co-author of his pandemic
diaries. Isabel Oakeshott, the journalist who was given access to 100,000 of his
WhatsApp messages to write the book and has now handed them lock, stock and
smoking barrel to the Daily Telegraph. I'm delighted to say Isabel Oakeshott
joins us in the studio this morning. Morning to you. Morning. You helped Matt
Hancock to write his Covid story. Why did you take the decision to set fire to
his account? Well, this morning in the Daily Telegraph, we have former Education
Secretary Gavin Williamson writing about how he now thinks he probably should
have resigned over what happened to schools and children during the pandemic.
Millions of children were shut out of school for the best part, off and on for
two years, with devastating consequences for their well-being and their
education. That's just one of the many issues that are now coming to light as a
result of this cache of very raw communications which show us what was really
being said behind the scenes as policy decisions were taken that affected all of
our lives. It's undoubtedly fascinating. We're talking about it here. But why
write a partial and selective account of Covid with Matt Hancock and then breach
his confidence, break a non-disclosure agreement and write an account that
contradicts the account that you wrote in the first place? Well, first of all,
the account that I helped him write is his account. I fully discharged my
responsibilities to Matt Hancock. Together, we produced a book that made a
fantastic impact. It was a book that he wanted. I didn't leave anything out.
Your responsibilities actually broke a written legal agreement, a non-disclosure
agreement, not to reveal the contents of this. My responsibilities, having
finished that book with him, are now to the public interest. Did you break an
NDA? I mean, that's a matter of public record. And did the Telegraph pay you for
the messages? The public interest is far more important. Did the Telegraph pay
you for the messages? I'm a working journalist. So they did pay you for the
messages? I'm a working journalist. They did not pay me for the messages. I've
been helping the Daily Telegraph with the investigation. You'll see that I've
been writing stories for the Daily Telegraph. Just for clarity, because it is
important. In other words, they didn't pay you a sum to receive the messages.
I'm not going to get into any arrangement I have as a journalist. OK, well,
money is partially, arguably, a motive. Your belief that there are things...
Seriously, seriously, anyone who thinks I did this for money must be utterly
insane. This is about the millions of people, every one of us in this country,
that were adversely affected by the catastrophic decisions to lock down this
country repeatedly, often on the flimsiest of evidence, for political reasons.
And yet you helped Matt Hancock write a book justifying all those very decisions
just a few weeks after. Why? Because I wanted to get to the truth of it. Quite
successful. Quite successful as it turned out. Well, it did, didn't I? Now,
another motive you've given, you've given that one, you've made the perfectly
fair point that journalists get paid for their work, but was that you thought
that the public inquiry would not do its job properly. Now, the inquiry chair,
Lady Hallett, said yesterday, you were wrong to say that she would take many
years and you were wrong to say there'd be a whitewash. The work is starting
now. It's timetabled. We know what the timetable is. So do you now accept her
reassurance? We actually don't. There's no specific deadline for the public
inquiry. Look, the judge in charge of the inquiry is an extraordinarily well-
respected figure. I in no way mean to disparage her. I'm sure she will do a
brilliant job. The issue is the remit, which is absolutely enormous. I don't
know whether you've looked at it. I have. I would say that's a lifetime's work.
It is completely unrealistic to expect any answers if that remit is carried out
as described, frankly, within the next decade. So what needs to happen is the
acceleration of that. No, no, no, it's not fair because they've broken down the
remit into sections. They have timetabled when each of those sections will
begin. And they've also announced that they will give interim reports. When's
the deadline? Are you interviewing me now? There is no deadline. You're right
about that. There is no deadline. But what there is, is a timetable for how and
when individual parts of the work will be carried out. It's not enough. I love
warm words. But you and I know that warm words, whether from politicians or
anything else, don't ever provide what the public actually need, which is
answers within a reasonable timeframe. Look, Sweden managed to wrap up its
inquiry last year. We need, as Keir Starmer said in the House of Commons
yesterday, Labour leader publicly called for this to wrap up by the end of this
year. That is a realistic timeframe. We might have another pandemic next month.
OK, well, precisely three years after, we got one public hearing. When did you
tell Matt Hancock that you were breaking your agreement with him to publish
these messages? I didn't tell him. At all? No. You didn't send him a text? No.
So he told, he reacted to the news of the publication? Yes. How would you
describe your behaviour to him? I would describe myself as somebody who is
acting in the overwhelming national interest. And if I take a bit of a kick...
How would you describe your behaviour to someone you work with and so on? Look,
do you know what I'm not going to do? Because it wouldn't be pretty, is get
involved in a slanging match with Matt Hancock. He can threaten me all he likes.
There are plenty of things I can say about his behaviour, by the way, that I'm
not going to do, at least not at this stage, because this is not about Matt
Hancock. It is so much bigger than that. Well, you say you're not getting in a
slagging match with him, but yesterday you accused him of... There's plenty I
can say. Yesterday you accused him of sending a menacing message. This morning
in the Telegraph you accused him of sending a threatening message. Are you
saying that he's threatening you legally? Well, I think he's done that quite
publicly, hasn't he? I asked you about the message. He's already said he's going
to see... Are you saying he's threatening you personally? I'm saying that he
sent me a message at 1.20 in the morning. Are you saying he threatened you
legally or personally in that message? Yes. Legally or personally? I'm saying
that he sent me a message at 1.20 in the morning. Well... It wasn't a pleasant
message. Well, is that a surprise? I'm not complaining about it. I'm not
complaining about it. But what... I think you used the word threatening or
menacing is damaging to his reputation. Oh, look... And people are entitled to
know... I have so much more that I could say. I have so much more that I could
say, but it isn't about Matt Hancock, is it? No, no. Well, it is now because I'm
asking a question about him. You have gone public by saying he sent you a
menacing message, which you now this morning describe as threatening. It's
nothing... Would you like to withdraw that? No. I'm not going to withdraw that.
You sure he didn't just say to you, you've made a big career mistake? He didn't
say I've made a big career mistake. I've done the right thing here. No, I'm
asking you what he said. Not one journalist worth their salt would sit on a
cache of information in such an important matter, such a historic matter, and
cover that up. Do you know what would have happened if I hadn't released this
stuff? The usual suspects would have had a massive go at me for sitting on these
files, wouldn't they? We know that. But you did sit on them for more than a year
as you wrote a book... Even I sat on them. I didn't... Giving Matt Hancock's
version of events. Look, I'm not going to get wound up by this. Let me be very
clear, Nick. There were 2.3 million words. I was trying to write a book in an
extraordinarily tight deadline. The book that we wrote was twice the length of a
standard political book. There is no way I could have gone through 2.3 million
words. And you can imagine, knowing that was what I had, how hard it's going to
be for the public inquiry. I had a whole year. I couldn't possibly go through
it. He hasn't been through it all either. Understood. So let me get a sense of
the conclusions you draw. Not the specific policy conclusions, but at the time
you published the book that you wrote with Matt Hancock, you wrote in The
Spectator, I don't believe there was any kind of conspiracy, still less any
malign intent. Our political leaders during the crisis may have been misguided
and got some things catastrophically wrong, but mistakes were made in good
faith. Do you still believe that? Yes, I do believe that. Look, I think if you
put any one of us or any one group of us in charge of something so difficult,
under so much pressure, we would all have made mistakes. I've worked alongside
politicians as a journalist for well over 10 years, and I think most of them
have the right intentions. That doesn't mean that they don't mess up pretty
badly, with pretty dreadful consequences for the rest of us. On this morning's
story, which is fascinating, I'm not in any sense disputing it is, didn't it at
one level state the completely bleeding of fears, which is the health secretary
put the priority on health and the education secretary took the priority on
education, and Boris Johnson made a judgment. And that's what they're paid to
do, isn't it? Well, what today's story shows is the depths of disquiet within
government over a fundamental tenet of the lockdown response, which was
repeatedly shutting schools. We now know, thanks to the Telegraph expose, that
Gavin Williamson thinks he should have resigned over it. I think that's pretty
important. And the key here is that we cannot... He hasn't thought about whether
he maybe should have perhaps resigned. He doesn't say he should have resigned at
all. What he said is he has thought about whether that was the right thing to do
or not. It's clear he has his regrets. And what is important out of this is that
we never again make these mistakes or casually shut down schools on flimsy
evidence because we know the consequences are devastating. More than a hundred
thousand children have never returned to school. That is a damning indictment on
the policy. Thoughts that we will be picking up with the schools minister, Nick
Gibb, after 10 past eight. Isabel Oakeshott, who handed those key messages from
Manhattan to the Daily Zola, writes about them in the paper today. Thanks for
coming into the studio. Ninety minutes past seven now. You may have heard at the
top of the hour in our news bulletin that the remains of a baby have been found
by police searching for the missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon.
The couple disappeared in early January and were arrested earlier this week.
Yotunde Yusuf is our correspondent in Brighton. Joins us now. Yotunde, morning.
Just tell us what more we know at this stage, please. Yeah, so Amol, this is an
ongoing investigation, as you know, a postmortem examination is due to take
place. And this morning where I am at in Brighton, police vehicles have been
arriving because part of the area they were searching has now become a crime
scene. And from what we know, the remains of a baby was found in Woodland, in an
area close to where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday.
Now, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon are currently in custody and police have
been given more time to question them. And they've been arrested, as you know,
on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. But as this is all still
developing, police have asked people not to speculate on the case, but they do
recognize the impact it's had on those following the story very closely. And I
can tell you from speaking to people in Brighton yesterday, it certainly has had
an impact on the community here because so many people have been involved in the
search over the last few days, whether that's by assisting police with their
inquiries or whether it's search and rescue teams looking through the Woodland
who are volunteers. And people have already started to lay a few candles here.
And as the day goes on, we expect more people will be reflecting on the tragic
news. Yotunde, Ian Brighton, very good to talk to you. Yotunde Yousaf, our
correspondent there. 21 minutes past seven, there have been calls for more
investment in farming after those fruit and veg shortages in recent weeks. But
can the Chancellor give that to farmers in his budget in just under two weeks
time? Sean joins us again from Paris. Sean. Yes, thanks, Nick. Agriculture here
in Paris, the biggest part of the economy. I'm at the Royal Welsh Warehouse, as
you've been hearing this morning in Newtown in Paris, hearing what the clothing
manufacturing industry has been wanting from Jeremy Hunt. But what about
farmers? I've got dairy farmer Jonathan Wilkinson with me, who's the Paris
County Councillor, also chair of the NFU's Cymru Milk Board. Morning, Jonathan.
Good morning. People will have seen on their shelves in recent weeks
consequences of global food supply issues, local food supply issues. Do you have
an answer to why that has been happening for people lately? We've been very
badly affected by inflation, agricultural inflation, huge cost increases in
terms of fertilizer, feed, fuel, and it's impacted farming very badly as it has
many industries and consumers. So we've not been insulated from that. But
because of the long term nature of farming, it's not like flicking a switch.
It's very difficult to dip in and out of production. And we've seen because of
heating costs, many horticulturalists having to leave sheds empty. It's been
cheaper for them to do that. And also poultry producers leave sheds empty rather
than actually fill their sheds with livestock. So in this recent shortage that
we've seen in the last few weeks, is there anything that Jeremy Hunt can do in a
couple of weeks time with his big decisions on spending, tax, borrowing, to
improve the situation either in the short term or as you might say in the longer
term? Short term, I think, you know, initially we'd like to see him. There's an
energy and trade intensive industry scheme and primary agricultural production
isn't able to access that at the moment. And that could help to insulate those
primary producers from these incredibly high costs. And that could be a very,
very quick fix. Tax relief on machinery can be 12 months written off. But for
animal buildings, sheds, it's a 33 year write off period. So, you know, if that
could be shortened, it will encourage investment and we need investment. And
when you see what's going on in the United States, the Inflation Reduction Act
and massive green subsidies in the European Union, been talking about electric
car batteries this week, making their own decisions. Do we have a strategy in
place here to encourage you to be investing and be greener? I don't believe we
have a sufficient strategy. There's huge potential in agriculture in Wales and
the UK to contribute to the green economy, to renewables. I'm in a partnership
with a farmer supplying him with cow slurry to mix with his poultry manure to
generate a lot of gas. He's producing a megawatt of electricity from what is
effectively a waste product. You know, he's he's invested in that significant
investment without any help whatsoever or any encouragement. But moreover,
regulation could potentially stop me exporting my manure to his farm to allow us
to produce that gas. So, you know, we're talking about reducing regulation and
encouraging investment. Jonathan, thank you. Jonathan Wilkinson there, who's the
chair of the NFU Cymru Milk Board. Sean, thank you. It's 24 minutes past seven.
Just a brief update on that interview I was doing with Isabel Oakeshott in which
she repeated the claim that Matt Hancock had sent her threatening and menacing
messages, or a message, I should say, at 1.20 in the morning after the Telegraph
first printed those WhatsApp messages. Mr. Hancock has been in touch with the
BBC and denies sending a message which was menacing. Quotes, this is not true.
If he wishes to say more, he knows where we are. Twenty five past seven.
Meanwhile, in in in animal news, Britain's adders are in trouble, potentially
big trouble. The country's last poisonous snake, which is a venomous viper, has
generally come out of hibernation in mid-March. But they've been seen this year
for a few weeks already, which is not healthy for them because the food and
cover that they need isn't available. Adders are already largely extinct in
places such as the Midlands, where they once roamed with relative impunity. Nick
Milton is a herpetologist who has written a book entitled The Secret Life of the
Adder, The Vanishing Viper, and joins us now. Nick, good morning. Good morning,
Amol. Why do you think the adders are coming out early? Look, what we do know is
that they're coming out a month earlier than they were 30 years ago. That's
that's definitely due to climate change. What we also know is that adders have
now been seen to be active in every month of the year. And you're right, the
adder is in real trouble. We had a citizen science project, a really fantastic
one called Make the Adder Count in 2019. And it showed that adders are now
restricted to just 260 sites in the whole of Britain and that 90 percent of
those have 10 or less snakes on them. And that if we carry on like this, the
adder will be extinct across most of Britain in the next 15 to 20 years. Now,
there are a number of reasons for that. Apart from climate change, there's
habitat destruction. There's increased predation. There's disturbance,
particularly from dog walkers. There's 60 million pheasants. 60 million
pheasants, Amol, are released into the countryside every year, which will kill
adders. That might surprise people, but it's absolutely true. There's inbreeding
because the populations now are so small and scattered. And also there's a
continuing negative publicity. There's just no other species in Britain
generates such lurid tabloid headlines as the adder. For example, the Daily Mail
last year ran with adders threaten families. You know, the adder is a secretive,
shy snake. It's a timid snake. It just wants to live its life. And we have to
have a fundamental debate now, which has to be led by the government's nature
conservation advisors who haven't taken, you know, a leading role in this or
haven't shown real interest in the decline of the adder. Because otherwise it
will. It will vanish from our countryside. And it's worth saying that I think
it's accurate to say that no one has died from an adder bite for 50 years. I
also read that they're very difficult to introduce once they're gone. What would
you like to see happen now, then? You've obviously written a book about the
subject, feel strongly about it. What needs to happen now in order to protect
the British adder? We need to see government and in particular its nature
conservation agencies taking a real lead on this. We need to have an adder
action plan. That means, first of all, there's no there is not one single nature
reserve or site of special scientific interest that's been designated for the
adder. The sites that are remaining, we need to see those designated as sites of
special scientific interest as quickly as possible. We need to look at some of
the impacts that dogs and game birds are having on the adder population. And we
need to take urgent action to address those issues. We need to get adder
champions. You know, we need people who if we can't as a nation, if we can't
learn to live, love the adder, sorry, we need to learn to appreciate it. And so,
for example, you know, King Charles, you know, the royal estate, there's been
lots of calls to rewild that. There are adders at both Balmoral and Sandringham.
It would be fantastic if him or Prince William took a lead on this. So that's
the sort of level of intervention that we need if we're not to see a species
that was central to our culture going extinct. That was in the Bible. That was
in Shakespeare. Thomas Hardy, Gilbert White, Ingo Blyden. It's got a big place
in our literature and our culture. Absolutely. Adder champions, the hunt, as it
were, if that's not, that's probably an inaccurate or insensitive way of putting
it, but the hunt begins now. Nick Milton, author of The Secret Life of the
Adder, The Vanishing Viper. Thanks so much. At 7.29, I should just make a
clarification. Any parallels between the behaviour of snakes and political life
are purely coincidental. You had to do that, didn't you? Gary's here with the
sports news. Gary. Morning. Catch us if you can, Arsenal, five points clear at
the top of the Premier League after beating Everton 4-0. League 2 Grimsby
knocked Southampton out of the FA Cup and Sheffield United beat Spurs. There
were some interesting results from last night's six games. Gabriele Martinelli
scored twice in Arsenal's four win over Everton. They are five points clear.
They play Manchester City on April the 26th in the other Premier League game,
Liverpool beat Wolves 2-0. On to the FA Cup and upsets. Commentator Vicky Sparks
joins us. Vicky, good morning. Good morning. First of all, the win for Grimsby,
2-1 against Southampton and Sheffield United 1-0 against Spurs. Give us the
details. Yes, two cup sets for you and one of them ranking amongst the biggest
in FA Cup history. Grimsby, Town of League 2, knocking out the Premier League's
bottom side, Southampton, to reach the quarterfinals for the first time in 84
years. Gavin Hollihan was their hero, scoring two penalties. Here he is. I just
back this group every time to cause upsets and we've shown it, you know, against
higher opposition in the cup all season. So I just had a funny feeling.
Obviously, you don't expect it to go the way it does, but yeah, just a special
night. Elsewhere, Tottenham's decision not to start Harry Kane backfired as they
were knocked out by Championship high flyers, Sheffield United, Illiman and Dye,
scoring a superb late winner. The two other ties produced wins for Manchester
United and Burnley. Yes, Manchester United, fresh from winning the League Cup
and securing the first trophy of the Eric Ten Hag era on Sunday, had a bit of a
scare. They had to come from behind to beat West Ham United 3-1 at Old Trafford,
courtesy of three late goals. The pick of the bunch and the vital strike came
from Alejandro Garnacho. That put them 2-1 ahead in the 90th minute. Beautiful
curling shot into the bottom corner. Championship leaders Burnley also struck
late as they laboured to a 1-0 win over League One Fleetwood Town, who played
the entire second half with 10 men. Colin Roberts scoring that winner in the
90th minute. And after those ties last night, they made the draw for the
quarterfinals. Who's playing who? Yes, the reward for Burnley and their manager
Vincent Kompany is a trip to his former side, Manchester City, where he remains
a true legend for what he achieved with them as a player. He spent 11 years at
City winning 10 major trophies. It will be a fascinating matchup with his old
mentor Pep Guardiola. Elsewhere, Grimsby will look to pull off another Premier
League giant killing as they travel to Brighton and Hove Albion. There's an all-
Premier League tie between Manchester United and Fulham. And championship rivals
Sheffield United and Blackburn will face each other in the last quarterfinal.
Vicky Sparks, thank you. In the first one-day international, England beat
Bangladesh by three wickets. David Milan, 114 not out. He's going to be my guest
at 8.25. Let's give you some racing tips. One for Ludlow, three o'clock. Number
two, Java Point, Taunton, four o'clock. Look out for number seven, Camulus.
Gary, thank you very much indeed. It is 28 minutes to eight. And Anita Rani has
graced us with her presence. She's here to tell us about Woman's Hour this
morning. Hi. Hi, Amol. Yes, thank you. This morning on Woman's Hour, I'll be
talking to Diana Parks, the mother of Joanna Simpson, who was killed by her
estranged pilot husband more than a decade ago. Former British Airways captain
Robert Brown struck his wife 14 times on the head with a claw hammer within
earshot of their children. Brown was convicted for the manslaughter of Joanna in
2011 and was jailed for 26 years. He served half his sentence and could be
released later this year. Diana Parks has called on the justice secretary to
intervene. I'll be speaking to her live on Woman's Hour at 10 a.m. Anita, we
look forward to that. Look at the weather now. Today, we'll see bright spells
for North West Scotland, Wales and Southern England. Cloudy elsewhere. You're
listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson and Amol Rajan. Here's a
summary of the news from Jane Steel. WhatsApp messages published by The Daily
Telegraph suggest the former health secretary, Matt Hancock, fought to have
schools in England closed as Covid cases rose in late 2020. At the time, the
government had decided to keep them open. In the messages, Mr. Hancock tells an
aide they need to launch a rearguard action against the policy. It was
subsequently reversed against the wishes of the former education secretary, Sir
Gavin Williamson. A spokesperson for Mr. Hancock said the messages had been spun
with an agenda. Police in Sussex say a post-mortem examination will be carried
out on the body of a baby found during the search for the missing child of
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The infant's remains were discovered in
woodland near Brighton. The couple are being held on suspicion of gross
negligence manslaughter. The third and final report from the public inquiry into
the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017 will be published this afternoon. The blast
killed 22 people. The report will focus on the role of the security services and
is expected to establish whether the attack could have been prevented. The Greek
Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis says a committee of experts will investigate
the cause of Tuesday night's rail crash in which two trains collided head-on. 43
people are now known to have died and dozens were seriously injured. Mr.
Mitsotakis blamed what he called tragic human error. Leading universities and
health charities are calling for increased science collaboration between the UK
and the EU. Now a breakthrough has been made on post-Brexit trading arrangements
in Northern Ireland. The group, which includes Cancer Research UK and the
Russell Group of Universities, said there had been a damaging impasse in
cooperation, which saw Britain being blocked from a major European science
scheme. The UK's biggest story-writing competition for children, 500 Words, is
returning to the BBC after a three-year break. The contest is open to 5- to
11-year-olds and will be judged by a team of volunteer teachers and librarians
as well as leading writers. The winner will be announced on World Book Day next
year. Jane, thank you. 25 minutes to eight. If Vladimir Putin hoped he could
reverse the expansion of NATO, he'll now know that that ambition appears doomed.
Finland, which has an 800-mile border with Russia, has taken a decisive step
towards NATO membership. The Finnish parliament voted to abandon its Cold War
policy of refusing to take sides in the confrontation between the West and the
Kremlin, a policy which led many to accuse the country, during the era of the
Soviet Union, of being cowled by its neighbour. Last week in Warsaw, Joe Biden
taunted Vladimir Putin. Instead of an easy victory he perceived and predicted,
Putin left with burn-out tanks and Russia's forces in disarray. He thought he'd
get the Findelisation of NATO. Instead he got the NATOisation of Finland. And
Sweden. He thought NATO would fracture and divide. Instead, NATO is more united
and more unified than ever, than ever before. If Turkey now drops its
objections, Finland and Sweden will join NATO, just as the Baltic states did
after the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. When I spoke last week to the
Estonian Prime Minister, Kaia Kallis, she stressed the significance of NATO
membership. When I go to schools and describe what NATO is all about, it's all
about when you have a school bully and you are weaker in your physical
appearance, then the school bully doesn't bully you when you have big friends.
And this is how NATO works. This is how deterrence works. Listening to that,
Elina Valtounen, Finnish MP, Chair of Finland's delegation to NATO. Good morning
to you. Is that what NATO membership means to you and to other Finns? Good
morning, Nick. Yes, absolutely. It's about joining the club of Western countries
who have these shared values, which we have obviously shared for over 100 years
of our independence, democracy and human rights. And clearly, we also look
forward to bringing our substance and our competence to the alliance. We have a
very strong defence and we have always taken security very, very seriously. I
was going to say, because joining a club might sound like a symbolic move. Do
you believe that there is real security value in this decision, but also real
need for it? You think Russia is a threat to Finland? Well, I think Russia is a
threat to our democratic values. So very much so. I think we need to be united
and unified in defending our values. And as I said, well, Finland has very
strong defence forces, despite we are a very small country. But we look forward
to contributing to the deterrence of NATO. When you talk of that threat to our
values, do you mean that in that era that was known as Finlandisation, the era
in which Finland did not take sides in the Cold War, the Soviet Union was in
effect able to get its way without invading, without crossing the border, simply
through intimidation and threat? Well, partly you could definitely say that. But
then again, after the wars, after the Second World War, well, luckily, Finland
was able to remain independent. We have used every window of opportunity there
has been to edge towards the West. We have joined the European Economic
Community. And then after the collapse of the Soviet Union, we joined the
European Union, which for Finland never was purely an economic decision, but it
was very much also a security and a value based decision. And we have been
closely collaborating with NATO over the past three decades, very closely over
the past decade. So I think we've always known where our side is. But of course,
for a small nation, we've never had the sort of the same liberties as the bigger
ones. Some may fear, though, that this will confirm Russian fears. And these
fears go way beyond the Kremlin, that Russia historically has been encircled by
the West, and the West wants to see it enfeebled at best and broken up at worst.
Well, I think the whole concept of talking about NATO enlargement is wrong,
because it's not NATO who is expanding, but it's the free people in democratic
countries who vote to join. So that's the same thing if you're sitting in the
Kremlin, isn't it? Well, that's well, and NATO is not there to attack anybody.
We are we are here to defend ourselves and our values. Elina Valtonen, thank you
very much indeed for joining us there. The vice president of Finland's
opposition there, the centre-right National Coalition Party. Incidentally, we'll
keep reminding you of this if you don't mind. We've got a new Instagram account
at BBC Today programme. We try and put the highlights of the programme on it. My
reporting from Estonia is on, along with lots of Martha's celebrity interviews
and Amol's big interview with Keir Starmer the other day. There's all sorts of
clips on that at BBC Today programme Instagram account. Indeed. 2028, let's have
a quick look at what the other news media are doing this morning. Most of the
newsie magazines were sent to the printers before the telegraphs. Lockdown files
were published. So the front cover, the New European has the headline, let them
meet sovereignty with a piece of food shortages across Europe. The spectator
cover this week is an essay by the Oxford historian and author of the Silk
Roads, Peter Frankopan, asking if Putin is winning. It suggests the world order
is changing in his favour. The New Statesman has a 3000 word essay by Keir
Starmer on his mission driven approach to government, which we had the pleasure
of discussing last week. The cover of Private Eye this week has the headline
historic jokes revisited above a picture of Rishi Snacks cabinet. Someone off
stage, as it were, says there's a shortage of vegetables to which the prime
minister responds. Not in my government. Old joke from spitty image days during
Margaret Thatcher's time, as I recall. Just the headlines which are not about
the telegraph story that we're covering a lot, the Matt Hancock story. NHS plans
to help millions stop using antidepressants. The Times reports that millions
will be offered other form of help, advice and classes and the rest. The Sun
leads again on what it called frogs it, which is that Harry and Meghan are being
evicted by King Charles from Frogmore College. The Daily Mail leads Carrie Keat,
killer pilot behind the bars. Carrie Johnson coming to the aid of Diana Parks,
whose interview you're going to hear on Women's Hours. We were hearing from
Anita Rani just a second ago. 18 minutes to eight is a world in which we
reproduce by growing babies outside of the womb. Possible or even desirable. The
technology of external gestation or ectogenesis is developing fast. Teams around
the world are looking into what is known as ex viva uterine environment therapy,
which gives us the rather poignant acronym EVE. It's also the title. EVE is the
title of a new book by the legal scholar Claire Horn, who joins us now from Nova
Scotia in Canada. It must be frightfully early, about four in the morning, I
think. Claire, good morning from London. Good morning. We'll get into the ethics
of your book in just a moment. I know that's what the book is mostly about. But
first, you might just telling us a little bit more about this technology and in
particular how far scientists have got with this technology, perhaps
particularly in relation to other species. Absolutely. So it really does sound
like science fiction. But in fact, this research is happening right now. So
there's groups working in Australia and Japan and the United States and in the
Netherlands on what is effectively a partial artificial womb. So this is a
technology that would submerge an extremely preterm baby in artificial amniotic
fluid to allow it to continue to develop as though it had not yet been born. And
at the same time, there's work happening at the other end of gestation with
embryos. So there was a team working in Israel that was able to grow mice from
embryos into fetuses with fully formed organs using a mechanical artificial
womb. And similar work has been done at Cambridge as well. So this stuff is
actually on the horizon. And I wrote Eve because I think we need to start
talking about the ethical implications now. Absolutely. And one of the central
arguments of your book is actually one applied in other domains, too, including
artificial intelligence or social media. Namely, the technology is neither good
or bad intrinsically, but our use of it will determine its ethical merits.
Absolutely. So it's really tempting with technologies like the artificial womb
to imagine all of these kinds of dystopian and utopian possibilities. But in
Eve, I really try to draw it back to contemporary ethical concerns and to kind
of argue that technology is just shaped by the limits of the society into which
it's introduced. And I mean, you wrote the book, as I understand it, Claire,
while you were pregnant yourself. And you must have asked yourself if you would
have used this technology. Did you get to a satisfactory answer? I definitely
had a lot of time to contemplate that as I wrote. And I guess what I thought is
if my baby had come incredibly prematurely and I had the option of a tried and
tested artificial womb, I probably would have considered it. But I reflected a
lot on the relationship that I had with my baby growing in my womb, and I kind
of couldn't imagine that baby being elsewhere. I mean, there are potential
advantages. You know, there are legion. I mean, there are many of them,
potentially people who are having kids later these days. This might suit them.
Potentially, there are people who desperately wanted kids but couldn't have them
for particular medical reasons. Maybe this would help them. But above all, it
could help people with birth inequalities in the poorer parts of the world where
infant mortality is still a huge issue. But what you see as a potential
downside, is it really to do with reproductive rights? Well, I think I would
draw it all back again to technology being very much shaped by the limits of the
world into which it's introduced in. And unfortunately, we live in a very
inequitable world. So I think all of those potential positive uses could be
things that we could look to further down the line if we addressed some of our
contemporary social problems. As to reproductive rights, I certainly think that
there's a danger of the technology being used as a new tool by anti-abortion
agents. So I think we would really have to think about how we protect
reproductive rights in advance of the technology being introduced. Right. It's
such an interesting and important subject. Claire, thank you very much indeed
for joining us. Claire Horne, author of the book Eve. 14 minutes to eight. Time
for Thought for the Day now. The speaker is Jagveer Jutta Johal, Professor of
Sikh Studies at the University of Birmingham. Good morning. Today is World Book
Day, which aims to promote and encourage reading for fun. Across the world,
children are dressing up as their favourite book characters and participating in
lots of fun reading-related activities. My young nephew will be going to school
dressed as Fantastic Mr. Fox this morning. We take access to books and education
for granted, of course. However, there are still places today where children,
especially girls, are denied this right. In Afghanistan, it's 528 days since the
Taliban banned girls from high school and 74 days since they banned women from
university. Millions of girls in Afghanistan are unable to access this most
basic of human rights. In protest over the Taliban's barring of women from
higher education, Ismail Marshall, a university professor in Afghanistan, tore
up his own diplomas live on Afghan television. Using a card named Dikra, which
means read in Arabic, he also distributed his personal collection of around
21,000 books for free to girls and women across Kabul. Professor Marshall was
arrested and little is known about his whereabouts. He joins the thousands of
ordinary citizens of Afghanistan that have been protesting against the ban. The
word Sikh is derived from the Sanskrit shishya, meaning a disciple or learner.
The Sanskrit word guru, long used in India to denote a revered teacher,
literally the one who dispels ignorance, is also used specifically by Sikhs as a
title for our ten founders and holy scripture. In the holy scripture, the Guru
Granth Sahib, vidya or education is characterized as light and its opposite, a
vidya, has darkness. The guru inspires us to enlighten ourselves through
education and experience and help others in acquiring knowledge, because without
knowledge and wisdom, we are unable to carry out all our individual and civic
duties. As the fourth guru, Guru Ram Das says, blessed is that mortal being who
shares the teachings for the good of others. Guru Angad, the second guru, opened
schools and also standardized the Punjabi alphabet into Gurmukhi, a script in
which the Sikh scriptures are written to ensure that education and teachings
were accessible to all sections of society. Reading and education provides a
route for the mind to explore new worlds, new experiences, and for the young,
particularly girls, is the key to opening the door to a better life. So while
enjoying World Book Day, I will be using this day to reflect on those children,
wherever they are, who are denied this basic human right and to stand in
solidarity with those fighting for it. That was Thought for the Day with Jagbir
Jyoti Johal. The time now, 11 minutes to 8. It used to be said of George Orwell
that anyone who wants to understand the 20th century needs to read his essays.
Well, anyone who wants to understand post-war Britain probably needs to read
Peter Hennessey's works or indeed listen to his radio programs. For instance,
Lord Hennessey's Reflection series, which is on BBC Sounds and features profound
conversations with almost all of the big beasts of recent decades, really is
wreathy and gold. His latest book, which sits in the state of the nation
tradition, tries not only to make sense of COVID-19, but to argue that the
pandemic ought to provide Britain with a new beverage moment in which, by mixing
zeal, punctiliousness and deep love of country, we can forge a better future.
It's called A Duty of Care. And when I spoke to Peter, I started by asking for
his version of Beveridge's Five Giants. I would go first of all to the social
care because there's a very high level of consensus on that. And we're still, we
do have a consensus, but it keeps being postponed. It cannot be postponed any
longer. Social housing, so much depends on a decent housing stock. And we need a
minister like Harold Macmillan in the early 50s, who made it his crusade to
build 300,000 houses. And that's how he paved his way to the premiership
eventually, was on the back of those paths to those new council houses very
largely. We've been trying to get technical education right, Amil, since 1868.
There's been promising signs. Ken Baker's University Technical Colleges are a
great model, but we've never gripped it. And all that was there in the 1944
Education Act. That was the bit of it that was never implemented. And I think
preparing our economy and our society for artificial intelligence is absolutely
critical because that was going to sweep away backroom jobs in the way that the
first wave of computerization swept away manufacturing jobs. Unless we can
harness it and humanize it at the same time, we're going to be in severe
trouble. And of course, the overarching problem is the combating and mitigation
of climate change. So those five shared tasks, we really do need to move as a
polity and a society and a country in a global context to shift that on.
Otherwise, the 20s will drift away. And there are so many crucial clocks ticking
that we can't waste another decade. You describe a state of a nation which needs
to grip these hugely important issues. The word care is in your title. You do
talk about the impact of an aging population and the fact that care is going to
become a bigger and bigger part of our lives. In terms of the health of our
politics, how healthy do you find our political discourse at the moment? I don't
want to be critical of people who try to do a decent job and are elected in a
way I'm not. Obviously, I'm a crossbencher in the House of Lords, but the
political class has great potential within it, but it's not risen to the level
of events. We really must devote more time to the things that, for example, the
select committees do best in the Commons and above all in the House of Lords.
And in there, there is rich, good material as a kind of shared think tank for
the nation as a whole. And the reports get almost no salience in the press
unless they involve a row. Do you feel that, broadly speaking, the calibre of
people we have going into political life has diminished? And if so, why? One of
the problems we've got at the moment is you need for our system of career civil
service, politically neutral civil service to work. You need a very high level
of self-confident secretaries of state and a very high level and confident group
of senior civil servants too, and we haven't got that. And we have the special
advisers complicating everything. Mind you, they have their function too. But
we're not in a happy state when it comes to the plumbing of everyday government
either. But there are reasons to be cheerful, you know, because the decencies
are just below the surface in life. And one of the things that Covid showed, the
duty of care we showed one for another, for neighbours showing for each other,
for the frontline health services showing for each other. We showed a side to
ourselves which we'd rather forgotten that we possessed. We were kind of the
best and the most altruistic that we could be. And then it sort of dissipated,
hasn't it? We've gone back into recrimination. We've got waves of industrial
action. We've got the most debauched and meagre political language in some
cases. The two other features of British political life in recent years have
been a, churn, a tremendous churn in terms of ministers and indeed prime
ministers, and b, scandal. I want to just address those two in turn if I may. To
what extent do you think that ministerial churn, prime ministerial churn has
inhibited competent government that does address the long term challenges you've
written about? It certainly does. And if you look at the bit, the productivity
bit, the bit of Whitehall that's dedicated to the question, the economic
question of my lifetime, I think the rate of change of secretaries of state for
trade and industry under their various names, presidents of the Board of Trade,
BASE or whatever it is this week, is something like two and a quarter to two and
a half years. Well, that's ludicrous, really. Vince Cable was a great exception.
He was given five years. Kwasi Kwarteng, when he came in as BASE minister, got
rid of the industrial strategy. I think it was the fourth or fifth industrial
strategy. No, it wasn't. It was the eighth, I think, that I counted up since the
war. Other countries stick to industrial strategies. We regard them as a kind of
embarrassment or an ideological absurdity, depending on where you stand. Why we
just can't stick at it in both terms of personnel and shared approaches to these
deep set problems, I don't know. Nye Bevan used to say, why gaze in the crystal
ball when you can see it in the book? Well, post-war West Germany shows you how
to do that. You know, they're really rather good at it and the French are as
well. Why do we have these peculiar aversions to doing the sensible thing, the
right thing? I did ask a moment ago about scandal and you have been outspoken
about them. Well, I think you could broadly call standards in public life. Do
you feel that they've taken a hit in recent years? Well, I had a bit of a rant
on Easter Sunday on Paddy O'Connell's BH, which I didn't mean to have. It just
sort of the magma rose and just spilled out about Mr Johnson. And I don't want
to do it again because there's no point really. He's not prime minister anymore.
But I really do rather care about the conventions of the Constitution because
they're all we've got to protect us between an overmighty prime minister and the
decencies of public life being conducted in the cabinet room and vis-a-vis
parliament and all the rest of it. I hope it's the first and last time I lose it
in a radio interview. Well, you haven't yet lost it in this one, but there's
time yet. But given the question I'm about to ask, maybe that won't happen. I
mean, despite all the maladies that you diagnosed, you did a moment ago mention
reasons to be cheerful. And I just wonder whether or not you, as you reflect on
British politics over the 60 years that you've been very closely following it,
if there is a tension, frankly, in your mind between optimism, reasons to be
cheerful and realism, because for all the hope that you have that this country's
best days may lie ahead of it, you also seem quite realistic about the fact that
at the moment we're not gripping the challenges you want us to. We're not. But
it's there for the taking. Those five shared tasks are there for the doing.
We've got good people. Perhaps they're not in the right places. They're not in
the right configuration. But I still think we can do it. In fact, I know we can
do it because I've lived in this country for a very long time now. When I draw
my last wretched breath, well, it won't be wretched. I hope I'll be laughing.
I'm determined to die with a piece of weapons-grade gossip ringing in my ear,
making me laugh. So I'm determined to die cheerful for those reasons. But I
shall also die cheerful because I know that within us are not just the
decencies, but immense capacities in this country. It's just a question of
getting the flow of those decencies. Like a subterranean river in a limestone
valley, you've got to get the underwater flow to come to the surface and shining
flow again. And we can do it. We've done it before and we can do it again. Peter
Hennessy, Lord Hennessy, it's a privilege to talk to you. Thank you, Admiral.
Brilliant analysis, glorious language, weapons-grade gossip. Who else? Peter
Hennessy, what a joy that was. It's three minutes to eight, I'm just coming up
to it. Helen Willets has got the weather for us. Nick, thank you. Hello there.
Good morning. We've got high pressure with us once again. So there's a lot of
dry weather around, which was the story of February. But there are some subtle
differences. Let's start with East Anglia, the Midlands and Southern England,
where there are some holes in the clouds, some sunshine this morning. It's been
frosty overnight, but temperatures in the sunshine at least will lift to between
eight and ten degrees Celsius. But that cloud might take a couple more hours to
break for parts of the Midlands and East Anglia. And then actually it might fill
in again later in the day in East Anglia. So largely dry, but we are going to be
chasing that cloud. Slightly less windy though than yesterday, so not quite so
much of a chill in the air. Similar story actually for Wales and the South West,
where there are just one or two showers around. But the cloud will break up a
little bit more today to allow, yes, a little bit more sunshine to come through.
It's not exactly warm. The wind is a little bit lighter than yesterday, so
temperatures might just lift one degree more, eight or nine. For Northern
England, more likely to keep the thick cloud here. There are some showers
around, particularly towards the northeast and down towards Lincolnshire as
well. The best chance of any breaks in the cloud will be across the West Coast,
I should imagine. Only six or seven here, despite a lack of breeze. And a
similar story for Northern Ireland. Quite a few showers here this morning.
They're light, a nuisance value. It's just cloudy for the most part.
Temperatures around about six or seven. And it's a northwest, southeast bit
across Scotland finally, where we'll have the best of the sunshine for the
Northern Isles, particularly Shetland, across the northwest Highlands, where
we're starting with the frost up to about seven here. But further south and
east, a lot more cloud, thick enough for some drizzly showers through the day,
holding our temperature about six or seven degrees. Thanks, Helen. This week on
Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How about Pat Butcher's
earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe a House of Games
winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's ten score paddle from Strictly? Not
that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items that could be yours
as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone! To enter, find out more or
donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash Red Nose Day. We'll find
the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or over to enter.
The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th March 2023. Good luck. Coming
up next hour, diagnosed with autism, illiterate until he was 18, we'll be
hearing the extraordinary story of Jason... We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. The BBC will be streaming on the BBC Sound
platform to reach the FA Cup quarterfinal for the first time in 84 years.