TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. You're listening to
the Newsroom from the BBC World Service, coming up. 141 countries reiterated a
clear demand to Russia, withdraw. Send your troops home and end this war. The
United Nations General Assembly overwhelmingly backs a resolution calling on
Russia to end its invasion of Ukraine. It's four hours, GMT, on the 24th of
February. At this point a year ago, the first Russian missiles had started to
fall. I'm Gareth Barlow in London. And I'm James Waterhouse in Kiev, looking at
how the past year has shaped Ukraine. We'll also explore the military outlook
for the two sides and hear a remarkable story of how the war has brought people
together. Also to come, the former film mogul Harvey Weinstein is sentenced to
16 more years in prison for rape and sexual assault. And we'll also have a
round-up of the latest sports news. You're listening to the BBC. Hello, I'm Neil
Nunes with the BBC News. As Ukraine marks one year since the start of Russia's
full-scale invasion, the UN General Assembly has overwhelmingly backed a call
for Moscow's forces to withdraw immediately. More than 140 countries voted in
favor of a resolution condemning the war. This report from our correspondent at
UN headquarters in New York, Netatofik. Draft resolution A-ES11-L7 is adopted.
In this symbolic hall, the one-year anniversary of the war was marked with a
resolution calling for a just and lasting peace. The vote showed where countries
of the world stood, but also how little positions have changed since the first
time the General Assembly condemned Russia's invasion in March. Nevertheless,
nearly three-quarters of the world body has consistently supported Ukraine. Only
a handful of countries voted against it, including Belarus, North Korea and
Syria. China, India and South Africa were among 32 abstentions. Russia's deputy
ambassador to the UN dismissed the resolution as useless, but the EU's foreign
policy chief Josep Borrell said the message from the UN vote was clear. On the
Russian side, there is a small handful of votes confirming that in the eyes of
the world the aggression against Ukraine needs to stop. And it needs to stop
now. Beijing has urged Russia and Ukraine to hold peace talks as soon as
possible. A paper released by the Foreign Ministry said conflict and war
benefited no one. It said further aggravating tensions could see the crisis
spiral out of control. North Korea has test-fired four strategic cruise missiles
into the sea, the state news agency said the missiles travelled 2,000
kilometres. It added that the drill demonstrated the readiness of what it called
Pyongyang's nuclear combat force. A rare blizzard warning has been issued for
parts of southern California from early Friday through to Saturday evening.
Millions of residents have been told to prepare for unusually cold weather and
snow. The winter storm has already led to emergency services in California's Bay
Area being inundated with calls regarding fallen trees and downed power lines.
More from Peter Bowes who is in Los Angeles. It is extremely cold here and the
torrential rain we've been getting over the last few hours is beginning to turn
into snow. And weather forecasters say over the next few hours we're likely to
see blizzards in California around Los Angeles, the kinds of which long-term
residents here have never seen before. Peter Bowes with that report from Los
Angeles. From London, this is the latest world news from the BBC. The government
of Madagascar says a powerful storm which hit the east coast of the island is
now known to have killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie brought
torrential rain and strong winds tearing roofs off houses. It's now heading
towards Mozambique where it's expected to make landfall within hours. A court in
Sierra Leone has ruled that the main opposition candidate for the presidential
election in June must stand trial on corruption charges. Samurai Kamara was
chosen as the candidate for the All People's Congress three days ago. He says
the case is politically motivated. The current president, Julius Madabio, is set
to run for a second term. A Russian Soyuz capsule has lifted off from Kazakhstan
to bring back three men stranded on the International Space Station. It'll be
some time before the two Russian cosmonauts and an American colleague return to
Earth, as Rory Gallimore now reports. Missions on the International Space
Station usually last six months. By the time these three men are scheduled to
leave in September, they'll have spent a full year in orbit. That wasn't the
original plan. A capsule already attached to the ISS was supposed to make the
return journey, but it began leaking coolant late last year. Liquid particles
were seen spraying into the blackness, forcing the cancellation of a spacewalk.
The new capsule is carrying supplies, although there's no replacement crew on
board. Boeing has temporarily suspended deliveries of the 787 Dreamliner again
in order to conduct analysis on a fuselage component. The Federal Aviation
Administration said deliveries would not resume until it was satisfied the issue
had been addressed. The aerospace giant recommenced deliveries of the planes
last August, after they had been halted for more than a year due to previous
problems. Boeing said production of the 787 would continue as normal. BBC News.
You're listening to The Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Gareth
Barlow. It's a grim anniversary. As dawn broke in Ukraine one year ago, pretty
much to the hour, Russia launched its full-scale invasion of the country. Its
military attacked from the north, east and south, and so began the biggest
conflict in Europe since the Second World War. The cost has been huge. The UN
estimates at least 8,000 Ukrainian civilians have died. Millions are homeless or
refugees. Cities have been flattened. As many as 100,000 Ukrainian troops are
dead or wounded. And Russia's losses are thought to be higher. Twelve months
have passed, with the war showing no signs of ending. And so the UN General
Assembly in New York has now overwhelmingly passed a resolution calling on
President Putin to withdraw his troops from Ukraine immediately and
unconditionally. The US Ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said
Moscow had been given a clear message. Today's vote was really historic. You saw
one year after Russia's illegal, unprovoked, full-scale invasion into Ukraine
where the countries of the world stand. These 141 countries reiterated a clear
demand to Russia. Withdraw. Send your troops home and end this war. So then what
does the vote mean? A question I put to our North America correspondent, Peter
Bowes. It shows us that the world is in about the same place as it was a year
ago with overwhelming opposition to Russia's invasion and the ongoing war in
Ukraine. The resolution reaffirmed support from 141 countries for Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. But it rejected any Russian claims to the
parts of the country that it now occupies. Seven countries voted against. 32
abstained, including India, South Africa and China. The French Foreign Minister
said Russia can and must stop tomorrow. I don't think anyone in that room
expected that to happen, but that was the sentiment of the room. And the
Japanese counterpart said next year we should not meet here to mark the second
anniversary of this senseless war of aggression. With regards to this
resolution, with regards to this session of the UN General Assembly, what does
it mean in real terms? Is it just a symbolic vote or is there some implication
of it? Well, it has no legal implication, so it is largely symbolic. But it does
show where the moral weight of the world is right now. And I think that is the
significance of it, that overwhelmingly countries believe and support Ukraine's
right to exercise self-defence. And that's significant coming from this body, of
course, which has at its heart the goal of keeping peace around the world and at
a time when in some quarters support is waning. Here in the United States, for
example, Gareth, there are some in the Republican Party more openly now
questioning the amount of money that the United States is spending on providing
arms for Ukraine. There's no questioning the Biden administration's commitment,
as we've heard from the President over the last few days. But I think what we've
heard from the General Assembly is a global statement of really steadfast
support for Ukraine. But the reality is Russia will turn a blind eye and a blind
ear to that global statement, surely? It won't have any impact or certainly very
little impact on Russia's, let's say, battlefield strategy. I think where it
could make a difference, difficult to quantify though, is in the arena of
psychological warfare. This is a message to President Putin that there remains
this globally strong resolve to oppose Moscow's war. Peter Bowes. Well, a year
ago, the BBC's James Waterhouse had been in Kiev for just six weeks. And then
the Russian invasion began. Since then, he's covered the conflict and spent time
with Ukrainians whose lives have been irrevocably changed by the war. I caught
up with him and asked how the past year has affected the people of Ukraine. I
remember in the weeks building up to the invasion, people would very calmly say
to me, well, we will fight. You know, it's about defending my country. It's
about defending my very existence and my children's future. And at the time, you
know, it was quite a thing to hear, but you sort of thought, well, you know, it
may well never come to that. How do you know until that moment comes? But on the
whole, they were serious about it. I think you had the resilience of the general
population who have had to learn to live with this. You've had the volunteers
who signed up in their millions. And then you've had the transformation of
Ukraine's military and weaponry. And I think Vladimir Putin miscalculated.
Whenever I drive around Ukraine, I think two things. Firstly, you can see why
Russia wants to take it. It's this vast, fertile landscape. And the second thing
I think is, I can't believe Russia thought it could take it, given its vastness.
It should have taken it. It was the far superior, bigger force. It still has
huge mass over the Ukrainians. And yet the Ukrainians still managed to stay to
the defence they are. To what degree on the ground and amongst the ordinary
Ukrainian population do they feel continually supported by the West? We see
often lots of calls, that frustration etched on the face of Volodymyr Zelensky,
calling for more weapons, faster weapons, weapons to be delivered more quickly.
But do you feel as though Ukraine still feels that sense of brotherhood with the
West, with NATO? I think in a political sense, they are clearly grateful for the
help that's been provided so far. They are frustrated with the rate it has
arrived. Before this invasion, what people cared about was who was helping us
and with what. And there was frustration aimed at Germany, who was initially
hesitant and sending in January military helmets and hospitals. Ukrainians would
say, well, I can't fire those. And I think that's been the sentiment ever since.
But when you talk about brotherhood, I think it's more like a neighbour across
the road that they feel, because despite the political will of Ukraine as a
whole on issues of wanting to join NATO and wanting to join the European Union,
they ultimately have not been realised. And so you have Ukraine sort of falling
through the gap. I think people feel that. And I think that is a deep source of
resentment for the majority of Ukrainians. Thus far, both the EU and NATO have
been non-committal of just when that will happen. At the moment, it's kind of
political platitudes on saying one day, yes, our future is together. A sense
that the country is to some degree being kept at arm's reach? I think so. I
think I've seen a lot of official visits come here and you see Ukrainian flags
crossed over with the European Union flag or the UK flag or the US flag. And
messaging is vital in war. And you see Ukraine is trying to push itself
westward. And we've seen in times gone by, whenever Russia's aggression
increases, Ukraine leans further to the west politically. This full-scale
invasion has kind of blown that out of the water. But it's still reaching. It is
still not fully incorporated into these wider blocks towards the west. It is
throwing everything westwards politically to try and achieve that, whilst trying
to throw everything in a military sense towards the east to keep Russia at bay.
And ultimately, it still hopes to repel Russia completely, but it feels a long
way off from that point. James Waterhouse there. And let's explore further the
point James just made. Can Ukraine continue to withstand the might of the
Russian military machine? Dr Jonathan Marcus is a former BBC correspondent and
now an independent diplomatic and defence analyst. He gave us his assessment of
the conflict now and the outlook for the next few months. This is not last
year's war. The stakes are just as high, but the two armies have changed.
Ukraine's forces not just survived the shock of battle, but have fought back,
inflicting reverses on the Russian invaders. All this came at a cost of heavy
casualties, and Ukraine is busy trying to build up new brigades and divisions
for the offensive to come. On the other side, many of Russia's best troops were
killed and their units shattered in the early stages of the conflict. Russia has
had to mobilise tens of thousands of poorly trained conscripts, it has enlisted
convicts, and it has had to reach deep into Soviet-era stockpiles of weaponry to
equip its newly organised formations. All this sets the scene for what could be
the most critical period in this conflict. This latest phase will be a drama in
two acts. The first, a Russian offensive in the east, largely focused on
securing more of the Donbass, is already underway. It is likely to build over
the coming weeks. Ukraine's aim will be to inflict heavy losses on the Russian
forces, to try to conserve its own combat power as much as possible, and then to
launch what will be the second act of the drama, to go onto the offensive
itself. Many analysts believe that Ukraine's goal will be to drive southwards,
to sever the so-called Russian-held land bridge, the band of Ukrainian territory
that links Crimea with Russia to the east. Everything now depends upon how
successful Kiev and Moscow have been in generating, training and equipping new
combat units. Resolving problems in ammunition supply will be crucial for
success. By the time spring turns to summer in Ukraine, we should know how
decisive this new phase of the fighting has been. For Russia, stalemate may be
enough. But Ukraine has to demonstrate its counter-attacking capability. It must
show its Western backers that the huge amounts of weaponry, training and money
that it has received are actually making a difference. Western support for
Ukraine remains strong. But if the war does turn into a stalemate, would there
be similar levels of backing, say, this time next year? Perhaps. And this is
maybe President Putin's lifeline. There is no real balance in this conflict, and
it goes way beyond the fact that Russia is the larger and, on paper at least,
the vastly stronger player. The war is being waged on Ukrainian soil. It is
Ukraine's towns and infrastructure that are being destroyed. And for Ukrainians,
this is a national struggle for survival. Of course, Mr Putin would like
Russians to see the conflict in similar terms. Perhaps some do. But slowly, as
the casualty toll hits home and economic sanctions begin to bite, what then? And
surely, in Mr Putin's mind, there must be one other fundamental question. How
will Russians judge this misadventure when the guns eventually fall silent?
Jonathan Marcus and plenty more coverage of the first anniversary of the war in
Ukraine across the BBC World Service today and in later editions of the Global
News Podcast. Let's move on now to another story that we're following. Disgraced
Hollywood film producer Harvey Weinstein looks likely to spend the rest of his
life in jail after a court in Los Angeles sentenced him to 16 years on rape and
sexual assault charges. That's in addition to the 23-year sentence he's already
serving. It was the allegations against Mr Weinstein that fuelled the MeToo
movement, and dozens of women have spoken out about sexual harassment and abuse
by powerful men since then. Sofia Batitsa has the story. He was the legendary
film producer at the top of his game, with the world at his feet. But Harvey
Weinstein became the first major figure taken down by the MeToo movement and was
sent to jail. And on Thursday, another conviction for attacking an actress in a
hotel room in Beverly Hills during a film festival in February 2013. In court,
the victim recounted her trauma. Before that night, I was a very happy and
confident woman, she said. Everything changed after the defendant brutally
assaulted me. There is no prison sentence long enough to undo the damage. Harvey
Weinstein is already serving a 23-year prison sentence for a separate conviction
in New York for rape and sexual assault. More than 80 people have made rape and
misconduct claims about him, dating back to the 1970s. But he maintains that he
is innocent, and that all of his sexual encounters were consensual. He called
his accuser an actress with the ability to turn on her tears. Please don't
sentence me to life in prison, he told the court, I don't deserve it. Weinstein
will be appealing, but he's 70 years old, so this sentence means that life and
death in prison are now very likely for this once revered Hollywood star.
Staying in the US, the state of Ohio, there is an increasingly fierce criticism
of the way the authorities have handled the aftermath of a major train crash
earlier this month, which caused a major chemical spill. Cleanup efforts in the
town of East Palestine are continuing after the incident, in which a total of 38
railcars derailed. Nearly a dozen of them were carrying hazardous materials.
Announcing the findings of an initial report, a senior federal investigator,
Jennifer Hermendy, called for an end to politics surrounding the disaster. She
said there was no indication the train's crew did anything wrong, but the
accident didn't need to have happened. Enough with the politics. I don't
understand why this has gotten so political. This is a community that is
suffering, so I don't care about the politics. What I care about is figuring out
how this happened. But I can tell you this much, this was 100% preventable.
While those investigations are ongoing, with a final report not expected for at
least a year. In the meantime, the blame game continues. Nomi Iqbal reports. We
haven't got any formal conclusions yet from this report by the National
Transportation Safety Board. But as well as the wheel overheating, the train was
also said to be travelling below the speed limit when it came off the tracks.
Eleven cars carrying hazardous materials, including vinyl chloride, spilled near
the Pennsylvania state line. It prompted an evacuation. The fears have been
growing about the short and long-term impact of the toxic wreckage on people's
health and the environment. Speaking from the town today, the Transport
Secretary, Pete Buttigieg, said the community didn't want to do politics. He's
been criticised for not visiting sooner, including from former President Donald
Trump, who showed up in the town yesterday. President Biden hasn't visited yet,
but he sent federal agencies to help residents after being criticised for not
doing that straight away. Nomi Iqbal. Let's take a look at some of the other
stories we're following. To mark the one-year anniversary of Russia's invasion
of Ukraine, the Eiffel Tower in Paris has been lit up in the blue and yellow
colours of the Ukrainian flag. The gesture of solidarity with the people of
Ukraine will remain until Sunday. Two Pakistani brothers, who were held without
charge for two decades in the Guantanamo Bay military prison, have been returned
to their home country by US officials. Abdul and Mohammad Rabbani are the latest
detainees to be released from the Cuban facility. Forty people remained in the
prison when President Joe Biden took office in 2021. He says he hopes to close
it down. The Flying Scotsman, one of the world's most famous steam trains, took
to the rails for the first time 100 years ago today. It was designed by Sir
Nigel Gresley and built in Doncaster in the north of England at a cost of
£7,944. That's around $9,500. The train took its name from the daily London to
Edinburgh Rail service, which started back in 1862. It was the first locomotive
to reach 100 miles per hour. And new film instalments of The Lord of the Rings
and The Hobbit, which are based on the J.R.R. Tolkien novins, are reportedly in
the works at Warner Bros. That's after the studios struck a collaboration deal
with the Middle Earth Enterprises. The original Lord of the Rings trilogy,
directed by Peter Jackson, scooped 17 Oscars and earned billions of dollars at
cinemas worldwide. Now let's switch to sport and Richard Newman's joining us.
England going well in the cricket, Richard? Yeah, it got better for England
after a bad start on day one of the second test with New Zealand in Wellington.
Stefan Schemmelt has been there watching for us. And Stefan, England well and
truly have a new star, don't they? Absolutely, they do, Richard. Harry Brooke,
184 not out, his fourth century in six tests. England 315 for three as the rain
in Wellington gives some respite to a New Zealand attack that has been bullied
by Brooke and Joe Root. Their partnership is worth 294. It's dragged England
from 21 for three. Brooke with some breathtaking stroke play. It's taken him to
807 runs in total in his six tests. No player in the history of Test cricket has
more runs after nine innings. For Root, this is a first 100 in eight tests. It
was greeted by a huge cheer by the travelling fans and was the last action
before the weather set in. England are 315 for three. Thanks Stefan. Staying
with cricket, we now know the first team through to the Women's T20 World Cup
final as well. Australia, the reigning champions, beat India by five runs.
They've done it again. Can anyone stop Australia? They seem to be winning
practically everything in the women's game at the moment. Yeah, they are pretty
ruthless. This will be their seventh straight Women's T20 World Cup final for
them. They're also the 50 over champions, the Ashes holders. Now, England play
the host South Africa on Friday. You have to say on form, England had the best
chance of beating Australia. They became the first team in a tournament's
history to go past 200 in an innings in their win over Pakistan this week. And
look, a team transformed under their new head coach, John Lewis. But South
Africa have the benefit of home support too. So that's not a foregone
conclusion. Far from it. And let's just turn our attention to football now. Man
U beat Barcelona in the Europa League and after years of struggling, any signs
that these teams are well and truly on the up again? Yeah, extremely positive
signs if you're a Manchester United or a Barcelona fan. United threw to the last
16 draw, winning 2-1 at Old Trafford to go through 3-2 on aggregate. It was a
great tie, really entertaining, a bit chaotic at times, but you made it a lot
more fun. Relatively speaking, most football supporters would take the struggles
of United and Barca, but they've been nowhere near their historic heights in
recent years and that's why they're playing in the Europa League. But that looks
to be changing. And briefly, any other significant results? Well, the Dutch
giants Ajax are out. They lost 3-1 to Union Berlin of Germany. Juventus and Roma
are among the teams through as well as are the Ukrainian side, Shakhtar Donetsk.
Richard, as ever, thank you. Now, those troves of historical artefacts are
unearthed every day all over the world. It's the same here in England. But in
recent decades, many of those pieces have been left to gather dust in warehouses
because of a lack of space in museums. Now, the public body, Historic England,
says time's running out to find a solution before the stores fill up completely.
Here's our science reporter, Patrick Hughes. Some of the most interesting
archaeological finds made today are discovered during building works.
Archaeological contractors, hired by developers, can unearth anything from
finely decorated Roman metalwork to ancient Bronze Age tools and pottery. The
finds are supposed to go to museums. But as many museums are running out of
storage space, it's becoming increasingly difficult for contractors to find
homes for them. Archaeologists say it's a missed opportunity for people to learn
about their history and heritage. Historic England and the Arts Council England
are talking to the government about plans to open a national archive that could
loan the artefacts out to museums and researchers. Historic England say they are
concerned that if storage space runs out, councils will no longer be able to
compel developers to excavate sites of archaeological interest and national
treasures could be lost forever. Patrick Hughes there. We return now to Ukraine.
Millions of Ukrainians have been displaced since Russia invaded a year ago. And
around the world, many people have opened their doors to host refugees. One such
family are the Baskins from London, a Jewish family. They saw a plea for help
from a Ukrainian woman and her two sons and decided to welcome them into their
home. Initially they thought they were just offering support to strangers, but
have since discovered a surprising link between their families that goes back
generations. Daniela Ralph reports. For almost a year, Anna Likholit and her two
sons, Alex and Mark, have lived with Shelley Baskind and her family in North
London. We just wanted to help because we felt that as Jewish people we've kind
of been in a position where we needed help. As everyone got to know each other
better, Ania told Shelley about her grandfather, Nikolai Diki. During the Second
World War, he took in Jewish families, hid them from the Nazis, saved their
lives. Years later, Ania's grandfather was awarded a medal by the Israeli
government for his courage, honouring him as righteous among the nations. When
she told Shelley about him, something clicked. When I got the photo of the
medal, I looked at it and I thought, I know this. That's so weird. I've seen
this before. It's the medal that my grandfather produced when he was alive.
Neither woman could quite believe it, but archive records showed Shelley's
grandfather, Moshe Hecht, had made the exact medal awarded to Ania's
grandfather. When my grandfather was alive, he had a factory for metal work in
Israel. So he produced medals for people who the Israeli government gave medals
to. And Ania's grandfather was one of them. It's unbelievable. And when I told
my mum and my father, it's, no. Maybe it's another situation. Yeah, but it's
true. Do you think this will be a lifelong friendship for you both? Yeah. You'll
start with each other now. Yeah. We're like family now. Yeah. A remarkable
report by Daniela Ralf, wrapping up this edition of the Newsroom programme.
Plenty more online, bbc.com slash news. This is the BBC World Service, with the
winner of the English as a Second Language prize for the International Radio
Playwriting Competition. My name is Zainul Karim. I'm a writer from Kazakhstan
and my play, it's a funny story about a student who finds someone else's
passport and wants to give it back to its owner. I thought I'd better take it to
the police station myself. It's on my way. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
Show me the passport. At first, I felt a little bit like I was limited in the
way how I can express myself. But then I like it even more because you close
your eyes and you just need to imagine. Ruslan Agdarov, not a Kazakh? Why isn't
the nationality stated in that passport? Why do you say he's not a Kazakh? He is
a Kazakh, absolutely. I would be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The
man lost his passport. We must give it back. Oh, what a face. The Passport,
Saturday at 19 and Sunday at 12 GMT. BBC World Service, welcome to Heart and
Soul. I'm Peter McJogue and this is my story about leaving the Catholic Church
to follow traditional African spirituality and the reaction I've received. Ifa
is the ancient faith of my people, the Yoruba. It's changed my life, but my
family in Nigeria remain devout Christians and they don't yet know I've
converted. Coming out of the Ifa closet, that's Heart and Soul, just after the
news. BBC News with Neil Nunes. Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky has
welcomed a vote at the United Nations calling for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The resolution was backed by an
overwhelming majority of countries, which Mr Zelensky described as a powerful
signal of global support. Today marks exactly a year since the full-scale
invasion began. China has called on Russia and Ukraine to hold peace talks as
soon as possible. A paper released by their foreign ministry said conflict and
war benefited no one and urged all parties to stay rational and exercise
restraint. North Korea has launched four cruise missiles into the sea. It's the
latest in a series of provocative weapons tests. A rare blizzard warning has
been issued for parts of Southern California from early Friday through to
Saturday evening, with millions of residents told to prepare for unusually cold
weather and snow. Madagascar's government says a powerful storm, which battered
the island's east coast, has killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie is
now heading to Mozambique. A senior federal investigator in the United States
has called for an end to the politicization of a rail disaster in Ohio. Jennifer
Humandy was announcing the findings of a preliminary report into the crash,
which caused a major chemicals spill three weeks ago. The American billionaire
financier Thomas H. Lee has died. He was 78. Media reports in New York say he
shot himself in the Manhattan headquarters of his investment firm. A Russian
Soyuz capsule has taken off from Kazakhstan to bring back three men stranded on
the International Space Station. The two Russian cosmonauts and their American
colleague are due to return to Earth in September. BBC World News. BBC World
Service. Welcome to Heart and Soul. Unusual activities for a rainy afternoon in
suburban South London. A handful of people are gathered in a dinghy basement
where a British Nigerian woman is chanting over some food and drink and small
wooden statues, all arranged on a mat. This is Ifa or Isheshe, the traditional
faith of the Yoruba people, and it's growing in popularity both in its native
West Africa and throughout the diaspora. I'm originally from Brazil, from the
city of Salvador. We have one of the greatest Yoruba diaspora communities in the
world. And how long have you been practicing Isheshe? Since last year. I grew up
being Catholic, being Christian, but at some point for me I realized that wasn't
working for me. There was things that I was disagreeing with, like guilty. Guilt
treatment? Yes. And you see that as a sin? Exactly. And I feel I'm able to
express my spirituality in a more free way. I share her dilemma. I too was once
a Roman Catholic, but I'm one of the many people now rediscovering the faith of
our ancestors. My name is Peter Bolahan Makjoub. I'm Nigerian and I'm also a BBC
journalist. And for this week's Heart and Soul, I want to explain my journey,
why people like me are giving up the church for traditional African religion,
and how those who don't believe sometimes react. I've come to this ceremony to
prepare myself to come out of the Ifa closet. I'm going to be heading home to
see my devoutly Christian family, and I'm expecting a showdown over my beliefs.
All the time, Isheshe practitioners are demonized. They're ostracized, and
nobody stands to our aid. Omobolanle Eliagu is the person officiating at today's
ceremony. She is the Iyanifa, also known as the Mother of Mysteries, the High
Priestess. There are also Fathers of Mysteries, known as Babalawos, and much
more to understand. To me, Ifa is not a religion. To call Ifa a religion would
be to undermine what Ifa is. Ifa is the esoteric word of Ele Dumare, by which
Ele Dumare speaks to the world. Ele Dumare, also sometimes referred to as Olon,
is the supreme God who created the universe and everything in it. Ifa also has
other deities called Orishas. A popular one is Eshu, the deity of justice, who
outsiders wrongly interpret as Satan. It's his statuette that's on show today.
As the ceremony resumes, a Babalawo spits gin over Eshu. It's an offering to the
God. Then he splits a kola nut and throws the pieces onto a plate to see how
they land. This is one way of knowing the will of the deities. The first tenet
of Ifa is what's known as Iwapele, which is good character. What do we mean by
good character? It's do I respect all the elements that Ele Dumare has created?
Do I respect the Orishas? Do I respect my fellow devotees? Ifa will speak
through the Babalawo, the priest or the Yanifa, giving direct instructions of
what Ele Dumare is saying is going on for that person, what they need to do,
what they need to not do. It's a divination tradition. You're having direct
communication with God or with the Orishas. Crispin Adegun is another diaspora
devotee who's studying to become a Babalawo. As he explains, Ifa is not just
about submitting to God's will. Devotees are co-workers with the divine. We play
an active role in our own destiny. For example, people usually come to Ifa with
issues like, I really like this guy, is he a suitable husband? Or I'm really
struggling finding work. So it's about taking responsibility. There is a perfect
realisation of you, but your job is to try and figure out what that is and find
it. As a devotee, what is it that one does? How do you profess this religion?
Generally, when you pray, the idea is first you give praise to the Orishas, to
God Almighty, to your ancestors, to the sun, to the moon, to the earth. Then you
give thanks. Then you ask for forgiveness. And then finally you ask for the
things you're actually praying for. It makes sense, doesn't it? Well, it's kind
of first. If you wanted something from your boss, you'd probably have to say
nice things first. Yeah, exactly. No one owes you anything. More and more people
of African descent are embracing Ifa, especially as they increasingly reject the
colonial past. But one of the reasons I haven't professed my faith to my family
is that some aspects of Ifa are pretty gruesome. There's animal sacrifice at the
heart of what Ifa represents. There's bloodletting of salt. Can you talk us
through that? Sure. People make offerings to the Orishas, which can be anything
from kola nuts, fruits, peppers, cooked foods, and also animal sacrifice.
Everyone says, oh my God, blood, demonic. But what's happening is you're taking
a chicken and you're offering the life force of that chicken either to clear
away negative forces or to bring forth good things like pregnancy or a new job
or new love. And you say a prayer over the animal, you offer its blood to the
shrine, and then you cook it and you eat it. Crispin discovered Ifa quite by
chance. He's a professional musician and went to Cuba to learn all about the
traditional drums known as batak. Those drums are used in Ifa worship, and he
soon began exploring the Orishas, spurred on by his own half-Jamaican ancestry.
My own journey, too, started in an unplanned way. In 2013, I was living in the
UK, and I had a dead-end job. I was a devout Catholic at the time, but I had
already started having some reservations. I'd always wanted to visit religious
sites like the Vatican, and when I did go, it felt like mere tourism. The
spiritual encounter I was hoping to have was lacking. Out of desperation, I
decided to try my wife's Pentecostal religion, but that didn't move me either,
and they wanted 10 percent of my income. At that point, I just lost it. Then in
2014, I had the chance encounter which changed my life forever. I skyped a man
living in South Africa who I had not seen since university, my old friend,
Shegun. You know, I remember the first time we had this conversation, because
you look different from what I remember you as when we were in uni. You know,
you had like dreadlocks, cowrie shells and beads on your neck, and then you told
me that you were a babalawo. I think I was expressing some disillusion with
religion. You're not where you're meant to be, you're not doing your job. I
remember, I can tell that you're a born leader, but you can't be doing many
other jobs. You need to be in an institution where you're present, you will be
felt as a leader, because that's what that Odu was saying at the time when I
casted that Odu. An Odu is a divine message. In my case, the Odu told me things
about my life that Shegun couldn't possibly have known himself. There's no way
you would know that I was in a job that I didn't like. So I found out a bit
surprising when you said that. You see, once you cast that Ifa and that Ifa
comes up, it tells you clearly that this is what's going on with Mr. A. Mr. A is
in this situation, he's meant to be at a different height in life. And I stopped
doing the job that I was doing, then I started to travel the world, and then I
go into the BBC, you know. The Ifa devotees will always be at advantage than a
regular guy. I was convinced. Slowly, I overcame the taboo around Ifa. I became
a devotee, and I've never looked back. But I've also never told my family. So
now I've got to go back home to come clean about this big elephant in the room.
My hometown, Abeokuta, is a mid-sized city about 80 kilometers from Lagos. Like
most places in this part of Nigeria, it's noticeably Christian, and my old local
church of St. David's is packed for Sunday Mass. This church, for many, many
years, was my home. I was born here, I was baptized right here in this church in
1974, and I grew up here a devout Catholic, an altar server, had my first Holy
Communion, had my confirmation. So coming back here today, I have mixed
feelings. That time we have the same vision, the same aim, and I know that time
we were forthcoming, very hardworking, going to the church to clean the church
almost every weekend. You know, we are just passionate about the whole thing.
Michael is one of my oldest friends and still attends this church every Sunday.
Back when we were teenagers, we started a religious group together, the St.
Augustine Youth Society. We wanted to be the best, most devout kids. We even
gave Michael a nickname, Monsignor. There were a whole lot of people there
encouraging us to grow up the Christian way, so it was a very good thing. And I
believe and know that those things still propel us. You know, because we are
just turning to each other as mentors. You know the reason? Because we saw
ourselves as brothers and sisters. In actual fact, most times I try to imagine
that if eventually some of us decided we were going to marry at the end of the
day, why don't we marry within ourselves? It's hard to hear memories of our
former solidarity in Christ, knowing that I no longer share those values. But at
least I don't have to make any big revelation to Michael. He's seen my Facebook
page, so he already knows I'm not going to church anymore. The very first day I
saw that, I was shocked. I was like, I hope this thing is not going to be true.
As a journalist, I don't really blame you. You need to dig deep for you to see
what's actually happening. But there are some concerns. My first concern is I
really don't want you to miss your path. Secondly, I know mommy very well. When
daddy was alive, I know him very well. Daddy is no more. May God rest his soul.
But mommy is still very much alive. He's right. My devout Catholic father died
two years ago, not knowing his son had left the faith. And crucially, I've yet
to tell my mom. The news is likely to distress her. This isn't going to be easy.
Next up is my brother Felix. He must know something of what I'm going through
because he's left Roman Catholicism for the Pentecostal church. He's seen what
happens when you act on your conscience. Pentecostal Christianity believes that
being a Christian is not to profess. You have to live that lifestyle. And you
need God to assist you. Am I right then that being a Pentecostal is a better
option than being in orthodox settings like the Catholic church, for instance?
OK, that's a good question. But at the end of the day, God is not going to judge
us on did you go to Catholic or did you go to a Pentecostal church. He's going
to judge us on are you a Christian. The true meaning of Christianity is people
that live like Jesus Christ. I feel that Ifa does help me live according to the
same ideals that Jesus espouses in Christian teaching. The devotee's ideal is to
have humility, respect, love and compassion. But I'm feeling nervous now. Felix
is like so many others here in Nigeria. He sees Christianity as the only faith
worth following. At the end of the day, we believe that the God that we read
about in the Bible is the real deal. We don't believe that there's another one
somewhere. Now the Almighty God is saying that if you want to have a good
relationship with me, it has to be via accepting my son as your ultimate. Every
other thing is fake. Every other thing is fake. It's a fairly uncompromising
line. What would Felix think of my deities? I decided to just hint at it. Would
you consider traditional belief as evil or demonic, satanic even? Traditional
religion? Well, if the practice has to do with human sacrifice, fetish practice
and all the rest, of course it's demonic. One would say it's evil. The Niger
society has painted it black. They cannot handle this. I'm on Skype again, this
time to another old friend, Femi, who used to worship with our group in
Abeokute. Now he's an Ifa devotee like me, but he's still very much in the
closet, scared of the stigma. They judge you, they nail you, they condemn you.
Yeah, it's almost like we're devil worshipping, isn't it? Exactly, exactly. Is
it hidden then? Are you making an effort to hide it so that you don't want
people to know about it so they don't judge you? Yes, I would say so, 100%. So
your elder brother, is he aware of this transition? Oh, no. What about your
mother? No, she's not. Does your wife know? No, she doesn't. Only my father.
Only your dad? It was Femi's dad who introduced him to Ifa. Femi became very ill
and they both wanted some deep spiritual advice. But one of the most eye-popping
things that he told me is that his dad still goes to mass. And so does he. I've
tried to create what I would call a balance. Are you saying you still keep your
Catholicism? Yes, I still do. The classic case is my own father. I was shocked
when you told me. Because when you're talking about how a devout Christian
father looks, your dad is the epitome of that. Exactly. Calm, gentle. I would
never ever believe that somebody like that... There you go. So you have so many
of them, so many of them that place all doubt because they know it's a lost
cause. It seems that even as some people profess Christianity, or for that
matter Islam, many also consult the Orishas when the chips are down, asking
their own ancestors for help when they are their lowest ebb. That gives me
comfort as I contemplate telling my dear mom about my own conversion. First
though, I'm off to see another brother, Emmanuel. He's younger than me but I've
got some trepidation because he's another evangelical. The likelihood that he'll
criticize my spiritual path is high. Emmanuel is big on faith. He says we are
fainting our salary being paid each month and in a car going when we turn the
ignition, so why not faith in God? And he thinks I should have more faith, even
as my instincts take me away from Christianity. You know, we are all Christians
but now I seem to be like the black sheep if you like. I've become really
interested in African religion. One thing I want to tell you today is this. I
want you to write it down. It is for God to introduce himself to each person.
There are things he wants us to do. There are things he wants us to get. There
are insights he wants us to know. That is why people will still go on different
sojourns. Even like yours, I feel that at the end of the day, your Christianity
is going to be deeper. So you feel like this African spirituality is just like a
tangent of sorts. What God has to say over an issue is actually the truth. So
for yours, one of the things I need you to be doing is a short prayer. Lord,
reveal yourself to me. You understand? So if I conscientiously pray to say, God,
reveal yourself to me, I will snap out of this thing that I'm doing and find my
way back. It's going to be a transformation. God is aware of what is happening
to you. This is humbling. Emmanuel is so forgiving, so magnanimous. And his
faith in Christianity and as he sees it, Christianity's ability to bring me back
from the brink is moving. I love my family. I don't want to hurt them or offend
them. But I don't want to leave a lie either. I need some advice and I know
where to get it. I've just learned that Ifa Shegun, my old friend in South
Africa who I Skyped when I was in England, has now returned to Nigeria. What's
it like for you here? Well, he gave me that Odoo, or spiritual message, all
those years ago. I want to tell you today, it's just the beginning. You've not
seen anything yet. This Odoo is a great Odoo. This Odoo says, you are a chosen
child. You're not in this world just to do regular things that every other
person do. No, you're going to do yours exceptionally. That's what this Odoo is
saying. This Odoo will never come down without fulfilling everything that it has
come to do. Ifa Shegun's take on my dilemma is unequivocal. My advice to you,
don't relent in your morning prayers. Don't relent in the work that you need to
do to propel you on your destiny. Because if I say that, having a good destiny
is not enough. But knowing how to go on that path to fulfill that destiny is
very, very important. If you continue to do that, you will get to the highest
height of your destiny. No human being is going to cut it short. Why do you
think our society, especially in Nigeria, look at Yoruba spirituality as evil?
Why is that attitude still here? The reason for that is ignorance. A lot of our
people do not love themselves. A lot of our people are still under slavery. They
are still brainwashed. They just love embracing other people's things. Let them
continue that way. This is the point where I finally have to put this matter to
bed. It's time to be honest with my mother. You know, I remember our days where
we would go to morning mass, and after we are through we go to our usual Sunday
mass, then we go back in the evening for benediction, all of that. So I think
out of all of us, my Catholicism was second to none. Am I right? Very right. My
wish has always been that all my children should attend the same church that I
attend. You know, we had all these songs. Do you remember them? Omnes gentes,
omnes populi. I have a beautiful relationship with my mother. I've always been a
mommy's boy. Then about three years ago, she saw me wearing a necklace and
bracelet which signify Ifa devotion, and she queried it. We haven't addressed
the matter since. It's like you went back in time. So I see you're very happy,
mom. It brings a lot of smile to your face. The reason why I want to have this
chat, mom, is because, you know, I speak openly about my issues. And maybe since
2013, I've not been to church. And now I find myself on this journey of
traditional African spirituality. There, I've said it. My mom's face tells me
all is not well. I don't think you have my support. You don't have my support.
That babalawo, that whatever name you call it, somebody that is practicing the
African religion, most of them, they tell a lot of lies. I want her not to be
disappointed in me. Perhaps there's some way I can soften the blow a bit. I
remember my talk with Femi and raised that. There's a friend of mine. We're on
the same path. But he practices it in his home, and then he goes to mass. And he
said to me, he realizes they don't really interfere with each other. Just like
our grandfathers and great-grandfathers would have done when the Europeans came.
They carried on with their isheshe, because they know that when problem arises,
that's what they will rely on. I don't cling to that. I don't buy that. You can
call your God whatever name that you want when you're on your own, but not
isheshe way. You have to love God and love human beings. Exactly. So these are
the things that are there. The concept of omoluwabi, meaning to behave
appropriately, to be kind. That's exactly what they say. It is the fetish, the
fetish side of it. What is the fetish? When you need to kill a cow, kill a
chicken, pour the blood or something, something. All those ones. The expression
on my mother's face almost makes me cry. I immediately want to tell her it's
okay and that I will abandon my plans. But then I realize this is the moment
where I need to rise to the occasion. For me, this is a cultural renaissance. My
forefathers, they were decent people and they had their own commune with the
divine. So I'm saying, the Africans, who didn't have the Jesus encounter in
their own spirituality, are we saying they're all doomed for hellfire? Are they
all going to perish? I'm going to be 18, by the grace of God, very soon. And I
want my son, my Peter, to come back to the Christian faith. In fact, that will
be the greatest present that you can give me. And that was that. Mom didn't want
to talk about it anymore. But it's okay. I'm no longer in the closet. I'm
finally true to myself and to my loved ones. Before I leave Nigeria, I'm going
to do something very special. I'm about to take part in an Ifa ceremony. And
this one is actually for me. It's going to be a series of worship, devotions and
prayers. And the purpose is to set me up spiritually for the year ahead, such
that I am one step ahead of every circumstance. Again, the priest spits libation
over refugees. He prays for blessings in my workplace and protection from all
dangers, and raises a series of curses on my enemies. At last, I feel confirmed
in my new faith. It's been a roller coaster of emotions for me. But this is how
I see it. If the Chinese, Indians, Jews, Arabs, Europeans and more cannot
embrace their own spirituality, why should I, an African, a Yoruba man, consider
my heritage, my culture, my tradition, to be devil-worshipped? That's all from
Heart and Soul this week and from me, Peter Mac Joe. The programme was produced
by Mike Gallagher. To hear more stories, go to bbcworldservice.com. This is the
BBC World Service, and on the Inquiry this week… One year after the start of the
war in Ukraine, Putin seems poised to launch a new offensive. The question is
where he might attack. This week we're asking, what is Putin's plan now for
Ukraine? The Inquiry at bbcworldservice.com slash inquiry. In the final episode
of Bad Blood, we look to the future. We hear the story of the rogue Chinese
scientist and a pair of genetically modified twins, and ask, what are the
cutting-edge genetic technologies now available, and what kind of future might
they bring?