TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Love you all to come back. Thank you so much. Alvaray, Charles Spencer and
Irene Tracy. Today's producers were Fatima Al-Qasab and Anna Budd, Studio
Direction from Antonio Fernandez and Russell Newlove, the editor, Alex Ritchie.
Thank you for listening. Goodbye. This is BBC Radio 4. Lee and Helen need to
make a decision about their future. And Brian gets a wake up call in the
archers, coming up shortly. And then the award winning artist, Sonya Boyce,
shares the soundtrack of her life with Lauren Laverne in Desert Island Discs at
11.15. And while we're on the subject of the arts... Explore the world of arts
and culture on front row. The atmosphere changes. The hair starts to stand up on
the back of your neck. The biggest news and interviews. It was an absolute dream
of mine to perform on a stage. Alongside live discussions, debates and the
latest reviews. She's a series of contrasts, which I thought were quite
fascinating. I loved it. I can't recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly
entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for front row. You are a
national treasure. No. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15.
And you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. Back to this morning now.
Time for The Archers. Oh, it's washing day, I see. Oh, sorry, Susan. Oh, don't
beg. It's too cold to put the washing out, so I just hang it wherever I can.
Kids get through so many clothes at Martha's age. Oh, and I'm just as bad since
I started at the Stables. Oh, wouldn't worry. Where's there any...? Thank you,
Alice. Sorry, you go ahead. Well, I didn't mean to call in on a Sunday, only I
wondered whether I could be of any help. Help? With the funeral. Oh. I hope I'm
not speaking out of tune, but we've been family for a long time and we still
are, aren't we? And I would really like to help if I can. No job too big or
small. I'm sorry. Oh, dear. I mean to upset your love. No, you haven't. That's
the last thing I intended. No, it's not you, Susan, it's just... I'm a European.
Thanks. Oh. It's so kind of you to offer. But at the moment, we're not sure
there's going to be a funeral. Your mum said she would have been more than happy
to feed them. Nolotanda's over at the house too. Thanks, Dad, but their dinner's
almost ready. Nolotanda's great with the girls, isn't she? And they seem very
taken by her. It's nice for Gran too to have young people around to distract
her. Yes. And after the valorant, I bet you and mum could do with a break.
Nonsense. I'm surprised you had them all over today again. Well, it was only an
hour. I promised the boys I'd let them help when we'd start planting the broad
beans in the polytunnel. And your girls seemed to want to have a go too. Yep,
Mabel and Evie certainly seemed to have had a good time. Anyway, I'd better go
and see what they're doing. I told them to set the table for tea. Well, it's
unnaturally quiet, so I'll go and check. Thanks again, Tony. Not at all. He
seems chipper. Yeah, he's really been enjoying spending time with all four of
them. And you? Yeah, they're great, really. In fact, I'm so pleased how Mabel
and Evie have taken the boys under their wing. Well, he seemed to worship them,
and I had been worried that Jack and Henry might get in the way. And he needs
quality time with his girls before they go, but so far so good. So why the look?
What look? Helen, if it's getting too much, you must speak up. Or maybe your mum
and I can do a little more. Dad, no, you do more than enough. And it's really
not that. At least taking the week off to be with them as much as possible. I'm
just doing whatever I can around work. Feeling left out? No. The girls and I
have spent some time together, you know, just us when we took Jack and Henry off
for football yesterday. It's a bit of a struggle. Jack and Henry off for
football yesterday. It's obvious that they're both so excited about going to
California, but they won't say it in front of their dad. They don't want him to
know they're excited, but it's clear as day that they are. Right. And Lee? Well,
the more they seem to be enjoying themselves, the more I think he's allowing
himself to imagine a life with them here. This is all my fault. Oh, Dad, we're
way past that now. Don't feel bad. It's Lee I'm worried about. There you go. Oh,
thanks. I don't know what I'm doing. I started on the washing before Martha's
back with me, then I got distracted by worrying about the funeral arrangements.
Everything's just half done. It's so difficult at times like this. Dad's clamped
up completely since he announced there'd be no funeral. It's just all a horrible
mess, and I feel like I'm having to keep it all together, and I don't know how.
I'm just not coping. Well, this love... I'm sorry to say it, but families can be
strange things, especially at times like these. I'm sure your dad can't amend
it. Of course there's going to be a funeral. I went to check in on him today,
and he barely said two words to me. I don't dare ask him about the coffin, or,
well, the other arrangements that have to be made, and I'm afraid to go ahead
and make any decisions in case he hates them. No, turn up, set yourself low. No,
sometimes I wish I could just hide under the table with a bottle of vodka and
wait for it all to be over. Oh, Alice. I don't want to burden the family with
it, but I need to go to meetings about my drinking, and I need to go regularly.
I used to, Susan, but right now it's so hard, finding time when I'm firefighting
at every turn. No-one's communicating, and if we leave dad to his own devices,
nothing will get done. Mum would have snapped him out of it. Jeez. Look, this is
mum's recipe book. I found it the other day. It's so well-used, there's loose
pages falling out all over the place. I thought I'd repair it and make sure
nothing's lost. That's lovely. They wonder, you can hand it down to Martha. No,
well, I'm afraid I don't have first dibs. I bet everyone will want it. But at
least it'll be in one piece, though. It feels like the only thing I can fix. And
I've even felt that. Here, let me help. Oh, thank you. She'd cut recipes out of
magazines and newspapers, but of course she'd add her own ideas. My mother was a
genius in the kitchen. I remember once she made a chocolate hazelnut mousse, and
Alice, it was gorgeous. She said it was the quickest and easiest thing ever. She
actually shared the recipe with me. But did mine turn out light as a feather and
soft as a cloud? It was more like a hazelnut and chocolate pate. Sounds like you
stumbled on something new. I love her. I just tripped up on my own clumsy
kitchen skills. Oh, no, that's not fair. You're a really good cook. Remember at
the time telling Neil it's because I didn't have one of them fancy mixers? But
it doesn't take a piece of expensive cake to make magic in the kitchen, Alice.
It takes true talent. And your mother had that by the bucket load. She did,
didn't she? Can you see here along some of the pages? She's marked whose
favourite the recipe is. There's even a couple of Sandra and Martha's in there.
Oh, it's so unfair they won't see her again. I'm sorry, Susan. You walked
through the door and I bombard you with all this stuff. Nonsense, Alice. I came
here to see if you were all right and to help in any way I can. You'll get
through this. You will. Being around the boys, especially since we moved in
together, it's been so good for him. It's like he's come to trust himself as a
father and not question whether he's any good or not, like he used to with
Alicia. Yeah. He was banking on this week being a success and when he finds out
how happy they are about moving, I worry he'll come crashing down. What are you
going to do? I wish I knew, Dad. I suppose I could find a way of broaching the
subject. But doesn't that risk making you look like the bad guy? Does it? Well,
only in that he might think you're saying it for an easy life. I can't sit back
and do nothing. I know, but do think carefully. It's not an easy situation. No,
it's not. What can I do for you, Susan? I've just come from Alice's. Right. And
she told me you said there isn't going to be a funeral for Jennifer. Why would
you say that? I'm sorry, Susan, but this is a family matter. Yes, and that's why
I'm here, Brian. I thought long and hard before I knocked on your door. I
appreciate what you must be going through. We all do. Good. Then you'll kindly
leave me alone, please. But you cannot shut yourself up. Then you'll kindly
leave me alone, please. But you cannot shut yourself away and pretend this isn't
happening. Jennifer should have a funeral. Of course she should. And you will
need to speak to your children and make all the decisions about it together.
Susan. Poor Alice is beside herself with worry. She's trying to keep all the
plates spinning on her own. It is not on her own. Well, that's how she feels.
Well, she's wrong. And forgive me, but I do not have to do anything because you
say so. Oh, the devil, Aida. Come into my home and tell me what to do. She's
thinking about drinking again, Brian. She hasn't, and God willing she won't. But
don't put her in that position. Please. She doesn't want to burden anyone with
it, but, lo, you said it's a family matter and you're her family. Remember, no
matter what you're going through, she's got to manage the addiction as well as
the loss, and that can't be easy. I'll see myself out. Susan, what am I supposed
to do? Be her father, Brian. That's all she needs right now. Mabel's meant to be
on drying up duty tonight. Oh, leave them. They're all on our bed watching a
film on the tablet. I don't know why they don't watch on the telly. Well, kids
and technology. Maybe a tablet makes them feel more in control. You know, Henry
will be asking for an upgrade when the girls take theirs home. We'll cross that
bridge when we have to. Maybe we can snuggle up, watch something on the telly.
Oh, sounds nice. What? Nothing. It's just dinner tonight. What? You felt like
the girls have always been here, you know? They're lovely. You should be very
proud. They've taken to you. It's only been a few days. I know I'm being
sentimental, but I can tell. They get gripy when they're not comfortable. You
make them feel comfortable. As they should when they're with their dad. You're
amazing. So they say. Look, why don't you go and pick something for us to watch,
and I'll put the leftovers in the fridge. Sure. I'll see you in a sec. Yeah.
Dad. Alice, go. You look how I feel. Thanks. What are you doing here? Checking
in on you. As you all seem to do with me on the hour every hour. Well, come in.
It's freezing. It's crisp. That jump at the tea through an arctic winter. Mum
got it me for Christmas. Alice, I've been looking at coffins. OK. I think your
mother would want something decent, but not over the top. Agreed. So I've marked
a few in the brochure. Perhaps you could get together with Kate in the morning
and work out some of the arrangements. For the funeral? Yes. Actually, Alice, I
owe you an apology. Dad. We're all going through whatever we're going through.
Coping however we can. But saying what I said about not having a funeral. It's
OK, Dad. No, no, no, no, it isn't. If Jenny could see me now. She'd know you
were doing your best. She'd say my best wasn't good enough. And it hasn't been.
I promise. I'll be there for any decisions we need to make together. And
whatever you and Kate and Adam organize for the funeral, I'm confident it'll be
the perfect goodbye. How's he doing? Oh, he's doing well, aren't you, boy? No
stiffness in the leg? No, not at all. He's been moving smoothly and with that
discomfort. Excellent. You look tired. Thanks a lot. I'm here. If you need to go
home, we'll have some rest. Do it. Darling, what kind of aunt would I be if I
let you come into work and sat at home myself? Anyway, distractions are very
useful at a time like this. Excuse me. Everything all right? It's just a message
from Susan to say she can have Martha tonight. Oh, take her up on it, honestly.
It'd be good for you to have some me time. We'll have to meet Dad and Kate about
the funeral arrangements. Oh, so there is going to be a funeral then. Kate told
me everything your father said to you. No funeral. I almost went round to the
cottage to give him an earful, but then I thought better of it. I know what
little value my opinion holds. Because he came and apologised. Brian did? Yeah.
Last night. If only people could be as forthcoming with apologies to me. What?
Clearly he's still reeling. Aren't we all? I do have to ask you about travel
arrangements, though, to the funeral. We need to know how many cars to book and
who's travelling with who. I thought maybe Gran would want to be with you and
Uncle Tate. Fine, fine. I'll go and speak to Mum about it and report back, OK?
Thanks. Pleasure. And take Susan up on her offer. Hmm, I'm not sure I should.
Why not? I think I may have made a mistake last night. What kind of mistake? A
stupid, stupid mistake. Wasn't it expected to see you here? Well, things have
spiralled a little out of control at home. Why? What's happening? Now we have a
competition on our hands. A competition? For what? So, all four of our
delightful Bambinos have decided they like American pancakes more than the
English ones. What? Exactly. The only way to get a decision on this is a
competition. English versus American pancakes. And with tomorrow being pancake
day... And we thought it would be a nice way to thank your mum and dad for all
the babysitting and stuff. They're going to be judging. Now, Mabel has sent me
to ask, do you have buttermilk? No. Apparently it makes the American ones really
fluffy. But there is a little hack to making your own with milk and lemon juice,
both of which we do have. Thing is, I'm leading Team England. Well, then just
pretend you don't know about that hack. Mabel's a dab-handed American pancake,
so she probably knows it already. I've got to bring my A game. Good luck. But
when it comes to food and kids, Americans win every time. Well, Bruce, we're
good. We done? Yep. Just need to kick about up the far end. And over the side
there. OK. I'll help. Right. Once we've bedded down, we can get them in and
ready for carving. So long as they manage to deliver without any intervention on
our part, I'm happy. Spoken like a true farmer. Oh, we've got enough on our
hands with this slot and Ben and the B&B. I still wonder whether it's a good
idea to open up when we're carving. He's been so determined to get it up and
running, then. Thankfully, it's just one room. We need to cushion him for many
hiccups. Keep building his confidence. But we've covered all our bases, surely.
Yeah. Insurance, fire and safety. Ben's done the food, hygiene and safety
course. I mean, it's pretty basic what we're offering. Oh, stop. What? That's
the ad we should have. Come and stay at Brookfield B&B. It's pretty basic. Oi. I
want him to make a success of it, right? He will. He's starting at the laurels
next week, too. We'll have our hands full of carving. Look, there's only so much
cushioning we can provide. Anyway, it's literally a bed and some breakfast. What
can go wrong? I don't know. Ben's talked to Mum about when she ran it as a B&B,
but that was years ago. Mm. I wish we could ask someone. Get some up-to-date
advice before we launch into this head first. There's not many who'd give that
away for free. All just a second, please, Lillian. We've had a spillage and
there's broken glass. And before you think it, it wasn't me. It was Barry.
Barry? With the rat. Just in those who he is. Came over to the till with two
armfuls of shopping, but will he ever take a basket? No. No. So down went the
bottle of cordial, and of course it would be glass. Susan. Oh, just let me put
them up to one side and I'll... Can we talk while it's quiet? Oh, of course.
What's the matter? I'm worried about Alice. Oh, I know. She's got so much to
cope with at the minute. Yeah. Actually, Alice was a bit concerned that she may
have overshared a little when you were there yesterday. Oh, nonsense. She was
upset and she had every right to be. Good. Alice wishes she hadn't admitted to
you. She was so close to having a drink. Oh. And when you texted today about
having Martha, she thought you might be thinking she isn't up to looking after
her. That's why she thinks I offered. She's afraid that if you're worried she's
drinking again, you might want to take matters further. Oh. But if that's not
the case, I'll tell her that. No, no, please, Lillian. Let me sort this. I think
it's a great idea. Go on, girl. It's nice and dry in here. At least we can make
sure Ben's off to a good start. I'm not sure Linda Snow will give you all the
secrets to her B&B success. Oh, come on. All we want is to avoid any snags we
may not have accounted for. She can't begrudge us that. She will if she wants.
Well, then, I'll remind her of the times she's marched over here and demanded to
have the village in her house. Well, then, I'll remind her of the times she's
marched over here and demanded to have the village production move to our barn.
And groping us into the cast. I'm sure she owes us one or two favours by now. I
don't know, David. You know Linda. You're all right. Go ahead. Well, it's worth
a try. I'll make a call as soon as I get a chance and see if she's free and
willing. Can I get you a cup of tea? No, thanks, Alice. Oh. Erm...Lillian came
to see me. Oh. So I thought I'd come and see you myself. Susan. I said some
things yesterday that perhaps I shouldn't have said. Not out loud. Not to you.
The thing is, though, I always feel the urge to drink. Especially at times like
this. Yes. But the point is I haven't. I wouldn't. I mean, recently, since mum,
I couldn't find the time to call my buddy, Lisa, or make time to go to meetings.
Because, well, there's just been so much to do and so much to process mentally,
emotionally. Alice. But I called her last week. And we've now got a strategy in
place and, you know, she doesn't perceive her around me or allow me to feel
sorry for myself. I have an addiction and I have to manage it, no matter what
the circumstances. Of course you do. There's no room for self-pity. Whatever
challenges I face, I can't take my eye off the board. I have to make time for
meetings and fill out my gratitude journal daily, no matter what. Alice. I am so
sorry that my message today will reduce so much. I was only thinking that you
need some proper rest. Maybe us having Martha for you would help, that's all. Is
that true? Yes. Oh, heaven knows it makes complete sense that you want to escape
all of this and hide away. Who wouldn't? But the thing that makes you a very
good mother and a strong person is that you haven't given in to it. No. I really
haven't. Of course you haven't. But it's been so hard. Oh, love. And I'd feel so
ashamed if I'd done it to drink now when Mum's gone. That's not going to happen,
Alice. You are so much stronger than that. I feel so lucky to have you here.
Especially now. We're all lucky to have each other, Alice. If death teaches us
anything, it's to value those we love while we have them. Oh. Which reminds me,
I've got something for you. Here. Oh, Susan. Recipe book. Now this one, it's
just for you. So you can put all of Jennifer's recipes in it and write down your
own. It's beautiful. Look at the illustrations, they're gorgeous. And all these
butterflies. Well, they're a bespoke edition by Poppy and Keira. When they found
out it was for you, they wanted to make it even prettier. Well, they have. Thank
you, Susan. Thank you. Lee, we need to talk. Okay. The last thing I want to do
is hurt you. Wow. This sounds serious. It is. I'm not sure you know this, but I
think... Actually, I know that Mabel and Evie are excited about going to
America. Well, they've been oversold the whole fairy story, haven't they?
Alicia's made sure, but it's not the same as the reality of living out there for
good in thousands of miles away from here. You're right. No one can know how
they'll take to it. But they've talked to me about going, and they sound really
well informed and genuinely happy about it. They've looked up where they'll be
living and what schools and things are close by. Evie's even found a young
people's dance class. They haven't said any of this to me. And why do you think
they haven't? Can't you tell me if you know so much? Because they don't want to
hurt you. They don't want to seem positive about going because they think it'll
sound like they want to move away from their dad. You don't want them to stay.
This isn't about me. I love you. And I admit, I had some reservations about how
Jack and Henry would take to the girls and vice versa if there'd be jealousies
about who's spending more time with you. But you've all managed it so well. I
know this is just a week's break together, and I'm loving having them here.
They're great girls. This isn't about what I want or what you want. It's about
our understanding what the girls want right now, and I think they want San
Francisco with their mum. What an idiot. I mean, thinking that I could compete
with San Francisco. I've always been held at arm's length thanks to their mum.
Look, you're in a good place right now. Don't look back at the bad times. It's
really not worth it. But I have to, don't I, to explain what's happening now. I
mean, if they move to the States, what kind of dad does that make me? Happily
waving them off, knowing I'm not going to see them more than, what, twice a
year? It's not enough, Helen. I feel like, at the age they're at, we're really
connecting. And I'm supposed to just give that up and hand them over. No. I've
got no choice, though, have I? There's nothing I can do. Yes, there is. You
could go with them. What? It's an option. A very real option, to stay close to
the girls. With your skills and training, you'd find work quickly, I'm sure.
Wait, what about us? Helen? Gesso I just bumped into when I got home. You're
home already? Yes, to get on with the decorating, remember? Yes, yes, sorry, I
remember. Gesso was waiting outside the house with the frozen shepherd's pie.
Brian? Yep, Brian. He wanted to say thank you for us having him over the other
night. That's nice. No, that's not nice, Roy. Oh, yeah, it's not, you're right.
Because now he's gone to throw on some overalls and help me with painting
Phoebe's old room. He'll be back any minute. I take it you don't want that? No,
I don't. I just wanted a little piece with my paintbrush. Why are you getting
home? Well, we got the architect over this week. I don't think I can get away
for another couple of hours at least. So looking forward to some time to just
chill out and paint without having to tiptoe around Brian. Come on, Kirsty, have
some sympathy. I have, on several occasions. We might as well have an adjoining
door so he doesn't have to bother ringing the bell. I'm sorry. No, Roy, you need
to get home as soon as possible and help. Well, help how? I don't know, but he's
your daughter's grandad. What's that got to do with anything? Just get back as
soon as you can. Brian, come in. Ryan, where do you want me? What on earth did
you say that for? Because I don't want to be the one who stands between him and
his daughters. I thought Tom was going to finish off planting the broad beans.
Don't change the subject. Suggesting he go with them sounds like you want him to
go. I do. If that's what he wants. Helen, you're making no sense. Dad, Lee is a
very experienced physiotherapist. If he can get a green card, he'd find work out
there quite easily. I can't pretend his only choice in life is to watch his
children get on a plane and move to the other side of the world. But suggesting
he go with them and set up a life in America. I've turned this over and over in
my head, Dad. I see how much he's hurting. And it is a valid and real option.
The only thing stopping him is us, him and me. To be selfish, to try and keep
him here. So, what if he decides to do it? I don't know. If Lee chooses to move
to California, what happens to you and the boys? Would you go with him? I don't
see how that's possible. With the boys schooling and my work here. So, if he
goes, that's it for you, too. Dad, I wish it was simpler. I wish Mabel and Evie
loved it here and didn't want to go abroad, but they really do. And Lee's cut up
about it. If he needs to be with his children, who am I to stand in his way? I
love him too much for that. Besides, we'd still be here, living our lives, but
his side of things would be pretend. That's a very noble approach, Helen, but
it's a risky one, too. One that could cost you your happiness. Well, right now
it is Lee's happiness I'm thinking about. I know he's been so quiet since last
night and what you'd enjoy speaking to me. Oh, well, that'll make judging the
pancake competition fun. Yeah. You had a chance to speak to Lillian yet? Oh, one
problem at a time, Helen. He's asleep in the armchair? Yes. How long? Just over
an hour. Can't he sleep at his own house in his own chair? Apparently not. He
started off well, really tried to help. But he can't really distinguish between
the old paint and the new. The colours are too similar. At least he tried. So I
convinced him to come down for a break and one cup of tea and two digestives
later, he's gone. Maybe you should wake him. Me? Yes. I was really looking
forward to some telly in me, feet up after the day I've had. Join the club. I
was meant to be soaking in the bath around about now, but how can I with Brian
in the living room? We could just go out to the pub, leave him a note in case he
wakes up. How does that help? I don't know. Wouldn't it be too horrible for him
to wake up with no-one here? Well, maybe he won't wake up and he'd still be
asleep when we get back. Either way, I'm starving so... Well, look, I know it's
my turn, but I haven't had a chance to cook. And I thought you said he brought a
shepherd's pie. Oh, yeah. I'll go and put it in the oven. Tony? Lee! You come to
collect me for the pancake competition. In fact, shouldn't you be over there
flipping pancakes already? Natasha and Pat are there with Helen. They seem to be
doing okay without me. You were all gung-ho yesterday. Yesterday seems a long
time ago. Listen, Lee, is this about the girls being excited about San
Francisco? They confided in you two? No, Helen did. Right. Only because she was
trying to get her thoughts in order. Did she tell you she suggested I move to
California with them? Yes. Wow. So she's really been thinking about it. She's
obviously looking for a way out. Nonsense. She's literally asking me to leave,
Tony. Maybe I shouldn't be discussing this with you, but... Lee, she's reminding
you there is an option where you get to be closer to them. No matter what, it
costs Helen and the boys. So she's willing to let me go. I'm not sure willing is
the right word. She's been in knots about this. She seemed pretty calm and clear
last night. It's not an easy situation for either of you, but each day she sees
you enjoying being a father with Mabel and Evie. She's acutely aware of what
you'll be missing when they go. I asked her. What about us? She didn't say
anything. It's not her decision to make. It's yours. I know my daughter, Lee.
She doesn't want this to be more difficult for you than it has to be. Sooner or
later, the girls will be getting on a plane, and it seems you have a decision to
make. It'll be all right if it was just one decision. I thought this was about
me and the girls, not me and Helen as well. Maybe I'm just not good at judging
this kind of thing. I don't think that's it. Then why would she tell me going
was an option? Because if she faced the same situation with Jack and Henry, what
would you tell her? Stay and let your boys go? What she said took every bit of
love and strength she has in her, Lee. She suggested it because she loves you,
and she knows how much you love your girls. What am I supposed to do, Tony? I
don't envy your situation, but I will say this. Being a good parent isn't just
about being in the same house or the same country as your children. Of course
it's the ideal, but when it's not possible, that's not the end. There are a
dozen ways you can be present in each other's lives in a meaningful and real
way, even long distance. I keep worrying they'll think I don't love them. Maybe
they're old enough to know you love them, Lee. I see it whenever you're
together. Yes. And you have this knack of making all four children feel loved
without ever feeling like they're competing for first place. Why do you think
they all get along so well? That is true parenting, my book. The UK's canals and
rivers are teeming with a plethora of... Morphing, sorry. I don't know what it
is about this chair and that narrator's voice. It puts me right to sleep. Don't
worry, Brian, that was for the best of us. You're probably more tired than you
think you are. Maybe an early night would do you good. Yes, yeah. I'd better be
off. Oh, and don't forget the shepherd's pie. It's already in the oven. Oh,
good. Good. Give yourselves a night off cooking. Thanks. Why don't you stay?
What? What's a massive shepherd's pie? It's too big for two. I know. Joy's food
parcel's a very generously portioned. Yeah, listen, thank you, but... I couldn't
possibly impose after the embarrassment of dropping off. Oh, well. And you've
got something for your dinner, have you? Yes, yes, yes. Don't worry about me.
Well, there's no point in defrosting another dish when there's plenty to go
round. Really? Well, if you're both sure. Of course. Well, I might go get change
if that's OK. Maybe you'll crack open a decent bottle of wine from next door.
Oh, sounds great. I'll bring some over. But it'll be ready by the time you get
back. Excellent. I'll see you both in a moment. Yeah. Oh! What's going to you
leave? He was ready to leave. Oh, come on. He did bring the pie over. It's
freezers. Stop full of them. I'm only trying to find the silver lining. There
isn't one, Roy. Our house has been taken over. Quality wine and good home
cooking isn't the silver lining. It's not that I don't feel awful for him, and
my heart goes out to him. It really does. But... I won't say it. Brian's company
isn't exactly... He always asks about work. And before I know it, he's going on
about ways to develop the rewilding site that are diametrically opposite to my
basic world view. He means well. I know. And I hate myself for saying this, but
once he's had a couple of drinks, he doesn't know when to stop. And I'm so tired
of having to smile politely and wait for him to wind down. I don't know what's
worse, when he's out like a light on the sofa or when he's railroading the
conversation. Well, do you want to call him and tell him not to come? Oh, sure,
there's nothing mean about that. You're the one who wants rid of him. And you're
the one who keeps inviting him back. I do not. You literally just did. You did,
didn't I, yeah? Oh, I'd better get changed, too. And tonight, you're doing all
the clearing up. Thanks for coming out for a walk with me. Oh, you don't have to
thank me. It's nice. Walk those pancakes off. They're quite full on, aren't
they? Sorry I was late tonight. That's OK. You've got a lot on your mind. I
have. Especially after what I said last night. I haven't stopped thinking about
it since you said the words and I kept wondering what you meant. You suggesting
I go? You could have asked me. I was right there. Yeah, but I'm a typical man,
aren't I? A dumb bloke who's happy to get lost in his own thoughts and ask for
directions. And? I thought, why is the woman I love looking for a way out? Why
is she keen for me to leave the country? Keen? Lee, that's not what I said and
it's certainly not what I meant. I know. I spoke to your dad. Oh. Cleared a few
things up. Such as? Such as. What would I say to you if it was your decision to
make? And then I spoke to Alicia. And tonight I'll be speaking to Mabel and Evie
themselves. So you've come to a decision? I have. The way I see it, if you can
be courageous enough to support me moving away to be nearer my girls, even if it
means losing us, then I ought to be man enough to let my girls be happy. To let
them go. And try out San Francisco for themselves. I told Alicia I want video
calls, visits in the holidays whenever possible, and I need to trust they'll
always know I'm their dad. Know how much I love them. And then I have to do
everything I can to be a meaningful, present part of their lives. So you're
staying? I'm staying. And this way I get to be a good dad to my daughters and to
my sons too. I've been trying these past few days to think of how I might tell
the boys that you might be moving far away. I just couldn't do it. I couldn't
find the words. Good. Because I'm not. Lillian! Lillian! I've got to get back.
Lillian, wait a minute. There's something I wanted to show you. Sorry, but I
don't have time right now. So when will you? Did you have your chat with Mum?
Yes. What was it about? Well, if you must know, I was here on behalf of Alice
and Kate, who are making the funeral arrangements and need to know how we're all
planning to get there. That's all sorted. Mum, you and me and Pat can all travel
together. Actually, Tony, the way things are at the moment, I'd rather travel in
a separate car. I've explained to Mum, and she's in agreement that I'll go with
Leonie and James, and she will go with you and Pat in another car. Is this
really necessary? Yes, I fear it is. Can't we show a united front for one day?
For Jennifer's sake. She would have wanted us to. Please don't tell me what
Jenny would have wanted. Lillian! I know full well the last thing she would have
wanted was for any of us to be upset or to upset Mum on the way to her funeral.
Now, if you'll excuse me... It doesn't have to be like this, Lillian! I'm truly
grateful to you for making the time. Of course, David. Although you're about to
start carving soon, aren't you? Any minute, yeah. Linda! Oh, Ardo, good morning.
Morning. Just a quick reminder. Sorry, I'm running late. I have a parcel
arriving today between 1 and 3pm. Not to worry, one of us will be here. Great,
thanks. Hello, Dash. Ardo? Yes. Don't forget the packed lunch you requested.
It's on the hall table, fully labelled. Of course. We'll do it. Thanks. Wow. You
make your guests a packed lunch. Is that a thing? Certainly not something we've
factored in. Well, if you mean, is it a regular service, then no. But given
enough notice, I don't mind. Ardo is an exception. Of course, he's been here so
long. It's less of a B&B and more of a home to him now. Wow. It really is the
full experience here. Don't be disheartened, David. Ambrich Hall is a high-end,
long-established outfit. You really can't compare yourselves to us. No. I see
that. Anyway, as we were saying, you seem to have all the right fire and safety
measures in place. Team-making facilities in the room itself, which is vital.
Now, I see that your room doesn't have an en suite. Yes. We have the shared
bathroom, which has been given a freshen up. Mum has the en suite, so that's one
less person using the bathroom. And Ben Ruth and I have decided that we'll try
and use the downstairs loo as much as possible. Hmm. Not ideal, but needs must.
It's imperative you make it clear to anyone interested in booking that the
bathroom is shared. Oh, of course, yeah. No, it's more any last-minute snags or
issues we may not initially have thought of that I was hoping to get some ideas
about. David, I can't know what would be required or best suited to Brookfield,
even with my extensive experience and success rate, unless I see it for myself.
You mean visit? Yes. I could squeeze you in at some point this afternoon. But
the main reason I'm asking is to help Ben. Remember, it's his venture now. In
which case, I will definitely find some time to visit today and cast a final eye
over everything. Oh, but we'll most likely be with the cows, Linda. And I wanted
to save you any trouble by coming here. David, do you want Ben to make a success
of this or not? Yes. Good. I'll see you later. These adjustments to the
architect's drawings are very good, Roy. She's managed to get the square footage
we were losing into the suites on the perimeter. Yeah. Is she out on site? Yes.
She's gone walkabout with Peter. They'll discuss materials and costing, which I
don't need to be involved in. I'm sorry I've got me timing's muddled up, Ardi. I
should have been here when she arrived. Don't worry. Peter was on site, and
Andrea's no shrinking violet. If we're not about, she gets stuck in and makes
use of the time. If one of us can be here in future, though... I'll make sure
I'm here next time. I would have been here myself, only I was way late on calls
this morning. Everything okay? Yes, fine. Just my sister and her kids doing my
heading. Oh, right, you two. Why? Who's been bugging you? Don't get me started.
Not your neighbour again. Yep. This is the man who lost his wife recently. I
mean, I feel for him, honestly. Once upon a time, he was family. But he's taken
me and Kirsty at our word, and now he's popping around all the time. He was over
last night for dinner, bought a shepherd's pie and some posh wine. That's nice.
Only Kirsty's right. He does love the sound of his own voice, and once he's got
some wine in him. It's like he picks a topic from the news and just rants about
it, like he knows all there is to know. And when he finally stops, Kirsty and me
self have to think of something to say that doesn't unintentionally come out as
being insensitive. It's a minefield, Ardill. Now, I do understand. The most
innocent common can seem offensive or hurtful to someone who's suffered a tragic
loss. I'm known for putting me foot in it, so the whole thing just makes me
nervous. So stop inviting him over. Simple. We can't, because it's the right
thing to do, isn't it? Not if you don't mean it. We do, sort of. Just, I mean...
But his family's always calling round to check in on him, and he says he hates
it. Makes him feel like he's being babysat. I reckon he keeps coming over to
ours to avoid the family checking in. Well, that doesn't sound too bad. As soon
as things settle, he'll get back to his new norm. Now he's invited me and Kirsty
round to dinner tomorrow night to thank us for the dinner he brought us last
night. So decline. So another awkward night on the couch for me and Kirsty. Roy,
you've just spent ages moaning about the guy. Why on earth would you accept a
dinner invitation? Because? The right thing to do has to come with the right
intention. Otherwise, it's hypocrisy. Hello. We'll be right out. We need it
outside. Can I give you a hand with that? Oh, you're all right, Lee. I should
look where I put things. Here, let me sweep up the soil. You put the trays back.
Everything okay? No. A case of more haste, less speed. Planted the broad beads,
and then I go and knock the trays over. Idiot. Accidents happen. This was
avoidable. Have you spoken to Helen today? Oh, as a matter of fact, I have, and
she seemed very happy. Did she? Well, I'll tell you, Tony, since I switched my
perspective on the whole situation with the girls, it's like this massive
weight's been lifted. Okay, kind of thorny's a long way away, but we can all
still talk as often as we can online, and they can come here, and maybe Helen
and I can take the boys over there. Oh, that's great news, Lee. Yeah. And I
wanted to say thanks, Tony. For what? If it hadn't been for your sound
reasoning, I'd still be moping about thinking Helen wanted to get rid of me. You
are very welcome. If only everyone was open to her little sound reasoning. Is
this about Lillian? Right, so? She'll come round, surely. Oh, you don't know my
sister. She's as stubborn as a mule. Linda! No, there's no need to be alarmed.
Hope you don't mind. I'll let myself in. Now, there are many things here that
need addressing. You're not going to step into this kitchen in those boots, are
you? Yeah, of course I'm going to remove my boots, but, you know, this is a
working farm. And our guests will know that comes with all the reality of a
working farm. Oh, no, no, no, David. That's a rookie mistake. Your guests want
to experience their idea of farming, not the stark, smelly, muddy reality.
Smelly? Oh, yes. There is a distinct odor life in here that's a little too close
to reality for my liking. Well, with all due respect, you're not our guest, so
your liking doesn't really... I have come to help, remember. Now, I don't see a
space for the guests when they're not in their room. Please tell me they're not
expected to be in here. No, we cleared the dining room for them. Well, yes, you
may think you have, but you'll need a television in there. They can have
breakfast without watching telly, surely. Or you could install a television in
the room. And you may wish to consider a cleaner. Linda, we want to make money
from this venture, not fritter it away. Right. That's it. What? Clearly, you
have no idea what it's like to have a real live guest staying at your B&B. And I
cannot, in all good conscience, let you loose on the world of bed and
breakfasting without a trial run of this place. I will be making a booking and
staying here in row as a guest tomorrow night. Oh, no, no, no, no. I'm sure
that's not necessary. We've got your notes. David, learn not to look a gift
horse in the mouth. And please address these matters before I arrive. You sure
you'd want to share this? No, thanks. I've got my packed lunch. We'll take a
quick half hour and then get back out there with Andrea before she heads back to
London. Sure. Adil? Yeah? I'm sorry if my going on about Brian upset you. He's
just... I'm sorry. Don't worry about it. Right. Good. Only I didn't mean to.
Look, if you want to feel sorry for him, then feel sorry for him. If you want to
moan about him, then moan. But doing both is crazy. You're complaining about him
for taking you and Kirsty at your word. Yeah, you're right. I bet he sleeps in
your armchair with the television on because it makes him feel normal. How do
you think he'd feel if he could hear you now? Yeah, I'm an awful person. It's
probably the only real sleep he has right now. Yeah, of course. And I'm sorry
again if I've spoken out of tone. Roy, stop apologizing. Sorry. I lost someone.
Close. A few years ago. It's bad enough you're going through hell. The last
thing you need is people being insincere and offering fake support. So that's
two taster sessions and anything for the boys? Oh, they'll be with Helen. I'm
getting some quality time in with my girls before they leave. Well, they'll have
a wonderful time with the horses. I can see that Evie's already taken to one of
the ponies. She's not stopped stroking them since we arrived. Looks like she's a
natural. Is she the youngest? Evie? Yeah. Or will Alice be taking the lesson?
Well, it'll depend on the rotor, but we have a lovely team here. Animals and
stuff. Honestly, they'll be fine. I'm sure. I just wondered. Perhaps if they
come back for longer visit, you could book some lessons for them. We'll see. Oh,
you don't sound too sure. Actually, they're about to move abroad with their mum.
Move? You mean, permanently? Yes. So, I don't quite know how it's going to work
once they're settled. I want to make the most of the time I've got with them
while they're here. Good plan. It's going to be such a wrench when they leave. I
can imagine. We never know what tomorrow brings, so we may as well make the most
of today. I'm sorry, Lillian. If I'm speaking out of turn, I was so sad to hear
about your sister. But for the life of me, I can't think why you'd want to make
more distance between you and your brother at a time like this. Lee, I know you
mean well, but... He's hurting, Lillian. Because of Jennifer's death and because
of the distance between you two, when you could be closer than ever. It's not
always that easy. It is if you let it be. I'm sorry. I know it's not my place.
But we should make the most of the present while we still can. If a sudden loss
doesn't teach us that, then what does it teach us? She'll be arriving soon. Our
first official booking. Ms. Pectragoul. Our first mock official booking. AKA
from Mrs. Linda Snell. We should sort out our online bookings. Let's walk before
we can run, shall we? If it's not too difficult, we just create a web page like
we have with the events barn. In fact, it can probably be added to that. After
carving. That's warmed me up nicely. Dad! What? I hope you're going to wash that
up. I'm regretting this already. Hardly? It's a brilliant idea. A live, full
test of the B&B before it's up and running. We all need to make sure she has a
brilliant experience. Right. So is this where you roll out the red carpet?
Sarcasm is the lowest form of wit. She's not charging us for her time. She's
taken a whole day and a half out of her schedule. We're not going to pay her for
a night in a clean bed and breakfast made for her. Dad! What? They're for the
guests. There's a pile of them. She's not going to miss one biscuit. Honestly,
you'd think we're expecting a house full, not one person. This has to go really
well. She's a perfectionist. Or just fussy. You asked her to help. Don't I know
it? Or as? Behave yourself. Oh, Brian. This is lovely. We weren't expecting
canopies. Well, truth be told, Alice and Nolatando have been looking out for me.
I told them I was having you over and they came to make sure I did Jenny proud.
We brought some wine. Shall I go and put them in the fridge? Of course. You know
where you're going. Yeah. Kirsty, why don't you pot yourself a drink? OK, yeah,
thanks. Hello. Hi, Dad. I'm just checking in. Is everything OK? Yes, yes.
They've just arrived. Oh, good. Did I remember to leave the instructions for the
oven on the fridge? Yes. Yeah, I've been following them to the letter. OK, good.
I'm so sorry I couldn't be there to help tonight, but I have some business to
discuss with Auntie Lillian. Oh, don't worry. We'll be fine. Yeah, of course you
will. I take it she hasn't thawed yet. I'm sure she will in good time. Yes, and
pigs might fly. Will you just enjoy your dinner and I'll see if I can pop round
later to help the clear up. There's no need, really. Love you. Bye. Bye.
Everything all right? Yes, yeah, that was Alice. She's... She's worried I'll get
the oven settings wrong. Oh, she's just looking out for her dad. Who needs
looking out for her? Listen, I... I did want to say to you both again, I'm so
sorry for falling asleep in your armchair. Oh, no, Brian. Oh, just don't say
another word about it. Anyway, today is about giving you a thank you dinner like
Jenny would. So I'm just going to nip into the kitchen, check the oven's hot
enough, make yourselves at home. I feel so bad. Yeah. Especially after what you
said about Hardill. I know. So he didn't say who he lost? No, but it was clearly
someone very important to him. Still pretty raw, I'd say. You meet new people,
you never know what experiences they carry with them. So you think it's like a
family member or someone? It could be. I mean, he was quite annoyed with me. I'm
not surprised he didn't share more. Hmm. I wonder who it was. Please, just keep
it between you and me, Kirsty. I wouldn't want him to think I was gossiping. Of
course I will. There's nothing to tell anyway. Well, yeah. The takeaway from the
conversation was about... Well, Brian, I felt terrible for complaining. Oh, no.
I mean, what if that kid in our living room is the only quality sleepy guest?
Well, from now on, he's welcome to settle in the chair and make the nature
documentaries for as long as he likes. I won't be stopping him. Agreed. Linda.
Ms. Pectagoul. Yep, sorry. Actually, please call me Innes. Right. Innes. Is
everything OK with your room? It's very charming. Great. But there is a problem,
I'm afraid. Oh, what's that? These complementary soups. They're scented, which
plays havoc with my skin. It's very sensitive, you see. I was wondering if you
might have anything perfume-free that I could use. Yeah, of course. Let me just
check with my mum. I would have bought my own. Only this was a last-minute
travel plan and I clean-forgot. I bet that's easily done. Would you like a cup
of tea while you're down here? It's freshly made. I don't drink caffeine after
six o'clock. OK. Would you like a biscuit? No, thank you. It's coming down in
buckets, aren't there? Dad, you've let Bess in. What are you expecting her to
do, leaving outside to get soaked? No, it's already soaked. Oh, oh, dear. Is
everything all right? No, it's far from all right, I know. I'm allergic to dogs.
All right, allergic to dogs since when? Tissue, please. Here you go. Thank you.
There was nothing in the details that said you had dogs roaming about. It's a
farm. Sorry, I'll take her out. There was no mention of dogs inside the house.
Come on, Bess. Come on, girl. She's got a dog herself. Correct you, David. I
gather Linda Snell has a dog. Your guest, Enis... Enis? Enis does not. Are you
going to get on board with what we're doing or not? Are you serious? I am
greatly serious, and a serious allergic reaction of a guest is no laughing
matter. Yep, into the living room with you. Good girl. Sorry, she's gone now. As
am I. If you could please put the replacement soaps in the bathroom before
morning... Yep, I will. Thank you. It's my own fault for not double-checking an
Alice call. Honestly, Brian, it's not a problem. I put the oven up a bit, so
it'll be cooked through any minute now. But the veg and potatoes are done, and
the beef won't and still not ready. It's fine. It all looks and smells
delicious. Oh, well, some thank you. This has turned out to be with you having
to help get it served. Oh, that's a good sign, isn't it? Right, well, you both
sit, and I'll get it out of the oven. No, no, no, Roy. Oh, let him. It would
have been his turn to cook tonight anyway. Well, you take it in turns, do you?
Yeah, yeah, it works for us, doesn't it, Roy? Yep, certainly does. And this
looks and smells amazing. It all looks delicious. Thank you, Brian. Well, Jenny
would always have a beef Wellington in the freezer. Her own, of course. Not from
a shop. So this is one of Jennifer's? Yes, yes, it is. Wow. So come on, who can
I serve first? Pete, what on earth are you doing? No, sorry, I just had to use
the carving jack on one of the heifers. What? So I'm a little mucky and easy to
get changed. You know, have a quick wash, Linda, if that's OK with you. In the
kitchen? Oh, needs must. Apparently the family bathroom is to be kept nice for
Inis. Anything I can do you for? That's a tea towel. What are you doing? I
thought Inis had gone up for the night. Dad? What's going on? Absolutely
nothing. I nearly came down to see if you had some herbal tea. It was only to
find your father, half naked, washing himself in the kitchen sink. Dad? Hang on,
what am I supposed to do when you have practically banned me from every other
space? My clothes are covered in afterbirth. Yes, all right. Too much
information. Is everything OK? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I had to use the carving jack
for one of the first timers. I was hoping she wouldn't need our help, but it
turns out the calf was back to front. But they're OK? Yeah, yeah. Well, I mean,
we'll keep a close eye tonight, be they look fine. OK. David, at least put on a
shirt or something. This is not an episode of Pol Dark. Give me five minutes,
Linda. Inis! I have been up since forever, and me and Ruth aren't going to be
getting much sleep tonight either. This is the busiest and most crucial time of
the farming calendar, so excuse me if I am catching my breath in my own kitchen.
There's the dining room for guests if you're offended by my long johns. Which
have seen better days. I'll put these in the laundry, Dad. Thanks, Ben. And then
I'll come and help. Maybe Mum can have a break. Erm, no, it's actually probably
better if you stay with Inis here. Make sure she's got everything she needs.
Well, now you're almost dressed. At least I can look you in the eye. Ben, I
don't suppose you could fill a couple of floss. Could you bring them up to me
and your mum before you go to bed? I'd better replenish the straw. I can't have
the calves on it if it's too damp. Sure. And call me if you need me, yeah? Yeah,
I will. Right, there. It's camera mile. It's supposed to be relaxing. Well...
Er, Inis, perhaps you could fill out the breakfast request form before you head
back up. It's going to take more than breakfast to wipe the image of your father
from my mind. Right, we've got apple strudel.