TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 That's next Wednesday morning at nine. BBC News at seven o'clock. Ukrainian
forces have come under increased pressure from Russian troops to withdraw from
the city of Bakhmut after months of intense fighting. The latest analysis by
British military intelligence says Kiev's soldiers have been fortifying their
positions and bringing in elite units. Western analysts say the city's capture
would be of little strategic benefit to Russia. The latest round of talks
towards an historic agreement to protect the world's oceans has overrun its two-
week deadline. Members of the United Nations are still trying to nail down a
deal which would preserve marine life in 30% of the ocean that doesn't belong to
any country. The actress Jane Fonda has been at the talks in New York. The ocean
is one of our strongest allies. Ocean provides us with 50% of the oxygen that we
breathe. We cannot live without a healthy ocean. The government's expected to
announce new legislation next week to crack down on small boats crossings in the
Channel. Rishi Sunak has been under considerable pressure from his own MPs to
tackle the issue. The proposal is expected to prevent people who travel to the
UK in small boats from making asylum claims. The United Nations and Iran have
reached an agreement that would allow UN officials to carry out further
inspections of Tehran's nuclear programme. The announcement followed the
discovery of traces of uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at an
underground nuclear plant in Iran. Prince Harry has said fear was a controlling
force in his life and that from the age of 12 when his mother died he was in a
constant state of fight or flight. The Duke of Sussex was speaking at a virtual
event in California organised by the publishers of his memoir, Spare. And the
Ministry of Defence says RAF Typhoon Jets were authorised to fly at supersonic
speed after contact was lost with a pilot of an unidentified plane. Essex Police
said the plane, which was escorted to Stansted Airport, had probably suffered a
malfunction with its communications. BBC News. In a quarter of an hour, Brian
Cox and Robert Ince are joined by Joe Brand, Hannah Fry, Randall Munro and
Eugena Cheng as they discover the clever life hacks mathematicians use to solve
everyday problems in the infinite monkey cage. But on Radio 4, Mark Coles
profiles the UK government's new chief scientific adviser, Angela McLean. Covid
back in the spotlight this week. Specifically, the advice scientists gave
ministers during the pandemic and whether it was acted upon. Fresh questions
have been raised about the judgement of the former health secretary, Matt
Hancock, during the Covid pandemic. It comes just as the government has
announced the appointment of its new chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick
Ballance, replaced by Angela McLean, his former deputy. Next slide, please. We
have to turn to how many people have died from Covid. And our first way of
counting that is daily Covid-19 deaths in hospital. McLean making history, the
first woman to hold the position. She certainly doesn't suffer falls. Very
curious, very exacting. What you see is what you get. Relatively little known
until now, so we thought we'd do some digging. A word of warning from Angela
McLean's daughter, Rosie. She's quite a private person. The Wikipedia page is
not brimming with details. Tell me about it. She was born in 1961, the third of
four children to doctor parents. Her father, Andre, was a professor of
toxicology at UCL and still going strong in his 90s. He's a natural scientist to
his fingertips. Angela McLean's husband, David Van Os. And Angela's mother,
Lizzie, also still going strong, was a doctor and a psychiatrist. Her
grandmother had been an actress in pre-Second World War Berlin. Angela herself,
born in Jamaica, where her dad was researching malnutrition among Jamaican
children. She used to tell us stories about how she would get to school in a
basket on the side of a donkey. Beats backseat of the school bus any day. Her
parents moved back to South London while Angela was still young. And by eight,
she'd become good friends with Alison Hindle. Now, rather conveniently for us,
commissioning editor for drama here at Radio 4. The pair of them bonding over
trying to balance long bamboo canes on the tips of their fingers. The sort of
thing we used to do in the pre-TikTok era. I remember how competitive Angela
was. But also, she wanted to know what movements would disturb the cane more
than other movements. And I like to think that that was an early indication of
her future inquiring mind. Sounds a bit harder than poo sticks. Whenever I went
round to their house, people were always talking about educational subjects. It
was not a sit around on the sofa watching telly kind of environment. In fact, I
think there may not have been a television. What, no Top Cat or Scooby Doo? At
18, she was off to Oxford University to study maths. To her, maths was a
language and a philosophy and a way of thinking, not just sort of adding up sums
and doing fractions. It's her world view. And an all-consuming one, recalls
close friend Catherine Innes Carr, who was studying chemistry back then. We
liked to think of ourselves working late into the night, pushing back the
frontiers of science. Though willing to cross the traditional arts-science
divide to find love. Eh, David? She read maths at Somerville. I read English at
Trinity. So we are the living embodiment of C.P. Snow's two cultures. Had to
Google that one. The university drama group where the two cultures, the two
students, came together. He was a very keen theatre designer as a student. And
she had got her eye on him and decided that she would volunteer to help with
various bits of theatre design in order to be in his company. And it paid off.
Alison shared a flat with Angela at the time. Began to notice some unusual
habits. When she was particularly pleased about something, I remember she would
do a little jig, sort of jumping up and down on the spot. And if things didn't
go to plan... She would sometimes vent her tension by throwing things at the
wall. Come again... Every now and then she would get up and throw a cup at the
wall. By the time we left that flat there were dents in the plaster. Hope their
landlord isn't listening. After graduating with a degree in maths and plate
smashing, she went to do a PhD at Imperial College London, where she met fellow
student, Graham Medley. We started our PhDs on the same day, in the same office.
Graham, now Professor Medley, a leading expert on infectious disease modelling,
remembers her thesis on measles being pioneering work. She came up with the idea
of something that is now called the honeymoon period. So this is the point where
you start vaccinating against a disease like measles. And the disease
essentially disappears for a long period of time, but then comes back later
because of the build-up of susceptibles within the modelling. You're losing me
slightly, Graham. WHO and other groups had said, oh look, the vaccine's not
working anymore, but in fact it's just a consequence of the way in which disease
is transmit. I see. And that idea of the honeymoon period is now firmly embedded
in the literature and taught to undergraduates all the way through, so it was a
very successful PhD. Angela and David wed in 1986, their honeymoon in Alaska,
and followed that with a hike across Corsica. And before long Angela was
settling down to do research fellowships at Oxford University and the
prestigious Pasteur Institute in Paris. Now we're being told the Ministry of
Agriculture vets strongly suspect that a case of foot-and-mouth disease has been
found in southern Derbyshire. After the 2001 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease,
Maclean sat on a government committee looking into how to prevent future
infectious diseases in livestock. She co-authored a book on SARS, a respiratory
disease caused by another coronavirus, and chaired a group of experts trying to
come up with policies to reduce the risk of future pandemics. When she first
started in that area, I remember kind of feeling, oh, well that's intellectually
interesting, but when would it ever have any practical application? How wrong
was I? Indeed. We'll get to COVID-19 in a bit. She also did groundbreaking
research into HIV-AIDS, persevering to crack one of the biggest puzzles about
the illness. Trying to explain the long incubation, relatively long incubation
period of that virus, where people typically develop AIDS many years after
infection. Professor Graham Medley again. One of Angela's major talents is being
able to understand what she doesn't know and what other people don't know, and
then work on it, work out to actually resolve that question. In 2008, she became
a senior research fellow in theoretical life sciences at All Souls College,
Oxford. The following year, she was elected to the Royal Society, the oldest
independent scientific academy still in existence, made up of some of the
world's most eminent minds. Daughter Rosie again. I remember that being a really
big moment, and also kind of that, you know, I had a pretty awesome mum. Up
until that point, regarded not as a top scientist, but just mum. Albeit a
slightly odd one, who would encourage her children to extract the DNA of peas at
the kitchen table before tea. That was pretty fun. I bet. I remember lots of
science-y craft projects. Inner element when it came to organising Rosie's
younger brother's Harry Potter-themed birthday party. Maclean assuming the role
of potions master at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. My mum set up
the kind of, the potions lab, and it had this experiment. You would sort of stir
some chemicals together, and this liquid would go from see-through liquid to
dark blue, and then you stirred it again, and it went back to see-through, and
it was just stuff like that. You know, she was always finding fun stuff for us
to do, and enjoying it just as much herself. She's also a bit of a twitcher.
Goes bird-watching, walking most weekends with her friend Catherine in his car.
The pair of them, early risers, up with the dawn chorus. Often it'll start with
one or other of us messaging at about five and saying, shall we go? And shall we
go at six, or shall we go at seven? We go in all weathers, and she's very, very
observant, so much better at spotting a kingfisher than I am. Oh, look, there's
one. They call you Lady Luck. She's still keen on theatre, musicals too. It
wasn't just a ploy to get her man. In fact, we're going to see Guys and Dolls on
Friday, so if I burst into tune, please forgive me. So what about work? What do
Angela Maclean's colleagues make of her? She has very strong views. She has a
backbone. Cecile Fabre is a senior politics research fellow at All Souls
College, and has known Maclean since 2014. And when she disagrees with you,
she's able to communicate that very clearly. She has a very low tolerance
threshold. In 2019, she joined the army, well, sort of, became the MOD's chief
scientific advisor. Thought of Rosie again. She loves kind of folk songs, carol
singing and singing out loud, campfire songs. She really loves that song,
Something Stupid. Has been known to do something stupid on occasions. She once
accidentally burnt her eyebrows off setting up a bonfire. She does it in petrol.
And then we all stood far back and she explained fire safety and threw a match
on, which didn't catch. And I think she threw another one on and leant over the
bonfire, struck a match, and it obviously then flung up and she burnt off her
fringe and she burnt off her eyebrows. Luckily, she was fine. And if the photo
on a Wikipedia page is anything to go by, the eyebrows have grown back. She
started her role at the MOD in September 2019. The job meant she became a member
of SAGE just weeks before COVID-19 happened. One of my colleagues said to me at
the time, the country is very lucky to have Angela in that position at that
time. She and Professor Medley co-chairing SAGE's crucial SPI-MO subcommittee,
giving ministers expert advice on modelling and epidemiology. Angela's job was
really to manage the results of what the committee was saying inside government,
so taking it to policy makers to make sure that the modelling and the science
that was being done was being understood and being considered carefully by
policy makers. Care to expand on that, Graham? Tell us what sort of response she
got? No, not with the inquiry going on. Angela Maclean's role, that relationship
between scientists and government ministers, likely to be central to the
upcoming official inquiry into how the pandemic was managed. All sounds rather
dramatic, doesn't it, Alison? She was extremely discreet about it at the time,
but there was a tension for her between the scientific observations that she and
her team had made and what the government might have preferred to be being said.
So what about Maclean's husband, David? What did he think? It was the biggest
opportunity to put science at the heart of government decision-making that she's
ever had, and I think she found it quite exciting as well as very stressful.
Presumably frustrating as well, because not everybody gets the science, do they?
No. And I mean, you know, so things like exponential doubling, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32,
and soon you get to a very big number. That's really important to understand if
you've got a disease that's doubling every five days. And I think all the
scientists felt the same way, that you've got to deal with the situation as it
is. As Sir Patrick Valens' deputy, Maclean would sometimes find herself stood
next to the Prime Minister, taking part in the government's daily 5pm Covid
briefing. And what you see is that deaths in the UK is still continuing to climb
and is higher than we would wish, I think is all I can say. Her daughter Rosie
adjusting to seeing her mum on the telly. I was just incredibly proud. One of my
friends said to me, if anyone is going to be doing that job, I'm really glad
it's your mum, because she's a no-nonsense woman. There were some in government,
as well as the public at large, who felt that the scientists went too far, used
mathematical modelling to put forward worst-case scenarios that didn't always
turn out to be accurate. Not fair, says husband David. You had a highly
infectious disease and her contribution was the result of 20 years of thinking
about it, but also 20 years of giving advice to government on science policy.
Right place at right time, I hope. And so to the top job. How does friend Alison
Hindle reckon Maclean will fare as government chief scientific advisor? I think
she will be a very clear-minded advisor to the government and I hope for the
government's sake they listen to her. Answer is temperamentally direct. So if
speaking truth unto power is important and good for inner democracy, then I
think she'll deliver on that. The only thing Angela Maclean might need to work
on is getting used to the limelight that inevitably comes with the job. Yeah,
well, we're having a small party on Sunday lunchtime to celebrate her success.
Nice. If she's hiding in a cupboard under the stairs, I'll know that she... the
profile is just a step too far. It's over, Angela. You can come out now. Profile
was presented by Mark Coles, the producer was Sally Abrahams. In a moment, Brian
Cox and Robert Innes apply mathematical thinking to everyday problems in The
Infinite Monkey Cage. Meanwhile, on Tuesday... There's a crisis in UK music
education. In today's climate, there's a lot less funding available to support
many young musicians who would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch,
a musician myself, and in a new three-part series, I'll be finding out why the
future of British music is under threat. If you don't have adequate provision in
our schools, that is going to have an impact on the talent pipeline, and it is
going to have an impact in terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it
in danger of becoming an elitist occupation? Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds starts on Tuesday morning at 11.30. Now on BBC Radio 4, time to join
those infinite monkeys. Hello, I'm Brian Cox. And I'm Robert Innes, and this is
The Infinite Monkey Cage. We are back from our Australian holiday. All of us, as
you can see, heavily bronzed by the Oldham rain that you managed to bring to
Australia. Now, what are the chances of us having a month of rain in Australia
when you promised it was going to be all lovely and like spring? Well, all I'm
saying is don't travel with him. He brings the moors with him. He's like a
terrible Heathcliff figure. And I refer to that Heathcliff figure, not Laurence
Olivier playing him, Cliff Richard in the awful musical. Today's show is
basically a rebuttal to, I'm sure everyone here knows someone who goes, I don't
even know what was the point in learning maths at school? All of those kind of
stupid things where you had to learn about, you know, Euclidean geometry and
algebra and quadrilateral equations. Quadrilateral equations? Yeah, yeah. I
remember I'm playing the part of someone who doesn't like maths. Very
convincing. Can I just say, Robin, you don't need to act someone who doesn't
like maths, because I bloody hate maths. So let's just focus on me. Do you? Do
you genuinely not like maths? No, I didn't really like it. I think it was my
first maths teacher. He just would go on and on and on. And we would want to
finish the lesson and then he'd just go off at a tangent. LAUGHTER Thank you.
Mathematicians are often seen as otherworldly types living in an alternative
universe of numbers. It's not this otherworldly eccentricity that we're looking
at today. On today's show, we're looking at pragmatic mathematics. Can thinking
like a mathematician make life more liveable? Is there better living through
mathematics? Today we're joined by two mathematicians, one cartoonist and
someone who definitely knows how to divide up the cake, and they are... I'm
Professor Hannah Fry, I am a professor of mathematics at UCL. And the elusive
solution that I am looking for is a way to tell people that without them
immediately asking me a very hard sum. And I'm Randall Munro, I'm a cartoonist,
I draw XKCD and write books where I answer people's ridiculous questions using
science and math. And the elusive solution that I'm looking for is, I've been
texted a lot of six-digit codes that I am not allowed to tell anyone, and I want
to know when I can finally share them because there are some really cool numbers
in there. Hi, I'm Dr. Eugenia Cheng, I'm a professor of maths and scientist in
residence at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. And the elusive
solution I'm looking for is how to fit an infinite amount of chocolate in my
finite stomach. Ah, that was mine. Hello, I'm Jo Brands, I do a bit of catwalk
modelling, and I'm hoping to be the next Prime Minister. And the elusive
solution I'm looking for is how to stop people treating me like a halfwit now
I'm getting older. This is our panel. Hannah, before we get into the how do we
live a better life and those kind of things, I wanted to start rigorously at the
beginning. So what is mathematics? Oh, an easy one then. Sure. Thank you. Okay,
so I think that mathematics is a way of thinking rather than a thing itself. So
I think it's about searching for patterns. I think it's about building absolute
truths on one another. And I think it's about being playful with ideas. I think
it's those things together. Or the other thing that it could be, if none of that
works as a definition, I think it's also, what's that phrase? A bit like
pornography, difficult to define, but you know it when you see it. You can't be
building absolute truths on one another, can you? Because that implies that you
can derive all of them. Look, don't worry about the bottom too much. Russell and
Waller. All the axioms. Okay, they did try and do this, right? At the turn of
about 1900s or so, the mathematicians were like, hang on a second. We've got all
of these truths built on truths built on truths. What's at the bottom? Have we
really made sure that we've got solid foundations here? So they went right back
to basics. There was one guy who decided to try and define the concept of two-
ness. He spent seven years and then just gave up. Couldn't manage it. Bertrand
Russell also tried to prove that one plus one equals two. If I remember rightly,
it took about 300 pages of very dense mathematical notation. Then when they
wrote the proof, it said once arithmetic addition has been defined, then it will
follow that one plus one equals two. Basically, it's really, really hard to do.
You can't do this stuff. Then some other people came along and said, actually, I
think you really can't prove this. There's always going to be some things that
you just can't prove. Then so we just sort of gave up and don't worry about it
too much. Does that give you confidence, Jo, that basically it's not possible to
prove one plus one equals two, and so we give up at that point? I kind of went
into a coma halfway through. I wouldn't even think you'd need to prove it. But
as I've already said, I'm not a mathematician. I found I really struggled with
it at school. I mean, my maths teacher said to me I was very average, which I
thought was quite mean of him. Don't worry, I've got bloody loads of those. I
can always tell when you've had dinner with Giles Brandreth. It just picks up on
it, doesn't it? You know what, I'm proud to say I've never had dinner with Giles
Brandreth, but I might do now. Following on, how can then such an abstract
logical framework, and as you said, even the foundations of that framework, we
can argue about the 300 pages. But how can that be applied to everyday life? Oh,
in all kinds of ways, because the thing is that then you have this series of
rules that are sort of separate from people that you know to be true, and then
you can play with them and manipulate them in any way that you like. And then
there are certain things that are just absolute facts, right? Like, for example,
let's say you're at the North Pole and it's zero degrees, right? And then
somewhere on the equator, it's like 40 degrees. You know as a fact that there's
going to be somewhere along that line, from the North Pole to the equator, every
possible temperature in between the two, right? It has to be the case, right?
And that is like a mathematical fact, it's called the Intermediate Value
Theorem. But then once you have that as a fact, that if you have something that
sort of changes slowly and incrementally, and you've got these two points, zero
and 50 in that example, and you kind of move through it, there has to be a point
in the middle, then you can take that idea and you can apply it to different
situations. For example, if you're with a mathematician in a pub, right? I mean,
unusual event. I wanted to, I don't understand it. I said he'll have a pint and
he'll have a pint, and you bought no pint. Oh, wow. He drank them both. You see
why these things are important. Okay, so you know when you're in a pub and
there's a bit of a wobbly table, and then people sort of get a bit of card and
they shove it underneath the bottom. You don't need to do that. You don't need
to do that, because the Intermediate Value Theorem tells you a way to
mathematically fix a wobbly table, right? So if you imagine you've got four
legs, okay, so you can set up the table so that three of the legs are touching
the ground and one of them is floating in the air. And then if you imagine
rotating that table so there's three legs stay attached to the ground, if you
rotate it, then either the free leg is going to stay in the air or at some point
it's going to hit a bump. So if you just sort of imagine ignoring the laws of
physics for a moment, right? I can't do that. Sorry. Try, Ryan, try. If you
imagine that it could like pass through that bump, well then that means if you
carried on rotating the table, there would be a point where the tip of that leg
would be below the ground, right? So at one point it's above the ground, at
another point it's below the ground, which means there has to be a perfect point
in between the two where that fourth leg is touching the ground. And so now you
never have to have wobbly tables. Only slight caveat with this is that there's
no guarantee that the table will actually be flat. But it works every time. So
it's a completely idealised... No, I mean, actually, no, it properly works. It
properly works. So you just rotate the table and it will find... So you don't
have to put beer mats underneath the leg or anything, just rotate it. Yep. Can I
give you another application of the intermediate value theorem? I'm so glad you
mentioned it. It's one of my favourite theorems. Mine is much more ridiculous
though because I once used it to settle an argument with an American about
whether baby carrots exist. Because in America they don't have baby carrots,
right? They have baby cut carrots. They use machines to cut carrots down into a
baby size. But the intermediate value theorem... But they do have baby carrots
because it grows, right? That's the intermediate value theorem. You did it! You
applied the intermediate value theorem. So at some point... The carrot will...
So there has to be some point in the middle before it became a big carrot when
it was a little carrot. It's the intermediate value theorem. Can you just state
the intermediate value theorem without vegetables? Precisely. Let me see if I
can because you have to get the assumptions right. And the assumption is that
the function is continuous. That's the key. And that's actually quite difficult,
a quite difficult definition. And so as long as it's continuous and it hits a
certain point and then another point that's higher up, then it will have to hit
every point in between at some point. There's an example in your book which is a
more serious example where you can use mathematics to try to think more clearly
about problems. And it was the famous case in 2018 of the bakers that refused to
bake cake for a same-sex wedding. Yes. So I'm a pure mathematician, which is
usually taken to mean that I do stuff that's so abstract and has absolutely
nothing to do with real life. Well, first of all, what's real anyway? What is
real life? Do we exist? But what to me... Yes, yeah, we do. I agree with Hannah
that math is really about thinking more clearly. And for me, having abstract
things means that I can find... It's about spotting patterns and it can include
patterns between different ways that people think. And often there's an analogy
between someone's argument and some much more ridiculous argument. And that if
we can spot that analogy, then we can figure out what is going on with those
arguments. And the example I think you're referring to is where there's some
lawsuit in America where some Christian bakers refused to bake a cake for a
same-sex wedding. And someone on Twitter, because everyone on Twitter is great,
someone on Twitter said, that's like forcing Jews to bake a cake for a Nazi
wedding. Now, there is... Very Twitter. There is an analogy. And so here's the
thing, it's very tempting to just yell at people and go, oh my God, that's so
dumb. And then they yell at you and go, oh my God, you're so dumb. And then
that's the internet. But I think it's more productive to acknowledge the very,
very violent sense in which there actually is an analogy between those two
things, which is at a very high level saying, yes, it's forcing people to bake a
cake for people they disagree with. But on the one hand, it's people who
committed mass genocide against them and tried to kill off their entire people.
And on the other case, it isn't. And so for me, abstract thinking is about very
carefully being able to construct arguments and find the sources of differences
between arguments, which can actually help us to empathize with people. See,
there's something that often doesn't get put in the same sentence, abstract
maths and empathy. And so I'm trying to show, because I really believe it's
true, that abstract maths helps me to understand what other people really mean.
So it's a mode of thought, which, so you're saying that it's useful because it
disconnects you from the emotional sort of... In a way, yes. Abstract maths is
about making comparisons between different situations, finding out what is
similar about them, but at the same time, seeing what is different about them.
And so that when we have arguments with people, instead of just going, you're
wrong, you idiot. And then they go, you're wrong, you idiot. You're, OK, here's
a sense in which you have a point, and here's a sense in which I have a point.
And now we can go a bit deeper and find out where the root of those differences
is, rather than just kind of yelling at each other. I mean, Randall, it seems
we're dealing there, talking also about ideas of the abstract. And you get, I
mean, some of the things that you've dealt with in the What If books and also
online, is a wonderful way of seeing that I think very often people hide that
abstract thinking. And you have kind of opened this fantastic door of saying,
whatever the most wonderful or strange quandary is that you have, I'm going to
try and work out how we can get through it. Yeah. One of the things that to me
is really fun about these tools of math and abstract thinking is that they don't
care whether the question you're asking them is ridiculous or not. And so you
can apply the same math to the question of what is the tidal force created by
the moon to what is the tidal force created by a large wheel of cheese sitting
nearby. And you can use the same equations, the same math to figure that out.
That to me is really exciting, that I can just take these tools and not just
apply them to the things you're supposed to in school, but to anything. So give
us some examples of the rather surreal examples of that mode of thought. The
intermediate value theorem, someone asked a question that applies it in a way
that I had never thought about before. Eventually all of the stars are going to
burn out. Sorry if that's a spoiler. And I knew this. I did a physics degree and
they talked about this. And then I also knew that if you go really far forward
into the future, all of the stars will be at absolute zero at some point.
Everything will cool down, all of the remnants that are left behind of these
dead stars. And what had never occurred to me was that meant at some point in
between, there would be a point when the stars were about room temperature. And
so someone asked, when will that time be and can I go touch one? And I had never
thought about that before. And that led me to think, okay, how on earth would
you even approach this problem? How do you figure out what year that's going to
be? And how would you get near one of these stars? What would it be like? None
of these are things that are going to happen. But it turns out you can take
scientific papers and demand these answers out of them. And if you can figure
out how to do the math right, they give them to you. It's not going to be for a
while. There's some maths in this actually because you can't cool something down
to absolute zero in a finite number of steps. No, the universe may go on forever
though. So it's going to get closer and closer. So is it possible to cool
something down to absolute zero when you can't do it in a finite number of steps
if the age of the universe is infinite? That sounds like a physics question. But
we can actually even do an infinite number of things in a finite length of time.
We don't even need to go all the way to infinity because you all did it. You all
did it today. So this is one of Zeno's paradoxes. How did you all get here?
Well, first you had to cover half the distance to get here. And then you had to
cover half of the remaining distance. And then you had to cover half of the
remaining distance of that. And then you had to cover the rest of the distance.
And so it sounds like that's an infinite number. That is an infinite number of
things. And it sounds like you wouldn't be able to do that in a finite number of
time. But you did, even if you got stuck on the train. You did all get here in a
finite amount of time. So we go around doing infinite numbers of things every
day. I mean, is this partly, and I'll ask you actually, you remember this bit,
when you're dealing with sometimes these abstract ideas and sometimes these
ideas, which we have as the laws of physics. But is this a bit like when you're
philosophically looking at these things, that you need to know the laws of
physics in the same way that someone to play the piano badly in an amusing way
needs to know how to play it well. So you need to have the rules to then allow
your imagination to go wild within that and create something truly satisfying.
Yeah, I think that sometimes you need to know which things are important so you
know which ones you can ignore. I think that's definitely true. You need to
understand what is the measurement error in this quantity, how much could this
vary, how would it affect the solution. And then you can know, okay, it doesn't
vary enough to matter for the solution. And then you can ignore that. But you
can't ignore it until you have first figured it out and known, okay, yes, I
didn't need to know that after all. Well, that's what I wanted to ask you, Anna,
because you deal with the mathematics of cities. And sometimes we would imagine
that the idea of using maths when you're also dealing with emotional creatures,
creatures that are seen as making irrational decisions, that the two might be
very hard to join together to take the mathematics of the city. So how do you
start out? Can you give us an example of the mathematics of cities? Yeah, of
course. Okay, so I think that when you try and use mathematics with its really
rigorous rules and like hard-coded into the universe, and then you try and apply
it to people, it's really difficult, especially when you're dealing with just
like one person. But something happens when you zoom out, when you start to look
at big groups of people together. It's like the noise in one direction ends up
sort of canceling out the noise in another direction. And so while, you know, so
you can do things like, for example, you can say with a really high degree of
accuracy how many people are going to use the tube on a Monday morning, right?
Or how many people are going to turn up at A&E on a Friday night? And the thing
is, is that each one of those people in A&E has had their own life story, has
had their own accident, their own reason to be there. They shouldn't, in theory,
be connected to one another, and they're not. But something happens when you
zoom out that actually our behavior collectively becomes really predictable. Is
that in some ways disheartening when you, you know, this idea that people are,
you know, there are a lot of people out there, you ain't the boss of me, et
cetera. And people like to imagine that they are moving, you know, with a level
of freedom away from the context of everyone else. But actually the truth is
that we are more of a mass as we move around in those patterns. So when people
first discovered this, that was genuinely how people thought about it. So it was
a guy called, a French guy called Ketelet. This is like maybe 17, 1800s. And he
was looking at crime across all of France. He had like all of the crime stats.
And then he looked and saw that like the number of people who got murdered every
year in all these regions of France was basically completely unchanging. And not
only that, it was like the type of murder. So there's, I mean, it's like France
and whenever it was 1800s. So there were some excellent ways of dying. Right. So
like there was lots of sort of the same number of jousting deaths. I'm making
up. Like there was definitely bludgeoning by a stone. That was one. And swords,
that kind of thing, poisoning. And those numbers were unchanging year on year on
year in every region. And so then there was this big debate because it was like,
well, hang on a second. If there is this pattern that is really clearly there,
how can you punish people for committing murder? If like are they definitely
doing it under their own steam? Because because otherwise, why would this sort
of universal law appear? And it's like, how do you take away an individual
person's freedom for committing something if that pattern has to be there
because of the universe? So the argument is with the murder, statistically,
someone has to do it. That's basically it. So if you get to the end of the year
and you've had like five too few murders, were they like, who's going to do it?
Pick your stone to bludgeon with. That's for volunteers. It's interesting, isn't
it? It's basically the idea behind Asimov's foundation, isn't it? That given a
large enough population, you could in principle predict how the future will play
out. Is that conceivably a possibility? I mean, Asimov being Asimov said, you
know, you need a galaxy of billions and billions and trillions of people,
perhaps. But then statistically, you can start to understand how the future will
unfold. I mean, that's the idea behind those books. Yeah. So, OK, I don't think
you can. I don't think you can, basically, in short. And I think the reason why
you can't is because I'm sitting here saying, yeah, you can make these
predictions. But there's still, as Randall said, there's still error. And the
thing is, is that like when you start taking those predictions, you start taking
them too seriously. Then I think that that's where things start to become really
problematic. Because then you start applying them to individuals as though it's
like an absolute cold hard fact, like somebody must murder. Like, for instance,
I've seen this one academic who claims that he can take somebody when they're
born and tell you whether or not they'll be a criminal by the time they're 18.
Right. And that's like seriously problematic. But I think that the other reason
why you just can't do this stuff and there's just too much noise, really, I
think. But you can do it in order to design a better city. Yeah. But one thing
you could do, which I think would work, is you could make men stay in after six
o'clock at night and there wouldn't be any murders at night at all, apart from
maybe a pissed woman. It's true, though, you do have statistics where huge
numbers of, say, one group are committing crimes more than another or crimes are
happening at particular times or in a city, I would think, mathematically
speaking. Crimes are happening more often in particular areas of a city where
it's easier for people to commit crimes. So I would imagine that you can
actually predict and change on that basis. But I don't even know if town
planners use that sort of information, do they? OK, so it's true, you can. You
can. You can look at a city and you can see where the crime hotspots are and you
can see how the road network influences that. Because, of course, different
types of crime is going to happen on a cul-de-sac versus a really busy high
street. You can do all of those things. The problem is, then what do you do
about it? Because what people have tried, and this is about five or six years
ago, there were a few mathematicians who were like, hey, we can do this. So they
set up this company that would tell the police where the crime was going to
happen that night. And the thing is, well, OK, so there's two big problems here.
The first is that somehow in that translation, it's changed from being a
probability, really tiny probabilities, too, here, by the way, to being a cold,
hard fact. And that sort of uncertainty gets lost in translation. So suddenly
you have police turning up to an area being like, right, you know, thinking
they're in minority report. And, you know, where's the crime? So that's kind of
one problem. But the second problem is that the way that those models work is
that they work on the basis of how much crime has been reported from an area.
And so if you flood an area with loads of police because you think there's going
to be more crime that happens there, then more crime is going to be spotted. So
more crime will be reported. Yeah, because the police will be doing it. So
there's this thing they do in Chicago where they think there's going to be
crime, which is that they play classical music into the street. And all the
criminals are like, oh, classical music. Oh, I'm not going to hang around here.
And then they go away. Do they really do that? Yeah, they do. Well, I don't know
about the criminals, but they do play classical music in the street. No, no, I
don't think they do. They do play classical music. They play classical music in
the street. All the time or just on particular crime times of day? I suppose I
haven't been there all the time, so I don't know. But I think it's all the time.
They just kind of pipe it into the street. But I think that is a sign. I can see
that even when one of the train stations, tube stations just up from here, maybe
it's Houston Square, they quite often play classical music. And you can
literally see by the fact that if you are moving in a world that is frenetic but
there is something beautiful around you, I can see how that would also have that
effect of not being… I love Beethoven's Fifth, I'm not going to murder my
grandma tonight. I think that's a much more optimistic… Not Beethoven's Fifth.
That's the irony of the deaf grandmother and that's how it was managed to get
there. But I can see that certain… you've got some Elgar going on there.
Although, do you remember that experiment where they took… what's his name? Is
it Joshua Bell? And they stood him in a… Yeah, in a Washington DC subway
station. Yeah, in a tube station and they gave him a Stradivarius and he stood
there. And he'd been playing to this sold out crowd, night after night after
night, could not get a ticket for Love Nor Money and there he was in the tube
station with a hat, a bucket hat waiting for a coin. And basically no one
stopped at all, no one gave him any money. Except every child who walked past
stopped and listened. Isn't that beautiful? That gives me so much hope for the
future. And one of the things that I think it's like when we talk about maths, I
don't know if you find this when you go around doing events, that children,
little children, aren't afraid of maths yet. And they're so excited by these
ideas and they're so excited by thinking about infinity and they're not bothered
by the fact that they don't understand it. They love the fact that they don't
understand it. There's all these possibilities there for becoming more
intelligent when you don't understand something. And then somehow we get them
through education and all we do during the education process is get them to hate
maths, worry about not understanding things and then run away when something
seems difficult. It's really tragic. And then the adults also won't stop and
listen to the music and all the children do. I think it's beautiful. Yeah,
sorry. Sorry, we'll move away from beauty. Don't worry, Brian. Let's go back to
the cold, harsh universe. It seems to me there are two different uses of
mathematics. What you're describing, Hannah, is a very specific use of
statistics, for example, the way that crowds move through a city, you can design
a city. And I think what you're describing, Eugenia, is a transferable skill
that emerges from studying pure mathematics. So it's a way of thinking that you
derive from the study itself. One of the things I think is really important is
to stress that those are both really important aspects of maths. But there's one
that the transferability, I think, is really crucial because so many people
maybe even appreciate the fact that somebody else does maths. Do you appreciate
the fact that somebody else does maths, Joe? Very much. Right. So you appreciate
the fact that, good, you, right answer. But then they go, well, I don't have to
do it because someone else is doing it. It's true. Yeah, that is true. But they
are actually, in some sense, correct. I want to validate them, even if Joe
doesn't like being validated. I still want to validate everyone who thinks that
they don't have to do maths because someone else will do it for them. That is
correct. But that's because often the kinds of maths that you're told are useful
are not the ones you need to do. It's like, oh, yeah, maths can send a spaceship
into space and maths can fly a plane and maths makes your phone work, which is
all true. But you don't have to understand maths to use your phone. And so it
can seem that that's just for other people. But that's not the point. The point
is being able to use your brain in a way that's kind of better. It's a core
strength. It's like doing core exercises so that you can use the rest of your
muscles better or just not fall over when you're walking up the street. And so
for me, abstract maths is a core strength inside my brain that enables me to use
the rest of my brain in a more efficacious way. So, Randall, equally important
that you worked out what happened if you shrunk Jupiter down to the size of a
house. Yeah, there's a few different aspects of mathematics. There's like more
kind of building models and taking theoretical structures and finding ways that
they are analogous to everyday life. And then there's the kind that I think
about is more like counting and measuring. And so a lot of the figuring out, for
example, the question someone gave me was if you shrunk Jupiter down to the size
of the house, someone's house and moved it into a neighborhood in place of a
house and then just kind of let it go, what would happen? And so my first
thought, I think when I saw that was, is there a homeowners association or is
there like you're probably going to get in trouble? But what I what I think is
fun about these questions is like I don't know the answer. I could imagine it
being really, really catastrophic. But then I could also imagine it not being.
It's just a ball of gas. It's, you know, about the size of a house. How bad
could that be? So if you took the sun and shrunk it down to three kilometers in
radius, then it would form a black hole in extra. If you took the earth and
shrunk it down to about, I think, just under a centimeter in radius, it would
form a black hole. Wait, you're keeping the same density or you're just taking
all of that mass and shrinking it down? Yes. You take the whole thing, all the
matter in the earth and shrink it down. So what I'm trying to work out in my
head is so I know that the sun, because I've got the numbers in my mind, I know
the sun down to three kilometers in radius will form a black hole. I know the
earth down to just under a centimeter in radius will form a black hole. Jupiter
is in between those. So it's a good question, actually. So what I want to know
is the Schwarzschild radius of Jupiter, basically. I should be able to work that
out, but I need to know the mass. Yeah, yeah. Well, so what the real question
here is, is which kind of shrinking are we talking about? Because, like, I think
of it, there's like the compression shrinking where you keep all the mass there
and fit it into a smaller space. And then there's I think of it as the honey, I
shrunk the kids style of shrinking where you're making the thing smaller, but it
seems like you're taking away some of the mass. So it's made up of the same
stuff. There's just less of it. And, you know, like like if a character gets
shrunk down in a movie, they don't usually, you know, stay so heavy that they
just immediately punch through the floor. And so that's that's the way I
interpreted this for Jupiter. I was saying, well, what if you shrink it down?
It's made out of all the same stuff, same temperatures, same pressures, same
chemicals. There are just fewer of them. So it's the size of a house. No, but
then they would just sort of dissipate. Right. Because it's just then it's just
a small ball of gas. How bad can it be? At very high temperature. So it can't
hold itself together. It is. It is. It's gas that's really, really hot. Yeah.
And so because it's really small and really, really hot and under high pressure,
but it doesn't have all that mass that it had when it was big before we started
messing around with it. It is the gravity isn't there to hold it together, which
means that it would start to expand and, you know, it would expand rapidly,
which when you have physicists talking about that often means what a normal
person would call exploding. And and and so this I found if you have a Jupiter
sized ball of gas with the temperatures and pressures of Jupiter, it turns out
it would be enough to obliterate not just like your block of houses, but the
entire surrounding neighborhood. And you end up with a sort of a mushroom cloud
rising over your portion of the city. But what I thought was really fascinating
about this is the more I thought about it, the more I realized this is this is
actually just the process that formed Jupiter in reverse, because the reason
Jupiter is really hot is because there was a big ball of gas in space that was
cool and diffuse. And then it fell together under the force of gravity and
falling together, heated it up. And that heat is still there. There's some
contribution for radioactivity, but but it's just it got squished together. And
the solar system is only four or five billion years old. So it hasn't had time
to cool down yet. And so if you took all that heat and then remove the gravity
holding it together, it would go from being a small hot ball of gas back to
being a large, diffuse, cold one like it was when the universe formed. So you'd
just be watching Jupiter's formation in reverse. It's an interesting thing,
because all I'm thinking is that, you know, you're talking about the issue is
what if Jupiter was the size of a house? And Brian's so successful, all he's
thinking about is I need a house the size of Jupiter. So it's kind of an
interesting thing to. There's a couple of other ones. I mean, there's one.
You've got to deal with the soup thing, right? But the soup, you were asked by
someone, what if the atmosphere is, I hope this is right, the atmosphere of the
solar system, rather than being made of what it was, was made of soup. And I
went with a specific about the kind of soup. No, this question came from a five
year old named Amelia, which is my favorite questions come from little kids,
because I think I don't know that little kids are necessarily more creative than
adults. But I do think they are much more nervous about asking questions that
sound silly or make them look like they don't know what they're talking about.
So adults will try to ask very scientific questions like sessions that have a
lot of science words in them. And little kids just ask questions like, what if I
filled the solar system with soup? Which turns out to be like a much more
scientifically like fun question than a lot of the adult ones. Yeah. And so they
I don't know. She asked specifically, what if she filled the solar system with
soup out to Jupiter? And and this would create a black hole situation. That is a
lot of mass in one place. And the gravity would be so strong that not even light
would be able to escape. You can calculate where the event horizon of this
supermassive black hole would be. And it's somewhere between Uranus and Neptune.
So everything inside of that zone would be would be doomed, falling toward the
center, forming probably a singularity. Also, everything outside that zone would
be doomed, too, because it would soon fall inside that zone. So this would would
completely destroy the solar system and then start in on sucking in nearby solar
systems as well. What type of soup are we talking about? Yeah. So so I looked at
this. I mean, the nice thing, this is one of those things where where because
you can always try to figure out how much does the input matter? How much does
does the exact density of the soup matter? And if you find a really diffuse
soup, something that's like, you know, cotton candy density, you know, maybe you
could come up with something where it wouldn't immediately form a black hole.
But if it's a soup that has any kind of a water base of a wet soup, I don't know
about cooking. Then then you're going to have something that's about the density
of water. I did try to figure out the calorie count. I tried the Campbell's
tomato soup. It came somewhere around 10 to the 41, 10 to the 42 calories. You
could maybe cut that down a little bit if it was more of a chicken noodle from a
black hole to a war hole. Now, this is this is actually two cultures. They're
divided. There were seven people like the rest of them. So, Hannah, I mean, you
know, Randall goes, goes looking for some of the, you know, the more peculiar
questions, some of the things which can start off as surreal or abstract. But
then you actually do find out the science. I presume that when you're doing
public lectures as well, you have moments where someone will ask a question.
That moment they lose their shame and I think I really want to know this. What's
the most kind of unusual quest that people have been on? OK, so a few years ago
I did a talk on the mathematics of love. Right. But specifically, I had a whole
thing about divorce and I was doing this talk and I used it as an example. And
at the end, someone came up to me and said, OK, it's really interesting. And I
thought it was an example about the dynamics of arguments in a couple just
before they break up, because I have this girl that I want to get with and she's
married. So how do I? I think you're right that the questions from kids are
better. The other one I loved was it was you'd worked out how many people you
have to date before. Statistically speaking, you should choose your. I got in
lots of trouble for this, right? Because because, OK, it's true. You can use
something called optimal stopping theory and you can move to more. Sorry. I'm
sorry. Optimal stopping. Right. So the idea, Joe, let's say that you're single
and you're like, OK, I wish I was. Yeah. OK, let's go back to those happy days.
OK, so let's say you're like, OK, you know what? I want to be settled down in a
year. So what you do is you take that time window and in the first 37 percent of
it, you just go wild. Just do whatever you want. You just enjoy yourself. Just
get a sense of what's available to you. And then after that window is passed,
you then the next person who comes along that's better than everyone else that
you've met before. That's the person if you want to maximize your chance of
getting getting someone good. Now, the problem with this specific. So what do
you mean? You said the first 37 percent percent is one of the. Yeah. Right.
Yeah. So that's all the time of the time. Exactly. So you have a lot of liaison.
Yes. You just you just 37. What decade did we suddenly appears in a frock coat?
This radio for anyone. So. So, yes. So, I mean, you've had all of these
liaisons. Sometimes I'm a little bit flirty, but yeah, someone's lost a lace
neckerchief, etc. How many do you need to have to make? Oh, it's all about
cutting up in the in the time window. Right. So it doesn't matter about how many
is. Because what you don't want to do is you don't want to just like the first
person who comes along. Yes, you. But then equally, you don't want to leave it
too long. If you if you actually want to if that's your main goal. So this is
like the way to maximize your chances of getting the best person. But the thing
is, is it doesn't guarantee it. Right. It definitely doesn't guarantee it
because there are lots of ways that can go wrong. So for starters, your perfect
person could appear in that first 37 percent liaison window. Like goodbye and
off into the sunset with like a swish of your petticoat. And then they're gone
forever. Or the other thing is, it could be that it just so happens that all of
the people that you meet in your liaison window are just like really boring
people. And then the next person that comes along is is still really terrible,
but just maybe marginally better than everyone that you met before. And then if
you're following the rules, you're like, OK, great. You were done. Which means,
you know, you only end up with somebody who's marginally better than the first
37 percent. It's not kind of a good situation. And overall, your chances of
ending up right of getting the one I think are about a third. Right. If you do
it this way, which means that two thirds of the time you're better following
another strategy. After this talk, I got a lot. I got so many emails from
people. The two thirds of all the people who watched it and telling me how wrong
I was. And Joe, what was your strategy? Just to do the liaison window for about
20 years. Well, I think we've covered it. We've managed to love soup and social
justice in one show. So I think we've covered a lot of ground with mathematics.
So first of all, can we just say thank you to our panel who are Dr. Eugenia
Chang, Professor Hannah Fry, Randall Munroe and Joe Brand. Then we asked our
audience if you could find an equation, solve one problem of living. What is the
problem of living you would like to be dealt with? And let's see, the first
question I got is how long to keep an odd sock in the vein hope its sister sock
will turn up. So that is the three sock problem there. So we get towards that
again. Let's be inclusive towards socks. Why do they have to match anyway? Then
you can just include your sock already and not wait. And how do we know they're
really three socks anyway? How do I know I'm wearing a pair of socks? Belinda
said an equation to figure out how long can you hold a biscuit in a cup of tea
before the end breaks off? It sounds like one of yours, Randall. That's a good
question. Oh, yeah, that sounds like a question for for an experimentalist. I
actually suggest you do that because it is an experimental question to get a lot
of cups of tea, a lot of biscuits and do it. Yeah, I'm sure someone has. I'm
sure there was a paper on the biscuits. They do do that all the time with
biscuits. Try and sort of check out how long they last because it's obviously
really important. Hobnobs in in my experience, they're the best ones. They last
for half an hour. This is a good one here. I'm not going to say whether it's
from a man or a woman. How do you calculate the minimum acceptable amount to
spend on a spouse's Christmas present? I suspect that might be from my husband.
So thank you very much, everyone. And next week we are going to be doing a show
about how to commit the perfect murder. And then the week after that, I'll be
back with my co-host, Jim Al-Khalili. Or I'll be back with Dara Obrin. Let us
wait and see. Thank you very much. Goodbye. Turned out nice again. The Infinite
Monkey Cage was presented by Brian Cox and Robin Ince and produced by Alexandra
Feacham. It's a BBC Studios production. And if you can't wait until next week to
find out if one of them was able to commit the perfect murder, the whole series
is available now on BBC Sounds. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming East
London Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from the... We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. Risk as a
potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, The Shamima Begum Story, Series 2 of The
Begum.