TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
At two hours GMT on the BBC World Service. Mr. GM, the Russian leader whips up
support for his war at a rally in Moscow, while the head of the United Nations
denounces it. That invasion is an affront to our collective conscience. It is a
violation of United Nations Charter and international law. I'm Peter Goffin, and
coming up on the newsroom, we'll look at Elon Musk's complicated relationship
with the state of California. Funerals in the West Bank for Palestinian
civilians killed in the latest Israeli raid. Hello, what's wrong? And Mozambique
braces for Cyclone Freddy. Plus, we'll learn how our prehistoric ancestors got
their food. All that coming up after this bulletin. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth
Barlow. The head of the United Nations has condemned Russia's invasion of
Ukraine as an affront to the world's conscience. Antonio Guterres was speaking
at a special meeting of the UN General Assembly in New York. It's debating a
motion, tabled by Kiev's allies nearly a year after the invasion began, calling
for Russia to pull out of Ukraine immediately and unconditionally. The Kremlin's
ambassador, Vasilina Bienza, accused the West of wanting to defeat Russia at any
cost. He said the US and its allies were prepared to plunge the entire world
into war. I think that today, one year after the active stage of the Ukraine
crisis began, very few doubt that it's not Ukraine that's fighting Russia,
because Ukraine basically spent all of its military potential in the first weeks
of the special military operation. Rather, it's the collective West, in the form
of the United States, NATO, and the European Union. The Biden administration
says it's extremely concerned by levels of violence in Israel and the occupied
West Bank. The State Department spokesman Ned Price made the remark after a raid
by Israeli troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and about 100 wounded.
Several Palestinian gunmen were among those killed, as well as civilians. Mr.
Price called for calm. We had productive conversations in recent days with the
parties and US regional partners in support of efforts to prevent further
violence. We are deeply concerned that the impact of today's raid could set back
efforts aimed at restoring calm for both Israelis and Palestinians. Today's
events further underscore the urgent need for both sides to work together to
improve the security situation in the West Bank. A court in California has
sentenced a man convicted of killing the American hip-hop star Nipsey Hussle to
a minimum of 60 years in jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper four years ago in the
Los Angeles neighbourhood where both men had grown up. Peter Bowes reports.
After a trial last year, Eric Holder was found guilty of fatally shooting Nipsey
Hussle in 2019 outside a clothing store the rapper owned in South Los Angeles.
As well as first-degree murder, he was also convicted of wounding two
bystanders. Nipsey Hussle was a rising star, a former gang member known for his
musical talents and community activism. He'd worked with artists including Snoop
Dogg and Drake and won two Grammy Awards after his death. It was a level of
success that eluded Holder, who'd been an aspiring rapper in the same community.
Media reports in the United States say the daughter and son-in-law of Donald
Trump have been summoned to testify before a federal grand jury. They say Ivanka
Trump and Jared Kushner have been called to give evidence on the former
president's role in the storming of the US Congress two years ago. Both had
served as White House officials in the Trump administration. World News from the
BBC Vigilance has been held in several Portuguese cities in support of victims
of sexual abuse committed by members of the Roman Catholic clergy. Organizers
say the gatherings were staged to express shame at recent revelations about the
abuse of nearly 5,000 children over the past 70 years. A report published last
week by an independent commission found that three-quarters of the perpetrators
were priests. Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are attempting to
reach more than 50 miners still trapped in an opencast cul-pit that collapsed on
Wednesday. Two people are known to have died at the mine in Inner Mongolia. Six
others have been rescued. President Xi Jinping has ordered an investigation.
Although mine safety has improved in China, fatal accidents are still common.
British and Irish political leaders have condemned the shooting of an off-duty
policeman in Northern Ireland. He's in a critical condition in hospital after
being attacked at a sports complex on Wednesday night. The UK's Prime Minister
Rishi Sunak said he was appalled. His Irish counterpart, Leah Veradka, called it
a grotesque act of attempted murder. And the British government has announced
plans to make major changes to the way English football is governed. The
proposals include setting up an independent regulator. Dan Rowan has more. The
independent football regulator is designed to prevent a repeat of the failings
that led to the collapse of Berry FC in 2019, one of a host of clubs to suffer
financial crisis in recent years. The body would oversee a licensing system to
ensure clubs are run sustainably, be responsible for a strengthened owners and
directors test and could block teams from joining breakaway competitions like
the European Super League. With the Football League wanting a greater share of
the Premier League's record wealth and the FA pushing for more funding for
grassroots football, the regulator could also intervene to decide how much money
flows down the pyramid. That's the latest BBC News. A block of former Soviet
countries within NATO, known as the Bucharest Nine, signed a declaration
condemning Russia. They also asked Mr. Biden for a stronger US defence presence
in the region. The Romanian President, Klaus Johannes, co-hosted the summit.
Vladimir Putin himself has been busy touting his war as a fight for Russian
freedom against Western aggression. On Wednesday, tens of thousands of people
packed into Moscow's Luzhniki Stadium for a patriotic concert and rally
headlined by President Putin. The Russian editor, Steve Rosenberg, was there. At
the stadium, which hosted the 2018 Football World Cup Final, patriotic pop songs
were the warm-up act, plus speeches reminding Russians that their country had
defeated Napoleon and Hitler and would be victorious in Ukraine. Hitler was
highly staged managed. Tens of thousands of people had been bust in from
colleges, factories and state enterprises. Enter Vladimir Putin. Sharing the
stage with Russian soldiers back from the front line, the Kremlin leader
declared, right now there is a battle on our historical frontiers for our
people. They are fighting heroically, courageously, bravely. Three cheers.
Hurrah! State propaganda here tells Russians that it was the West that started
the war in Ukraine. Many in the stadium seem to believe that. If we didn't start
all this, Irina tells me, I trust our president. Not everyone here, though, was
so enthusiastic. In temperatures of minus 15, we saw large crowds streaming away
from the stadium even before Vladimir Putin arrived. Steve Rosenberg in Moscow.
Well, in New York City, the United Nations has called a special meeting of the
General Assembly to consider a resolution for just and lasting peace. If it's
adopted, the UN would demand that Russia leave Ukraine immediately and without
conditions. Now, a vote is not expected to take place until later on Thursday,
but the UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres has already condemned the
Kremlin's war. That invasion is an affront to our collective conscience. It is a
violation of United Nations Charter and international law. The position of
United Nations is unequivocal. We are committed to the sovereignty,
independence, unity, and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders. Antonio Guterres there. Well, our New York
correspondent, Neda Tofik, told Charlotte Gallagher more about this proposed
resolution. Ukraine and their supporters, obviously the West, are hoping that
they get close to the number of support that they've gotten with previous
General Assembly resolutions. Those include two from March that denounced the
invasion, that called for the humanitarian situation to improve and criticized
Russia for it, and then one from October that condemned Russia's illegal
annexation. And in all of those votes, they got more than 140 members out of the
193 bodies. So really, only a handful of countries voted alongside Russia, and
those resolutions, many more, chose rather to abstain from the vote at all. So
that is what Western nations are hoping, because for them, leading into the one-
year anniversary, they're really hoping to once again show just how isolated
Russia is all these months on. Obviously, it sends a message, and it's symbolic
if this is backed, but is Russia paying any attention to this, really? Yeah, I
mean, we have to remember, right, that this is a General Assembly resolution.
It's where Russia doesn't have a veto, like the Security Council, so like you
say, it is very much symbolic. I don't think anybody is under the illusion that
this is going to change President Putin's calculus or change anything on the
ground, but rather, I think it's very important for the international community,
from the West's perspective, to be able to say that they are going to stand up
to the principles of the UN Charter. Meditofik in New York. For almost two
decades after its founding, the electric car giant Tesla was based in
California. Then, in 2021, its co-founder Elon Musk had a change of heart and
abruptly moved its headquarters to Austin, Texas. In a parting shot, he called
California the land of taxes, over-regulation, and litigation. But now, he's
back. We're excited to announce that Tesla's global engineering headquarters
will be right here, the former headquarters of Hewlett-Packard. This is, I
think, a poetic transition from the company that founded Silicon Valley to
Tesla, and we're very excited to make this our global engineering headquarters.
Mr. Musk made the announcement alongside the governor of California, Gavin
Newsom. I'm appreciative of you and appreciative of our partnership over the
course of the last 20 years, and let's see this as the beginning of something
even more extraordinary on the journey to dominate in this space and to change
the way we produce and consume energy in this state and this nation and the
world we're trying to build. California governor Gavin Newsom there. So, what's
behind this move by Tesla? Our North America technology reporter, James Clayton,
told me more. This really marks a vault fast from Elon Musk, another one, and it
kind of shows you how much power California still has in the world of tech,
because Gavin Newsom, when you saw that press release, was smiling ear-to-ear
that Elon Musk had decided to move the engineering HQ of the business back to
California. And it's pretty clear that he thinks this is a bit of a coup for
California, and I think there is also in this a kind of impression that
California is losing tech businesses, particularly the area of Silicon Valley,
San Francisco. So, this is a bit of good news for the area. So, there's all
sorts of things that this announcement kind of displays, but I think in
particular it shows that California is a huge market for Tesla, and Elon Musk
simply couldn't move everything out of the state to Texas. So, seemingly that
relationship between Tesla and California is improving, but at the same time,
the company is still facing government investigations and regulatory reviews by
the state. Exactly. And if you look at how tech is regulated, California is
usually at the forefront of that, and that is absolutely the case when it comes
to driverless cars. And there's a California rule that has come into place that
you can't over-exaggerate, or exaggerate, I guess, how effective the driverless
part of your car is. And I think anyone who follows Tesla will tell you that
Elon Musk has said time and time again that by the end of the year, Tesla will
reach pretty much full driverless capacity. So, it will essentially be able to
drive itself year after year. That does not come to pass, and in fact is being
sued in a class action lawsuit about those claims, and certainly new California
regulation should mean that Elon Musk should not make these claims again. So,
you have all sorts of regulatory pressure, kind of almost aimed at people like
Elon Musk that is coming out of California. At the same time, you're getting
Elon Musk saying, oh, actually I'm going to move my engineering HQ back to
California. Once again, that shows you the power that California still has in
tech. James Clayton in San Francisco. You're listening to the BBC World Service,
our top headlines this hour. The UN General Assembly is meeting in New York to
discuss a demand for Russia to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from
Ukraine, nearly a year after its invasion began. The United States says it's
deeply concerned after an Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank left 11
Palestinians dead and many more wounded. And a man who shot dead the American
rapper Nipsey Hussle has been jailed for 60 years by a court in California. Now,
let's shift our attention to a cave in France, where researchers have found
evidence of the first bows and arrows ever used by modern humans in Europe. The
findings, published in the journal Science Advances, means European archery is
40,000 years older than we thought. The newsroom's David Lewis is here to tell
us more. David, what do we know about this discovery? Yeah, it's really an
astonishing find. Up until this new study, the earliest known use of bows and
arrows for hunting in Europe was sometime between 10,000 to 12,000 years ago.
Those tips were discovered in peat bogs mostly around modern-day northern
Germany. And this new evidence comes south of them, in Grotman Drin Rock
Shelter, overlooking the Rhone River. And it wasn't the most straightforward
find. The area was first excavated in 1990, and amongst the horse bones, the
andethal teeth and stone tools discovered, the site contained multiple layers of
archaeological remains, stretching back more than 80,000 years. There's evidence
the andethals and their cousins, Homo sapiens, both lived in the cave complex.
The key discovery here was of tiny stone points dating back some 54,000 years.
These hand-cut flints are key because all the other elements connected to
archery, such as wood, leather, resins, etc., are perishable and are rarely
preserved in such ancient sites. So how do the experts assess where they were
from and how old they were? Well, the stone pieces found by specialists in this
so-called archaeological layer E, attributed to Homo sapiens, stood out as more
finely sculpted than the flints in the layers above and below. All right. Are
ancient ancestors using these tools to hunt for food? How did researchers figure
out that's what they were used for? Well, it's not just the ancient people who
are using them. As proof, researchers took it upon themselves to reproduce the
tiny flint heads. They're smaller than a penny coin, some less than one
centimeter wide, and fired them off as arrowheads with a specially produced
replica bow at dead goats to see if they could pierce animal hide. Lormets from
Marseille University, a co-author of the study, said, we couldn't throw them at
the animals any other way than with a bow because they were too tiny and too
light to be efficient. In short, the force of a shooting arrow was needed to
bring down prey with such a small flint. Interestingly, Metz also said there was
evidence Homo sapiens in the anathols met in the cave at some point, though she
doesn't know if that was a friendly encounter or otherwise. All right. Thanks,
David. David Lewis, a reporter with many arrows to his quiver. The Biden
administration says it's extremely concerned by growing levels of violence in
Israel and the Palestinian territories. On Wednesday, the Israeli army killed 11
Palestinians and wounded dozens more in the town of Nablus in the occupied West
Bank. Within hours, funerals were held for some of the raid's civilian victims,
including a 72-year-old man. Hello, my son! Hello, my son! Our Middle East
correspondent Tom Bateman sent this report. We are in one of five hospitals in
Nablus now, treating people with bullet wounds. And I've just been up to one of
the wards where the doctor described this as one of the worst events of his
kind. He's seen in recent years. He called it a disaster. We spoke to a 15-year-
old boy who has a bullet wound to the leg. He told me that he was standing near
militants and he was hit by Israeli gunfire. And what is so striking about this
is the time of day this raid happened. It was the middle of the morning when the
old city of Nablus is packed with families and people shopping, when the
Israelis encircled a building where they said three militants were holed up,
those men were all killed. All senior Palestinian militants and members of the
Lions Den group, which is a militant group, which has been active in the city
over the last year. But the other thing that is so striking about what's
happened here is, first of all, the death toll, which matches the most deadly
raid in the occupied West Bank in the last two decades. And it's the number of
wounded. So the Palestinian Health Ministry is saying that more than 80 people
have gunshot wounds. On the ward we were just in, they were treating at least
eight people. One of them also, they said, was shot in the back. Now, the
Israeli military says it operated because the men that it targeted, it was
trying to arrest them. They refused to surrender. It says the Palestinian
militants fired on them. And they upgraded their response firing shoulder-
launched missiles towards this building. It says that those men were involved in
the planning and the killing of an Israeli soldier last year and also they were
planning imminent attacks. The Palestinian Authority, though, has described this
as a massacre. And amid reported concerns about retaliation, Hamas, the militant
group, has said that its patience is running out. And all of this, when the
United States have been trying to broker a kind of understanding between the
Palestinian leadership and the Israelis to ease what have been spiraling
tensions recently, this shows that those attempts are failing. Our Middle East
correspondent, Tom Bateman, in Nablus and the West Bank. Now, Gareth has some
other stories from our Newsdesk. Canada's military has said it recently
discovered evidence of Chinese surveillance efforts in the Arctic. The
discovery, first reported by the Canadian newspaper, the Globe and Mail, has
raised questions about China's activities in the far north. It comes after a
suspected Chinese spy balloon floated through US and Canadian airspace before it
was shot down by the American military. Brazil says it will suspend beef exports
to its biggest market, China, from Thursday after finding a single case of mad-
cale disease. The Agriculture Minister said the sample was sent to the World
Health Organisation for Animal Health for further checks. Brazil is one of the
world's largest exporters of beef. And five million seagrass seeds are being
planted off the coast of Wales to create underwater meadows to find climate
change. On Wednesday, 50,000 were laid in sands off the northwest of the
country. Rory Francis from the World Wildlife Fund Wales said it would make a
real difference in terms of both absorbing carbon and also of restoring really
valuable and important marine habitats. Thank you, Gareth. Tropical cyclone
Freddie has battered the east coast of Madagascar. Heavy rains, thunderstorms
and powerful winds tore roofs off houses and triggered a storm surge. At least
four people were killed. And UN officials now say Freddie is forecast to hit the
African mainland in Mozambique. This local resident gave his assessment of the
preparations there. I think work done so far is commendable by the government.
They have been caught off guard several times, so I think they've learned some
good lessons. One is that the risky people themselves, they want to see so that
they believe. The second thing is the government itself. The sooner they get on
the ground, the sooner they act, the better for the population. They can save
more lives. We heard more from Jose Tembe, a journalist based in Maputo, the
capital of Mozambique. In some of the places the cyclone will pass through,
there has been a test of resilience over the last 48 hours, even before cyclone
Freddie. We could see cars on television submerged, ceilings blown up, and
electricity disrupted. Residents say flooding is worsened not only by the rain,
but also by ditches which are clogged. People are desperate. Their homes are not
resilient, and they have not been able to stock food and water for the cyclone
days because they can't afford it. People are talking food, are fortifying their
houses. Awareness or early warnings are not enough. Jose Tembe in Maputo. Now
let's check in with Richard Newman for the latest from the World of Sport. Thank
you. The Manchester City head coach Pep Guardiola says his players should feel
proud rather than down after drawing one-all with Arby Leipzig in their
Champions League last-16 first leg. At full-time in Germany, he gathered his
team and a huddle on the pitch. He's explained why. There were heads down. I
said, why are your heads down? You had your heads up. It was really good. The
game you played. People were like, it doesn't matter. You play the way you play
the game, you should play. We could be more, at the end look more earlying or
what happened. Yeah, of course, but it's going to happen. Romelu Lukaku scored a
late goal in Inter Milan's 1-0 win over Tenman Porto. The Women's World
Champions, the USA, have retained the She Believes Cup after beating Brazil 2-1
in Texas. One of the other favourites to win the World Cup this August, the
European title winners England, won their own mini-tournaments, thrashing
Belgium 6-1 to claim the Arnold Clark Cup. England will become the first major
football nation to have the sport government regulated. Plans will be formally
outlined on Thursday, but the Bosy will have power to block clubs from joining
closed competitions, like the failed European Super League from two years ago.
Strike actions being avoided by the Welsh rubber union team after compromises on
key issues were agreed in a contract dispute with the governing body. It had put
Saturday's Six Nations game with England in Cardiff in doubt, but it will now go
ahead as planned. Captain Ken Owens says it's not been a good 18 months for the
game in Wales. It's got to be a long-term solution because Welsh rugby can't
keep going on this merry-go-round of crisis after crisis. Everybody in Welsh
rugby, we need to pull together now to find the best way forward and we need to
do it collaboratively together to put Welsh rugby back at the top end of world
rugby and not the laughingstock, which I think we are at the moment. In cricket,
England have named an unchanged side for the second test with New Zealand, which
starts in Wellington on Friday. It means James Anderson will play after
returning to the top of the bowling rankings at the age of 40. Thank you,
Richard. Now, there are just 10 weeks to go until King Charles' coronation, but
there are concerns that some church towers in the UK will be silent over the 6th
of May weekend due to a shortage of people who know how to properly ring the
bells. The BBC's Joe Black has been to the English town of Ipswich to meet a
team of campanologists preparing to ring for the king. On the waterfront at
Ipswich, the bells at the church of St Clement ring out. It's a deconsecrated
church and this isn't the weekly service. It's a training session. Balance to
balance, so when we ring rounds in a minute, you can control. That's it. Now
control the backstroke. Most of the new recruits have answered the call to ring
for the king. A recent appeal by the Campanology community to get more people
interested in acquiring this skill. Among them, Freya, a 17-year-old A-level
student who has been ringing since November and says being involved on
Coronation Weekend will be something to remember. It's like being something I've
been interested in, but I suppose ring for the king made me think this is the
time to get into it. All yours. Amanda Richmond from the Association of Ringing
Teachers is guiding the new members and is pleased with their progress. We want
to make sure that there are ringers to every church so that we can all ring out
the ring for the king, for the coronation. In some areas of the country, bell
ringing is thriving. Those here at St Paul's in Birmingham are aged between 11
and 80 years old and their bell ringing school is full. But in other places,
there can be very few. Simon Linford is from the Central Council of Church Bell
Ringers. We probably had a couple of decades of not really realising that the
ringing community was getting older and failing to replace ourselves, but now
we're actively looking to replace ourselves. It takes around 10 to 12 hours of
one-to-one tuition to get a basic level of ringing. Still time to learn ahead of
May the 6th. That report by Joe Black and amongst a group of bell ringers
preparing for the coronation of King Charles. A reminder of the main news now,
the UN General Assembly is meeting in New York to discuss a demand for Russia to
withdraw immediately from Ukraine, nearly a year after the invasion began. And
that brings us to the end of this edition of the newsroom from the BBC World
Service. Thanks for listening. This is the BBC World Service with the winner of
the English as a Second Language prize for the International Radio Playwriting
Competition. My name is Einor Karim. I'm a writer from Kazakhstan and my play.
It's a funny story about a student who finds someone else's passport and wants
to give it back to its owner. I thought I'd better take it to the police station
myself. It's on my way. Wait, wait, wait, wait. Show me the passport. At first I
felt a little bit like I was limited in the way how I can express myself, but
then I like it even more because you close your eyes and you just need to
imagine. Ruslan Adarov. Not a Kazakh? Why isn't the nationality stated in the
passport? Why do you say he's not a Kazakh? He is a Kazakh, absolutely. I would
be happy if people just laugh and enjoy it. The man lost his passport. He must
give it back. What a face. The Passport. Saturday at 19 and Sunday at 12 GMT.
This is an assignment on the BBC World Service investigating why, a year on from
the invasion of Ukraine, many Russians support, or at least accept, a war
against their closest neighbour. Why they think they're the ones fighting for
survival. We find out how the Kremlin's alternative truth has been constructed
and how a nation's memories have been exploited. That's assignment with me, Tim
Huel, and Nick Sturdie after the news. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The head of
the United Nations, Antonia Guterres, has denounced Russia's invasion of Ukraine
as a violation of international law, a motion demanding the immediate withdrawal
of Moscow's forces has been debated at a special session of the UN General
Assembly. Moscow's ambassador told the gathering that Ukraine's allies were
prepared to plunge the entire world into war. The United States says it's
extremely concerned by violence in Israel and the occupied West Bank. Earlier on
Wednesday, a raid by Israeli troops in Nablus left 11 Palestinians dead and
about 100 wounded. A US court has sentenced a man convicted of killing the hip-
hop star Nipsey Hussle to at least 60 years in jail. Eric Holder shot the rapper
four years ago in Los Angeles. Hundreds of rescue workers in northern China are
attempting to reach more than 50 miners trapped in an open cast coal pit that
collapsed on Wednesday. Two people are known to have died. Six others have been
rescued so far. The attorney general of Ecuador says she'll ask for corruption
charges to be brought against the former president of the United Nations and
denies the accusations which are linked to the construction of a hydroelectric
plant. Severe weather warnings have been issued for parts of New Zealand's North
Island. Heavy rain and thunderstorms have forecast to hit areas still recovering
from a cyclone which killed at least 11 people. The British government has
announced plans to make major changes to the way English football is governed.
The proposals include setting up an independent regulator which could block
teams from the joining breakaway competitions. And Brazil is suspending beef
exports to its biggest market, China, from Thursday after finding a single case
of mad cow disease. The agriculture minister said a sample had been sent to the
World Organisation for Animal Health for further checks. World news from the
BBC. This guy's got a gun in front of you. Is he putting it on me? It was a
cold, grey morning almost exactly a year ago. I was filming at Chastormal
Airfield just outside the Ukrainian capital Kiev when we ran into three
soldiers. He says get out. Where is Tel Aviv in your BBC? Where's the governor?
A Ukrainian man who was a bit of a Ukrainian patrol, I assumed, until I saw
their uniforms. Those are Russians. Here comes the helicopter. Here comes the
helicopter. OK, let's go. Let's go. Oh, yeah. Get in the car. It was a Ukrainian
counterattack and the beginning of a full-scale war between two countries that
had been so entwined that just a few years earlier, a popular Ukrainian comic
called Valodomir Zelensky had co-hosted Russian television's New Year's Eve
show. Today, one of those who swayed along in the audience, the Kremlin's top
propagandist, Vladimir Savovyov, calls for cities in the country that President
Zelensky now leads to be wiped off the face of the Earth. I'm not a Russian. I'm
not a Russian. I'm not a Russian. And yet many Russians believe, as one of the
country's biggest stars sings, that right is on their side, that they're the
ones under attack, fighting for survival. You're listening to assignment on the
BBC World Service with me, Tim Huel. We've been covering Russia for most of our
lives, and in this programme, we're trying to understand how millions of
educated 21st-century citizens have been persuaded to support, or at least
accept, a war with their closest neighbours and inhabit what seems a parallel
universe. Maybe it's too easy to say they've simply been brainwashed, zombified
by Kremlin lies. You cannot be turned into a zombie if you don't want to be a
zombie. People are choosing to believe in this truth. We're going to find out
how Russia's parallel world has been built over many years by playing on a
nation's memories and fears. In the spring of 2014, the year ushered in by
Zelensky on Russian TV, crowds chanting Russia, Russia, seized government
buildings across eastern Ukraine, including in Donetsk, where I was filming.
It's a mainly Russian-speaking city, and perhaps more than anywhere else, the
place around which the Kremlin's alternative truth has been built. Armed
separatists declared a breakaway People's Republic in reaction to the overthrow,
shortly before, of Ukraine's president Viktor Yanukovych. He fled after massive
protests against his refusal to sign a deal with the European Union. But many
Ukrainians in Donetsk and other eastern cities, who'd voted for Yanukovych in
democratic elections four years earlier, saw it as a Western-backed coup
orchestrated by Ukrainian nationalists. So, too, did volunteer fighters who came
from Russia itself to defend Donetsk, including one called Pavyukuk Mirov, who
cooked us a military supper of beef and macaroni in his barracks. Why do I say
Donetsk is Jerusalem? Because this is a holy war of the Russian people for its
future, its ideals and its great country that was cut into pieces 25 years ago.
Holy war? He meant that Donetsk had been retaken for Russia just as the
Crusaders retook Jerusalem. Then such lofty language seemed outlandish. Now it's
commonplace in Russia, thanks partly to the information war waged by
nationalists like Pavyuk, who's still in Donetsk, blogging prolifically on
social media. He's a rather intellectual Crusader, whose non-Daguerre is
Shakespeare, because he loves the playwright so much. But he had to take up a
gun, he told us then, to help save Donetsk from a Ukrainian-Nazi bloodbath. Now,
when we speak to him again on the phone, he claims it's only last year's Russian
invasion that finally averted that threat. If it hadn't struck first, there
would have been genocide, just like Rwanda, pure and simple. But where's the
evidence for this? For years, before 2014, they had already been promising to
slaughter Moscowites. A video clip, not shared by bloggers like Pavyuk, shows
young protesters in Western Ukraine in 2014, briefly chanting, Moscow-lyaku na-
hyl-lyaku, hang the Muscovite, an old contemptuous term for Russians. It's just
one of the tiny grains of fact used to build myths and spread fear. And the
shells that Ukraine has intermittently fired at Donetsk since 2014, trying to
regain its own territory, are also supposedly evidence of its murderous intent.
Pavyuk says he's lost comrades. Half the lads you saw then are gone. After 30
were killed, I stopped counting. Ever since 2014, the Kremlin-controlled media
has kept the suffering of Donetsk near the top of the news. And that's convinced
many Russians that they'd already been at war for eight years, when Putin's so-
called special military operation began last February. Even now, relatively
minor Ukrainian attacks on Donetsk are reported in detail, with no mention of
far worse Russian attacks elsewhere in Ukraine. But the hyperbole spread by
bloggers like Pavyuk and repeated on talk shows doesn't stop there. If Donetsk
falls, they argue, all of Russia may eventually be lost. On many western
platforms, they say openly that Russia should be carved up into 26 separate
states. Look, Ukraine's head of military intelligence, Mr Kirill Budanov, has a
map in his office of Russia divided up. Another grain of truth, weirdly. Perhaps
it's a bad joke. Budanov does have a map a bit like that. You can imagine how
Russia's influential talk shows lap that up. On one, 60 Minutes, host Yevgeny
Papov told viewers the map showed how Kiev dreams of decolonizing Russia. And
yet, when we talked to Papov, he insisted, following the Kremlin line, that this
isn't a war against Ukrainians, it's just against their western masters. It's
war with NATO and Nazi regime of Zalesky. Sorry, just come back to this one
point. About your father. I'm not going to tell you a lot about it. Oh, please
just tell me a bit about his circumstances. No, no, nothing. Is he suffering or
does he think the same things as you? Stop, I'm not going to tell you more. For
security reasons, he says. Or is it just too uncomfortable to put himself in his
father's shoes right now? Papov is an experienced correspondent, and yet there's
something about his approach to his work that takes me aback. You were chief
correspondent of Russian TV in New York for six years. Yes. I'm interested, did
that change the way you thought about the West? I knew everything about the
United States before I came to New York. Really? And I did not change my mind on
anything because I knew everything. We have free press in our country. Why you
two dictators? How to live? That's the main question I can ask the Western
world. But if Russia invades a sovereign, neighboring country, how is that not
ultimate dictation of its will? Ask yourself, if Great Britain invade sovereign
country as Iraq, tell me, how do you feel when you occupy Malvin Islands? You
talk about the Falklands. Of course, it's Malvin Islands, and they are
Argentinian islands, not yours. Are you asking me about invasion? What's the
hypocrisy, man? As he's talking, I feel myself transported back to 1982. The
year the Falklands, or Malvinus, were retaken by Britain after an Argentine
invasion, and I was a student in Leonid Brezhny of Soviet Union. And what was
surprising in that then-isolated country was that many people I met believed, or
claim to believe, that they knew more about the West than I did. Has anything
changed, in your opinion, in the relations between Russia and the West since
Soviet times? I was born in Soviet Union. I like this country, of course, and
nobody asked me when you destroyed my country. And we made a great mistake when
we hugs each other in the 90s. Oh, really? When the Western Russia embraced,
when it hugged, that was a mistake. So, you destroyed my country. How do you
think I can feel about you? But today, in Russia, it's not just servants of the
Kremlin's media who inculcate scorn for the West. There are other voices who
started scoffing in similar fashion on their own initiative to appeal to a
younger, cooler audience. Can I introduce myself? My name is Ivan Kondakov. I
was born in Arkhangelsk. It's a northern part of Russia. Now I'm an engineer,
I'm a scientist in aviation structures, and also I'm a poet, I'm a singer, and
I'm a comedy maker, to say it out loud. In this slick video, Ivan, a jovial
character with full blonde beard, is strumming his guitar and clinking champagne
glasses with friends in his kitchen as they tuck into plates of brawn. Brawn?
Well, it's an old-fashioned Russian dish that has to be boiled for hours. And
that's the joke in Ivan's song. Russia's not short of cheap energy, so we can
enjoy our lovely pigs trotters in jelly, thank you very much, while you Western
Russophobes, who won't buy our gas, just shiver through the winter. Ivan's
nationalism, like Yevgeny Papovs, dates back to the 1990s, when I lived in
Russia and I remember it well. He was a teenager back then. As you know, we have
lost the Cold War. Industries have been closed, people lose their jobs, so yes,
it was a feeling of shame, a feeling of absence of the future. But at the same
time, the 90s was a point when there was a democracy, was there not? Democracy
is the same fairy tale as a communism. They say you have some choice, in fact
you have no choice. Your salary can be measured, democracy and elections cannot
be measured, that means it is nothing. It is a reality, it is nothing.
Territory, however, can be measured. And in 2014, Russia got more, when Vladimir
Putin announced to a jubilant Moscow crowd what he called the return of Crimea
to Russia. It was that seizure of Ukrainian land that turned Ivan from a fairly
apolitical Russian engineer into a flag waving patriot. And eventually into a
Z-singer and Z-poet, part of what is now a whole cultural movement named after
the letter that denotes support for the war. He has got thousands of followers
on his YouTube and Telegram channels and his own radio show, bringing him a
measure of fame he quite enjoys. My life changed. I can see when some people on
the streets recognize me and say, hey, it's you, it's you. I'm looking at this
influence and I think I'm doing right. Because I know the Russian mentality, you
know, what people are worrying about, and I try my best to make them a little
smile. He mocks liberals and anti-war campaigners, who are traitors in his book,
but perhaps the biggest target of his humor, as he sees it, is a group that the
Kremlin also attacks ever more in its information war. LGBT people. He has a
favorite poem. Can I read it? The right translation is that in English there is
a lot of words, meaning genders. Everyone needs their own toilets. We challenged
him about his homophobia, but his answers became ever more offensive. I don't
understand how people can like to be tolerant. Russia is for traditional values.
Frankly speaking, Western world now is for, we call it, Satanism. You call it
what? Satanism. That's quite an apocalyptically black and white view of the
conflict. And one that Sasha Arhipova, a social anthropologist researching
Russian attitudes to the war, has often encountered. Many, many people to whom I
was speaking, they are believers of the idea that we are living in this bipolar
world and everybody is in the war against us. So we are not aggressors. We are
defenders. And we are defending our spiritual core. And the last time the
Russians defended their country, their values, and won, was in the Second World
War. The Great Patriotic War, as it's known in Russia, commemorated every year
on May the 9th, Victory Day. As the number of surviving veterans has dwindled,
people carrying portraits of fathers and grandfathers who fought have joined the
parades, part of what was originally a grassroots initiative called Immortal
Regiment. The original idea was not to commemorate victory, but to commemorate
loss. And the main slogan was never again. But especially after annexation of
Crimea, a lot of new people started to participate and the main idea for them
became not never again, but we can repeat. Why? Because they start to feel that
the revolution in Ukraine is not a bad thing and the West is trying to steal
Ukraine and steal our victory. And this idea of going to war, of heroic behavior
became more and more popular every year. Modern Russia is a big country with
different languages and there are a lot of people who don't like Soviet past. So
the victory in the Second World War is the only thing which can unite people.
And the presidential administration, they make this idea of war against the
evil, against the Nazis, the new common ground to the new Russian identity. We
are the sons and daughters and grandsons of people who fight the evil. And now
this evil is in the territory of Ukraine. Last year on Victory Day, Vladimir
Putin, carrying a portrait of his father, led a million people through Red
Square. He wore the orange and black ribbon of St. George, originally a tsarist
military decoration that was used again in the Second World War. Since 2014,
it's been promoted and worn as a symbol of a so-called Russian spring, the
annexation of Crimea and aggression in eastern Ukraine, and now a support for
today's war. That's why I'm talking about this cult of dead, like about the new
civil religion. It became a symbol on the battlefields too. Those young Russian
paratroopers I saw, who landed at Hastormal Airfield a year ago, all wore thick
orange and black stripes, sewn along the lengths of their sleeves, hardly
effective camouflage. Days later, pictures emerged of scores of dead Russian
soldiers in the outskirts of Kiev all wearing the same stripes, dead testimonies
to a cult of reliving heroic history. Not long after me, Russia's most
celebrated war correspondent, Alexander Kotz, also reported from Hastormal
Airfield. He called it a new site of Russian military glory. Its occupiers,
though of course he didn't use that word, were worthy successors to Russian
warriors who'd fought the Turks in the 19th century and the Germans in the 20th.
By chance, I'm an old acquaintance of Kotz. We've been in contact since we met
in 2008 after he reported on Russia's invasion of Georgia. Kotz reports for the
popular daily Komsomoskaya Pravda, which Putin himself says he reads every
morning on his way to work. Kotz's telegram channel and those of other war
bloggers are followed by millions. They've become leaders of public opinion for
certain social groups. People may not trust official statements on TV, but
they'll certainly read war correspondence on telegram. Kotz says openly that his
aim is to raise Russian morale, and he says he's learnt a lesson about that from
the enemy. Driving through Russia early in the war, he saw no patriotic posters,
whereas in Ukraine... When we entered towns we liberated that had been under
Ukrainian control, we found every park had a monument to a defender of the
fatherland, every school had a portrait of a soldier, they had been building up
their ideology, and I have to say, they'd done it rather well. So Kotz set out
to create Russian heroes. He wrote, for example, about a young airman called
Pyotr Kashtanov, shot down, along with his navigator, by Ukrainian anti-aircraft
guns over enemy territory. They started to walk towards our lines 30 kilometers
away, but the navigator had a broken spine and he said, just leave me behind.
But Kashtanov replied, we'll get out of this together, I won't leave you. To
Russians, his experience recalled the story turned into an iconic film of a
second World War pilot, Alexei Mariesyev, who was badly injured in both legs
when he was shot down by the Germans and crawled through snowbound forests back
to Russian territory. I was very touched when one man told me he'd read my story
to his child at bedtime and he said stories like that should be taught in
schools in patriotism hour. And yet, despite all the propaganda for the war,
anthropologist Sasha Arkhipova's research suggests most Russians just accept it
rather than actually supporting it. Russian government punished you for any type
of street rallies, protests, so people feel more and more, you cannot do
anything. That's what psychologists called enforced helplessness. One of my
informants, she gave me this image that I'm like a leaf in the stream, I'm just
going somewhere and I cannot influence anything that is happening around me. And
I don't like this war and people are dying, but what can I do? Arkhipova says
that enforced helplessness may even lead to enforced patriotism, a feeling of my
country right or wrong, because if there's nothing they can do, opponents of the
war who stay in Russia may accept elements of the Kremlin's truth just to stay
sane. Even if you have a possibility to read, I don't know, Telegram Channel,
maybe you don't want to do it because you are very tired of this situation. So
it's not a brainwashing because people are choosing to believe in this truth.
But for how much longer? BBC Russian service researchers have corroborated the
deaths of more than 14,600 Russian military personnel in Ukraine over the last
year, but the real figure is thought to be at least twice as high, probably
more. So, will the ever rising death toll change what Russians choose to
believe, or will it just reinforce the Kremlin's truth, because no one wants to
believe that a son, husband or friend died in vain? The nine years that Pavel,
fighter blogger and Shakespeare lover, has spent on the front line seems only to
have strengthened his patriotism. What makes Shakespeare a great writer is that
he is able to look at reality through another person's eyes. What do you think
the war looks like for ordinary Ukrainians? Look, how can I put myself in the
position of people who are trying to kill me every day? Now, the ugly language
of songs like this is gradually filling more and more public space in Russia,
part of a tide of aggression and hatred that citizens can't insulate themselves
from. But what will Ivan and other turbo patriots do if the war eventually ends
badly for Russia? Even Putin's go-to reporter, Alexander Kotz, is worried about
that. The defeat will really shake the trust of those most loyal to the state. I
don't even want to think about it, because it won't be like the uprising in
Ukraine in 2014. It will be far bloodier. A coup or uprising by the nationalist
right, it's no longer inconceivable. As Ivan Kondakov sings, this is the time of
Z. And whatever happens in this war, the stories that have built Russia's
parallel world may have changed the country forever. Thanks for listening.
Assignment was produced and presented by me, Tim Huel and Nick Sturdie. This is
the BBC World Service, and on the Food Chain this week... High-end food doesn't
always come out of high-end kitchens. In fact, there's a culinary world where
Mishnan-style meals are produced with the bare minimum of cooking facilities
cobbled together in unlikely places. I'm Marie Keyworth, uncovering the hidden
world of high-end mass catering. The Food Chain, today at 11.30 and 23.30 GMT.
In 50 minutes, witness history. Today we're taking you back to 1958, when the
most notorious plastic explosive in the world, Semtex, was invented in
Czechoslovakia. Stay with us. Eitlich is next. This is the BBC World Service,
the world's radio station.