TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-23H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On FM, on Longwave and on BBC Sounds, this is BBC Radio 4. It's ten o'clock,
good evening. Welcome to The World Tonight with James Kimarasami. The head of
the FBI says it's most likely that Covid was caused by a laboratory leak in
China. One of the scientists who visited Wuhan to check out that theory tells us
she isn't convinced. If that is a lab origin, that's horrible, but you cannot go
accusing that without really providing the evidence for it. Nigeria has a new
president-elect. So who is he? And how old is he? It turns out even some of his
closest supporters aren't sure. I have not bothered to look at his age because
for me age is just a number. It's the quality of people you have around you that
determines how well you govern. He's older than me and that's it. Remains have
been found by police looking for a missing baby near Brighton. We'll hear about
the first debate, which has just ended, between the three contenders to succeed
Nicolas Sturgeon as Scotland's First Minister. And parlez-vous Serge? English
comic book words from a very French singer. A new exhibition has opened in Paris
about the life and work of Serge Gainsbourg. That's all after the BBC News, read
tonight by Tom Sanders. No scientist would say it didn't leak from a lab because
they can't prove that. So one really important area of work that has been
carried out by scientists is looking for related viruses that would give us
clues as to where this might have come from. So a lot of work has been carried
out taking samples from bat caves elsewhere in China. And researchers have found
very closely related viruses that are circulating in wild bats. So everything
points towards natural spillover, but we just haven't got that final conclusion
yet. Allies of the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock say he's considering
legal action after the Daily Telegraph alleged that in the middle of April 2020,
he rejected expert advice to give Covid tests to everyone going into care homes
in England. Mr Hancock denies the claim, saying at the time the country didn't
have the capacity to test on that scale. The Telegraph has obtained Mr Hancock's
WhatsApp messages from that period. Here's our political correspondent Ian
Watson. A series of messages from April 14th 2020 suggest that Matt Hancock
initially welcomed advice to test everyone going into care homes in England. He
appeared to change his mind later though, and only gave a commitment to test
those who'd come from hospitals. A spokesman for Mr Hancock said that had been
because more widespread testing hadn't been deliverable. Mr Hancock's spokesman
said all of his messages had been handed over to the official Covid inquiry,
which was the proper place to make an objective assessment. At PMQs, Sir Keir
Starmer called for that inquiry to conclude by the end of the year. The Prime
Minister said the inquiry was independent and that he wouldn't comment on the
piecemeal information that had been leaked. Police searching for a baby near
Brighton say they found an infant's remains. The search began on Monday
following the arrest of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, who'd been living
rough with their newborn baby for several weeks. Our correspondent Frankie
McCamley is near where the remains were found. Officers confirmed a baby's
remains had been found in woodland in Brighton, close to where Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday. A police tent has been erected in the
woodland as the investigation continues through the night to find out exactly
what happened to the baby. Officers say a post-mortem examination will be
carried out in due course. Ms Martin and Mr Gordon have been detained for
another 36 hours for questioning after being arrested on suspicion of gross
negligence and manslaughter. The parents of a disabled teenager who died after
becoming morbidly obese under their care have been jailed. Kayleigh Titford's
body was found on soiled sheets at the family home in Newtown in Wales in
October 2020. She weighed 22 stone at the time of her death. Her father, who was
found guilty of gross negligence manslaughter, was sentenced to seven and a half
years. Her mother, who admitted the same charge, was jailed for six years. The
Duke and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed they've been asked to vacate their
home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle was given to
the couple in 2019. Our Royal Correspondent Sarah Campbell reports. Frogmore
Cottage is where Prince Harry, Meghan and their children have stayed on their
infrequent trips back to the UK. Sources close to the couple say they thought of
it as their forever home, a gift from the late Queen. That they've been asked to
leave is, the BBC understands, a source of disappointment. One concern of theirs
is understood to be safety and security. Where now will the Prince stay with his
family when visiting the UK? The logistics are still being sorted out, with
financial issues to be resolved. Not least that the couple paid £2.4 million
back to the Treasury to cover renovation costs and rent. Buckingham Palace says
this is a private family matter. Reports that Prince Andrew has been offered
Frogmore Cottage have not been confirmed. Scuffles have broken out in the
Israeli city of Tel Aviv between police and demonstrators who staged what they
called a day of disruption to protest against proposed changes to the judiciary.
Police used stun grenades and water cannon and deployed officers on horseback.
Almost 40 people have been arrested. Israel's Prime Minister, Benjamin
Netanyahu, said he wouldn't tolerate anarchy. But these protesters say he's
undermining the independence of the judiciary and threatening democracy. We're
stopping the entire traffic in the entire country in hope that the current
government will understand that we're that serious and we will do everything in
our power to change the current path that they're taking. I was born in Israel.
I fought for 30 years in this country to save this country. Now I'm fighting
against the dictatorship that's going to happen here. I want that to happen. The
Greek Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has blamed what he called a tragic
human error for last night's train crash, in which at least 43 people were
killed. More than 70 others are in hospital after a head-on collision between a
passenger and a freight train. The transport minister has resigned. A local
station master has been charged with manslaughter by negligence. The World
Meteorological Organization has warned that there could be another spike in
global temperatures between June and August this year because the weather
pattern known as El Niño is likely to develop. Over much of the past three
years, global temperatures have been under the influence of an opposite
phenomenon called La Niña, which has a cooling effect. Despite that, 2021 and
2022 were warmer than any year prior to 2015. The University of Cambridge has
agreed to return to Australia four Aboriginal spears that were brought to the UK
by Captain James Cook more than 250 years ago. The spears were taken from a camp
used by the indigenous Guayagual people who resisted the explorers' landing on
the shores of Botany Bay in what is today the south of Sydney. The Guayagual
community considers the spears national treasures. They still use similar multi-
pronged tools for fishing. Thanks Tom. You're listening to The World Tonight
with James Kimarasamy. Leaked WhatsApp messages may have reopened the debate in
this country about the government's handling of the Covid pandemic, but in the
United States, undisclosed, classified information is being quoted as the source
for new doubts about the origins of the virus. The FBI director Christopher Wray
has publicly endorsed the theory that the virus originated in a laboratory in
the Chinese city of Wuhan rather than in a wet market there. He thinks it's
quote most likely that Covid was created in a lab as opposed to being a zoonotic
disease that was transmitted from animals to humans. First of all, let's speak
to our correspondent John Sudworth. He's in New York, was in China before that,
so knows an awful lot about this. John, tell us what the head of the FBI has
said. Well James, I think to start with, it's important to note that the
question of Covid's origin three years after the pandemic began is marked really
not by how much we know, but how little we know in terms of the possibility that
this thing emerged from nature, the so-called natural origin. The virus hasn't
been discovered in any host animal species. This idea that it may have spilled
over from another species into humans, no clues there, nor has it been found,
China tells us, in any of the patient samples stored in Wuhan hospitals in the
months and weeks leading up to the outbreak of the disease. In other words,
they've drawn a blank. And on the question of a lab leak, the alternative, if
you like, far more controversial theory, again, nothing. If China has conducted
official investigations of those labs, if it's looked at the samples held or the
experiments carried out, very little has been released, if anything, about what
has been found. And it's in that atmosphere, I think, that we understand why it
is that President Biden has felt this is such an urgent mission now for his
intelligence agencies to look with every tool, he said, for answers. But it also
tells us why those answers are so difficult to come by. In these comments from
Christopher Wray, though, you can see, I think, something of the way that
intelligence process is being played out in public. We've known for some time
that the FBI felt that the lab leak was the most likely of scenarios, although
with low levels of confidence. But this was his first public statement backing
up that position. And he used some pretty firm words to do so. The FBI has for
quite some time now assessed that the origins of the pandemic are most likely a
potential lab incident in Wuhan. So here you're talking about a potential leak
from a Chinese government controlled lab that killed millions of Americans.
Yeah, pretty uncompromising, those words, John. And what have the Chinese said
in response? Well, Jamie, you know, China has long pushed back at the idea of
the lab leak. It has, you know, in some ways doubled down on those denials by
pointing its finger at US-based laboratories and suggested that investigations
ought to take place here. Really, China's position, though, is to refute any
suggestion that the virus came from China in any form at all, either natural or
as a result of a lab leak. Today, as expected, we heard from the Chinese Foreign
Ministry spokesman, Nao Ning, dismissing again in no uncertain terms the FBI's
claims. China firmly opposes any political manipulation with the origins tracing
in any form. Employing the intelligence community in science matters is in
itself the evidence of politicization of origins tracing. Given that the US
intelligence community has been making things up, their conclusion lacks
credibility. By rehearsing the lab leak theory, the US will not succeed in
discrediting China. Instead, it will only hurt their own credibility. China
saying it's political then, John. As you say, this has been around for some
time, but it is the first time that the FBI director has said this publicly. Do
you read anything into the timing? Well, in the last couple of days, we did have
a slight sort of shift of the needle, if you like, in terms of the intelligence
assessments. We heard from the US Energy Department that it has changed its
intelligence assessment to supporting the FBI view that the lab leak was now the
most likely. That brings the total number of agencies supporting that position
to two. We are told that four intelligence agencies are still of the view that
the natural origin is more likely and two are undecided. So this is, at least to
some extent, a debate that is shifting slightly. John Sudworth in New York,
thanks very much. Well, in early 2021, a team of 10 scientists from the World
Health Organization visited Wuhan to assess for themselves the origins of the
virus. At the end of a much delayed and closely monitored trip, they concluded
that the lab leak theory was, quote, extremely unlikely. Although even the
director general of the WHO, Dr Tedros, later said that all hypotheses remain
open and require further study. The Dutch virologist Marion Coutmans was one of
the scientists on that trip. So what does she make of the FBI director and, as
John said, the US Department of Energy now saying a lab leak was the most likely
theory? I find it very difficult to make anything of that because they are not
sharing what they are basing that on. It's classified information, so it's
really difficult for me to assess it. So based on your first-hand experience of
going to China, going to Wuhan, what conclusion did you draw? So the conclusion
that our team drew was given all the information available that the zoonotic
origin was the most likely route, also given the history of wild animal farming
and wild animal marketing. And that's what we concluded, and that the lab leak
route was the least likely. Do you feel that you got the kind of access you
needed to state with confidence which was the most likely cause? So the first
visit really was focused on bringing together all the little pieces of
information that had been collected in Wuhan around the initial outbreak, plus
data from studies that we had asked Chinese scientists to do. And based on that
information, which was quite a lot of data, we concluded we do think the
zoonotic hypothesis is most likely, but we would like to see a whole list of
studies to dig deeper because it's clear that we were not at the root of the
start of the pandemic. Yeah, and then questions were raised by, I mean, 2021,
after your trip, questions were raised by Dr Tedros, the head of the WHO, said
there needed to be more investigation, all hypotheses remain open, require
further study. Then Anthony Fauci, who had previously said that he thought it
was most likely zoonotic transfer, said he was not convinced the virus
originated naturally. So something happened, it would appear, to make people
doubt your conclusion. Well, I think you have to ask them what happened. We have
shared all our findings. All the data is in a 400-page report. Of course, there
can always be discussion, but what you would want to see with discussion is also
pieces of evidence. And there hasn't been that evidence, is that what you're
saying? That's exactly right. There's evidence, but we cannot share it. There's
evidence, it's classified, and that really stops the discussion. That's no
longer a discussion you can have among scientists because there is no discussion
to be had. And it would be very much welcomed if real data would be shared. So
would you then call for the US intelligence agencies to share that data with
people like you who have had first-hand experience of the situation in Wuhan?
Yes, at least with WHO, and then they can decide who they would call in for that
discussion. Because I guess the problem now is the politics of all of this has
become so pointed. Do you feel it's now going to be very difficult to separate
the geopolitics from the science? Yes, I felt that for a long time already,
because that was our experience. There was already a report circulating that
there was not enough data before anyone had seen our report. So that
geopolitical process has been ongoing for a long time already, and it really
doesn't help. The implications for humanity are pretty serious, aren't they? If
we can never really get to the bottom of the origins of COVID-19 because of
politics, because of geopolitics. I think that's the real tragedy of this,
because the questions are very important, and it's crucial that we understand
what happens. And if that is a lab origin, that's horrible, but it needs to be
studied, it needs to be looked at. But you cannot go saying that, accusing that,
without really providing the evidence for it. Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. You heard there Marian Kopmans, one of the WHO scientists who went to
Wuhan, saying that geopolitics means that there is no longer the possibility for
a rational scientific discussion. What do you make of that? So I have a lot of
respect for Dr. Kopmans. First, I need to clarify, she's not a WHO scientist.
She is a Dutch scientist who was part of an independent committee, independent
team, organized by the WHO. I think it's a very important point, because in your
conversation with her, you mentioned how Tedros had not endorsed the findings of
this international committee. So in my view, which has been my view from the
very beginning, there's a very, very real possibility this pandemic stems from
an accidental lab incident in Wuhan, followed by a criminal cover-up. We need a
full investigation. There's no doubt that politics have been part of this from
the beginning, starting from well before anybody was saying anything. And on day
one of this pandemic, the Chinese government began its very significant
crackdown. It was hiding records, destroying samples, silencing Chinese
journalists and scientists. It's done everything in its power to prevent a full
investigation. And I think the world needs to say enough is enough. Is it time
then for U.S. government agencies to be open about what intelligence they're
basing their revised theories on? Yeah, I would love that. I mean, I once had
all of the security access to read those kinds of documents. I don't have them
now. I certainly hope that they do. I mean, there are sometimes reasons why
intelligence agencies aren't able to share information, particularly if they are
protecting human sources who may be put at risk. But I certainly agree with Dr.
Koopmans that we should get everything out into the public sphere that we
possibly can, because it's just unbelievable and inconceivable, frankly, that
pick your number, an economist number, 20 million deaths from COVID-19, and
three years on, China is blocking the kind of comprehensive and unfettered
investigation that has always been required. Now, despite this public statement
by Christopher Wray, it's still a case, is it not, that most U.S. government
agencies do not subscribe to the lab leak theory, in public at least? Yeah, that
certainly is the case. And it's good that we have a level of skepticism in the
U.S. intelligence community. I think all of those intelligence agencies were
completely burned by the absolute failure of U.S. intelligence in the run-up to
the Iraq War. So I think that's very significant. Having said that, the FBI is
the agency of the United States government that does forensic investigations,
and the Department of Energy is not just the electric company. The Department of
Energy oversees the U.S. national labs, like Lawrence Livermore National Lab.
They employ tens of thousands of the top scientists in the world, including
physicists, chemists, biologists, and others. So it's very significant. But I'll
be the first to say we don't have an absolute answer to this question, which is
why we need to keep digging, which is why we need a full investigation, because
we can't just give the Chinese government veto power over whether or not we
investigate the worst pandemic in a century. Jamie Metzl, former member of the
U.S. National Security Council and WHO's advisory committee, thanks very much
indeed. Now police searching for a 2-month-old baby near Brighton say that they
have found the remains of an infant. This follows the arrest of Constance Martin
and Mark Gordon, the couple who disappeared in early January and who are now
being held on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. We're joined from
Brighton now by our correspondent Frankie McCamley. So Frankie, just give us an
update. What have they said about this discovery? Well, good evening, Jamie.
Yes, we were called to this urgent police press conference this evening, very
unexpected after we'd just had an announcement a few hours earlier with the same
officers who had basically told us there was very little to say, despite this
huge search operation that we could see was going on. But outside Sussex Police
Headquarters, Detective Superintendent Lewis Bassford from the Metropolitan
Police joined Chief Superintendent James Collis from Sussex Police, and they
gave the update that everyone really had been dreading, that a baby's remains
had been found in woodland close to where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon had
been arrested on Monday. So it seems from around half past two this afternoon
and 5.30 this afternoon, just before we were starting to see it was going dark
and this investigation was going into a third evening, those remains were found.
Now, police did not say these were definitely the remains of the baby they were
searching for, and they asked the public and the media not to speculate as a
post-mortem examination does still need to be carried out. But officers, I think
it's important to say, officers also used this press conference to thank members
of the public, and especially the person they said who spotted the pair in a
shop in Brighton, which led to their arrest 53 days after they were reported
missing. As you say, post-mortem will be carried out, but in terms of the
investigation, what happens next, do we think? Well, this, Jamie, has been a
huge investigation, as many of us know, trying to track this couple down for
weeks. Their car was found on fire on the side of a motorway. What alarmed
police even more was that there was evidence that Constance Martin had given
birth. The couple then and their newborn baby, they were nowhere to be found,
and that triggered this national search that lasted around seven and a half
weeks. The couple was spotted in Liverpool, Essex, London, East Sussex. They
were captured on CCTV. It's understood they were sleeping outdoors in a tent,
trying to live off the grid. But over the last few days, the focus really has
been here in Brighton, where I am, where the couple were arrested. Alarms were
sounded even louder when the couple didn't have their baby with them, and police
say, you know, and we've seen it, they threw all of their resources into the
search for this infant, and we know officers began searching open ground,
allotments, using all sorts of devices, from sniffer dogs, thermal imaging,
drones, helicopters, civilians even joined in with some searches, and especially
in some remote parts of the South Downs. Witnesses have told us they saw
officers searching bins, brambles, you know, everything they can. But this, of
course, an operation trying to find a baby less than two months old. As the
weather down here, I can confirm, is cold, and it's getting colder and colder,
and officers getting increasingly concerned as the days go by, and as the
investigation will now continue into this evening. Frankie McCamley in Brighton,
thanks very much. Oyo Mange, Oyo Mange, we shall stand, Oyo Mange. Supporters of
Nigeria's President-elect, Bola Tinubu, celebrating his victory today. After
waiting several days for the election result, the ruling party candidates less
than inclusive slogan, It's My Turn, turned out to be accurate. Mr Tinubu will
lead a nation of more than 200 million people, Africa's most populous nation,
and one of its youngest. His age, though, is a bit of a mystery, as we'll hear.
His feelings, though, are clear enough. I am profoundly humbled that you have
elected me to serve as the 16th President of our beloved country. This is a
shiny moment in the life of any man and affirmation of our democratic existence.
A shiny moment in his life, he said. But the opposition want to take the shine
off his win. They've called the election a sham. They say they'll challenge the
result in court. So, questions about the election process itself. But what more
do we know about Bola Tinubu, the man who's been declared Nigeria's President-
elect? Dr Tony Osakpawam Agbons is a researcher in governance and leadership
issues in Nigeria and a senior lecturer at Anglia Ruskin University. The
President-elect is quite popular in Nigeria, but his past is really shrouded in
a lot of secrecy. I can't put my finger on it, who he really is. He's known as
the political godfather. Why is that? Yeah, he's a political godfather because
he's been a senator in our parliament as far back as 1992, 1993. And then he's
been a governor of a state, Lagos, one of our very popular states, was governor
for eight years, do two terms. He's been in politics. He was one of the main
champions of the current President, Mohamedou Buhari. So he's quite known. But
when you talk about really knowing somebody's past, for him, there's a lot of
secrecy about him. Yes, indeed there are questions, are there not, about his age
and his health. And just have a listen to this. This was my World Tonight
colleague Razia Iqbal speaking to the governor of one of Nigeria's states, Zuna
state, and she asked him what seems to be a pretty simple question. How old is
the President-elect? He is about 70 years old, I believe. About 70 years old. Do
you not know exactly how old he is? No, no. I have not bothered to look at his
age because for me, age is just a number. It's the quality of people you have
around you that determines how well you govern. We've seen many states that are
governed by very young people and they have messed up. And we've seen states
where old people who are governing, that have also messed up. He's older than me
and that's it. I don't bother about these things. OK, Governor, do you bother
about the concerns around the President-elect's health? There have been many
stories circulating about his health. He has spent long periods in hospital in
London and refused to elaborate what he was being treated for. You can check in
London, he had knees replaced in London. There is nothing to elaborate upon. He
had his knees replaced. And I do not think he has any fundamental health
problems that are any more serious than that of any average 70-year-old. The
reason I bring it up, sir, is that there has been considerable speculation
inside Nigeria that his visible trembling of hands and occasional slurred speech
suggests that he could be in the early stages of Parkinson's disease. This, of
course, is absolutely critical information to have about the leader of a
country. Can you unequivocally tell us that he has no serious health issues,
such as Parkinson's? I cannot unequivocally tell you because I'm not his doctor.
But as an innocent bystander who has worked with him in the last eight months, I
can unequivocally tell you that President-elect Aswaj Bola Ametunubu is healthy
enough to govern Nigeria. The verdict there of the governor of Kaduna State,
Nassir Ahmad El-Refae, speaking to my World Tonight colleague Razia Iqbal. Tony,
listening to that, what now stands before him? What challenges does the new
president have? Listening to that interview, I'm just like really taken aback as
to how senior public officers can try to deceive the populace, deceive the
people. The truth of the matter is, like your reporter rightly put to Governor
Nassir El-Refae, we've all seen in public during this campaign, the president-
elect now, shying away from debates, shying away from public engagement where he
will be interrogated because we all know and we believe that his cognitive
ability is impaired. He's been known to be very incoherent. There's the popular
speech he gave where he was saying a town hall different from Bala Blue, Bulaba.
Look, English may be some of our second language, but there's nothing like that
in the English language, which is the official language in Nigeria. And there
were a lot of other gaffes he made during this campaign. But moving away from
the election itself, though, what are the big challenges facing the country? A
huge country, more than 200 million people, a very young country as well. What
are the main challenges for Nigeria and Nigerian society at the moment? I would
say the main challenge facing the country is that of insecurity and the poor
state of the economy. Nigeria, as we speak, the national debt is about 77
trillion naira. GDP has plummeted and has a high rate of unemployment, more than
33 percent. 133 million of Nigerians out of the 200 million are in
multidimensional poverty. These are figures that were released by the Nigerian
National Bureau for Statistics. So those challenges are there. And Nigeria has
actually hoped that this election was going to bring a new team in place, to
take the country to a different pathway. But having the same of the same, that
is why you find a level of disenchantment in the country at the moment. And that
was Dr Tony Osakpamwan Agbonz, a senior lecturer at Anglia Ruskin University on
the new president-elect of Nigeria. Now, more leaked WhatsApp exchanges
involving the then Health Secretary Matt Hancock during the height of the Covid
pandemic have just been published by The Daily Telegraph, this time concerning
the decision to close schools. Let's speak to our political correspondent, David
Wallace-Lockhart. David, so what's in them? So we should say the full context on
all of this is that we haven't seen the messages in their original form. We're
going off what The Telegraph is reporting here. But one of their latest batches
of leaked messages from May 2020 appeared to show a discussion between Matt
Hancock and then the then Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson. At one
point, they're discussing protective equipment from schools. Matt Hancock says
there must be a way that schools can access the protective equipment from local
public services if they have no alternative. And Sir Gavin replies that they can
as a last resort, so that in his words, they can't use it as a reason not to
open. All of them will, but some will just want to say they can't so they have
an excuse to avoid having to teach. What joys. I'm not sure that's something a
lot of teachers would be particularly happy about. Another exchange from October
2020, after Gavin Williamson had announced a delay in A-Levels, Matt Hancock
messages him to say it's a cracking announcement and adds, what a bunch of
absolute arseys the teaching unions are. So I don't think that's something that
the teaching unions will be too happy about. We have heard from Matt Hancock's
spokesman this evening. He says The Telegraph are publishing partial accounts,
obviously spun with an agenda and that Matt Hancock was focusing on saving
lives. We have approached Sir Gavin Williamson, no comment from him. But it does
appear that the pair also had some different approaches to the ideas of shutting
down schools during the pandemic. Gavin Williamson writing for The Telegraph on
a separate issue there, saying that perhaps he should have resigned when he was
serving as Education Secretary. And The Telegraph promising more of this to
come? Yes, that does appear to be the case. Now, we know that the reply from the
Prime Minister Rishi Sunak when he was asked about these leaks at Prime
Minister's questions this afternoon was that there is a Covid public inquiry
going on. We should let that do its job. We should not be looking at how Covid
and lockdowns were handled via leaked messages in the media. But it does appear
that The Telegraph has a huge number of WhatsApps that Matt Hancock sent during
the pandemic. And it does appear that they seem to be suggesting there will be
many more stories to come out of these. David, many thanks. David Wallace-
Lockhart, our political correspondent there. Now, the three contenders to be the
next First Minister of Scotland have been taking part in the first of several
campaign debates this evening. Kate Forbes, Hamza Yousaf and Ash Regan are the
trio hoping to succeed. Nicola Sturgeon, of course, Paul Hutchin is a journalist
from The Daily Record and he's been watching the debate and joins us now from
Edinburgh. First off, Paul, you've been watching via live stream, I think,
because media access has been pretty limited, hasn't it? Tell us about that.
That's right. There was a big row that broke yesterday. The SNP said that no
media would be allowed into the first hostings in this leadership contest in
order to give their members a safe space. Now, as you can imagine, that led to a
bit of an outcry and a partial U-turn, which was that a limited number of
journalists were allowed in the venue in Cumbernauld and they agreed to a live
stream as well, which allowed anyone in the country to watch it. So it was
overshadowed by a transparency row. And how did it go? It was a fairly mild-
mannered debate. People were expecting fireworks, but that didn't quite happen.
Probably because SNP members didn't really ask hardball questions. I think that
it all went off in quite a good spirit. I think that there's a debate next week
on TV that will probably be spicier. That doesn't mean to say that there weren't
issues that divided the candidates. I think one of the main ones would be the
Scottish Government's legislation on gender recognition reform, which has
currently been blocked by the UK Government. Now, Health Secretary Humza Yousaf,
he believes that the Scottish Government should be challenging that decision,
using taxpayers' money to go to court. But the two other candidates, Kate Forbes
and Ash Regan, are sceptical of the legislation and don't believe that the
Scottish Government should be pursuing a court challenge. So that was an issue
on which the candidates agreed to disagree. And that was probably the sharpest
division amongst them all. A lot has been said about Kate Forbes, her Christian
beliefs and her views about equal marriage. Did that come up at all, or was that
not something that the members wanted to get into? Well, it wasn't asked by a
member, but it was raised by Humza Yousaf. Now, as you say, the contest has been
dominated so far by Kate Forbes' view that she would not have voted for same-sex
marriage had she been an MSP in 2014. And that went down really badly. And it
came up in the hustings tonight when a member asked if someone who has a
personal faith could rise to the top. Now, Humza Yousaf pounced on that by
saying that people from the LGBT community would want a first minister who could
look the first minister in the eye and know that the first minister would
basically promote LGBT rights and do so with enthusiasm. That was clearly a dig
at Kate Forbes, who has kind of said that she would accept the law as it stands,
even though she's personally opposed to same-sex marriage. Quite a few more of
these to come then, Paul. That was the first of nine, and I'll probably be
watching them all. Right. Well, good luck, Paul Hutchin, from the Daily Record,
there on that first debate in the first minister contest in Scotland. Now, from
recording a subversive reggae version of La Marseillaise to propositioning a
startled Whitney Houston on live television, the French singer-songwriter Serge
Gainsbourg was a provocateur par excellence. But he was also a celebrated
cultural figure in France, for his musical innovation, for his duets with
Brigitte Bardot and Jane Birkin, as well as for his relationships with them. 32
years after his death, a new exhibition about the Gainsbourg oeuvre has opened
in Paris, and Vincent Dowd has been to see it. Je t'aime, je t'aime, oh oui, je
t'aime. Outside France, Serge Gainsbourg is associated above all with the song
Je T'aime. In 1968, the version with Jane Birkin became a mini-scandal. The BBC
banned it for being too sexy. In Paris, the new exhibition at the National
Library reminds us this was the original version, opposite Brigitte Bardot.
Gainsbourg was admired for reinventing Gallic cool for the rock era. One of the
exhibitions co-curator is Anatole Magiart. The basis of the exhibition is the
550 song titles that are written on the facades of the exhibition. They're all
there from 1954 until 1990. A lot of them are in our collective culture as
French people, but also internationally with songs like Je t'aime, moi non plus,
Bonnie and Clyde, Aux armes, etc. These are songs that have had a major, major
impact here in France. Bonnie and Clyde In 1968, the song Bonnie and Clyde was a
product of Gainsbourg's brief relationship with Brigitte Bardot. Caroline
Reynaud of the Library says no one in the 1950s would have predicted Serge
Gainsbourg would turn out an admired musician and writer. He had this very
particular way to sing at the audience and at first it was a disaster. He kind
of probably always knew that he had some kind of a destiny to fulfill. It's one
of the contradictions of this personality, you know, very shy and at the same
time wanting to express something. Tiens, bouc, petite fille, dans mon
commextric Oddly, what the utterly French Gainsbourg sometimes expressed himself
in was the English language. Serge Gainsbourg was one of the first to work
really the French language and to make it sound proper with rock. French has a
problem with the way it sounds. He was one of the first to bring inside French
language some English words. There was this song called Comextrip, we all know
in France, with all this shbam, pop, blop, which is not common in French
language. So we're looking at six original manuscripts by Serge Gainsbourg
around the song Fort Moustang. These songs were recorded in the UK. We get that
very British sound, you know, the fuzz rock guitars and so on. And so it
actually begins, this song, with a brochure about a Fort Moustang, integrating
also Anglicisms into the French language. He used to use words for the sounds of
words, not for the meaning, like the poets. This song, Comment te diras-tu,
meaning How to say goodbye, it rhymes in X. And we don't have many words in X in
France. So we had to cut the words. The new exhibition centres on Serge
Gainsbourg as writer, but he was one of the most popular French celebrities of
his generation, and as he grew older, he could appear deliberately offensive.
His shyness was one of the elements that drove him to this very provocative
character that we see appear from the 80s. As with any good double, especially
literary ones, at the end the act finishes by taking over the initial
personality. Serge Gainsbourg is remembered now for some very ill-tempered TV
appearances, and when he was young, for attracting some very beautiful women.
The exhibition at the Pompidou Centre wants us to remember as well a prolific
and inventive writer. Vincent Dowd reporting. Before I say not adieu, but au
revoir, our closing headline tonight, China has accused Washington of political
manipulation after the head of the FBI said the Covid pandemic was probably
triggered by a leak from a laboratory in the city of Wuhan. Other US agencies
have come to different conclusions. The Dutch virologist Marion Koopmans, who as
part of a UN team travelled to China to investigate the origin of the virus,
told this programme that no evidence had been shown to support the lab leak
theory. That is The World Tonight. This is James Kamara-Sami. I'll be back
tomorrow at ten, but for now, from me and everyone on the programme, goodnight.
Studio direction was by Alison Purcell-Davies, the editor was Jonathan Fenton-
Fisher. Marco Valdo's increasing obsession with nurturing the plant at the
factory where he works brings surprising results. The rain and the leaves
continues in a moment. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you do after
being a prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next
Wednesday morning at nine. Now, The Rain and the Leaves from Italo Calvino's
Marco Valdo, a show dramatised and narrated by Toby Jones and starring Mackenzie
Crook. Marco Valdo worked as a packer for Spavenco. He spent his days packing
and unpacking boxes on the factory floor. But every morning, Marco Valdo had
another special task. He worked in the reception lobby, away from the conveyor
belts. Good morning, signora. I'm sorry? Morning. Yes, of course, good morning.
Looks like it's getting ready to rain again. Over there, by the basin. Right,
thank you. It was Marco Valdo's special responsibility to water the solitary
potted plant that sat in the corner. It was a green houseplant with an erect,
thin stalk from which broad, long-stemmed, shiny leaves stuck out on either
side. It was one of those plants that are so plant-shaped, with leaves that are
so leaf-shaped, they don't seem real. Everything OK? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Thank
you, signora. I mean... All right, then. I mean, if it was up to me, signora,
I'd quite like to move the plant into the... The truth was that the plant was
suffering. And it would continue to suffer if it stayed where it was, in the
shadow between a curtain and the umbrella stand. Not enough light, or air, or
dew. It's not good. Not good. Every morning, Marco Valdo discovered a new and
grim indication of the plant's distress. The stem of one leaf was drooping,
unable to support the weight. Another leaf had become as spotted as a measle
child, and a third had turned bright yellow. Here you go. Nonetheless, the main
stalk of the plant continued to grow, taller and taller, to thrive, in fact.
Without its fronds, without its leaves, the stalk grew until it was naked as a
broom handle, with just a clump of leaves at the top, which made it look a bit
like a palm tree. I think it's going to rain. Sorry, signora. You can almost
smell it. Yes. But Marco Valdo was preoccupied. He contemplated the plant with
the same compassion he'd feel for an ailing relative. Oh, dear, dear, dear. In
fact, he viewed this lanky, yellowing bush, stranded in this sterile lobby, as a
kind of companion. His companion in misfortune. Is it dead yet? What? The plant.
The plant was known as the plant. Maybe because the plant was the only
representative of the vegetable kingdom anywhere in the factory. Oh, it'll be
okay. But the truth was that the plant had come to dominate Marco Valdo's waking
thoughts. When he examined the gathering clouds in the sky, he did so not like a
city dweller debating whether he should wear a raincoat, but more like a farmer
praying for a drought to end. Here we go again. Whenever it started to rain,
Marco Valdo would drop what he was doing, escape the factory floor, and run
right back to the lobby. I told you, rain. He would rush over to the plant, take
the pot in his arms, and place it outside in the courtyard. Hurry, hurry. And
almost immediately, the plant, feeling the water spilling from its leaves,
seemed to expand, offering more of itself to the sky, spreading the greatest
possible surface to the rain. And Marco Valdo stood there, transfixed, observing
the plant as the green of its leaves seemed to intensify under the force of his
gaze. Careful, you'll get it all wet. But Marco Valdo and the plant stayed out
there in the courtyard, man and plant facing each other. The man feeling plant-
like sensations in the wet, rooted to the spot. And the plant, unaccustomed to
the open air, stunned into the same state of amazement that a man feels,
drenched by a sudden downpour, his clothes sodden. Man and plant. Plant and man.
Much later on that particular afternoon, as clocking off approached... Signor
Villigelmo? Signor? But Signor Villigelmo, the foreman, was preoccupied with his
final checks. What is it? I was wondering if I might leave the plant out in the
courtyard overnight. What are you talking about? The plant, in the lobby. It
needs water. I'm trying to finish for the day. And it's going to rain tonight.
Are you crazy? Why? What if someone steals it? The plant? Yes, the plant. That's
factory property, and guess who'll get the blame when it goes missing? Really? I
can't risk it. What if I take it home with me? What are you on about? How about
I look after it until tomorrow morning? I can load it onto my scooter, and that
way it'll get all the rain it needs. Well, it just needs more rain, Signor.
Okay, okay. But it's your responsibility. You understand? Hunched over the
handlebars of the scooter, bundled up in his windbreaker, with the plant pot
strapped to the rack, Marco Valdo, the plant, and the bike looked like a single
entity. In fact, bundled and hunched as he was, Marco Valdo practically
disappeared, so that it looked as if the plant was driving the scooter. And
every time Marco Valdo checked over his shoulder, the plant looked taller,
greener, and more leafy. It's a Christmas tree! No, no, no, no, no, no. It's
not. Christmas is months away. Careful, it's fragile. Where do you think you're
taking that? Inside. In here? Yes. There's no room in here for a tree. It's not
a tree, it's a plant, and it needs my help. I'm going to put it on the
windowsill. I have to keep an eye on it. All through supper, Marco Valdo stared
at the plant, balanced on the sill. And all evening, he surveyed the shifting
clouds above. And that night, he barely slept a wink. The worst thing about the
tiny attic into which Marco Valdo's family were crammed like tin sardines was
not the lack of sleeping space, nor was it the restless murmuring of his wife
and six children, top and tailing with each other, nor even the ongoing rumble
of the traffic far below. No, the main drawback with life in the eves was the
rain. There were at least four or five leaks in the attic ceiling, and on rainy
nights, he was kept awake by the ticking and tocking of various drips. Normally,
the sound would make him shudder at the prospect of rheumatism. But tonight, the
mild, steady rain soothed him, because it promised nourishment for the sickly
plant, fuel for the unfolding of its leaves, until, like the billowing sails of
a drifting galleon, floating on an empty ocean. Papa, wake up! Papa, wake up!
Happy Christmas, Papa! The tree has grown! What? Wait, let me see. Marco Valdo
couldn't believe his eyes. The plant now filled half the window. The leaves had
doubled in number, no longer drooping, but erect and sharp as swords.
Extraordinary! He restrapped the plant to the back of his scooter and... At
work, he decided to leave the plant out in the courtyard again. And as the rain
continued all morning, he stopped what he was doing and stared out at the
thirsty plant. What's going on? Look. What? The plant. What's wrong with it?
Nothing. The rain did it so much good last night, I've decided to leave it out
there again. Signor Villigelmo, the foreman, found himself being led out into
the drizzle. See how much it's grown? This isn't the plant that I... Yes.
Crikey. The following weekend, the sky was again scattered with black, cumulus
clouds. Boss? Boss? Marco Valdo, how's the weather looking tomorrow? Oh, bad. My
wife says it's already raining wherever. Good, good. Perhaps... Perhaps I could
take the plant on a trip. A trip? In search of rain. Marco Valdo spent most of
Saturday and the whole of Sunday racing up and down streets, chasing the clouds
most likely to burst. Every time he checked the plant, it was still securely
strapped, but it was growing taller and taller. As tall as the taxis that
surrounded him when he stopped. By mid-afternoon, the plant was as tall as the
trams, and with broader and broader leaves, so that the rain streamed directly
onto his waterproof hood, like a shower. Occasionally, he readjusted the plant
to meet the trajectory of the shifting rainfall, so that it looked like the
plant was dragging the rain directly from the clouds, as everything rushed
ahead, drawn by the same power. Wind, cloud, rain, plant, wheels. Marco Valdo!
Marco Valdo! Work began again as usual on the Monday morning. Marco Valdo!
Signor? Where is it? What? What have you done with the plant? The plant? Have
you lost it? No, no. Come with me. Where have you hidden it? It's there.
Outside, look. Where? There. But Marco Valdo was pointing to a tree. A tall,
remarkably healthy tree that reached all the way up to the second floor of the
main building. What is that? Well, it's grown a bit. How are you going to get
that thing back into the lobby? Well, I thought we could stay outside. Don't
worry. Don't worry. Okay. Okay. Right. You're going to have to take it back to
the nursery in town and exchange it for a proper plant that we can put back in
reception where it belongs. Do you understand? Of course, Marco Valdo had
understood these instructions, and he'd intended to do exactly what he'd been
told to do. But every time he got close to the right street, he couldn't bring
himself to do it. He just didn't have the heart to give up this creature, now
that he had raised it so successfully. Nothing in his whole life, it seemed to
him, had given him the same satisfaction he'd got from the plant. And so he
didn't stop. He just kept going. He drove the tree up and down, crisscrossing
the city, to-ing and fro-ing along the embankments and across bridges. By now,
foliage from the tree completely engulfed his scooter, and Marco Valdo ploughed
off, hidden from view. And all the leaves and the fronds and even the stalk,
which had remained very thin, swayed back and forth as if trembling under the
rainfall. And later, much later, as the afternoon wore on and the sun began to
set, the light began to blend with rainbows, and the plant, which had kept on
growing as long as the rain endured, was now virtually exhausted. But Marco
Valdo raced on and on, out of the city. He was oblivious. He didn't notice as
the intense green of the leaves began to yellow. He didn't even notice the
procession of traffic that he and the tree had accumulated behind them as they
careered out of town. The crowds cheered, whooped and tooted their horns as the
yellowing leaves flew towards them from the scooter ahead. Finally, Marco Valdo
looked up from his handlebars and noticed the leaves dispersing in his wake. And
when he checked behind him, expecting to see the thick green crown of abundant
growth, he saw that the tree had gone. Only the thin, bare stalk remained, and a
single yellow leaf right at the very top. And that's when he noticed the
procession he had inspired. And in the late afternoon glow of rainbows at dusk,
he watched as hundreds of yellow leaves twisted and twirled in and out of the
night. He watched as hundreds of hands reached up to grab and snatch. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.