TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and the literature, but yet you can still see it as a potential threat. This is
the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. This is Alex Ritson with The
Newsroom. Nigeria's governing party candidate Bola Tinabu looks on course for
victory in Saturday's disputed presidential poll. The US Supreme Court considers
a challenge to Joe Biden's key policy of forgiving hundreds of billions of
dollars of student debt. Gen Z is on track to be the generation that owns the
least amount of wealth. Reports that Russian forces are on the verge of taking
Bakhmut, a city which has become a symbol of Ukrainian resistance. Russia
doesn't count the cost, simply sending more and more people in constant assaults
on our positions. Media tycoon Rupert Murdoch admits in court that Fox News
anchors endorsed the false idea the US presidency was stolen from Donald Trump
and out with mummy. I take care of her. I maintain her. She's like my spiritual
girlfriend. At home, she's in my room. She sleeps with me. The Peruvian delivery
man found drinking in a park with 800-year-old human remains. First, this news.
Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. The governing party candidate has won
the most votes in Nigeria's disputed presidential election, but the Electoral
Commission has yet to confirm Bala Tinubu's win, as he must also pass the
benchmark of 25% of all votes in all of Nigeria's states. He has a total of
almost 9 million votes, far ahead of his main rival, Atiku Abubakar. More from
Mayani Jones. The head of the Electoral Commission hasn't yet announced a
winner, but results from all 36 Nigerian states and the capital, Abuja, have
been announced. Mr Tinubu appears to have won with 36% of the votes. There's
been frustration with the slow pace at which the results were announced. The
Electoral Commission says this was because of technical issues with the new
electronic system that has only been used nationally in these polls. The two
main opposition parties have called the process a sham and called for new
elections. The fire service in Greece says 16 people have been killed and at
least 85 were injured in a late-night train crash. Rescue workers have been
scouring the severely damaged carriage as a passenger train near the central
city of Larissa had collided with a cargo train, causing it to derail and catch
fire. An ambulance worker at the scene gave the latest information. The injured
have fractures in the limbs, hip and rib area and breathing problems. The fire
has been put out in the front carriages. Firemen have gone into the carriages,
trying to remove the dead so that they can then rescue those trapped inside. The
United Nations' nuclear watchdog says it's discussing with Iran the issue of
highly enriched uranium particles recently discovered at the country's Fordow
enrichment plant. Iran has previously denied that it plans to build a nuclear
weapon. Bethany Bell sent this report from Vienna. In the report, the IAEA said
it has asked Iran to explain the origin of the particles of uranium, which were
enriched up to 83.7% purity. Weapons-grade uranium is 90%. The particles were
found earlier this year at the Fordow nuclear site, which is dug into a
mountain. The report said Iran had informed the agency that unintended
fluctuations in enrichment levels may have occurred. Brazil's Supreme Court has
ordered the conditional release of some of the people who participated in the
violent anti-government assault and government institutions in the capital,
Brasilia, last month. The court said that 137 alleged rioters will have to wear
electronic tags while they await trial. The rioters refused to accept President
Lula's narrow victory over the far-right Jair Bolsonaro in October's elections.
World News from the BBC. The coffins of 65 victims of a migrant shipwreck in
southern Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in Crotone in Calabria
region. They died when the boat they were travelling in hit rocks and broke up
in a storm on Sunday. About 80 people survived, others are still missing. Some
relatives from Germany and elsewhere have arrived to pay their respects. The US
Supreme Court has had arguments over the legitimacy of President Biden's plan to
give loan relief to millions of students. Six Republican-controlled states have
brought the case, arguing Mr Biden is exceeding his powers. He promised to
cancel $430 billion worth of student loans after the COVID pandemic. President
Putin has signed an amended language law which will ban the use of non-Russian
words in official situations and government publications. It says these must use
Russian words and expressions that correspond to what are termed modern literary
norms. Residential areas often use such words as cottage, house and forest
instead of their Russian equivalents. Peruvian police have discovered a mummy
believed to be at least 600 years old inside the cool bag of a food delivery
worker. He was searched at an archaeological site. Will Leonardo picks up this
story. Officers in the southeastern Peruvian city of Buenos Aires had approached
a group of apparently drunk men before opening one of their food delivery bags.
Inside, they found a pre-Hispanic mummy squeezed into the square container in a
foetal position. One man then explained he'd been sharing a room with the
bandaged mummy, which he'd named Juanita. He said he considered Juanita to be
his spiritual girlfriend and had taken her out to show his mates. Experts have
since said the mummy is believed to be a 45-year-old male. Peru's Ministry of
Culture has now taken charge of the remains and the delivery worker has been
arrested. BBC World News. Hello, this is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. The
presidential election in Nigeria is Africa's biggest democratic test. Almost 90
million Nigerians were eligible to cast their ballots on Saturday and in the
past hour or so, the independent National Electoral Commission, INEC, has said
that Bola Tinebu, the ruling party candidate, has won the most votes. But he's
not yet officially been declared the winner. That's awaiting certification based
on winning enough voters in enough of Nigeria's constituent parts. The delay has
been causing some suspicion and opposition parties are calling for the results
to be scrapped, claiming that millions of votes have been tampered with.
International observers say there were major logistical problems and a lack of
transparency from INEC. Just before we came on the air, I got the latest from
our correspondent in Lagos, Mayoni Jones. So the Electoral Commission here in
Nigeria has been reading out results for all of the country's 36 states plus the
capital, Abuja. The head of the commission has now finished reading those
results. He says he is going through them manually and then will be moving on to
announce the winner. So the winner hasn't officially been announced by the
Electoral Commission yet, but based on the numbers that he's read out earlier
and that were read out by various representatives from each state, we know that
he's won the most amount of votes. He's won about nine million votes. So he's
far ahead of his main rival, Etiquette Bubaka. Because the election was on
Saturday. Why is it taking so long? Yeah, that's what a lot of Nigerians are
asking at the moment. There was a new electronic voting system, which was meant
to help agents at polling stations send their results out on Saturday. And so
they should have started being available to the public from Saturday evening.
But a lot of polling stations opened late and there seems to have been lots of
technical issues with this voting system. So the first results didn't start
trickling in until 24 hours after polls closed. And then they've been gradually
coming out since. Now, the Commission says there's been no foul play. It's just
because of technical issues. But the main opposition parties have come out now
and said that they are not happy with how it's all gone and they want the
election to be re-run. And are they going to get their wish granted? At the
moment, it doesn't seem likely. The Commission says they should go through the
proper channels, so they should go through the courts and present any evidence
of wrongdoing that they have. So for now, the Commission says it stands by its
results and the results that it's read out today are the official ones. What's
the mood in the country? Do people believe what they're being told? Obviously,
these announcements come quite late at night here in Nigeria, you know, around
2am. So many people are not quite aware. Those who are aware, I think, are
sceptical. There's already natural distrust in Nigeria in the electoral system
because the country has a history of vote buying and rigging. Walking through
the streets of Lagos today and talking to people, I think everyone feels very
confused as to why the results have come out this late and that's led to a lot
of mistrust, definitely. Myoni Jones. President Biden wants to alleviate the
plight of millions of people who find themselves in a lot of debt after their
studies. He had a plan to cancel some of that debt, but several states argue
that he's exceeding his powers. And on Tuesday, the US Supreme Court began
considering the matter. Janiyah Moore is a graduate student at Virginia
Commonwealth University. She took part in a demonstration outside the court in
support of President Biden's plan. Right now, I'm currently sitting on about
over $70,000 worth of student loan debt just to obtain my education. On top of
that, even wanting to further my education with a doctorate degree. So this to
me is very important, especially in regards to wanting to do more financial
movements in my life and also setting up a more stable foundation for myself and
my family as well. The Democrat Congressman Maxwell Frost explained why he
believed President Biden's plan was needed. We need to ensure that our people
don't have this crushing student debt so that way they can thrive, that way they
can move to ownership. You know, Gen Z is on track to be the generation that
owns the least amount of wealth. And I know what it's like too. People know me
for being Gen Z, but also being able to not afford an apartment here in DC. And
so this is part of this greater struggle to ensure that people have the
resources they need to have true freedom in this country. Our Washington
correspondent, Nomia Iqbal, explained how important the policy was for the
president. It was one of his key campaign promises to younger people that he
would forgive student debt. And so if it struck down, not only has he gone back
on that promise in the eyes of a lot of young people, certainly the ones that I
spoke to outside the Supreme Court, but also it sets this precedent where if the
Supreme Court decides that actually states that don't like any federal
initiatives can challenge it, then they could do that for any federal initiative
that President Biden has. But ultimately, the question that justices are being
asked is, is forgiving student loans in the name of the pandemic an abuse of
presidential power? So Donald Trump's administration invoked an act back in
March 2020 to pause student loan repayment requirements because of the pandemic.
Biden did the same. It cost a lot of money. And now Biden is saying we're going
to end the repayment pause, but we're going to forgive the debt that you have
accumulated depending on how much you earn, and especially for those people on
grants for low income families. So that is what's at the heart of the case.
You've got Republican led states challenging it. You've got two student loan
borrowers challenging it, saying, well, this unfairly excludes us. So that's
what the justices are looking at. We won't get a ruling, though, however, until
the summer. It's important to understand that student debt in this country
follows you right into your old age. So a lot of them were telling me that if
they have student debt and some of them are 19 years old, they've already got
debt of about $10,000. They won't be able to get a mortgage. It will affect, you
know, getting a car. It just affects their credit score. So that is why they are
so passionate about the justices upholding it. Nomier Iqbal, the repercussions
from the 2020 presidential election are continuing to echo around US politics.
This week, the media magnate Rupert Murdoch admitted that some of his news
anchors at Fox News were endorsing the idea that the 2020 presidential election
was stolen from Donald Trump and said they were wrong to do so. The admission
has caused widespread astonishment. I'm joined by our North America
correspondent, Peter Bowes. Peter, this is remarkable, isn't it? Well, you know,
given the scale of the controversy surrounding Donald Trump's false claims
following the election, it's certainly very surprising that Rupert Murdoch, the
chairman of the media empire that owns Fox News, the conservative, leaning news
network, that he now acknowledges that some of the station's presenters endorsed
the idea that the election had been stolen from the former president, even
though they, at Fox News, and Mr. Murdoch himself, understood it not to be true.
And perhaps even more surprising is that Mr. Murdoch is acknowledging in this
sworn deposition that he's given that at the time, he could have attempted to
rein in those TV hosts, but he failed to do it. He said with hindsight, he would
have liked the station to have been stronger in denouncing false claims. And
this emerged as part of a defamation case brought by Dominion, the company that
ran the electronic voting machines. Yes, Dominion Voting Systems, they say Fox
News maligned its reputation during the coverage of the 2020 election. This is a
voting technology firm that says those false and malicious rumors about voter
fraud were detrimental to its business, and it is holding Fox News accountable
to the tune of a whopping $1.6 billion. Now, Fox News has argued that the
comments are protected under the constitutional right to free speech, and that
it was only reporting on Mr. Trump's allegations and not supporting them. Fox
has also argued that the lawsuit mischaracterizes the facts by cherry picking
sound bites, omitting key context and mischaracterizing the record. So where is
this going to go? What will it mean? Well, there is a long way to go with this.
It's a complicated legal case, and in order to prove defamation, the company
would successfully have to argue that Fox presented this false information and
did so knowing that it was untrue. And it's a delicate legal question. Can Fox
be held liable for airing false claims? For their part, Fox's lawyers have said
that Dominion has produced zero evidentiary support for what they call its
dubious theory that high-level executives at Fox chose to publish and broadcast
or played a direct role in the creation and publication of false election lies.
So it is going to be quite a trial. It's due to begin in the state of Delaware
in April. Peter, thank you. Peter Bowes. President Biden's special envoy on
climate, John Kerry, is in Brazil to help find a way to preserve the Amazon
rainforest. In recent years, during the presidency of Jair Bolsonaro,
deforestation rose sharply as the then president promoted development over
preservation. But Brazil now has a new president, Lula da Silva, who's been a
vocal supporter of protecting the rainforests. Mr Kerry has been speaking to the
BBC about how the US could help Brazil. My colleague James Reynolds began by
asking him why the US was offering so much less money than some other donor
countries. We're not offering so little. That's only one piece of the mosaic of
what we're going to be contributing to this effort. We will be mobilizing. We
are mobilizing right now. Philanthropies, companies, countries, private sector
sources. The 50 million is just a down payment on our commitment to be part of
the Amazon fund. But in our system of government, the president has to, for
public money, get the Congress to agree to an allocation. There is legislation
in the Senate, Republican and Democrat sponsored alike, for about $4 billion.
There's $9 billion in the House piece of legislation. But that has to be passed.
And there's no guarantee that it will be. So we're proceeding to do a number of
things for a multilateral development bank reform efforts to be able to provide
more concessionary funding, using the voluntary carbon market as a source of
funding. And the president is going to be fighting for money from the Congress.
So there are many different sources that are going to be cobbled together here,
including, obviously, other nations in the world. Mr. Secretary, is the future
of climate change policy where you are in Brazil, or is it actually here in the
United States, in the state of Florida, where Bolsonaro, Trump and DeSantis are
all making degrees of effort to take national office? They would have very
different climate policies from yours. Well, we already saw the climate policies
of President Bolsonaro and certainly of President Trump, who pulled out of the
Paris Agreement. But I believe the world has made a decision now. This is not
something that one person in one country in politics or otherwise is going to be
able to turn around. Now, Ford Motor Company and General Motors are not going to
spend billions, as they have, to transform their factories and then all of a
sudden, because someone else is elected, they're going to turn around and say,
oh, we have a different view of the economic future. That's not happening. Not
in the United States, not anywhere in the world are people going to suddenly
turn away from the science and the facts that are dictating that we have to deal
with this crisis. John Kerry. This is the BBC World Service. Our main news this
hour. Bola Tinebu, the candidate for the governing party, has won the most votes
in Nigeria's presidential election and now appears headed for victory, but the
opposition has called for the poll's cancellation. President Zelensky has issued
a stark warning about the weeks-long Russian drive to encircle and capture the
eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut. In his nightly address, he said President
Putin's forces were shattering anything that could be used to shield the city's
defenders from the onslaught. The most vulnerable front line is around the city
of Bakhmut. This morning, our main general reported that in the last few days,
about 800 enemy fighters have been killed in his region alone. Russia doesn't
count the cost. Simply sending more and more people in constant assaults on our
positions. The intensity of the fighting is only increasing. I'm joined in the
studio by our reporter, Pierre Vickery. Pierre, how close are the Russians to
taking control of the city? Well, it's very difficult to be absolutely certain,
but what is certain is that slowly, slowly, the Russians are making progress. I
think you can get an idea of how difficult the situation is for the Ukrainians
by the vehemence of President Zelensky. A few weeks ago, he was saying it was
difficult, it was manageable. Now he's saying that it's only a town. I think all
of that indicates that the period of Ukrainian resistance in Bakhmut may be
coming to an end. Why are the Russians so determined to capture Bakhmut? They're
desperate for victory. They haven't had one on the battlefield since July. And
that was long before the Ukrainian counter-offensive that took back places like
Khariv, Kherson, and some of the other towns that were being contested. Putin
needs something. They have poured so much treasure, have lost... We're getting
reports of up to 800 to 1,000 Russian dead a day. It's just almost like a First
World War situation. Russia desperately needs a victory. And even if it's just
the ruins of a town, I've seen pictures of Bakhmut, there's hardly anything left
there, that will still go down as a win. So where does the war go from here?
Well, at the moment, the Ukrainians are in a defensive mode. They're trying to
absorb a Russian offensive that doesn't seem to have a huge amount of energy.
Success is being measured by advances of a few metres a day. It's almost like a
First World War battle. What we expect to come is a Ukrainian counter-offensive,
but that can't really start until they start getting the weapons that they have
been promised, the tanks, the longer-distance artillery pieces. And then one
expects Ukraine to try and cut a line across from Melitopol, Kherson, attack
Crimea, or put Crimea under a defensive position. And then the chemistry of the
war might start to change. So that's what we expect within the next four weeks.
Yeah, thank you, Pierre Vickery. Sydney has a famously vibrant gay scene, and
this year's Pride is coinciding with a big conference on human rights for LGBTQ
people. Organisers say it will highlight the horrific abuse of people in 70
countries where being gay is illegal. The conference brings together dozens of
Australian and international experts. Phil Mercer sent this report from Sydney.
Sydney World Pride! Half a million people are expected to attend Sydney World
Pride. There has been significant social change in Australia over the years.
Marriage equality laws were passed in 2017, and the age of consent for
homosexual and heterosexual sex is the same. But in dozens of other countries,
being gay is illegal. Discrimination and abuse are the focus of a three-day
human rights conference that's one of the centerpieces of the festival in
Sydney. Anna Brown, the chief executive of Equality Australia, an advocacy
organisation, says homophobia is rife. Around the world, we see LGBTIQ plus
people criminalised because of who they are or who they love. There's still 70
countries that criminalise same-sex sexual acts, and we need to make sure that
as a community, we move forward together. So ending conversion practices that
try and tell LGBTIQ people that we're somehow disordered or broken, protecting
LGBTIQ people seeking safety in asylum, First Nations justice, and responding to
these increasing threats to trans and gender diverse inclusion, including in
places like Australia, the US and the UK. World Pride promotes LGBTIQ rights
around the world. It was first staged in Rome in 2000, and has also been held in
Jerusalem, London and Madrid. The next festival will be in Washington DC in two
years' time. Phil Mercer. Richard Newman is here with the sport. Thank you,
Alex. We'll start in England with the FA Cup, where the 2021 winners Leicester
are out after a 2-1 defeat to the Championship side Blackburn in the last 16.
Rovers boss John Dahl-Thomason was delighted and says the margin of victory
could have been greater. It was a big achievement for the lads. Quarter-final in
the FA, the biggest cup in the world. All the tradition and the rovers in the
quarter-final, the lads have done an excellent job. Manchester City boss Pep
Guardiola says he never had any doubts that Phil Foden would return to form
after he scored twice in their 3-0 win at Bristol City. The England midfielders
had limited playing time since the World Cup. The impact from Phil since his
arrival has been outstanding. You know, in your career, you have many, many
years, so you have a time period maybe you can drop a little bit. But the way he
works every single day and always, you know, football pay off what you give
them. Brighton are also through, winning 1-0 at Stoke, and Fulham beat the
fellow tops of the flight side, Leeds 2-0. In Italy, Paul Pogba finally made his
first appearance for Juventus since moving back there from Manchester United
almost eight months ago in a 4-2 derby win over Torino. Cremonese shocked Roma
2-1 to leave Welsh side Airbus UK as now the only top flight club in Europe yet
to win this season. Rafael Nadal's pulled out of the Indian Wells Masters tennis
and the Miami Open because of the hip injury which forced him out of the
Australian Open. Carlos Alcaraz has also withdrawn from the Mexico Open because
of the leg problem, which troubled him at the Rio Open final defeat to Cameron
Norrie. And New Zealand Rugby say they'll decide on who will lead them beyond
this year's World Cup in the next six weeks, meaning it could be confirmed that
the current head coach, Ian Foster, won't continue in the role while still
preparing for the team for the tournament. His contract expires after it. The
recruitment process for 2024 and beyond has started now because of what's been
described as significant competition for elite coaching talent. Richard, thank
you. How safe is it to have TikTok on your phone? A growing list of governments
and other official bodies have told their staff to remove the app from their
work phones. Here's our security correspondent Gordon Carrera. It's been a
wildly successful app spreading around the world. And one of the reasons it's
been so successful is because of the way in which it understands its users. It
knows what they're interested in and knows how to feed them more videos to match
those interests. And it's precisely that strength, it's understanding, it's
reach which worries some security officials. Now, one concern is that it could
be used to collect sensitive data, to track and understand people. And that's
why what we've seen in the last few days is governments asking their officials
not to use it on official devices. So that's the concern basically of a kind of
espionage. Now, it's worth saying other social media apps also collect large
amounts of information, but of course, they're not owned by a Chinese company.
And as well as the fear of the Chinese state somehow extracting data from
devices, there's also the fear that it could somehow influence what's going into
those devices, to shape the information going in, to somehow influence the way
people think. Now, it's worth saying these are hypothetical risks. There's not
really evidence that they've actually come to pass so far. And the company
itself says it hasn't happened and it won't happen, that these bans are
political theatre. Gordon Carrera. Finally, police in Peru have made a macabre
discovery. Officers were on patrol in a park in the southern city of Puno when
they saw a man with a mummy, which is believed to be between 600 and 800 years
old. With more, here's the newsroom's Daniel Mann. Julio Cesar Bermejo, who was
with his friends, had been carrying the pre-Hispanic mummy in a cool bag, which
he used to keep food to take to people's homes when he was a delivery driver.
The mummified human was wrapped in bandages. Mr Bermejo, who is 26, even has a
name, Juanita. I take care of her. I maintain her. She's like my spiritual
girlfriend. He adds, at home she's in my room. She sleeps with me. However, a
specialist at Peru's Ministry of Culture says, it's not a Juanita, it's a Juan,
as the mummy was a man who was at least 45 years old when he died. The ministry
has now taken possession of the remains with the aim of protecting and
preserving, it says, this heritage. Mr Bermejo claims that his father brought
the mummy home almost 30 years ago and denied that he was trying to sell it.
Rather, he took it to the park last Saturday because his friends wanted to see
it. An official said that Mr Bermejo will remain in custody while the case is
being investigated. Let's hope the police get that case wrapped up soon. Thank
you for listening to the newsroom. This is the BBC World Service meeting the
Vietnam War veterans who left America and retired to the country they fought in.
50 years ago, on the 29th of March... All American forces will be withdrawn from
South Vietnam. Today, a small group of US veterans, now in their 70s, have
returned to live there permanently. I was expecting people to hate me when I
came back. People welcomed me like I had just left the day before. I am Nam Pham
and I'll be finding out why they choose to retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of
what you've seen and what you did. I say this is the only thing that makes
sense, me living in Vietnam. I came back to fight the war. I kind of explain it
as when you're a little kid, you've got a monster under the bed. I had to look
under the bed and the monster wasn't there. No place like Nam. Today at 10 GMT.
I'm Misha Glenny and after the news, I'll be digging deep into Russia's past.
Where it came from, what it is, and how over the centuries it expanded into the
biggest country on earth. There is this ambivalence always between how people
regard Russia. You could accept the culture, how wonderful the ballet is and the
literature, but yet you can still see it as a potential threat. Join me, Misha
Glenny, for the invention of Russia after the BBC World Service news. BBC News
with Neil Nunes. The fire service in Greece says at least 26 people have been
killed and more than 85 injured in a late night collision between two trains.
Rescue workers working in very difficult conditions near Larissa are scouring
severely wrecked carriages. One initially went up in flames and there are fears
of people still trapped. The governing party candidate has won the most votes in
Nigeria's presidential election. Results from all 36 states and the capital are
in, but the Electoral Commission has yet to confirm Bolotinibu's win. Two
opposition parties have called the whole process a sham. The UN's nuclear
watchdog has asked Iran to explain the origin of highly enriched uranium
particles discovered at the country's Fordow plant. Iran says there may have
been unintended fluctuations in enrichment levels. The coffins of 65 victims of
a migrant shipwreck in southern Italy have been laid out in a sports hall in
Calabria. They died when the boat they were travelling in broke up in a storm on
Sunday. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last remaining independent media
outlets, Mada Massa, are to be tried. They are charged with offending
legislators from a party which strongly supports President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
President Putin has banned the use of non-Russian words in official situations
and in government publications. Words much used include blogger, meeting, talk
show and face control. A Bolivian man has recounted his experience of being
missing in the Amazon for a month. Jonathan Acosta said he had eaten insects and
drunk his own urine. And Peruvian police have discovered a mummy believed to be
at least 600 years old inside the cool bag of a food delivery worker. He said
that he shared a room with the bandaged body. The authorities are considering
charging him. BBC News. In the year 1767, the Empress of Russia sent a statement
called the Instruction to an all-Russian group tasked with writing a new set of
laws. Russia, she wrote on the opening page of the Instruction, is a European
state. But is it really? And why was this German from Stettin in Pomerania even
in charge? The Invention of Russia. Presented by Misha Glenny. Huzzah! Huzzah!
Episode 3. Huzzah! Catherine the Great and the Question of Europe. The producer
is Miles Ward. You may have noticed a recent TV series called The Great. It was
based on historical facts, sort of, it's said. It starred Ellie Fanning as
Catherine and I confess I loved it. It was great fun. Huzzah! Her husband was
Tsar Peter III, by all accounts a fool who played with toy soldiers. And when he
was murdered, Catherine took control. Virginia Rounding, author of Catherine the
Great. Love, Sex and Power. Virginia, well, let me start. Love, sex and power.
Are all the stories true? They're embellished, but they give a flavour of the
kind of person people didn't forget. Huzzah! When she first arrives in St
Petersburg and then in Moscow, she's aged about 14 and was picked by the Empress
Elizabeth to come and be the marriage partner of her nephew Peter. She didn't
speak Russian at that point. She made herself ill trying to learn it in the
middle of the night. She's not actually Russian, of course. No, no, she came
from one of those small German principalities referred to by some historians as
a feudal ant heap. Her name was Sophia. She was given the name Yekaterina when
she became Orthodox. And how involved was she in the coup, which deposed her
husband in her favour and indeed his subsequent death? She was very involved in
the coup, but not necessarily overtly. For one thing, she was pregnant at the
time by Grigory Arlov and had to keep that quiet. But she'd been involved
quietly for years. And reading between the lines, it's clear that there were
concentric circles of people involved in plotting. But she was certainly playing
for enormously high stakes. So what are the sort of things that she starts doing
early on? We know that she's heavily influenced by some of the key figures of
the Enlightenment. What does she go for first? She's horrified to find that her
officials do not have a map of her territories. So she sends them out to get
one. When Catherine was crowned in 1762, Russia was already vast. It had
expanded out of Moscow, over the windswept steps to the south and the east.
Russia at this time looked like a largely Asiatic state. But half a century
before Catherine, the centre, Moscow, had moved. Been wrenched, you could say.
Well away from Asia, to the north and to the west, 500 miles north and west, in
fact, to the edge of the Baltic Sea. St. Petersburg, purpose built to gain
access to Europe. What do you think of the effects? Very nice, Miles, very nice.
The decision to move the capital out of Moscow was made by Peter the Great,
grandfather of Catherine's unfortunate husband. Of course, it's certainly not
the first contact that Muscovy had had with the West. I mean, Muscovy has had
contacts with the West since the end of the 15th century, but they've been
fairly sporadic. What Peter did in many ways was to intensify something that was
already there. My name's Simon Dixon, professor of Russian history at UCL. I've
always been interested in Imperial Russia, since I learned Russian at school and
first went to Moscow in the 1970s. And why does Peter choose St. Petersburg, or
at least the territory that was to become St. Petersburg? Why does he choose
that territory to build his window onto the West? Well, he'd certainly been
looking around for a new capital. He wanted to make a break, clearly, with the
traditions of everything that had gone before him. And initially, when he was
fighting the Turks, he'd thought of building a new capital in the south, in
Azov. But the difficulty there was, of course, that the Black Sea was controlled
by his rivals, the Ottomans, and so that really didn't get anywhere. St.
Petersburg turned out to offer him that kind of warm water port through which he
could exploit one of the most valuable commodities that the Russians had. And
the Russians were to make a lot of money throughout the 18th century on selling
what are known as naval stores, that's to say, pitch, hemp, tar, masts, all the
kind of things that you need to build a wooden navy, and which the British navy
was very keen to buy. The British navy, the greatest wooden navy in the world,
can't supply itself because it doesn't grow pines high enough for the main masts
of its ships, and it has to import them from the Baltic. And the very best masts
are called Riga masts, exported through Riga from Russia. Janet Hartley, author
of The Volga, Russia's Greatest River. So that fundamental strategic and
economic importance is there. And Peter? Well, he was above all interested in
shipbuilding at that stage, and he'd grown up in Moscow, and in Moscow he'd had
contact with the foreign quarter, and so he'd made a number of contacts with
individual foreigners there, and these were the things, I think, that inspired
him to make the first journey to the West of 1697 to 1698, initially in Holland,
and then in the beginning of 1698 he came to London. Roderick Braithwaite,
author of Russia, Myths and Realities. Peter went to the West to learn. He was
completely unfazed by the idea that he might have to learn from the West. He
knew that the West had things that he needed, and he imported a lot of
Westerners to promote this stuff, including a lot of Scottish naval officers who
were the original commanders of his navy. Peter was, by all accounts, a giant of
a man. Angry too, they say, but also deeply curious about the West. But Peter
had a problem. The superpower of the North were the Swedes. And only by
destroying them could he take control. The key battle, of course, came in 1709,
the Battle of Poltava, and that was definitely a turning point for Russia. The
British, who had been quite disparaging about Russia, I wrote a biography of the
first ambassador in Russia, not the first envoy, but the first ambassador, who
was sent out to Russia to assert the right of the British to roll and sell
tobacco. They weren't interested in diplomacy. Suddenly, after 1709, everything
changes, after the Battle of Poltava, between Sweden, which was the dominant
power in the Baltic, and then Russia, which, of course, was landlocked. Till
then, of course, until the early 18th century, the only way out to the West had
been through Archangel in the far north, which was extremely inconvenient for
all concerned, both for the Russians themselves and for foreigners coming in. It
was frozen over for much of the year. So St. Petersburg was a huge new kind of
option for him. And he saw it in many ways as a new Amsterdam through which he
could run a major trade. He saw it, too, of course, as a new Rome, an imperial
capital. And he saw it as a new Jerusalem, too, because it's worth emphasizing,
I think, that St. Petersburg wasn't a wholly secular creation. All the churches
built there were quite different from the ones in Moscow. Very few onion domes.
They had spires instead. And churches were a crucial part of the new capital. So
new Rome, new Amsterdam, new Jerusalem. This was a new vision of Russia and its
place in the world. Moscow versus St. Petersburg. An enduring rivalry. Can you
remember the first time you went there? I certainly can. I first went to Russia,
to the Soviet Union, when I was a 15-year-old schoolboy. We had a rather
eccentric language teacher who had been a tank captain during the Second World
War, and this turned him into a committed Marxist. And... LAUGHTER
And.....Freddie decided that we should organise a school trip to the Soviet
Union, which he had some admiration for, precisely because of its contribution
during the Second World War. So there I was in 1973, in a 15-year-old, in
Easter. I went to St. Petersburg, which was tremendously exciting. It was still
cold and snow was everywhere, and my main aim was to secure a Soviet army belt
on the black market. They just looked so fantastic, and I was able to swap a
Beatles album for a Soviet army belt, which I was very, very proud of. And then
when I went down to Moscow, a rather darker side, it was Easter, and so I went
to see the Easter service at the Orthodox Church, and as these very old Russians
sort of hobbled their way towards the front of the church to be greeted by the
priest, there was a group of the Communist Youth Organisation, the Komsomol, who
were standing there jeering and shouting and throwing paper. It was a very
sobering and unhappy vision. HE CLEARS THROAT Are we still there? Yeah, I'm
still here. Yeah, what about you, Myles? Have you ever been to Russia? I have
been, and last time I went, I got arrested in Moscow. Why are the Russians
slightly different? Is it because they're Eurasian and that they are mixing
cultures that are very far apart from different continents, or is it because of
the fact that their autocratic system never really modernised properly?
Remember, you had serfdom until the 1860s, and when the serfs were freed, the
Russian state, or the Tsarist Empire, was never really able to manage the
fallout. So you have very different feudal systems persisting for longer in
Russia than you did elsewhere in Europe, and I think this may have something to
do with it as well. Simon, how many people died in the building of St
Petersburg? I don't know the exact number, and I don't suppose the exact number
is known, but about 10,000 to 30,000 people would be working on it in the early
years, and they needed, of course, to be constantly replenished by state
peasants and by soldiers. So it is, in that sense, true that the city is built
on the bones of the workers who built it. This is the great theme, of course, of
Pushkin's poem, The Bronze Horseman. The Bronze Horseman is the great statue to
Peter the Great, unveiled by Catherine in 1782, a hundred years after Peter was
born. And in Pushkin's fantastic poem, the statue comes alive and chases a
little clerk. And so what you get in the poem is the opening stanzas, which are
in a fantastic, very formal sort of Russian, but then you switch to a more
demotic kind of register to see the social costs, as it were, of the triumph of
building St Petersburg and seeing the little clerk being trampled. So, yes, it's
very much a two-sided coin. Well, that's a brilliant little story. Thank you.
Huzzah! If I understand you correctly, when Catherine the Great comes along, she
actually has something to build on. Her reforms, her attempt to introduce
Enlightenment principles, there is actually some firm ground there. Oh, there's
very firm ground by 1762, when at the time of her coup, for example, in 1755,
the first university was founded in Russia, in Moscow. 1757, Academy of Arts is
founded. So there's a whole sort of efflorescence of cultural activity. She
corresponded with Voltaire. She copied out Montesquieu. She persuaded Diderot to
go to Russia. And she did her best to inspire her elite to take them on and to
imitate them. They didn't immediately respond. They tended to be much more
interested in parochial questions about their own estates. But there's a
whopping great difference between a very small number of magnates who own
thousands and thousands of serfs spread across the empire and a very much larger
number of nobles who own maybe 20 serfs or fewer than 20 serfs, most of whom
were not literate. So there wasn't a complete matching of minds there, which
brings us back to where we began, the arrival of Catherine the Great and her
attempts to reform the state. In her famous instruction, it said, all men should
be equal, the law should protect, not oppress, and serfdom should be abolished.
The language on this was quite vague. And finally, she added, autocracy should
be upheld, the enlightened despot. Where she connects to the enlightenment isn't
necessarily in some of the more advanced ideas, but it's in that desire to
classify, to make order out of things. Virginia Rounding. Codifying, classifying
the legislation in Russia, trying to get order out of chaos. I think that's all
the time what she was pushing for. And in her attempt to make Russia more part
of Europe and never be thought of as backward, which she couldn't bear, it's
this great urge to impose order. Do you think in the long term, she really
contributed to the modernisation of Russia? Because the 19th century really
appears to be Russia not moving forward in terms of its social and class
structure. Was it that her ideas didn't just set in, or was it because it was
just too impossible a task? I think that's the question we all keep asking
ourselves forever about Russia. It seems to get so far and then fall back on
itself. But there was something about the 18th century and Catherine's attempt
that does, from this distance, look like a kind of golden age that somehow
didn't stick. I do think Russia's size does give it very specific problems.
Quite large parts of Russia have been effectively ungoverned. The majority of
the population didn't really change at all. My name is Sarah Young. I'm a
specialist in Russian literature and on Russian prison writing. Russian prisons.
We've mentioned the serfs, but what do the prisons, gulags in Soviet speak, what
does that system tell us? It tells me that Russia has an extremely harsh penal
system that does depend on distance, on separating criminals from their loved
ones, if they have any, that they effectively become completely isolated and
without support. Sarah, it reminds me of a novel by Georgi Vladimirov, Faithful
Ruslan, when all the prisoners are let out of the gulag in the mid 1950s. And of
course, the poor dogs can't let go of their prisoners because that's been their
whole life. And the prisoners can't reintegrate into any normal human society.
This is a prison system which destroys human spirit. I think it really is. And
we see this in so many memoirs that describe semi-deliberate neglect. Fast
forward to the present day and you have Alexei Navalny, who is suffering the
after effects of his poisoning and not being treated appropriately in prison.
The only time Putin's actually sort of referred to him by name, Putin saying
that he couldn't guarantee that he would survive prison. There's no doubt that
Russian people have suffered. And if I go back to the 18th century and Peter,
forced labour, forced to build St. Petersburg, forced from their homes,
merchants forced to resettle there. There's always been an element of force from
the centre and a difficulty of resistance. You can burn down the manor house,
you can be a Cossack and sack a town, but actually it's very, very difficult to
overthrow a regime or to overthrow a social structure. That does lead to a sense
of helplessness, in fact, and possibly that too is part of that sort of
resilience or what you might say suffering. And liberalism, i.e. the demand for
constitutional reform, economic reform, is so weak in Russia. Why? Well, I think
there are very few rulers that give up their power peacefully. And I think one
of the problems in Russia is actually its military success. I mean, if you look
at the second half of the 18th century and the Napoleonic Wars, it is an
enormously successful country militarily. And Catherine the Great, the
enlightened despot who lapped up ideas of peace and equality, enjoyed military
success as much as any of her male predecessors. Simon Dixon again. You're
right, of course. Catherine primarily was interested in moving to the south and
there are all sorts of reasons for that. One was strategic, of course,
eventually to take control of the northern shores of the Black Sea. And here she
could be claiming to be competing with Peter rather than really emulating him.
That was a very important part of her strategy. So whereas he'd founded the
Baltic Fleet, she would found the Black Sea Fleet. And allowing her to do that
would eventually take the Crimea in 1783, but also, of course, an awful lot of
very fertile land, black soil land, which would allow the population gradually
to move, as it did, from the north down into Ukraine and into the steppes so
that Russia never suffered from any kind of Malthusian trap where the population
was growing faster than the resources available to it because Russia was able to
expand into this fertile territory in what is now Ukraine. And this is why she's
called the Great. I bless our new leader, Catherine the Great. You're calling
yourself the Great? Of course. It wasn't the letters she exchanged with Voltaire
or the meetings with Diderot that made Catherine great. It was the military. We
must act. Crimea, western Ukraine, a hefty chunk of Poland to boot. Great power
status assured. The bear had moved from the fringes to become the continent's
leading military force in little over 100 years. And what had changed back home?
Frankly, very little, except perhaps we might want to mention the writers,
Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Gogol. He's Ukrainian. Indeed, he's called Hohol there.
He's Ukrainian, so is Shevchenko, of course. And there are quite a few Ukrainian
writers who Russians and Westerners think are actually Russian. Still quite a
list. Janet Hartley. I think you're right. I mean, it is great literature. This
is a country that isn't just a military power based on Tsardom and serfdom. This
is a power that has a very high level of cultural intellectual elite, even
though it is just a small high level. So I think that is some transformation of
the view of Russia, but it's still ambivalent. There is this ambivalence always
between how people regard Russia. You could accept the culture, how wonderful
the ballet is and the literature, and how charming individual Russians are, but
yet you can still see it as a potential threat. And I think that is fairly
rooted in Western thinking from the 18th century onwards. And academics today
who love Russia, love its literature, its culture, are struggling with the way
Russia is run. Crimes against the individual are and have always been considered
less serious than crimes against the state. Dr Sarah Young of the School of
Slavonic and Eastern European Studies. And what does that tell you? It tells me,
I think, that Russia has this enormous tension about what it wants to be, and
that the European element in that is a very strong one, but it's very far from
being the only one. And what are the others? Not sure I can answer it without
saying something extremely negative at the moment. You know, that feeling I have
had recently, that we see something fundamental about Russian culture in the
looting of occupied territories in Ukraine, in the torture that's documented.
And this is something that we obviously saw at the end of the Second World War,
when the Red Army was advancing on Berlin. There is a violence and disregard for
human life that is extremely troubling. Sarah wanted to make clear that Russia
was not alone in its use of violence. And she highlighted the Nazis as just one
example of where Europe has acted with barbarity too. Nonetheless, I think her
point is well made. But what if you're Russian-born? I asked Misha Gabovich, a
Russian-born historian, now at the IWM in Vienna, what he thought about it. Now
I'm almost beginning to get my doubts about whether it was a good idea to teach
my children Russian, and to immerse myself so much in Russian-speaking culture,
because I take very seriously the criticisms that you hear nowadays from a lot
of people in Ukraine, but also other post-Soviet countries, that Russian
imperialism is not just a political phenomenon. It's also something that,
whether you like it or not, is deeply anchored in many layers of Russian
culture. So you're in a very good position to help us with one of our most
difficult questions, which is, is Russian culture a European culture, or is it a
hybrid? I definitely think that Russian culture is a European culture. What is
the alternative? I mean, you can't seriously call it an Asian culture. There are
some influences from countries other than European countries, but you could say
that for any other European, Spain, Britain, France, I can't imagine them
without thinking about their centuries of interaction with the Arab
Mediterranean or the overseas colonies, etc. So I think that Russian culture
very much always has been a European culture, and very often out of a desire to
be accepted even now. And if you look at the geopolitical rhetoric of the
current Russian regime, which we might be tempted to dismiss as sort of Asian
despotism, so much of it is about thirsting to be accepted as the real Europe,
maybe even a Europe that's more real than other countries in Europe have now
become following, you know, decades or centuries of degradation, etc., which is
another very old trope. But there's such a strong yearning to be accepted as a
full member of Europe rather than a poor marginal relative. You can't categorize
it as anything else. Which brings us, finally, to the abolition of serfdom, the
Emancipation Edict of 1861. Catherine had talked of ending this system that tied
peasants to the land a century earlier, but it never happened. And besides,
Russia was doing fine, imperial expansion back then pretty much unchecked. But
then came a setback, a failed war in Crimea, humiliation, maybe recognition that
a corrupt system finally had to change. The 1861 Emancipation Edict is
comparable with the abolition of slavery insofar as whenever slaves were
emancipated, they usually got a pretty rough economic deal. And the Russian
peasantry got a rough deal. This is Robert Service, author of brilliant books on
Lenin, Stalin and the last of the Tsars. Peasantry regarded the emancipation as
a con. And many of the peasants in the first years after the emancipation
assumed and acted on the assumption that the Tsar, Alexander II, had himself
been deceived by the wicked landowners. So there were ructions, there was
trouble in the countryside because the peasants wanted more of what they thought
was their rightful landed possession. And this continued right through to the
1917 revolution. So when it all exploded, it was no mystery to the landowners.
The landowners had been, many of them anyway, had been moving off the land for
fear of physical retaliation by the peasantry. They got bailiffs to run their
estates. They were fearful of a resumption of peasant violence. There was a sort
of ticking time bomb in Russia that ticked and ticked and ticked. And that alarm
became the death knell of the gentry in 1917. EXPLOSION This is the BBC World
Service examining the challenges we face from long Covid. We'll be hearing from
scientists trying to unravel the cause of the condition and finding out what the
latest research on some sufferers is showing. When we exercise participants just
for six minutes and we do blood tests at the end, their blood looks like they've
run the London Marathon. The long haul of long Covid. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20
GMT. These oral histories are based and are inspired by actual events.