TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Emma Begum's story, series two of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on BBC Sounds. BBC
News at 11 o'clock. The Science Secretary Michelle Donnellan has said the
government is getting a grip on illegal migration and will look at creating more
safe routes for asylum seekers. The government is expected to set out plans that
would mean anyone entering the UK illegally on a small boat would be removed,
banned from returning to the UK and unable to apply for British citizenship. But
Sir David Normington, former Permanent Secretary of the Home Office, told the
Today programme there are practical problems with the plans. At the heart of the
policy is a gamble that if you say it's illegal to come in a small boat people
will stop coming. I think that's highly doubtful. These are people, many of whom
are desperate, they have fleed from persecution and being told that there's been
a change in legislation in the British Parliament I don't think is going to make
a big difference to them. Police searching for five people who went missing
after a night out in South Wales have found three of the group dead. The car
they were last seen in was found just after midnight in the St Melon's area of
Cardiff. It's thought they were involved in a road accident. The two other
people are in hospital with serious injuries. In the last half hour the former
Met Police Officer Wayne Cousins, who's serving a life sentence for the murder
of Sarah Everard, has appeared in court. He's to be sentenced for indecent
exposure. A public parole hearing has begun as to whether Charles Bronson,
considered one of the UK's most violent offenders, should be released from
custody after spending much of the last 50 years behind bars. The 70-year-old
admits using extreme violence in the past but says he's changed. The head of
Russia's Wagner mercenary group has said it's not getting the ammunition it
needs from Moscow as it seeks to gain control of the Ukrainian city of Bakhmut.
Wagner says the lack of supplies could be ordinary bureaucracy or a betrayal.
BBC News. These days many people are used to documenting their daily lives and
sharing their opinions online but what do you think of prospective employers
snooping on candidates' social media profiles when they're hiring? Evan Davis
and his guests will be discussing the modern recruitment process on the bottom
line at half past 11. First on Radio 4, following new developments in this
story, here's another chance to hear what happened to Ricky Real and a mum's
25-year fight to get justice for her son. There's strong discriminatory language
at the start of this programme. I'm Amit Sharma and this is the story of Ricky
Real, a student who went out one night and never returned. A week later his body
was found in the River Thames by the Metropolitan Police. His mum believes her
son was killed. Ricky was murdered because the racial attack clearly shows that
they, it said, Pakis go home. Ricky was Asian, his three friends were Asian and
the abuse came from two white men. Otherwise what stopped him from coming home?
It's 25 years since Ricky's death and his family refused to give up hope on
finding out what happened that night. For me this is not just about a family
trying to find out how their son died, as important as that is, it goes deeper.
Ricky's death highlights how racist instances were treated in the 90s when
victims' families could be treated with suspicion and often found it difficult
to convince the police to take their concerns seriously. The investigation into
the death of Ricky Real remains open. It's no longer active because the police
say they have no more lines of inquiry left to follow. I want to see if I can
help Ricky's mum Sukhdev Real find some answers. I am an actor and I was cast in
a reconstruction of Ricky's last night for a BBC documentary in 1998. The boys
first went to a supermarket to buy some alcohol for the night. I played the role
of one of his friends. That's me walking into a supermarket. I'm acting out
buying some beers just as Ricky and his mates did before they set out for the
night. Racial abuse was rife in the 90s and I remember thinking at the time that
this could easily have been me and my friends. Lakhvinder Singh Real or Ricky as
he was known to his family and friends was a second generation British Sikh, a
Londoner like me. He was a third year computer science student at Brunel
University. He was clever and spent most of his time on his computer but on the
night of the 14th of October 1997, Ricky planned an evening out. I'll let
Ricky's mum Sukhdev Real tell you what happened. I was rushing around trying to
cook dinner and so I had to go to my younger son's open evening and I had a
phone call from Ricky saying he's going out with friends and not to cook for him
and I just jokingly told him I said no I've already cooked and you've got to eat
it and he said to me all right then and he came. I saw him, he bought a new
shirt and because I had been telling him to go out get mixing with friends
rather than spending time at home on his computer on his books and then he said
to me his friends are going to come and pick him up. Before he went this was an
agreement with all my children what time are you coming back. He said to me one
o'clock. I said fine. So when one o'clock came he didn't come home. I was a bit
concerned so I started ringing his mobile. His mobile was switched off. This is
the stairs where I sat waiting for Ricky to come home. I thought as soon as he
comes in I'll open the door. He told me he was going to Brunel University
because there was supposed to be a gig there. I phoned the police stations,
different hospitals, still worried, worried, worried and this continued all
night long. I didn't go up, didn't go anywhere. I think at three o'clock sitting
on the stairs I must have dozed off for a few seconds and there was like a jerk
like current in my body and I just shot up and I knew then Ricky was in trouble
and then eight o'clock and we were really going out of our minds you know as to
say where are we supposed to do? Your child's missing, where do we go? So I rang
the police station and the woman said to me as Ricky was over the age of 18 they
can't do anything. I would have to wait for 24 hours. I was telling them how
worried I was. This was out of character. Ricky's never gone missing before. The
first problem Sukhdev encountered with the police was that they wouldn't look
into the case for 24 hours. That was the protocol back in the 90s but since
Ricky's case this has changed. Today a missing person's report can be filed
immediately. Worried and desperate to do something the family tried to find the
friends that Ricky went out with. After ringing around they made contact and
that is when Sukhdev discovered that Ricky's mobile and jacket had been left in
his friend's car that night and that they hadn't gone to a gig at Brunel
University but to Kingston upon Thames. But there was more. The friends told the
family that they had been racially abused by two white guys. Ricky's friends
then ran at these guys and were punched. Another friend was punched too. The
altercation lasted a few minutes before the white lads shouted scram. They ran
towards the bus stop which was the direction Ricky was going in just before the
fight. A bus pulled up and they disappeared. Ricky's friends thought the two
lads may have got on the bus but they couldn't be sure. It's at this stage that
they also realised that they couldn't see Ricky. They searched for him but
assumed he had gone home. Ricky's friends would later give evidence at the
inquest but the first thing the real family did upon hearing about the fight was
to go to the police. We went with Ricky's friends to Kingston police station and
the boys, Ricky's friends, told the police that they were with Ricky when they
were attacked. They explained that there were verbal abuse, there were physical
abuse but the police refused to take the statement. They said, well you know
what? He said this is just nothing and he also said, you Asian people, arrange
your children's marriages and as a result, you may have done that and Ricky has
decided to run away. Then he winked and he said, well you never know, Ricky may
be gay and he's too frightened to come out and tell you. This was the second
problem Sukhdev faced with the police. They didn't think that the name calling
and the fight was that important. The officers shrugged it off and then went on
to make sweeping, stereotypical assumptions about why Ricky hadn't come home. It
was now almost as if the police had been waiting for Ricky to come home. It was
now almost 24 hours since Ricky had been missing. Alarmed and distressed about
the news that he had been racially attacked, Sukhdev and her family got help
from the monitoring group, a charity experienced in helping families who are
victims of racism and racially motivated hate crimes. My name is Suresh Grover.
I've been working with Sukhdev since 1997 and I've coordinated the Justice for
Ricky Reel campaign and I work for I'm standing opposite Fennec and Bantles
shopping centre which is on Wood Street in Kingston. On my right is the bus stop
and it's also the area where the fight and racial abuse took place between the
two youths and Ricky's friends and that's the last time they remember seeing
Ricky. We spoke to bus drivers and we looked at palatal bins thinking that he
had been injured and still there. I remember my husband climbing into it to see
if Ricky was lying there and seven of us forming a human chain to go down into a
building which had floorboards missing to see if Ricky was there. We located
CCTV cameras in Kingston. Sukhdev, she actually went to Bantles and I was with
her. We spoke to the security guard and they said no police officer had come
there and he actually gave us the image and it's an image of his last moment
captured by this CCTV camera as we see it and then he walks down and then I
remember with my colleagues trying to trace where Ricky's last moments would be.
There were only two or three possibilities either he'd come on this Bantles
shopping centre and turn right or if he was chased he would have gone straight
and when you trace that you would end up a downhill road and at River Thames.
And we met senior police officers at Kingston and we told him where we think he
would be and you know the tragedy is a week later when we convinced them to do
helicopter searches with with heat sensors in the river so they could trace a
body. They found him within seven minutes. On the 21st of October 1997 I was due
to meet the press and the police had come in and they said we found Ricky from
the bottom of the river. I just collapsed. We got in the car we got in the car
and we came here home. I didn't want to go in because every day I went out. I
used to tell my children I was going to bring their brother home so I didn't
have the courage to tell them that I lost Ricky but as soon as I entered the
door was flung open that my daughter just hugged me and said the police officers
told her that they have found Ricky at the bottom of the river. They had no
right to break this news to my children in my absence. The children were aged
11, 17 and 21 and although they weren't all minors Sukhdev felt as their mum it
was her job to tell them about Ricky not strangers. This was the third encounter
Sukhdev had had with the police in which her relationship with them further
soured. At the time the police had said that they were worried that the family
might hear the news on the radio or the TV and wanted to tell them first.
Understandable perhaps but then there was a fourth visit from the police almost
immediately after the news that Ricky's body had been found. The police officer
came to my house he said Mrs Ria I'm sorry about your son and it's a tragic
accident. When we found Ricky his fry buttons were undone and he must have gone
to the river to urinate and fell in. Sukhdev told the police that her son had a
phobia of open water and it didn't make sense that he would go near the river to
urinate. Sukhdev was now not only having to come to terms with the news that her
son was dead but also with the fact that the police investigating had already
made up their minds that this was an accidental death. For Sukhdev and her
family this was the final blow. I went to see Ricky in the mortuary I placed my
hand on his forehead and I said no matter what happens to me I will get justice
for you my son and that's a promise that gets me out of bed in the morning. On
the 3rd of November Ricky was cremated after scattering her son's ashes in
Cornwall. Sukhdev took a bold step against the police officers investigating her
son's case. He made a complaint about the police and through a solicitor the
police conducted the investigation. Look at Ricky's picture and look at his eyes
I used to call it puppy eyes it's the last image. On the 16th of December 1997
the police complaints authority as it was called then and now known as the
independent office of police conduct instructed Surrey police to launch an
investigation into the Metropolitan Police's initial investigation into Ricky's
death. I now want to introduce you to Clive Driscoll a former detective chief
inspector with the Metropolitan Police. Now Clive was never formally involved in
Ricky's case but he was one of the main detectives to finally get a conviction
in the Stephen Lawrence case some 20 years after the black teenager was killed
in a racist attack in London. I wanted to find out from Clive where you begin
with a case that's over 20 years old and can you tell us what the case is about?
Where you begin with a case that's over 20 years old and could he help me? I
would have thought that there was an opportunity around um already as a gravelly
CCTV. There were images of two boys in an alleyway and of course there was an
image of an unidentified car in a pedestrianized area very near to where Ricky's
body was found. What do you think we can do with that evidence 25 years later?
Just ask the questions are there new opportunities to enhance anything any of
the forensic opportunities now with today's science? The original investigators
on the case do you think even though they're retired now if we were to go back
they could tell us anything different? That was one of the first things I did
was was was always go back and speak to the officers. Ricky was accompanied by
three of his friends on the night and they have not come forward since the
original incident. Without a doubt they can help and that's what we want. If you
look at Ricky's case there was an assumption that he'd come home but he didn't
come home so six days were lost you could say 144 hours were lost and so that
that is where it started going wrong. I start my search I need to find the now
retired detective superintendent Bob Moffett who led the initial investigation.
First thing I need to do is go back and find out what evidence he had that
convinced him that Ricky's death was accidental. He spoke on the BBC documentary
I was in but the quality's not great it's a bit crackly but you can still make
out what he says. Well the first thing we noticed when we took Ricky's body out
of the river was that his fly buttons were undone. A special post-mortem took
place and Dr Shepherd tells us that he would have had an urge to urinate. The
thing you notice about the river's edge is that it is crumbling away. I think
it's highly likely that he could have missed his footing and suddenly fell into
the river. Listening to that it does seem possible that it could have been an
accidental death but there's a lot of assumptions. I need to find Bob Moffett
but I also need to get my head around why the real family still remain convinced
that this wasn't an accident and why this is still an open case. Michael
Mansfield was the family's barrister at the coroner's inquiry in 1999. I have
very clear memories of tramping the streets of Kingston looking for places where
he might have been CCTV looking at the riverbanks and having had that on the
ground experience and having listened to the family it seemed to me there was a
very strong possibility that this was an attack on him. And the reasons for
coming to that conclusion are primarily the fact that one, he had an aversion to
water so it's unlikely if he wanted to relieve himself he'd go in the river but
having inspected the riverbank it didn't look at where he was found which may
not mean where he went in. It didn't look slippery, it didn't look crumbly,
didn't look as about to give way that he might have slipped which was the police
view so that didn't add up either. I think the most compelling aspect of this
was an altercation. There was clear evidence that something like that had
happened. Another reason why I came to the conclusion this was almost certainly
an unlawful killing and an assault was the pathology reports. There are a number
of them but if you read all of them you put them together he had been seriously
bruised. And of course you have to remember that this happened in the 1990s.
Running in parallel is the Stephen Lawrence case. This was at a time when the
police themselves were extraordinarily reluctant to admit that racism existed
and it wasn't until the Lawrence inquiry under Sir William Macpherson that he
came to the conclusion that the Metropolitan Police were suffering from a
malaise, namely institutional racism. Therefore when it comes to investigating
crime at that time there was a reluctance to accept that this might have been a
race attack. There were a total of four pathology reports into the death of
Ricky Reel and they all failed to provide conclusive evidence that Ricky was
attacked. But nor could they rule out third-party involvement and agreed that
there could also be a number of explanations for why the fly buttons on Ricky's
jeans were undone. Michael Mansfield offered a number of alternatives as to why
this might have occurred. The buttons could have simply loosened as the body was
being pulled out the river or been undone by the pressure that builds within the
body in a river. These unknowns convinced the inquest jury that there was no
compelling evidence to say that this was an accidental death or an unlawful
killing. I spend weeks along with my producer searching for Bob Moffat and then
we find a phone number. Hello and thanks for calling. The person you are calling
is unable to take your call. Hi my name is Amit Chana and I'm ringing from BBC
Radio 4. Please call me or my producer on 07... Then on a Friday afternoon Mr
Moffat called back. But this wasn't the Bob Moffat we wanted. This retired
copper knew and had heard of him but had no idea where he was. I was gutted.
Then I get a message from Clive. It's about Ricky's friends. I know at least one
of the young men that were there on the night are. I've sent an email and really
that was only within the last 24 hours. And another breakthrough. We managed to
find the detective chief inspector who carried out the second investigation into
Ricky Reale a year after his death and she's agreed to talk to us. This second
investigation took place in 98-99 and I just want to give you a background to
what else was happening at the time. Remember the police complaints authorities
investigation into Ricky Reale's case? That inquiry also concluded around the
same time as the Macpherson reported to Stephen Lawrence and it was damning.
Concluding that the Metropolitan Police Force was institutionally racist but the
findings into Ricky's case were not made public. A decision made by the
commissioner of the Metropolitan Police at the time. We only know a little of
what that report says because Sukhdev's MP John McDonnell used his parliamentary
privilege to highlight some of the key findings. I'll read out to you just one
line from his speech in the House of Commons. Overall the report condemns the
investigation because it lacked focus, it eliminated the racial incident earlier
in the evening too readily, it lacked thoroughness. Sukhdev was allowed to read
the police complaints authority report, after all it was her complaint. But she
had to sign a legal document saying she would not discuss its findings with
anyone, including her husband and family. But on the positive side another
investigation into Ricky's case was underway. My name is Sue Hill, I'm a former
detective chief superintendent with the Metropolitan Police. Sukhdev and her
family lost faith in the police from day one because she felt the Metropolitan
Police were not taking this seriously enough and I think that we failed, the
police failed to communicate properly at the very outset. When I met Sukhdev one
of the reasons I wanted to meet with her is to say to her I am going to tell you
everything, I will do everything possible to find out what happened to Ricky.
The police at the time were not explicitly linking Ricky's death to the earlier
incident or they kind of ruled that out so that was a criticism by the police
complaints authority. So I was very mindful when I was doing that investigation,
was there a link between those two lads earlier in the evening shouting at Ricky
and his friends and Ricky's friends running at them and you need to rule out
that that altercation did not lead to Ricky's death which in my opinion I tried
to do. Those two lads when they ran behind the bus they ran away from Ricky and
his friends and as far as we were concerned, well you can never prove it
definitively, but they got on the bus and left Kingston. We never picked them up
again on CCTV. We know that we saw Ricky on CCTV wandering down through Kingston
but the last thing that ever happened to him when he went into that river we
could never ever say there was no CCTV down by that river, there was no CCTV of
anyone with Ricky. There are questions that you can't answer. His friends
couldn't tell us. Sukhdev still doesn't have those answers and my honest belief
is she never will. As sad as that is because no one could have reinvestigated
the incident as much as I did and I was asked by the coroner and pushed by the
coroner to give my view as an experienced investigator. I said on the balance of
probabilities Ricky probably did meet his death from an accident. I couldn't
find any third party involvement but equally I couldn't exclude any third party
involvement and that's what I'm saying to this day despite all that
investigation. There are still more questions than answers but does Sue Hill
think with all the advancement in science and technology we now have that it's
worth revisiting and re-examining the CCTV images? The point is even if you
enhanced any CCTV that we found that night, how are you going to link that to
Ricky's death? There is no intelligence and no evidence and my team and I did
everything to determine why Ricky ended up in that river and I honestly truly
believe we will never know and I think there is no point in starting a
reinvestigation because there will be nothing to find. I'm confident in that.
Surely if there is a glimmer of a chance of improving the quality of any of the
key evidence it should be done even just to eliminate some of these people or
maybe we're just clutching at straws. I'm now emailing the Met Police asking if
they want to reply to the specific allegations that Sukhdev has made with regard
to the initial investigation into Ricky's case. They don't. Here's a summary of
it. The investigation into the death of Ricky Reale in Kingston in October 1997
remains open. There have been numerous investigations and reviews. Officers have
taken hundreds of statements from witnesses and people with information. In 2012
new information was reported to the police by a member of the public which led
to a man being interviewed by officers. However he was subsequently eliminated
from the inquiry. No arrests have been made or charges brought in connection
with Ricky's death. Currently there are no active lines of inquiry into the
death of Ricky and the case remains open. We would urge anyone with information
about Ricky's death to contact the police. I've only been doing this for a few
weeks but the constant knockbacks are getting me down. The Justice for Ricky
Reale campaign has been going on for longer than Ricky was alive. I really don't
know how the family have kept going. My next destination Milton Keynes to try
and talk to one of the last people that saw Ricky alive. I'm just parked outside
the house of one of Ricky's friends in Milton Keynes. He's not responded to any
of the emails we've been sending him. I'm not going to record as I approach his
house and knock on his door as he doesn't know I'm coming. But I'm hoping he
might agree to speak to me. Wish me luck. So I've knocked on the door, a guy
came to the window, didn't show me his face, talked to me through the slap of a
blind, said he wasn't who I was looking for. My gut reaction is it is him but he
refused to speak to me. I've posted a letter through his letterbox and hope he
gets in touch. I still think that the friends could have some information which
they thought at the time wasn't relevant but could be now. There's nothing else
I can do now but wait. A few days later while I was in rehearsals for a play
that I'm in I had a missed call and a voice message. I immediately think that
it's from Ricky's friend, maybe he's changed his mind and would speak to me but
it was from Sukhdev. Oh hi Amrit, just got a message from someone giving their
name and contact details saying that they know how Ricky was killed. I'm going
to pass this information to the police for them to investigate. I feel shocked,
it really shook me. I immediately called Sukhdev back but there wasn't much more
she could add. He was a guy, he'd left his name and contact details and said
that he knows who killed Ricky and is happy to be contacted by the police. This
could be a breakthrough for Sukhdev and her family but she's also aware that she
can't get her hopes up as we don't know if the informer is genuine or reliable
but this is the first possible new line of inquiry the family have had for over
a decade. Sukhdev with the support from the monitoring group has written to the
Metropolitan Police with this new information and has requested a meeting with
the Commissioner. I got in touch with the Met to get a response and they've told
me that the investigating team are looking into the information. I'm standing
right now at the river looking at the place where Ricky was found. I often come
to this river just to talk to Ricky when I feel really lonely so I come here and
talk to him. Every line of inquiry gives us hope. And there's one more twist to
this story I need to tell you about. In 2014 Sukhdev claims that she found out
that her and her family had been spied on by the Met's undercover police units
while she was campaigning to get justice for Ricky. She'll be giving evidence in
the public inquiry into the undercover operations too. All Sukhdev wants is the
truth. How did her son die? And since we've finished recording, Sukhdev and her
family are due to meet the Metropolitan Police to discuss Ricky's case. And a
further update. The meeting between Sukhdev Real and the Commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police did go ahead. Detectives will now reinvestigate the case,
they say with fresh eyes and with the benefit of modern technology. What
happened to Ricky Real was produced by Puminder Khadkar. It was a 2 Degrees West
production for BBC Radio 4. Next this morning, how can employers find the best
new recruits? To answer that, Evan Davis is the man for the job after a word
from Helen Lewis. Welcome to The Spock. When we're in the midst of it, we're
going to make decisions that are different than the decisions that we would make
if we were looking from the outside in. Bold thinking for a better world. We
struggle to recognise or remember that these inequalities come from somewhere.
That sense of human connection can save a life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new
series of close-up conversations. More big thinkers with big ideas bidding to
change our world and hearing some of the personal reasons behind them. Probably
one of the best decisions I've ever made in my life was making that step. The
Spock starts tomorrow morning at 11 on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio
4, it's the bottom line, which this week is asking, what's the best way to hire?
Here's Evan Davis. Hello, welcome to the programme. We are always inclined to
judge others, aren't we? But it is all too easy to misjudge them as well. And in
business, this matters a lot because companies have to judge people every day in
order to make choices about who they employ or promote. And I think it's
underappreciated. For example, people talk endlessly about how to improve
productivity, about how we have to get the most out of each employee for each
hour worked. But recruitment rarely gets a mention in such conversations. And
yet, putting people in jobs that they can naturally do well is surely among the
most important things a company can do to improve productivity. So how should
they go about selecting the right folks for the job? It's an area that is
changing. Technology plays a part. The requirement for diversity is also
extremely important. So let us discuss it with three guests. And first up is Sir
John Timpson, chairman of the Timpson Group, which is perhaps best known for
high street shops that do everything from re-soling your shoes to replacing the
screen on your mobile phone. When it comes to recruitment, you're a very special
company because you are particularly famous for recruiting ex-offenders. Yeah,
we are. Well, that happened completely by chance simply because my son James,
who is our current chief executive, went to a prison, Thorncross, near
Warrington, because there was a business occasion there and a tour around the
prison. And Matt, the inmate who showed James around, impressed James so much.
He said, here's my card. When you get out, get in touch. I'll give you a job.
And that's how we started 20 years ago and for good reasons. One was the fact
there still are 85,000 people in prison and no one was actively trying to
recruit there. So we got the pick of the bunch. And secondly, people without a
job leaving prison, more than 60% were likely to re-offend. With a job, that
percentage goes down to under 20%. So now about 13% of our workforce, that's 500
people, have joined us from prison and it's all been a great success. Right.
Now, how do you choose the good ones from the ones who are not going to work?
Okay, we're after a business which is full of people with a nine or 10 out of 10
personality. You can teach somebody who's got great personality how to cut keys,
but you can't put great personality into a grumpy cobbler. And that told us that
what we got to do is to recruit on personality. But what is personality and how
do you spot it? Well, I think first of all, you've got to have it to spot it.
And once you've got the right people in your business and you've got the right
culture, they will know it. And I'll go to a shop and I'll find someone, not
quite us, and I'll ring the area manager and say, well, I'm in wherever it is.
Oh God, they'll say, I know you're talking about Hamish or whatever it might be.
Yeah. I said, what do you think? I reckon he's only about a sixth. You're dead
right. Well, what are you going to do about it? We've got that language. It's
not written down anywhere, but you know it. And we ask them to work. We don't
ask them, we pay them to work for a day in a shop with someone who gets it. And
that's the final check. Okay. That's John Timpson. Also joining us, Claire
Hamilton, who's head of UK talent acquisition at the global business and
services group Cap Gemini. Absolutely massive company, Claire, just tell us a
quick biography of what it does. So we're 14,000 people in the UK, 350,000
worldwide. We're made up of a number of different brands and they offer
different consulting services in different sectors around the world. And, you
know, massive software projects at companies all over the place will be hiring
Cap Gemini to help them get things installed. How do you recruit at Cap Gemini?
You're head of UK talent acquisition. How do you acquire talent? The important
thing for us really is to do it in as many different ways as possible. So
recognising that to attract a graduate to come and work for us is a very
different effort to say, attracting somebody who's got years of experience in
industry. And equally, if we're looking at attracting executives to the
business, it's another experience as well. But Claire, let's not deal with how
you recruit a new chief executive or people at the more routine end, but people
in the middle with skills. Is it job interviews? Is it CVs? It will depend on
the type of role. So if we're looking at something very technical, we'll include
a technical test. But yes, it's interviews. We may offer people to come in and
spend a couple of hours with their team. So culturally, do you feel like you
belong and that you fit and that you believe in the values? And I think there's
a real emotional tie to moving jobs now. It's not as simple as saying, right,
you'll do, tick the box, in you come. It's absolutely about making sure that
people want to work for you and that they've got a choice today. How were you
recruited? Just talk us through, you've been there just under a year. What was
the process you went through? So I applied for a job on LinkedIn. That's
already, we're into kind of how this is all changed. Absolutely. I had a phone
call within 24 hours from the recruiter that was looking after the job. Would
really like to talk you through the position, find out more about you. I then
had an interview with my now boss, and then I met two of the senior leaders in
the business. It was a really good experience and there was a lot around, you
know, how do you feel about the organisation? What are your drivers? And I think
that just goes to show it wasn't necessarily about can I save them money? Can I
do this? It was do I care? Very interesting. You've talked about cultural fit.
And we'll talk more about that because obviously that can sometimes be used as a
way of excluding people who may come from different backgrounds, different
cultures and such like. But let me introduce my third guest, Michael Barrington-
Hibbert, who is the founder of and chief executive of Barrington-Hibbert
Associates. Just tell us a little about the business and what you do. Thank you,
Evan. And before I actually talk a little bit about the business, it's come full
circle. Sir John, I actually encountered in sunny Bracknell, Berkshire, one of
his incredible stores. This is between university and had an opportunity to
speak to a gentleman called John who actually worked there. And we struck up a
conversation. And he said, look, Michael, I think you're a solid nine out of 10.
So I beat Hamish by three, by the way. So I had a job offer in Bracknell, but
unfortunately, I had to go back to university. But it has come full circle. It's
a pleasure to meet you, Sir John. So just in terms of the genus of my
organisation, we are an executive search firm, and we really do specialise in
placing underrepresented groups. Now, it's not just ethnic minorities, we're
looking about social inclusion. I come from a working class background, born in
a council of states. And my journey was one of exclusion. It was one where I
didn't quite fit the mould, whether it be from an academic standpoint, my social
economic background. So for us, we hunt for those who don't have the voice in
the boardroom. And we focus predominantly with UK FTSE 100 companies. Roy
Bhandari I want to get into this topic through the programme. But just as a
starter, we've heard about Sir John rating everybody and just knowing who fits.
And we've heard about Claire having coffee with the team and cultural fit. Do
those methods, if you like, of filtering who works and who doesn't work for our
organisation, is that up against what you're trying to do, Michael, which is
bringing people from other backgrounds and cultures? Michael Munger Look, I
think it's nuanced. It's complex. CEOs are rewarded for risks. If you're going
to hire a CFO, are you going to take a chance on Hamish or Matt? Or are you
going to take a chance on somebody who's actually done the job at another
competitor before? As I was once told, no one gets fired for hiring someone from
Oxford or Cambridge who has done a similar role. So we're trying to educate
leaders around the returns that a diverse workforce has. And this is the
fundamental challenge. When we work with organisations, I want to work with
people like Sir John, I need to work in the boardroom. Because once that culture
is defined, it filters through the organisation. But it also goes down to middle
management, because there's an element where middle management are under-
resourced, they don't have the training. So I'm going to enjoy having a
conversation with you. But are you empowered by the C-suite to really drive the
cultural evolution of Capgemini? Claire McCann Thank you. I think yes, they
don't just pay lip service to this. And we've got six employee networks, women
at Capgemini, we've got the Race and Equality Network, we've got the Armed
Forces Network, all of these things are supported by our C-suite. As a
headhunter, I hear this all the time in terms of employee resource groups,
commitment around numbers. But is that really changing the dial? We've seen if
we talk about for moment gender, we've seen a three point increase in the last
year in females in our organisation in the UK. Now, three points doesn't sound
like a lot, but in the tech space, you know, most exactly. Yes, it's moving the
needle. But I think the part of it is about doing more than you commit to do.
And that's why I messaged Michael last night and said, I'd love to talk to you
after the show. Because there's things that I think we need to do more of to get
to where we need to be. All these are ways in which you might not really be
recruiting open-mindedly, is your point. You're not recruiting open-mindedly.
How do you select that? What do you do to make sure you get a pool that is open-
minded, drawn from a large panel, if you like, a cross section? So we partner
with diverse charities, we work with the Armed Forces, we work with the
Prisoners Association. So we really do cast our net. So we sponsor, we give
scholarships out to individuals. So we've been in this space for over 20 years.
So our network is very diverse. We don't actually send job descriptions out, we
have conversations. So an element of what Sir John said, you have a personality,
you have a conversation, let me give you a chance. Yeah, I think one of the
things that we have a real problem with, in every organisation, not unique to
where I am, or I'm sure where any of you are, is helping people understand how
to hire for potential. Everyone wants to look at, right, I've got this perfect
10 and I'm not going to take someone who's 60% and offer them development. So
one of the important things, I think, is education of our middle management,
particularly the decision makers, who will be looking, well, John just left this
job, he had been in the business for 20 years and he could do all of these
things, but actually to go to market and replace him, you're never going to get
like for like. So how do we hire for potential? Do you think CVs, references and
interviews are a bit out of date? I suppose interviews and... Interviews are not
out of date. You've got to meet the person, but not to ask the sort of questions
that were traditionally asked. My idea of an interview is just having a chat.
I'm not interested in a CV, I don't want to know what qualifications they've
got. No trick questions where you kind of go out the room and see how they
behave when you, or give them a funny thing. No, no, no, or giving them any
tasks to do. No, just have a chat. Chat about their home life. What team do they
support? Who are their best friends? That's the way you get to know what their
personality is like. And when I started, it was quite a big shift to get a
business that was recruiting purely on skills. And they went, the skill test
was, you know, go and repair a pair of shoes and then we'll decide whether they
hire you. I wasn't interested in that. So that's when I invented my Mr Men
interview form, which is lots of little caricatures with an empty box under each
of them. There's one set, which is Mrs Happy, Mr Keen, Mr Helpful, Mrs Nice. So
what's this? You ask them which they are? No, no, no, no, they don't get the
form. It wouldn't work that way. And then there's the other lot with Mr Grumpy,
Mr Scruffy, Mr Unhelpful and so on. And you have a chat and then you tick the
boxes that most suit that character under the Mr Men. And those people who got
ticked the right boxes, the happy and the keen and the helpful, they're the ones
who are asked to spend a day in a branch. And that's where we go. How is that
consistent across the United Kingdom in terms of your stalls? Well, the
important thing is that we will not employ anyone into our field team outside of
the business. Everyone who runs the whole of our organisation out in the field
started as an apprentice. So they've done the training through that. They know
what we want. I mean, it's interesting though, just talking about CVs and
interviews, the other two of you, to what extent are those genuinely useful
indicators at telling good candidates from less good candidates? I think it's an
indicator. There's a lot of tall tales that people do put into CVs, but it's an
indicator. At least it tells you where they've worked, what type of skill set
they may have. I think the interview to Sir John's point is where you really get
down to the nitty gritty. And for me, it's much more conversational. It's not
about firing hundreds of competency based questions at someone and kind of
making them sweat throughout an interview. You want to create an environment
where they can really tell you about some of the things that they're good at,
some of the things they're passionate about. And that may be about their
football teams as much as it is about the skills that they've developed and
honed through their career. You've always liked the lunch test, which was the
thing. Oh, you asked your question. Would I like to have lunch with this person?
Could I survive? Or maybe dinner? Or maybe a transit land? That's a measure of
how much you relate to that person's personality. I disagree slightly with that,
because what that does is bring one's own bias into the equation. This is the
fundamental issue. So I'm 43. And I had my children back for halftime last week
with one of their 16 year old friends. And I struggled to spend five minutes
with her. She's lovely. She's adorable. But we're just coming from very
different places. And I think who's done it really well. And I think that's one
of the questions is Body Shop. Body Shop have removed for entry level roles,
interviews and CVs. What they've done is called open hiring. So effectively, if
you answer these three questions, are you qualified to work in the United
Kingdom? Are you happy to work eight hours a day? And are you a team player?
They invite people in for a day paid. And if it goes well, then they'll be
offered a permanent contract. And as a consequence, their diversity metrics from
an ethnicity, gender, but also retention is also increased exponentially. Are
you a fan of blind CVs, Michael, we should explain those ones where basically
you don't give away anything about your background. No photo, no name, no age,
you essentially only put the stuff they need to know. And so they can't bring
unconscious biases is the theory. Do you a fan of those? No, from my experience.
So I mentioned earlier, I come from a single parent, one bed council flat in
Wembley. And I ended up at Oxford University. And what tends to happen is people
will look at my beginning and see where I've got to and been able to delineate
some of the barriers that I had to overcome. So actually, better candidate than
the one from Eton because had to get potentially Yeah, potentially. So so again,
from that standpoint, I would prefer to have the information. However, I have my
own biases. So again, there's no foolproof formula, what the best route is and
what the wrong route is. How do you counter the charge, john that there will be
all sorts of unconscious biases that your team are displaying. And you don't
know because they're picking people who they like and who have 10s or nines on
the personality scale that they've chosen. And you'll be missing good people as
a result of that. Always. I mean, you try really hard, you talk about it, but
there will always be a level of bias. I mean, we create a certain amount of bias
in our business, by the fact that we tend to employ a lot of friends and
relations of people who already work for us. We also discriminate in favour of
people from the armed forces, because that's people leaving the forces are very
vulnerable part of society. So yeah, you can't help some sort of bias. Sure.
What I'm hearing so far is there is no obvious single bullet way of recruiting
the right people. Is that fair? We try and encourage organisations to diversify
their suppliers. We advise the FTSE 100 companies that we work with actually to
work with minority owned businesses, whether it be gender, ethnic minority to be
able to have a wider stretch when it comes to candidates. Equally, we have to
look at it from a pipelining standpoint. So I co founded 10,000 black interns in
the summer of 2020, to create paid internships for black students across the
United Kingdom and year today, I think we're at 5000 paid internships. Last
year, we launched 10,000 able interns. So this looks at aimed at aimed at
neurodiversity, people with physical ailments, mental ailments in terms of being
able to get access into the workforce. But there's no silver bullet approach.
Unfortunately, it's cultural evolution. Yeah. Right now, how's it changing?
Technology has offered a whole new set of things companies can do. Claire, do
you snoop in the social media backgrounds of your candidates to see if there's
anything dodgy there? Absolutely not. You don't? Why not? Must be tempting.
Well, I think we hire 1000s of people every year, and it would be quite an
investment to go and do that. But I think we've all got the right to a private
life. I certainly don't feel that going into someone's personal Facebook account
would be a good way to assess them against their job. Really? I disagree on that
for sure. Just reputationally, when we are working not just with interns, but
also senior execs, we do a bio, but we also do a sense check in terms of their
social media handles. You've seen the impact it has on shares and stock prices
where you see homophobic tweets put out by senior executives. So I really do
believe that the C-suite, so people like Sir John, the CFO, the executives,
middle management, and even interns going in, it's really important. I think
they have to manage that. But organisations, I think, will be doing more in
terms of people's backgrounds and things of that nature. Let's just think a bit
more about technology and the way it can affect this. And I want to play a clip
from Wouter de Veel. He is the founder and chief executive of Test Gorilla. It
is a service companies can use that offers them a library of online aptitude
tests that they can use or tailor in order to screen applicants. Here's how he
describes the business. So let's imagine you're recruiting a customer service
person. So you want to test for different things. So you can add a test about
problem solving, for example, cognitive ability, but also for actual customer
service skills, like communication might be very relevant in this case. And then
you can customise it further with your own custom questions. So for example,
hey, why do you want to work for our company? Or here you have an email from a
customer, how would you respond? And you send out this assessment to all your
candidates, either by email or even better in the vacancy where you in the past
would say, please send us your CV, you can now put a link directly to the
assessment. Now and then as a customer, once you have your candidates, you can
log into your account. And there you will see all your candidates ranked from
the highest scoring one to the lowest scoring one. And what happens in practice
is that you spend your time on the best candidates. So for those you're going to
double click, you're going to see, hey, who are those people, and then you
decide on who you invite for an interview. So it's a very different process,
which is much more fair, because everyone gets a fair chance of a sudden, not
only if you have the perfect shiny brand names on your CV, for example, and it's
much more efficient, right? We think there's a huge shift from the old way of
hiring based on CVs and manual screening towards a new skills based hiring. And
that's accelerated by some mega trends in the market, like increasing social
awareness of bias, right? Me Too, Black Lives Matter, you name them, but also
the increasing global talent pool. As you start working remotely, you get talent
from all over the world applying, how on earth are you going to use a CV to
compare them? You can't, because you don't know all these brands. I think my
kids, they will see CV based screening as things like smoking in public, right?
Or driving without seatbelts. It's just unfair and not something for the 21st
century. So that's Wouter Derweel, who's behind Test Guerrilla. What about you,
Michael? Are you attracted to aptitude tests? We are. We actually made a
decision as a business to actually invest in a couple of companies, one being
Equitas, which is an intelligent software to give middle managers the
opportunity to be able to hire and recruit more diverse teams by utilising
preloaded aptitude testing. So I do believe that it has a place. But again, it's
proof of concept. It's not established just yet. John, you must have, because we
really talked about your team, you know, running the shops. What about your
management? So first, we should say the chief executive of Timpsons is your son.
So he went through a strange interview process. But even the others on the... I
mean, we will use typically a recruitment consultant to provide us with a
shortlist to make sure we've got the skills we need. But then again, we are
interviewing for attitude. It's so important for us that people who are working
outside of the shops realise that their job isn't to tell people what to do out
there. It's to help them do the job. They're support. And it's very different
from most other head offices. How many of you measure outcomes in recruitment?
And I'm asking this because I think there are people on this planet who are
better at getting through job applications than doing the job. How many times
are you picking those people rather than the right people? Well, we do produce
the statistics between one area. Bearing in mind, our recruitment is all done by
one of our 50 area teams. So we're measuring how many of their people have been
leaving compared with the other areas and so on. So there's a level of... Okay,
so you do measure it and you can see... you measure it as people who basically
have to be asked maybe to move... Yeah, and if recruitment is the most important
job of our field team, the second most important job is to say goodbye to those
that don't fit in because no one wants to work alongside a four-hour term. Do
you measure at Capgemini, Claire? Well, we look at how many people are leaving
within three, six, nine months. You know, we track all of that. But can you give
me a rough guide to what proportion of hires are regretted? I couldn't share
that. But is it 2% or 20% or 60%? Well, certainly if you look at attrition over
the last three years with the pandemic, we saw the great resignation. Everyone's
been talking about it. Lots more movement. If you look at regretted leavers
versus non-regretted leavers, the non-regretted leavers actually are far fewer.
Right. Michael, companies are getting much better at tracking diversity. Yes. I
don't know whether companies do... whether they are very good at saying, you
know what, 25% of the people, Barrington Associates, as recommended to us,
turned out to be dubbed, but this other company, they were sending us better
candidates. Are they good at measuring that? They are getting better. I think it
depends on seniority. So if you look at the C-suites, invariably it's going to
take three to four years before an organisation admits defeat, because obviously
the implications from a shareholder standpoint is obviously there. And
reputationally, I would say at the entry level, decisions around regret can
really sort of get to the point within three months, six months. So I would say
we as an organisation are constantly reviewed. Of your interns that you place in
FTSE 100 companies, what proportion of them managed to get a permanent job?
Super question. So why we set it up, it wasn't actually to get these kids
permanent roles. It was more about life experiences. But having started the
programme two and a half years ago, we're trending at 15 to 20% of those
students matriculating out of the programme into permanent roles, which is
incredible. We've talked about so many aspects. There's one more I do just want
to talk about, which is the pool from which you draw. Is one of the ways to
improve both diversity and aptitude, to be drawing from a wider pool? So I
suppose it's where do you advertise the job really matters? It might be easy for
you at Capgemini, because I bet you, Claire, that there is somewhere where all
the people you want to employ look, and you can advertise there. And you always
just know this is the platform on which they'll all be looking. So we just do
that. I wish it was that simple. And I mentioned at the beginning that I applied
via LinkedIn. If that's all we ever do, we'll only get the people that are
present on that platform. So we've got to be more smart than that. We work with
Code Your Future. So they bring refugees into training programmes and bring them
into the organisation. And we're looking at how we can assist transitioning
people who are choosing to leave military service into the working world. We've
got returner programmes, a programme called Relaunch, where we look at people
who've been out of work for a period of time. But these are quite special
programmes to make sure that you're giving opportunities to all. But just in
terms of the general advertising? I think any good recruiter will tell you that
posting and praying isn't the answer. We've got to be present on some job
boards, we've got to have a social media presence, and we've got to raise
awareness of the brand. Michael, this seems like a very important way of
improving both diversity and the quality of people in jobs. 100%. And with the
10,000 black interns and 10,000 able interns, we learned a very humble lesson
pretty darn quickly. We initially launched on LinkedIn, a professional network,
and we assumed that we were going to get access to underserved and
underrepresented communities. And that wasn't the case. So we moved very much
into Instagram, Twitter, we hire influencers and say, right, apply to 10,000
black interns, apply to 10,000 able interns, to be able to get diverse talent
into the process. So it's been a fantastic learning curve. And there are many, I
think we've got 800 firms signed up to 10,000 black interns, and 10,000 able
interns, they're also learning a lot from these experiences. There's only so
many seminars, so many coaching sessions that you can do at the C-suite. But if
you can see it, and live that experience of some of the diverse talent coming
into these organisations, it does start to make a change. It has been absolutely
fascinating for me, listen to the three of you really talk through some of these
issues. Thanks so much for that. My guests, Sir John Timpson from the Timpson
Group, Claire Hamilton from Capgemini, and Michael Barrington-Hibbert from
Barrington-Hibbert Associates. Thanks to them. Thank you for listening. We'll be
back next week. Do join us then. Evan Davis. The Bottom Line was produced by
Simon Chulet, and you can of course, find many more editions and subscribe to
the series on BBC Sounds. You and yours is after the midday news, today
reporting on long-awaited reforms to gambling laws and how COVID has changed our
shopping habits. Join Winifred Robinson in around five minutes. Watch on BBC
iPlayer.