TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-10H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at nine o'clock. President Zelensky has reflected on what he called a
year of pain, sorrow, faith and unity, as Ukraine marks the first anniversary of
Russia's full-scale invasion. He said Ukraine had remained invincible and
pledged to do everything to defeat Russia this year. Ceremonies are taking place
across the country to remember those who've been killed or forced to flee.
Ukraine's Culture Minister, Alexander Tuchenko, told today both the Russian
government and public need to be punished for the war. These people elected this
president. These people are waving flags two days ago, greeting his speech about
war in Ukraine. It's also a responsibility of those who are not publicly
claiming against war, against Putin. So for us, it doesn't exist good Russians.
The Archbishop of Canterbury has warned that Russia must not be treated like
Germany after the First World War once the conflict in Ukraine is over. Writing
in the Daily Telegraph, Justin Welby said Russia must be able to recover and be
secure without being allowed to repeat its aggression. A fourth man has been
arrested in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition
after the attack on Wednesday. Police say they're focusing their investigation
on the dissident Republican group, the new IRA. Candidates vying to replace
Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP and Scotland's first minister have until
noon to garner enough support to get their names on the ballot paper. The winner
of the contest will be announced at the end of next month. And archaeologists
have expressed concern that troves of ancient artefacts are gathering dust in
warehouses because museums in England are running out of space. The objects
range from fine Roman metalwork to Bronze Age pottery unearthed during
construction work. The government agency Historic England says a solution needs
to be found soon before the stores are full. BBC News. On this first anniversary
of the invasion of Ukraine, Woman's Hour talks to Dame Melinda Simmons, the UK
ambassador there at 10am this morning. Or if you're in the mood for some
music... Head to BBC Sounds for a brand new classical mixtape where you can
bathe in the shimmering strings of Richard Strauss, tappy toes to Oscar
Peterson's take on Gershwin or enjoy Haydn's keyboard concerto in F Major. The
classical mixtape available now on BBC Sounds. This is Radio 4 and now it's
Desert Island Discs with Lauren Laverne. My castaway this week is Jenny Bevan.
She's a triple Oscar winning costume designer and has spent 40 years building
characters and weaving narratives for the big screen through clothes. Her eye
for detail and knack for authenticity are the stuff of legend in the film
industry and they serve her well whichever world she steps into. The exquisite
period costumes of the King's Speech, Gorseford Park and Sense and Sensibility
feel absolutely true to their settings but then so do the post-apocalyptic
steampunk of Mad Max Fury Road and the 70s fashion banquet of Disney's Cruella.
She grew up in a creative household and dreamed of becoming a set designer until
a lucky break set her on an altogether different path. She describes her job as
storytelling through clothes. So what story do her own choices reveal? Perhaps
that she's someone who likes to push the boundaries and mix things up? After all
she did make headlines around the world when she rocked up to collect her second
Oscar in an M&S leather jacket. She says I love dressing others and I know how
to make them look beautiful on screen but I've never been interested in that
kind of look for myself. Jenny Bevan welcome to Desert Island Discs. Thank you
Lauren it's a real honour to be here. Oh we're delighted to have you so Jenny
you must have the most wonderful imagination to keep being able to visualise so
many different worlds and characters over all of the decades that you've been
working. I wonder what the starting point is for you once you've got a new
commission? The script and the director's vision. So normally I'm sent the
script and if I like it then there's a meeting with the director arranged unless
of course it's someone I've worked with before. From that moment I sort of live
in that world and that's what I really love is becoming part of the world of
whatever story it is. So as you're reading it is it coming to life for you? You
can visualise it quite early on? It normally does on the first reading. I do
have a huge imagination which served me slightly worryingly when I was very
small because I used to have terrible nightmares and you know imagine all sorts
of horrors under the bed and you know whatever. I wonder what qualities you most
enjoy in the actors that you work with? What are you hoping for when you set out
to start your fittings? I think the thing I'm looking for and when it happens it
just makes it sheerly joyous is when the actor turns and says now I know who I
am. Jenny of course you're sharing your tracks with us today, the music that
matters to you. How important is music to you when you're working? Do you use it
to help you create an atmosphere when you're fitting or working with an actor or
to create a world? I do it at home. I don't use music in the fitting room but in
my own life music is probably the most important of all the arts. I was brought
up in a family of classical musicians and that was absolutely what we heard and
lived with all the time and it's still, in fact in my next life I will share
this with you. I'm going to be a conductor and I'm going to practice which I
didn't do this time round. Oh well good to know what your future plans are. Well
before we get there let's get to your music. This first disc today, what's it
going to be Jenny? It's from the St Matthew Passion which is probably the piece
of music I first took in and really listened to because both my parents were
classical musicians and it was very badly paid in the 50s. So when they were
both in something I was often taken along to rehearsal and I have this
incredible memory of I think it must have been a rehearsal room in somewhere
like the Royal College of Music because it's a big Victorian room. I'm sitting
on a bent wood chair, my feet don't touch the ground and they've rehearsed and
I've heard it and then they're putting their instruments away and my mother's
wrapping her viola in a scarf and my father has a rather nice yellow duster
which goes round his cello neck and I just can see it as if it was yesterday and
the music's just crept into my soul at this point. I must have been about six,
seven. I love that they were dressing their instruments. Yes, well to put them
away. Also when you use rosin on a bow it gets powdery and so you need something
to just gently dust it. All the way through there. I know. and Who's made who?
Let me fight her to her treasure. Fight her to her treasure. Fight her to her
treasure. Fight her to her treasure. Giddalt from Bach's St Matthew Passion,
performed by Hans-Peter Blochfitz and the Chappelle Royal Orchestra conducted by
Philip Heravega. So let's go back to the beginning then, Jenny. You chose that
piece, as you said, to remind you of your parents, your dad, Peter in
particular, playing the cello. Tell me a little bit more about him. He was a
remarkable man, I think, and I think a cellist from a very young age and came up
to London, aged 16, to go to the Royal Academy of Music. And met my mother, who
was actually from the Royal College of Music on a Boyd-Neil orchestral tour
later on, but he always had projects. Letterpress printing he was extremely good
at. He was always making things DIY. That wasn't always quite so successful. And
then we got this whole high-fi thing going, and I think it was pretty medium-fi
actually, but he bought all the separate components and put them together. Oh,
and photography, that was another thing. I do remember standing next to him in
the dark with this little almost cupboard at the back of our flat in Kensington
and watching the photograph come up in the Bath of Hypo, I think it was called.
Oh, yes. He used to take beautiful photographs and then develop them and print
them. So I've just brought up in a very creative sort of way, I think. It does
sound like it was 24-7 creativity in your house. What about your mum, Molly? She
was a viola player, wasn't she? She was a fantastic viola player and a wonderful
mother, but she stopped playing to look after us. And I always think that was a
mistake. I mean, she should have kept playing more. I always thought she was so
good. She should have kept going more and not worried about us. We'd have been
fine. But in the room downstairs in the flat, she left a wall so that we could
draw on it. I would never forget that. It was such a brilliant thing to do, just
let them go free on the wall. It sounds like a very joyful household, the way
that you described it. This kind of active, interested, expressive household. It
was. And she also sent us to a fribal school rather than a regular primary
because she loved that German system of play. And through the play, you learn
actually an enormous amount, which I absolutely loved. So they must have been
very progressive because this would have been the 50s. Yeah. So with both of
your parents being professional players, Jenny, did you and Hilary follow in
their footsteps and take music lessons? Did you do it informally just as part of
family life? We absolutely did take lessons. And Hill was much better than me as
she is at most things and played the piano. I played the cello, which I did
enjoy. But I just was hopeless at practicing and I just wanted to be able to do
it. But I did learn it up until I was about 15 or 16 and can still just about do
it. And we have this terrible family quartet. It's called the Ploque Hautet.
I've heard about this. Now the Ploque Hautet taught me through the repertoire.
What have you got? Oh, not a lot. So we formed because I had a huge bathroom
project at my house. And to celebrate the finishing of the building works, we
played a piece written by my friend Julian Marshall, which was called the
Bathroom Suite. And I'd said to him expressly, it has to be in four, four time
and C major. But oh, no, no, we were in three sharps and all over the place.
Anyway, we got through it wearing, of course, bath hats and bath robes. Speaking
of music, time for your second disc. What are we going to hear next? We're going
to hear the Stakely Homes of England performed by Noel Coward, which I mean, we
didn't just stick to classical music at home. And we had some really wonderful,
funny records like Flanders and Swan and this fabulous Noel Coward. And we used
to listen to them in the evenings with a cup of tea. This is the days of this
high five, marvelous high five, I think, that my dad made. We lived in Putney in
a very normal Edwardian house, not huge. And my mother, I think she died by this
moment. She died very young. And this fabulous aunt came to look after us. And
it would be whoever was around. Plus, there was normally at least three or four
people sort of tucked into corners, you know, waves and strays and cousins and
what have you. We'd put on an LP and listen to it. And I just have these
wonderful memories. The Stakely Homes of England, we proudly represent. We only
keep them up for Americans to rent. Though the pipes that supply the bathroom
burst and the lavatory makes you fear the worst, it was used by Charles the
First. Quite informally and later by George the Four, on the journey north, the
State Department keeps their historical renown. It's wiser not to sleep there in
case they tumble down. But still, if they ever catch on fire, which with any
luck they might, we'll fight for the Stakely Homes of England. The Stakely Homes
of England, though rather in the lurch, provide a lot of chances for psychical
research. There's the ghost of a crazy younger son who murdered in 1350, won an
extremely rowdy nun, who resented it. And people who come to call, meet her in
the hall. The baby in the guest wing who crunches by the grate, was walled up in
the west wing in 1428. If anyone spots the Queen of Scots in a hand embroidered
shroud, we're proud of the Stakely Homes of England. The Stakely Homes of
England, written and performed by Noel Coward. So Jenny, when you were young in
this rather bohemian home, were you always making things, putting on plays, that
kind of thing? It was more dolls houses in those early days. And then I had this
wonderful grandfather, he used to give us six months, if we could tell him where
a quote from Shakespeare came from. And he decided he wanted to take me to see
my first Shakespeare. And he took me to see Dorothy Tooten in Twelfth Night. I
must have been 10 or 11, I think. And I'd never seen anything like it. What kind
of production was it? It was probably quite a straightforward production, but I
was just entranced with the acting, the look of it, the storytelling. I knew at
that point I needed to be some part of it. I don't think I ever wanted to act.
But I knew there was something about being part of that world that really,
really was going to be important. Now, as you mentioned, Jenny, you lost your
mum when you were very young. You were just 14 when she died. How clear are your
memories of that time? What do you remember about it? She was ill for quite a
long time. It was cancer. And possibly these days would have been cured. And I'm
funny about death. I don't know. I've always had just an inevitability about it.
So it's sad, but it's not anything that isn't in a funny way normal. And then
this fabulous aunt, Paul, who was is a distant relation, not I think fourth
cousin or something, said, if we wanted her to, if the girls wanted me, I will
come and look up. And she brought her two children, Rod and Claire. So we
actually expanded as a family and we're still incredibly fond of each other. But
you had that emotional support from ex-family and friends. Yes, absolutely. I
know that your sister said you stepped in to help with the practicalities and
support her and look after her. Tried really hard, I must say. You know, the
washing. Oh, dear. I can remember one of the very early things I bought after
that experience when I first earned a bit of money. It was an automatic washing
machine. That's true liberation. It was obviously a few years later. So what was
it, Twin Tub before that? Oh, Twin Tub, yes, absolutely. And a lot of hauling of
stuff between the two. No, absolutely. But that must have been quite a lot of
responsibility to take on as a teenager. Yeah, I think it was. It's time to go
to the music. Disc number three. What are we going to hear? Disc number three is
the Flower Song from Carmen, which I designed for Covent Garden at a
ridiculously early age, doing a sort of rescue mission due to people not being
available. La Fleur Côte de Maveille-Gette. The Flower You Threw At Me, sung by
Placido Domingo with the London Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Sir George
Schulte. So, Jenny, you're going to have to talk me through this. You ended up
designing not only the sets, but also the costumes for Carmen at the Royal Opera
House. You were just 21. You described it as a rescue mission. Quite the day of
you. How did you get the gig? I'd been sent to the Welsh Theatre Company as an
Arts Council trainee assistant designer, which was a fantastic scheme that ran
then and you would be put in a theatre. And that at that time was run by Michael
Jelliot, who also ran Welsh National Opera. And he'd been asked to do Carmen at
Covent Garden and had actually asked my head of department when I was at Central
School of Art and Design, Ralph Colteri, to do the sets. And Ralph was very
modern in his design style. He did really extremely beautiful sculptural sets.
But the conductor, Sir Georg Schulte, who was coming back for his first sort of
gig after he left the opera house and was coming back as a guest conductor,
didn't want a modern interpretation. So suddenly, you know, Ralph decided it
wasn't right for him and they were left without a designer. And Michael turned
to me. I'd done two incredibly small shows for him at the Welsh Theatre Company,
which was an 80 seater and splot. I said, what did I think of Carmen? And I
said, well, of course I know a bit of it, but I've never really. So he said,
well, listen to it and see what you come up with that one. As I was an Arts
Council trainee assistant, I thought, oh, well, that's just him asking me to do
something. So I designed a set for Act One, which is the Piazza. And he took a
look at it and he said, we're going on a plane tomorrow. Have you got a
passport? I said, yes, we're going to Frankfurt. We're going to see Sir Georg
Schulte. I want you to show this to him to do Carmen. So I packed up the model
and off we went to Frankfurt. And Schulte said, I'd just like to see what you do
for Act Two. So I came back and signed Act Two and he liked it. So that's how I
got the gig. And then happily in the house, this is a house in Putney. My friend
David Fielding was living there. He'd just we were at college together and he'd
come back. So I got him involved. So we actually ended up doing it together. And
then he took on the props and because I was suddenly then asked to the costume.
How did that come about? So at first it was just the sets. And then what
happened? Well, nobody wanted to do costumes for a 21 year old designer set. So
it was like, you will do it. So how many are we talking? About 400. But at the
Opera House, everybody was incredibly helpful to me. I think they realized if
they weren't, it could all go horribly pear shaped. And the more help I got, the
more likely we were to end up with a good production. It was never going to be
earth shattering or fabulously modern, but it was a good solid rendition of
Carmen with nice sets. I was proud of the sets, actually. So it went well. And
after a few years working in theatre, you helped an old family friend out.
They'd asked you to work on Dame Peggy Ashcroft's costumes. And that took you
into designing for Merchant Ivory. So Nick rings me and says, could I just go
and help her get together a wardrobe of clothes for this eccentric English
dealer who's going to be traveling overland with her female companion. And then
no money involved. So I looked through my wardrobe and I had some odd pieces and
I went over and we had a wonderful day. And then I went back and she said to me,
she said, my dear, we're getting on quite well. Now, I've never been to India
before. This is pre-Julin the Crown or Passagwini. I said, I'm a little
concerned about going. And she said, they offered me a first class air ticket.
If I change it for two economies, will you come with me? So I end up in this
palace in Jodhpur, Rajasthan. And I just get involved with everything I do,
crowd collecting. I do props, I do costumes, I help with continuity, you know,
basically. And after that, I was simply part of the Merchant Ivory family and
they saw me as a costume designer. Didn't you go traveling together? After the
film, which was in Rajasthan, we went down to Goa and we had an incredible time.
We were both on a Lambretta scooter, you know, and it was a lovely end to what
was really my first film. It's time for some more music, Jenny Bevan. What's
your fourth piece today and why are you taking it with you to the island? It's
O'Meal Bambino Caro from A Room With a View. It was the film I did with Merchant
Ivory and John Bright. And I was so surprised because obviously when we make a
film, you have no idea what the music is going to be. You're making the pieces
of the jigsaw, which are then slotted together by someone else and then
varnished over and all that. And so remember sitting in the cinema for the cast
and crew screening and absolutely being blown away by the choice of this music,
which I had no idea was going to be on the film. O'Meal Bambino Caro by Pacini
sung by Kiri Takanoa with the London Philharmonic Orchestra from the soundtrack
to A Room With a View. Jenny, it's not just about getting the visual look of a
film right. It's also about understanding its social context, isn't it? I know
that when you worked on the film The King's Speech, you made sure Geoffrey
Rush's character didn't have too many clothes. Yeah. Well, we didn't then.
They're obviously a bit earlier, but only a little bit. But I remember having
very few clothes in the early fifties and you mended them and you polished your
shoes and you only had three pairs. You're indoor, you're outdoor and you're
daps, possibly a pair of Wollingtons. But absolutely nobody did and they wore
them round and round, as indeed in Jane Austen's day. They didn't necessarily
have many clothes, but they had a lot of accessories that sort of gave things a
really different look. And that's one of the fun things. And if you're on a
small budget, that really saves you. You enjoyed so much success, Jenny, with
some incredible period costumes. But then in 2015, there was a complete change
of gear. You were asked to work on something totally different, Mad Max Fury
Road. So how did you go about imagining costumes for this post-apocalyptic
world? I mean, it's a graphic novel to start with. So I guess you've got the
comics to help you, the visual references. But what sort of design criteria did
you have? It's exactly the same as if you're doing Jane Austen or modern or
King's Speech. It's a story of these characters and what their backgrounds are
and where they've come from. And in this, it happens in the post-apocalyptic
world. They're surviving with very little. They're in a world without much water
there. And it's a whole different set of rules, rules of survival. And a lot of
them are only kept alive by the curious contraptions they wear, like the mask on
the Morton Joe and the breathing thing on his back or Richter Sorectus with his
breathing thing. And that because like the wall boys have nowhere to put
anything, pockets would be really handy. So, you know, they would keep whatever
they owned in pockets. And that gave them a much sort of more solid look. But
real teamwork thing, actually, as it should be. It's time for your fifth choice,
Jenny. What have you got for us? My fifth choice is my daughter, Caitlin,
singing Scream. So she did toy with the idea of being a musician. She went to a
wonderful school and they had a great drama department. And they did The Fool of
the House of Usher as their A-level set piece. And she wrote this song Scream
when she was thinking of music. And with Jim Bell. And I just think it's really
clever. She did a whole CD and it's having my daughter with me, probably the
most important person in my life. Is this your fear? Can you hear me? You always
hear me. Scream. Scream. I will be by your side. The shame you tried to hide. I
will take you down. Can you hear me? Scream. Scream by Caitlin Albury Bevan. So
Jenny Bevan, your costumes for Mad Max Fury Road were hugely successful. You won
both an Oscar and a BAFTA for your work on that film. Now, when you went to
collect your BAFTA, the host for the award ceremony, Stephen Fry, did joke. Only
one of the greats of cinematic costume design would come to an award ceremony,
dressed as a bag lady, and it created a few newspaper headlines at the time.
What's your recollection of events? Well, I didn't hear it because I was already
backstage. And I love Stephen. And I love the fact he said that. Of course I
did. I had my head shut, I was hanging out. I mean, it was just a, I thought it
was just an absolutely fine thing to say. And I didn't think it did me anything
but good, really. But obviously this kind of hubbub around it. How long did it
take to die down and did that kind of creep into your real life at all? Were
there people outside the house and things like that? Yeah, we had a bit of that.
But what was interesting was actually understanding what film stars go through,
just having a moment of learning what it feels like to be recognised in the
street and all that. It died down very quickly. It was all fine. There was a
tabloid journalist in your head, though. There was indeed, yes, he leapt out,
but my neighbour across the road. It was funny because he said, come over and
have a drink. And literally, I mean, we're talking over the road. When I got
ready to come back to my house, he said, I'm going to walk you across. I said,
Stuart, don't be ridiculous. It's over the road. I'm walking you back. And there
he was when this woman literally jumped out of the head. So I was very glad he
had. So you won another Oscar for your work on Cruella, the 2021 film with Emma
Stone and Dame Emma Thompson. Now, anyone who's seen it, as I have numerous
times, will understand why. It is an absolute tour de force, a banquet of 70s
fashion, both stars wearing a stunning parade of outfits. And one of Emma
Stone's involves a white cape that actually literally burns off to reveal a red
dress. So she sets it on fire. There are multiple fashion shows. There are
balls. There are punk rock performances. I mean, you know, there are a lot of
extras and everybody's costume matters in this film. I'm imagining that must
have been really rewarding, but a challenging film to work on. How long did you
have to prepare? It was very quick. Another sort of rescue mission, really. We
actually had 10 weeks. It's not like theatre, but you have to have it already
for the first night. You're going in schedule order, always. But even so, it was
massive because the schedule was all over the place with stuff coming up front.
But Emma Stone, bless her, slipped at a, I think, a Spice Girls concert and
broke her collarbone for which she was so mortified. And I just said, so long as
you're not in too much pain, we are so grateful because they actually gave us
another six weeks. And we've been going at such a speed that we've just kept the
thing up and really, really helped, I think, put a lot of the detail in that
would have been a bit tricky otherwise. But I also have the most phenomenal team
on that. Jenny, it's time for some more music. Your sixth piece today. What is
it? Well, this isn't music. This is Joe Lyset doing the parking fine. And Joe is
a tremendous friend. And I'm not sure I'm going to like this island. I'll be
very, very honest. I like my home comforts. I'm not going to like being bitten
by bugs and not having a proper mattress and various things. And this makes me
laugh and has made me laugh from the minute I saw it. And Joe, in a funny way,
is sort of the epitome of the house I live in in London now, which is also full
of people and artists and musicians, sort of part time, whatever. And I do
really love that kind of life, which I sort of had through my life, is just
really fun people living at the house. So Joe came to lodge with you. He's a
friend of your daughter, Caitlin. Yes, they met at Manchester University. And
his dad brought him a flat. And Joe said, you know, if you want to leave your
stuff up over the summer break, do. And I thought, oh, that's brilliant. I don't
have to drive all the way up to Manchester and back. And I said, well, it's
really kind. You know, Joe needs a room. Do tell him he's welcome. Twelve years
ago. I mean, he's got his own house. He doesn't you know, he lives in Birmingham
and is a proud Brummy. But yeah, he's around. I feel like we should talk about
parking fines. Some recognition in the room. This is a bit of helpful advice. I
know we're in London and parking's a nightmare here. There's a thing called a
subject access request. It's part of the Data Protection Act 1998. You can
request any and all information that a company or an institution has on you. And
it's such a fabulous waste of their time. I don't want any extra admin. If you
give them some, they hate it. They normally go away. This is an ongoing one,
which isn't a parking fine, actually. This is this. I was driving in the wrong
lane and they gave me a fine for that. I know bloody squares. Now, I'm not sure
what I can say legally as to where this is. So what I'll do is I'll do a version
for the DVD. This was in London. I did a subject access request to them. They
didn't reply within 30 days. So they're breaking the law. And as you know, I
love the law. So I sent them an email that included this sentence, just to give
you an idea of the tone of the things I write. Matt, I add that if I fail to
observe your deadlines, you have the power to hand out additional fines, whereas
I have only diminished powers, such as sending emails like this and just
generally making myself a slight nuisance. However, I will be judged merely by
your human laws, whereas you will be judged at the gates of hell. Joe Lyset on
the perils of parking and driving in London. So, Jenny, you've just been
nominated for another Oscar for your work on Mrs Harris Goes to Paris. In a
nutshell, Mrs Harris, played by Leslie Manville, is a cleaner. In the late
1950s, she set her heart on owning a Dior dress. Was there much collaboration
between yourself and Dior? I understood when I took on the job that Dior would
be doing the Dior part. I hadn't really thought it through, to be honest,
because obviously that is not how an haute couture house works. But anyway, I
went to the archives and had the most wonderful time. They were so helpful, so
wonderful. I saw what they had from the 50s, which curiously is not a lot,
because in those days, they didn't see the need to keep pieces. They made their
collection, they sold it, they moved on. And then I realized, of course, that we
were looking at them with our white gloves on. There was no way that we would be
using these frocks that still existed. And so I remember sitting around the
table at the end of the day and thanked them so much for a fabulous time and how
much I'd learnt and how wonderful it was we were going to be working together.
And four faces looked at me in horror from the other side and went, naw! And I
thought, oh, interesting. So I said, well, I do know people who can recreate
Dior, certainly for a film, but it will be very expensive. And that's what we
did. John Bright and Jane Law made the most beautiful Dior recreations, which
are worn in the film, which was obviously a lot more than I quite understood
when I took it on. So these are haute couture dresses. I mean, how on earth do
you go about recreating something that takes so many hundreds of hours of work?
You do it with a film costume house who are used to making things overnight, if
necessary. But we didn't have to make it overnight. The real problem with Covid,
we were in full on Covid. This is one of the first films that was made. And we
went to Budapest because it was still relatively open. Obviously, getting fabric
was tricky and you need fabric with a real sculptural sense to it to make the
dresses we were trying to make. But it all had to be done to measurement. We
couldn't bring people for fittings. I'm very, very thrilled with what we did
manage to recreate. Jenny, you have said before, I think I'll stop designing
when I stop being terrified because that would be no good at all. It's just
about knowing how to approach the problems and how to deal with them and how to
solve them. It's one of the only things that gets better with age. What do you
mean by being terrified and how does that fuel your creativity? Oh, I think
there's always a point when you think, I don't know what they should look like.
I mean, you've seen it in your head when you read it, but the truth is that you
actually haven't a clue. And you slowly work your way in and bite-sized chunks.
And I sort of love that. And then I love the moment when you stop being
terrified because you've actually found it, all your version of it, and everyone
seems happy. But yeah, I am still like, I don't know what to do. I really don't
know what this should look like, which is happening. I've got a possible project
for later this year, very different again. I can't say what it is, but already
I'm happily terrified. All right. It's time for your seventh disc, Jenny. What
are we going to hear next? I'm really sorry about this, Lauren. I don't think
I'm going to like this island. I do love a home comfort. Any bug will bite me.
So I would like Gloria Gowner singing I Was Five. And I have actually sung along
to the record at moments of my life. And I just think it'd be brilliant. I will
blast this out on this desert island. No one will hear me. So in moments of
stress, this is the song that you sing? This is one of the ones, yes.
Definitely. Such a good tip. At first I was afraid I was petrified. I kept
thinking I could never live without you by my side. But then I spent so many
nights thinking, why you doing me wrong? And I grew strong. And I learned how to
get along. So now you're back from outer space. I just walked in to find you
here with that sad look upon your face. I should have changed that stupid lock.
I should have made you leave your key. If I'd have known for just one second,
you'd be back to bother me. Go on now, go. Walk out the door. Just turn around
now. Cause you're not welcome anymore. Weren't you the one who tried to hurt me
with your bite? You think I crumbled. You think I lay down and die? Oh no, not
I. I will survive. And as long as I know how to love, I know how to stay alive.
I've got all my life to live. And I've got all my love to give. And I'll
survive. I will survive. Hey, hey. Only the Lord could give me strength, not to
fall apart. Gloria Gaynor, I will survive. Jenny, it's almost time to cast you
away. What about the practicalities? Will you be able to fend for yourself on
the island? I think I'll have to, won't I? Is that all give in? That's it. I
will have to. I don't know how that'll work out, but we'll see. My imagination,
of course, goes to all the worst things. You know, the bugs and prinkles and
scratches and... Let's accentuate the positive. What sort of island are you
hoping for? Well, with little chalets and... It could be deserted, but still got
some rudiments of houses there. And maybe cooking pots and some fresh water
supply and maybe a little pool that would be nice. What about your own costume?
If you had to design a costume for Desert Island Survival... Probably be a full-
on mosquito, you know, at which we've worn Alaska, you know, really mosquito- A
kind of beekeeper type scenario. Yes, I think that would be the way forward.
Well, one more disc before you take the journey there. It's your final choice.
What's it going to be? The final choice is- actually was one of many. I had real
trouble choosing this one, and it's nothing to do with anything. It's the sort
of music I go to when I need uplifting, I need some kind of spiritual moment,
which I find music is very good for. And it hits those strings in you that just-
and when she starts singing- I mean, it's a bit like the Bach at the beginning,
that also does it, but it just hits a sort of chord. And it's Ombrakara de
Miasboza from Handel's Redemisto. Ombrakara de Miasboza from Handel's Redemisto.
Ombrakara de Miasboza from Handel's Redemisto. Ombrakara de Miasboza, beloved
shadow of my bride, from Handel's opera Redemisto. We heard Emmaké Borat singing
with the ensemble artist Cersei, conducted by Philippe Zarosky. So Jenny, it's
time. I'm going to send you away to the island. I will give you the Bible and
the complete works of Shakespeare to read. You can also have another book of
your selection. What would you like? I'm afraid it's going to be the complete
works of Jane Austen, if I'm allowed, because I find her so re-readable. And I
needed something that I can re-read and re-read and re-read, and she's always
got something terribly pertinent to say. I can absolutely give you the complete
works, but do you have a favourite book of hers? Probably not, actually. No, I
can just go round and round, really. You can also have a luxury item. What would
you like? I've thought about this deeply, and from, you know, Endless Mosquito
Repellent, I think a cello. Because it's the instrument I did learn when I was
younger, and I would obviously need some music, and I would have a real go at it
and try and do it properly. So when I get off the island, which I obviously
will, I can actually join in the family quartet, the Placole Quartet, you know,
being a bit better. The Placole Quartet are going to be seriously sharp by the
time you get back, it's yours. Seriously sharp. And finally, which track of the
eight that you've shared with us today would you rush to save from the waves?
The most difficult question till last, you're wincing. I went back for some
forwards, but I think it has to be the St. Matthew Passion. The Bach it is.
Jenny Bevan, thank you very much for letting us hear your desert island discs.
It's been an absolute pleasure if rather tortuous choosing only eight, but thank
you, Lauren. Desert Island Discs was created by Roy Plumlee. The producer was
Sarah Taylor. Exclusive performances by much loved artists. Together with the
BBC Concert Orchestra. From classic tracks to brand new covers. Radio 2's piano.
Watch on iPlayer. Listen on BBC Sounds. On Radio 4 Longwave, the daily service.
Here on Radio 4 FM, Catherine Rundell's biography of the infinity merchant John
Dunn concludes. His illicit marriage has destroyed his financial prospects and
he turns to the priesthood. Blake Ritson reads super infinite. Dunn's marriage
to Anne without the blessing of her father ended all possible preferment at
court. Losing his employment with Sir Thomas Edgerton, they began married life
in a small cottage near Woking in Surrey, provided by a young cousin of Anne's.
Money was tight. Dunn had no obvious employment and though children quickly
followed, several died in infancy. In 1612 he was befriended by Sir Robert Drury
after writing a funeral elegy for his daughter and was installed in a house in
Drury Lane. Dunn was now in the very heart of London, no longer having to make
the long journey on horseback to and from his family and it was alive with bite
and noise and possibility. More children came. Little Nicholas arrived in 1613.
Money grew tighter. Dunn had to give up his horse and beg or borrow one whenever
he needed a mount. His friend and biographer Walton paints Dunn in these days as
caught between two desires. He had been living for so long in expectation of
estate employment that the hope was ingrained but in him other different desires
were growing strong, a pull at him to work for God's glory in holy orders. Dunn
was urgently aware always of the fleeing time. From 1607 to 1615 he hesitated.
His hairline began to recede and he knew himself to be stepping into middle age.
A decision had to be made. Slowly, in both doubt and hope, Dunn's eyes turned
towards the church. One reading of Dunn's turn to the priesthood is that it was
an expediency, a second best. Many people looking over his life have believed
that his heart and ambition lay always with the court. The church was a
compromise, a road to public respectability and reliable money and a way to
finally scrub out the stain of what Walton called the remarkable error of his
marriage. And there must have been some truth in that. He had always known
himself to be rare and he wanted his talents to be recognised. But the idea that
Dunn chose the church only because his ambition had failed elsewhere allides one
fact. Dunn had to fight to get there. It was a tenacity in his desire to reach
the church, though it was not straightforward. It had grit in it. What changed
and pushed Dunn to navigate the last steps to the pulpit? In part, the deaths of
two of his children, Mary aged three in May 1614 and Francis aged seven in
November acted as a knife and a spur all at once. They galvanised him into both
misery and more urgent action. On the 3rd December we find Dunn on his way to
Newmarket to discuss his purpose with the king in person. There he met with as
good allowance and encouragement as he could have longed for. He promptly began
to prepare for priesthood. In the bleak middle of winter, 23 January 1615, Dunn
went quietly to St Paul's Cathedral to be ordained. He was 42. Very swiftly he
was appointed to be a chaplain in ordinary to the king. James was in comparison
to Queen Elizabeth, an addict of the pulpit and had doubled the number of
sermons the monarch had preached every week. Renaissance sermons were long,
often upwards of an hour, some up to three, but they were heard hungrily. They
had breaking news in them, politics, entertainment, theatre. People gossiped
about them and picked over them in the week that followed. Dunn preached without
a text in front of him. He would write the sermon out in full, take notes and
memorise it. For the first time, Dunn unleashed his charisma upon live reactive
audiences who could eat in full and demand more. His fame spread fast. In the
summer of 1616, he was made priest in charge of seven oaks in Kent, a cynic year
worth perhaps 80 pounds. Within a year of his ordination, he was offered 14
different clerical positions. At last, his prosperity was growing fast enough to
meet the needs of his family. But as his fortunes rose, tragedy rose alongside.
Anne died, and it was a baby that killed her. On the 10th of August 1617, she
gave birth to a stillborn child. The labour, her twelfth, was too long and too
hard. She survived less than a week before mother and child were buried in the
same grave. They lie in the graveyard of St Clement Danes amid the rush of buses
going down the strand towards the West End's theatres. Seven of her children
lived to mourn her, aged from fourteen-year-old Constance to little Elizabeth
just reaching her first birthday. It was for Dunn an irreversible end. He would
not take another lover. She was his last. He wrote in a poem, My Good is Dead.
If pain takes the precise shape of the love you have for the dead, then his
heart in those days must have been complicated and terrible. Finally, in 1621,
the king sent for the 49-year-old Dunn and asked him to arrive at dinner time
the next day. According to Walton, when his majesty sat down, before he had
eaten any meat, he said after his pleasant manner, Dr. Dunn, I have invited you
to dinner, and though you sit not down with me, yet I will carve to you of a
dish that I know you love well, for knowing you love London, I do therefore make
you Dean of St Paul's. The deanship was a heavy responsibility, carrying with it
the imperative to stir the hearts and mind the souls of the whole of London, but
it was also a fantastic piñata of a job, hit it, and perks and favours and new
connections came pouring out. The installation took place on 22 November 1621.
Dunn was ushered into St Paul's like a bride, presented to the bishop and
processed up into the cathedral and to the altar. A teideum was sung under the
high echoing ceiling. Dunn prostrated himself upon the stone ground. He kissed
the altar and rose to stand in the church that was now his own. Technically,
Dunn was bound to preach only three times a year, Christmas, Easter, and
Ascension Day. But he was a man who preached like others eat meat, hungrily. To
read the full text of a Dunn sermon is a little like mounting a horse, only to
discover that it is an elephant, large and unfamiliar. To modern ears they are
winding, elongated, perembulating things, a pleasure that is also work. If you
are a scholar, they offer notes to an A to Z of Renaissance religious
flashpoints. Aquinas, bishops, kazuistry, divine right of kings, arastionism,
Gnostics, heresy, incarnation. But they can also be mined by those reading for
other, less erudite and more unpindownable reasons. You could turn to Dunn's
sermons for meditations on the Gospel as the bedrock of faith. It is John, the
man who trafficked in powerful metaphors, Christ as true light, Christ as the
word, whom Dunn loves best. That, and wholly unsurprisingly, the Psalms. The
whole frame of the poem, he wrote of one, is akin to a beating out of a piece of
gold. You can also find him in the sermons at his most authoritarian. There are
places where he is harsh, where his audience would have expected joy. At the
wedding of Lucy Goodyear to the supremely handsome diplomat Francis Nithersole,
he declared, Marriage is but a continual fornication sealed with an oath. Sex,
he bemoaned, had overtaken all else in marriage. We rise poorer, ignoble, weaker
for every night's sin than we lay down. We sin and sin and sin. It's a long way
from the gleeful rakery of his youth. Anne was dead, he was older and in
physical pain, and his thinking about sex had taken on a flinty quality. What
Lucy and Francis thought of being sent in such funereal tones to their marriage
bed is not, alas, recorded. But done is at his most remarkable when he speaks
about how very hard it is to seek God at all. More than anyone else, he
acknowledged the way that the human heart darts about like a rat. His body, he
found so readily present in desire for other humans, betrayed him when he sought
the same intensity in prayer. I throw myself down in my chamber and I call in
and invite God and his angels thither. And when they are there, I ignore God and
his angels for the noise of a fly, for the rattling of a coach, for the whining
of a door. I talk on. Sometimes I find that I forgot what I was about, but when
I began to forget it, I cannot tell. A memory of yesterday's pleasures, a fear
of tomorrow's dangers, a straw under my knee, a noise in my ear, a light in my
eye, and anything. And nothing, a fancy, a chimera in my brain troubles me in my
prayer. It is his lifelong quest and lifelong disappointment that we cannot be
struck daily by lightning. This the same done who in the holy sonnets seeks a
force so great that it will sweep away doubt, exhaustion, distraction, and leave
something stripped back uncertain. Batter my heart, three-persand God, for you,
as yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend, that I may rise and stand,
overthrow me, and bend your force to break, blow, burn, and make me new. It's
not possible, of course. It doesn't happen for him. He remains relentlessly
embodied and therefore relentlessly distractible. And for all his bitterness and
furies, he was insistent on joy. When David danced and leaped and shouted before
the ark, if he laughed too, it misbecame him not. Not to show that joy is an
argument against thankfulness of the heart. That is a stupidity. This is a
contempt. The idea resonated through his life. He had written years before to
Henry Goodyear, Our nature is meteoric. We respect because we partake so both
earth and heaven. For as our bodies glorified shall be capable of spiritual joy.
And so our souls demerged into those bodies are allowed to partake earthly
pleasure. We do wrong if we deliberately bury ourselves in dull monastic
sadness. Later he wrote, Heaven is expressed by singing, Hell by weeping. He
knew, as Dante did, that there is a special place in Hell for those who, when
they could laugh, chose instead to sigh. It's in his sermons as it was in all
his work. Dunn was able to hold two conflicting truths ever in front of him, a
kind of duck rabbit of the human condition. Humanity, as he saw it, was rotten
with corruption and weakness and failure. And even so, it was the great light of
the universe. He gloried in mankind. If the inner world of each human was
extended outwards, he wrote, man would be the giant and the world the dwarf. Few
people would turn to Dunn's poetry or prose with its twisting logic and
deliberate difficulty for solace. But you might turn to him to be reminded that
for all its horror, the human animal is worth your attention, your awe, your
love. Blake Ritsum was reading the final episode of Super Infinite by Catherine
Rondell. The abridger was Richard Hamilton. The producer was Allegra McElroy.
You can literally go anywhere at the snap of your fingers. For 100 years, the
BBC has been making groundbreaking radio drama. Of course, a tired woman! But
you have to ask yourself what I'm tired of. The radio plays. We are making
changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and
platforms. And the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working
by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing
this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or
mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. What do you do when
something amazing happens to you when your sibling or best friend is going
through something?