TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC Radio 4, The Shamima Begum Story, Series 2 of I'm Not a Monster. Listen on
BBC Sounds. And you can hear the latest episode of The Shamima Begum Story at 11
o'clock tomorrow morning here on BBC Radio 4. BBC News at eight o'clock. In the
past few minutes, the RMT union has announced it suspended all industrial action
at Network Rail after receiving a new pay offer from the company. RMT members
were due to walk out on the 16th of March. Workers at train companies are still
due to strike on that date, but disruption is now likely to be less severe. The
UN Refugee Agency has said it's profoundly concerned about the government's new
legislation to deter migrants from crossing the channel on small boats.
Ministers want to ban people who arrive in the UK illegally from claiming asylum
or re-entering the country in the future. The UNHCR said the bill would deny
protection to many asylum seekers needing protection. Rishi Sunak has insisted
the measures are tough but fair. But Beth Gardiner-Smith, who's from the refugee
charity Safe Passage, disagrees. I mean, essentially what the government is
saying is to vulnerable refugees who, in most cases, don't have time to flee
with papers, don't have time to obtain a visa or the ability to obtain a visa to
cross borders. They're effectively saying, we will never give you protection, we
will never give you the security that you need and deserve. The trial of a man
accused of murdering a nine-year-old girl in Liverpool has been told she was
killed in a shooting that went horribly wrong. Prosecutors allege that Thomas
Cashman shot Olivia Pratt-Corbell at her home last August after he chased
another man towards the property. Mr Cashman denies murder. Israeli forces have
killed at least six Palestinians in a raid on Jenin and the occupied West Bank.
They include a man accused of shooting two Jewish settlers a week ago. Sixteen
other Palestinians were injured. The UN says it expects the costs of repairing
the damage from last month's earthquakes to exceed $100 billion in Turkey alone.
Officials warn the figure could be far higher once the cost of recovery was
included. And the organisers of this year's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool
say tickets for all nine shows sold out within 90 minutes of going on sale.
Tickets for the final were snapped up in just 36 minutes. BBC News. And now on
File on 4. As the government announces plans to try to stop people from entering
the UK on small boats, Livia Haydock investigates what's happened to 200 migrant
children who went missing from hotels used by the Home Office to house them. The
car pulls up outside a hotel, we're getting a back seat, car drives off.
Emergency which service? Do you need fire, police or ambulance? Police. Sussex
Police. It's summer 2022 and an urgent call is made from the front steps of an
English seaside hotel. The caller gives the police a car registration. Got the
number plate recognition up and running, car headed north out to the city.
Police track the car. The driver leaves Hove, past Brighton and heads towards
the motorway. 20 M20, kept going, kept going. So they follow the car as it
headed up north towards London. It doesn't look like the teenagers in the back
are wearing seatbelts, so officers don't want to start a chase. Instead, a
police helicopter follows the vehicle from the air. The M25 right now,
congestion is a couple of miles before junction A. And they're looking to have
it, M25, Wednesday was, with no traffic, traffic jam. Police surround the car in
the traffic and get the young people out of the back. The reaction to the call,
the police pursuit, the helicopter, might sound like an overreaction to what
was, on the face of it, some teenagers getting into the back of a car. But the
999 call came in from outside a hotel which is well known to police. It's been
taken over by the Home Office, used as a temporary home for dozens of child
migrants. A child has gone missing, then five went missing, then a dozen went
missing, then 50 went missing and nothing is happening. 460 asylum-seeking
children have disappeared from Home Office-run hotels in the last 18 months and
200 remain. This is horrific. Vulnerable children are being dumped by the Home
Office. Scores of them are going missing and I can tell the Minister there is
nothing specialist about these hotels. Over the last 18 months, the Home Office
has been using hotels across England to house children arriving in small boats
across the Channel without a parent or guardian. In what they call an emergency
measure, more than 4,500 young people have been put up in four hotels since July
2021. But just a few weeks ago, it was revealed that many of them were going
missing at an alarming rate. Some of them lured into waiting cars by
traffickers. So the story published, went online, Saturday evening and I sort of
just put my son to bed. Half hour later, check my phone and it's gone crackers
really. I first read about this story in a newspaper article by journalist Mark
Townsend. He's the Home Affairs Editor at The Observer. It was actually his
piece which revealed the police operation to get the kids back from that car we
just heard about, which was stopped on the M25. He had received a call from a
guard working at the hotel, who for months had watched a procession of
vulnerable young people walk out the doors, never to be seen again. The first
whistleblower worked for the Home Office, contractor called Mighty. He was on
the door of the hotels, if you like, providing security. And so he was, you
know, just watching what was happening. You know, the bird's eye view basically,
what was going on outside the hotel. And you've seen cars drive up, kids getting
in, cars pulling up, churning to kids, churning up again. Next day, same car,
kids were getting in. So he was watching it. So over a period of weeks and
months, he was getting concerned. He raised it with the Home Office. The police
knew about it, carried on. And I think he was kind of pulling his hair out. And
I mean, what do you make of that? Well, I mean, it shows two things. One is no
one really cared. They could abduct very vulnerable kids at will outside a place
where the Home Office was tasked with looking after these kids. So, you know, it
was a dereliction of duty off the charts, really. And secondly, criminals, you
know, they talk, they acquire intelligence like the police do. They knew there
was a cohort of very vulnerable, malleable kids who didn't have UK work
ostensibly, who could be taken from the hotel and put to work. The story has led
to a series of protests in Brighton from people who are worried about the safety
and treatment of the children who stay there. This demonstration just last week.
Maybe something this big, this devastating will finally open some people's eyes.
Basically, what's brought me out tonight is a really, really strong feeling of
disgust. In just 18 months, 440 children had been reported missing and 200 of
them still haven't been found. Tonight on Farland 4, we're going to try and find
out what happened to them. We're starting our investigation in Hove, near
Brighton. It's the 9th of February and myself and Kate, my producer, we're
sitting on the beach looking out to sea. I can't quite get my head around the
fact that hundreds of children in our care have just disappeared. And even just
looking out to sea now, I mean, this is the sea they would have come across in
small boats, as we keep hearing about in the headlines. That's how they would
have come here, but to get here and then vanish, it blows my mind. We're walking
up to the hotel from where those three kids we mentioned at the start of the
programme were taken by suspected traffickers. Another 69 children have gone
missing from this accommodation alone. We can't tell you exactly where it is,
but the traffickers don't seem to have any trouble finding it. So down here
should be the hotel. This looks promising to my right. Here we go. Oh, this is
it. Wow. Yeah. Wow. I don't like to say it, but it's clearly not the smartest
place. It almost looks like it's not even being used. I know there's someone in
there. Look. Oh, someone's coming out. Young guy. We tried to speak to the hotel
security guards who tell us no comment and go back inside. The neighbours,
though, have more to say. So you live nearby? Yes, I do. Just down the road.
Yeah. Yeah. And when did you become aware that there were children being kept
there? Well, it was during the pandemic and actually saw them getting off the
coach the first day when they arrived. What was that like? I was quite
upsetting, actually, because they were quite young. They were just like an old
anoraks and trackies, you know, and sort of old trainers sort of thing. And with
just, you know, a supermarket carrier bag, but not even full. I remember
noticing that. I remember noticing that they were like just a third full or a
half full of just old carrier bags. Possessions. Yeah. Not very much. Yeah. And
what's it been like living just down the road? I mean, do you see them much?
Yes. Yes. See them a lot. They often come along in groups, three or four, but
they're always lovely. They're just like young teenagers anywhere. Thank you so
much. Thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate it. Thank you. So one
door we knocked on in the area and the lady in said, look, don't want to talk,
no comment. But then went on to say, look, I'm deeply sympathetic for these
guys. We've seen them. Another guy we spoke to, he said, look, they come in
groups of three or four nice kids, no trouble. And I think because they've seen
them themselves, that is there's a human being, you know, and there's a face
that they've seen and they care. And everybody is like this kind of looking into
a black hole as to where these kids could have gone. How are you? Very good.
Thank you. It's the next morning and me and producer Kate jump into a taxi in
Brighton and head back towards the hotel. Have you got enough layers on? Because
I feel like we might be stuck for a while. Yeah, no, I've got loads of layers
on. I came prepared. I thought we might be doing a lot of hanging around. We
spend a couple more hours walking around and speaking to locals about what
they've seen before we decide to head back towards the centre of Brighton,
walking along the seafront. That's when we see a young lad on a bench. He's
wearing a plain black tracksuit and his lightweight black puffer jacket looks a
little thin for the weather. He's alone, staring out to sea. After a couple of
minutes chatting, he tells us he's 16 and staying at the hotel. We explain who
we are and that we're making this programme and he wants to tell us his story. I
have to be back at the hotel for lunch. That is 1.30. I am free now so I can
talk to you. He doesn't want to be identified so we're calling him Benny and
using an actor to speak his words. I came three days ago. I got on the boat in
Donkirk. Another boat met us at the English border. Smaller ones got off boat
first, then me, then the other people. Benny and his fellow passengers were
rescued by a Border Force patrol vessel when their boat started taking on water.
He tells us he fled Ethiopia with his mum and sisters two years ago when the
civil war started. First, they went to Libya where his mum paid a trafficker to
take him to the UK. She thought that's where he'd be safest. But after being
brought ashore here, his first stop was hospital. Then went to the hospital and
then somewhere else. Took our photos and put a band number around my wrist. Then
me and three others, they put us all in the taxi here. The other three were all
from Afghanistan. They were all young like me. There's like 40, 50 at the hotel.
There's Kurdish, Afghanistan, Albanian, Middle East. I'm happy now I'm here. I
want to go to school, go to college, study biology. We sometimes watch a movie
or I like music too. The hotel has given me £10 for the week. They gave us food
there. The food is OK. Today I have had milk, bread, butter. I have my own room.
His English is slightly stilted but good. We pause together to work out certain
words like butter and pounds. He apologises almost constantly that his English
isn't better. We tell him saying sorry all the time is actually a very English
thing to do. He laughs at the joke, but I think he's just being polite. I don't
know the plan from here. I don't know where I'm going next. They say wait one
week or two weeks and then we will know. In the future my idea is footballer. I
play attacking midfielder. I want to stay here to learn, to study and to play
football. I want to go to London. I have some friends who live in London.
Everyone lives in London. Everyone I think wants to go there. Bye. Shall we go
in somewhere and just sit down for a sec? He set off on his journey to go to the
UK about two years ago. He's been to Italy, Belgium, and Dunkirk. Dunkirk is
where he left from. The boat was horrid. There were a lot of people on it. It
was small. Just the type of stuff we've been seeing on the news. People packed
into boats. I said did you come together with your family? He said no because of
money. They all went to separate places. You pay where they can get you to. We
were just down the road from the shops. He hadn't ventured that far yet. I think
this was his first adventure out. He has no idea where he's going, where he is
now, and what the plan is for his future. He said what do you want to do? What's
your dream job? Of course a footballer. He's a Man United fan. It became very
clear that there is nothing to do. You've got a 16-year-old kid just knocking
about on his own. He looked vulnerable. That's how Kate spotted him. Are you OK?
Yeah, I feel deeply touched. I don't know quite what the word is. I feel quite
overwhelmed. I think meeting him has put a face on this statistic that was
thrown around in the headlines. It's just driven it home to me how important
this is. Until 18 months ago, children like Benny would have been absorbed into
the care system. But that system quickly became overwhelmed and the Home Office
had to find viable alternatives. Adult asylum seekers were already being housed
in hotels. But the decision to send unaccompanied children there too took many
by surprise. Peter Carl is Labour MP for Hove and Port Slade. I got a call very
late on one Saturday evening from the chief executive of Brighton and Hove
Council. Very unusual for him to call me late in the evening, particularly the
weekend, so I knew it was serious. And when I picked the phone up, he didn't say
hello. He just gushed that he'd just heard from the Home Office and within the
next two hours, 96 unaccompanied child migrants were going to arrive in our
community and that the Home Office had requisitioned use of a local hotel. What
was your reaction to that? The truth is I was angry because what kind of sign of
failure is it that we get to a situation where 96 vulnerable children, English
is not their first language, many of whom will be exhibiting the signs of
extreme anxiety and trauma, are shipped off to a seaside town and put in
accommodation that is not in any way, shape or form suitable for their needs?
You know, this is Britain in the 2020s and we're not prepared for this. We don't
have the proper facilities for this. We knew this was happening. You can't say
it's a surprise. They don't leave Syria, for example, and arrive in Britain the
next morning. You know, we have plenty of notice this is happening and yet we
were so unprepared that they had to shove 96 children into buses and drive them
to Hove late one weekend night. You visited the hotels, didn't you? Tell me
about your first visit to this specialist hotel these kids are being put in.
Well, the first thing to say is it is not a specialist hotel. It's a seaside
hotel that had been dormant for a while. What I experienced was slightly chaotic
amongst the staff who were there because they were all doing this for the first
time. There was a Home Office official there who was a very junior official and
she couldn't answer any of the questions I had, fundamental questions. What kind
of thing, may I ask? Who has legal responsibility for these children, who is the
parent of these children? And I was left with the very distinct impression that
the Home Office had placed a very junior official there who wouldn't be able to
answer those questions that I was asking. I think they were purposefully
avoiding answering those sorts of questions. The only agency I think acted in a
way that I believe that people listening to this and, you know, I, would have
expected in this situation was the police, Sussex Police. They immediately
sensed the urgency, the scale of danger. Their first question was, let's have a
conversation about keeping these kids safe. It's expensive. The companies who
run these hotels are making millions. The Home Office spending around £7 million
every single day on this kind of accommodation. Get the scraps! Get them out!
Not surprisingly, it's controversial. Get them out! Not far, right here, lad.
Get it! Within the last few months, there have been a series of protests outside
hotels used for housing adult asylum seekers. Last month, a peaceful
demonstration and counter-protest had been taking place outside a hotel in
Knowsley on Merseyside when police said a group of people arrived who were only
interested in causing trouble. Hundreds of people then clashed with police on
the street outside. Some turned up with hammers, threw fireworks and burnt out a
police van. 15 people were later arrested. It's terrifying for the people who
are housed there. But there is another threat which young asylum seekers are
having to face every day. There are criminals, criminal gangs, who understand
the vulnerabilities of children better than the people and systems we have to
protect them. So when you hear, and it is broadcast and it becomes national
news, that there is a hotel in Hove that has 96 child migrant asylum seekers and
that they are not kept in regulated accommodation, that for none of them will it
be they have English as first language, none of them are culturally aware and
none of them have a parent or guardian, what do you think is going to happen?
It's not rocket science. It is so obvious that these kids are going to be
extraordinarily vulnerable to adult criminals who seek to exploit children as
part of their crime. And it happened. The sheer numbers of children going
missing has prompted Sussex Police to create a brand new team of officers to try
and find them, whether they've gone of their own accord or been picked up by
gangs. Detective Superintendent Chris Ottery. When numbers of missing person
reports started to hit double figures per month, we decided that we would have a
missing person team that solely focused on missing children from the hotel. The
team have managed to find 68 of the 137 children who've gone missing on their
patch, but there are still 69 to find. And in a small number of cases, we've
identified people in places where they could be being exploited. So we've had a
small number that have been arrested, involved in criminal activities. So to
date, we've located 68. Eight of those have been located in situations which
could be exploited. For example, people that have been arrested involved in
supply of drugs, or we had one person who had fled a car wash, those type of
scenarios. There's an important statistic around these missing kids. The Home
Office says nearly 90% are from one country, Albania. We've been trying to speak
to people about this part of the story, and it's been incredibly difficult. The
community and those who work with them are reluctant to speak to the media,
especially now because of the negative press around Albanian asylum seekers.
It's not a safe place, and a lot of it comes back to poverty, because the gangs
are very prevalent there. And it's not just Albanian gangs, you get Turkish
gangs and all sorts of gangs operating through there. John Stokes is a foster
carer and charity worker from Bristol, who's raised two teenage boys from
Albania. He believes many of these disappearances are organised. He says it
starts in Albania. A family runs up a debt, maybe they've fallen on hard times
because of a medical bill or a gambling problem, and that's when the gangs swoop
in. The latest thing that's happening that I hear is that gangs are buying up
debts for families and going to the families and saying, you owe us now, we will
take your child. They make all sorts of promises, but the families don't have a
lot of option. So they're pressurised into the youngsters going. John says with
the pressure of the debt and possible retaliation on their family hanging over
their head, the teenagers do as they're told by the gangs, who then traffic them
to the UK. They're watched every step of the way by the gangs on the journey.
The young people are told what to say and what to do. In a way, it's kind of
grooming ready for when they get here. They get to England and some get picked
up and some don't. So some disappear. If they're put in the hotels, then the
gangs find out very quickly where they are, because the gangs have spent time
with these young people, so they know how to contact them. So they will follow
them. So when they get to the hotel, it's easy for them to find the hotel and
then pick them off basically and take them. The system is that the government
gets them, puts them in hotels, the gangs take them. And they can use these
people for whatever they need. And a certain amount of them will use them for
illegal means. These children won't have a choice in that. Without proper care,
able to come and go as they please, John says the children are effectively
sitting ducks. They really make it easy for the gangs. I mean, to me, it seems
like the government are almost in business for the gangs because they are doing
everything the gangs need. They're not prosecuting the gang, very rarely
prosecuting the gangs. They're prosecuting the victims because these youngsters
that end up in drugs farms are not wanting to be in drugs farms. They just want
normal lives. They don't want to be criminals. They are forced into it because
the gangs do that. The hotels is like, it's almost like opening a supermarket
for gangs. You're putting youngsters on display virtually. If a foster care has
said, I've lost a child, there would be an inquiry. The government can lose 200
children and nobody is held to account for it. We asked the Home Office for an
interview about what we've discovered during the making of this programme.
Initially, they said they'd look into it. But in the end, they sent a statement
to my producer, Kate. What did they have to say, Kate? Well, the same thing
they've been saying all along, that they had no alternative but to use hotels to
keep a roof over these children's heads. And that's because of the rise in the
numbers coming across the channel on those small boats. And what about the
hotels themselves? Well, they say every hotel they use for housing child
migrants has 24-7 security, that care workers are permanently on site too to
support the children living there. And they also bring in social workers and
people like nurses. And that incident where a number of children got into a car
outside the hotel in Hove, what about that? Yeah, well, they say security staff
are told to report anything suspicious like that, that kind of activity to the
police. But then a recent investigation found no evidence of children being, in
their words, snatched, abducted or coerced by criminals. They say that language
is highly provocative and should be limited to instances where there is clear
evidence that such offending is taking place. Now, we know there were arrests
following that incident in Hove. The police have suspicions around trafficking,
but that investigation is ongoing. And what about the children we know about
that are still missing, those that are being sought by the police in Sussex?
Well, when any child goes missing, they say not just asylum-seeking children,
but all children. A missing person, it's called a protocol, is mobilised. It
involves the police, local authorities to try and establish the child's
whereabouts and make sure they're safe. Those children who are still missing
could be anywhere in the UK. Others have been found in Manchester, Scotland,
Wales and London, which is where we are now. If they've been picked up by gangs,
there's a chance they might be being put to work illegally, and I know a few
places where people gather to get picked up for this kind of work. But there's a
big problem. Hi! LAUGHTER Welcome to the Fiat 500. I feel like a little lady
car. Because there are concerns that anyone working for the gangs may be being
watched, we've brought along our own security guy, just in case. But the hire
car we've been given is a Fiat 500. He has to fold all six foot of himself into
the back seat. We then head over to the first spot, a B&Q car park. So many
things happening right under our noses, aren't there? Yeah, totally, and that's
why I really want to see these guys, because this, for me, feels like the first
kind of... We're on the peripheries of the underworld, if you see what I mean.
Because it's the first kind of layer. First layer. Yeah. It's, um... I see
nobody here. Oh, yeah, there they are. There's only a few. One, two, three,
four, five. Is that it? Is it seven? Seven. More will come and go. Eight, maybe?
Yeah. And then someone in high-vis? If you employ someone illegally just to
replace a guy, the one in the high-vis is ideal, you know? You don't have to
supply them with anything. So, I guess we'll just park up here and see if we can
find our man. Yeah. The men gathered here are all looking for work, maybe
covering someone off sick on a building site, helping with a painting or a
gardening job. Sometimes members of the public pick them up too. But all the
guys we spoke to this morning are Romanian. They don't need visas to travel to
the UK, so they're not asylum seekers. Just working here illegally. Then, a
text. A group of teenagers have agreed to meet us for coffee and a chat. They're
all awaiting asylum, staying in a hotel paid for by the Home Office. At first,
it's just us and one guy from Libya. We chat in broken English using Google
Translate and he shows us videos of his home town. The videos are of fighting,
men being attacked. When another arrives, it gets a lot easier. His English is
perfect. He's from Eritrea and arrived in the UK a year ago, and it wasn't long
before he was targeted by a drugs gang. It was in the summer that I saw the
advert for the fair, you know, the fun fair, that I wanted to go there. So, I
went and I was walking around the outside and looking through the gates, but I
couldn't get in because you had to pay. That's right, that's what! And that's
when these two guys and this girl approached me and said, do you want to go in?
We can get you in. We're calling him Aaron and this isn't his voice, but these
are his words. They were really nice, asking me my name, where I was staying,
what's your Snapchat, let's swap phone numbers, you know, we're trying to make
new friends. We're going to let you scream if you're sitting down! I remember
clearly one of them looking at my shoes and saying, these are bad shoes, let me
get you some new shoes. From there, they got me some new shoes, some clothes as
well, and it just all started from there. And they're nice shoes, they're like,
I'm a big trainer fan, I know these go for like £170. Yeah, they're expensive
shoes, it was flashy clothes too. They didn't want me to go near any stores like
H&M and they wanted to go JD, Nike, get me some Louis Vuitton trainers, some new
jackets, Trapstar, you know, jackets. Everything they were paying for and just
saying they're doing it because they're helping me out. They were calling me
sometimes just to check on how I'm doing, they were being with me on my tough
moments, saying that everything will be all right, taking me out to partying
with them, meeting new people, hanging out with girls, you know, driving fast
cars, nice cars, and we'd be driving fast past the red lights. It was so much
fun. So it was that at the beginning. And suddenly the day came and they said,
listen, this is what we do. If you want to live like us, you need to sell drugs
as well. Had you ever been in something like this before? No, I'd never done
drugs or been in anything like this before coming to the UK. It was heroin,
cocaine and weed as well, so... Could you just walk away, say no, I don't want
to do this anymore? No, it wasn't that easy. They're violent, they're brutal.
It's just fake love that they're showing at the beginning. They take you to see
people that owe them money and also people like their own people, their own
friends that have made mistakes. You would see them beating them, not stopping,
hitting them with metal, pulling knives out on them. So brutal, like they don't
stop, no matter how much the person begs and screams. It makes you sick to your
stomach. It gets you at night. You see their faces and you hear their screams.
It's like you're replaying the whole thing over and over again in your head.
Aaron was one of the lucky ones. Once when he was selling cocaine for the gang
outside a London nightclub, he was spotted and chased by police. That's when he
decided he needed to get out. But there are plenty of others ready to replace
Aaron. He says he still sees members of the gang hanging around the hotel,
trying to recruit more teenagers. And that's why Chris Ottery and his small team
in Brighton are getting in early, intercepting those vulnerable young people
staying in that seaside hotel before they go missing. What we find with the
unaccompanied, asylum-seeking children is that sometimes you have quite a small
amount of information to work with at the beginning. So we really have to work
hard to develop that. So working with the hotels so that they have enough
information about the individuals that would be useful to the police in the
event that they walked out in advance of them going missing is helpful to us. So
the work almost starts before people go missing. A lack of faith in the
authorities, combined with fears of deportation and threats of flights to
Rwanda, means some of the kids choose to disappear. So the children are allowed
to come and go. The children in that location are aged 16, 17 years old and they
do have that freedom. So what will most often happen is that they will go out,
but will not return. And in terms of coercion, in terms of the people that we're
finding, the majority have been with people that are known to them, usually
family. Even in some cases, people have cited boredom, for example, and have
left for a period of time. However, for some of those people that are
outstanding, we are actually in active dialogue with them. We actually do
converse with them, but it's just trying to overcome that barrier of trust to
say, actually, you come and present to us so we can check how you are. We're so
close with some of them, but it's until they physically present to us in those
cases, we don't yet know where they are. So the majority of the missing that
have been found have been found somewhere safe. It's a relief to hear. But what
about the rest? I'm told that these kids are treated as if it was any other kid
that went missing. Peter Carl again. But let's just take a step back and ask
ourselves, if a child went missing from a middle-class part of Hove, you know,
let's just be frank about it. You'd see people walking around, you know, doing
search groups. And just imagine what would happen. There is something about
these children that has made them ignorable, that has made their rights somehow
different to others. But let's not kid ourselves that we are treating these kids
in the same way we would others, because we're not. Say it loud, say it clear.
Refugees are welcome here. Say it loud, say it clear. Refugees are welcome here.
Unlike that earlier protest on Merseyside and others in seaside resorts like
Skegness and Newquay, the protests in Brighton aren't against the asylum seekers
staying there, quite the opposite. These people are worried for the safety of
the young people staying in the hotels. For now, though, Aaron and the countless
teens just like him remain in limbo, living in hotels, waiting for news from the
Home Office. I've been here a year and nothing, no progress. It's depressing.
Being in a hotel is depressing. I don't want young kids to follow the same
footsteps that I've been through, because the footsteps that I've been in,
they're just full of violence and brutality. That's not what we want, because
that's why I escaped. I escaped my country because of the violence and brutal
killings. So I don't want kids to be exposed to that here as well, because we
came here for freedom, not to join gangs and causing violence to people. This
isn't just about one child going missing. This is fuelling crime, whether it's
drugs, whether it's the sex trade, right across our country. So if people can't
see that this is something that isn't just one isolated horrific crime, it is a
series of horrific crimes, then they are blind to the trends in crime blighting
our country right now. The producer of tonight's programme was Kate West. The
editor was Carl Johnston. You can download this episode of Final Four and many
more on BBC Sounds. The state of Mississippi was stopping nothing, including
killing me. Breaking Mississippi with me, Jen White, starts next Monday to
Friday morning at 9.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, it's time for
In Touch with Peter White. Good evening. A river meanders through the valley far
below the peaks. I just didn't have any knowledge of the mountains in Scotland.
I didn't know they existed. The Scotland that I knew was Glasgow. So I had a
very jaded view of Scotland. Later tonight, calls for films like this, promoting
adventure in the great outdoors, to be made far more accessible to disabled
people, we'll be reporting from a film festival in Sheffield, which has been
making the case. But first, few people can be unaware of the unrest in Iran over
the past few months, following the death of Marsa Amini in custody, a young
woman who was accused of breaking the governing regime's strict clothing code.
What's perhaps less well known are the accusations being made by Western
newspapers, human rights organisations, and the victims themselves, that many
young people, particularly young women, are being subjected to attacks aimed
specifically at their eyes by Iranian security forces. An Iranian news website
has reported that well over 100 ophthalmologists, who are part of the Iranian
Ophthalmology Association, have signed a letter calling attention to the
seriousness of the situation. During the recent protest events, a large number
of patients with eye injuries due to being hit by bullets, paintballs and the
like, have come to medical centres. Unfortunately, in many cases, the impact has
resulted in the loss of one or more eyes. Therefore, it is necessary to reflect
the situation to the relevant authorities and give necessary warnings about the
irreparable consequences of such severe eye injuries. Security police have so
far either ignored or denied allegations that such attacks have been made,
calling it propaganda. But many of those who claim to have been attacked have
gone public on social media, despite the risk of reprisals. The people we
approached were not prepared to risk direct interviews with us, but here's a
flavour of the kind of things that they've been saying online. Many of them make
the point that if others make sacrifices for the cause, then they must be
prepared to do the same. Although they're having to come to terms with pain, not
being able to enjoy nature or see their friends clearly, all of them seem to
have a sense that their sacrifice will be worthwhile, and they believe they're
getting their message across to the rest of the world, bringing attention to the
brutality of the regime. What we were particularly interested in understanding
is why these attacks have been directed at the eyes. What is its particular
significance? Khosrow Isfahani is from the BBC monitoring service. I put that
question to him. It appears that these security officers were intentionally
targeting sensitive parts of body, including the groins, the eyes, to cause
maximum damage. Some of these people who have been blinded during the protests
have described laughing officers pointing guns at their eyes. Throughout this
movement, we have seen pronounced presence of women who have been defying the
state brutality, constantly being on the front line of the protest, and even
walking towards armed officers with open arms, defying all forms of threats and
pressure, the pressure that they have been facing for four decades, and refusing
to bend. So, of course the regime targets women during these protests. Many of
the women and young people targeted during the protests are young, beautiful
people. How are these people getting medical help? Because I imagine there's
quite a lot of pressure on the relevant hospitals. Indeed, and there is actually
a security risk when it comes to providing medical help to people injured during
protests. There have been cases of doctors and nurses getting arrested because
they were taking care of people who were injured during these protests. There
have been cases of people smuggling medicine to areas that the Islamic Republic
had actually imposed blockade against provision of medical care to protesters.
So, doctors and nurses that were taking care of these people are risking their
life, are risking their jobs and their livelihood to extend help to people that
need them. And I think some ophthalmologists have made their protests or the
nearest you can get to making a protest in these circumstances. Indeed, 140
doctors signed an open letter criticizing the government for targeting the eyes
of the protesters. They were shocked by the high number of cases they had to
take care of. Is this kind of attack specific to Iran or has this kind of thing
happened elsewhere? This type of attack has happened in almost all authoritarian
states. Wherever the regime deploys brute force for quashing protests, we are
seeing similar patterns from internet shutdowns to the use of tear gas and
sexual assault and rape to targeting protesters' eyes and sensitive parts of the
body. These are patterns that are happening both across the Middle East and even
in South America. Now, when the authorities are asked about these cases, they
either have ignored requests, for example, from the Western press or they've
said, this is just not happening. How have you been able to authenticate the
cases of the victims that you've been talking about? Both the victims and
doctors have provided medical documents showing how these protesters were
blinded. We have seen videos of the regime using brute force against the
protesters. And when we talk about the denial that we are hearing from the
regime, we are talking about the same regime that arrested a woman whose nine-
year-old son was killed during the protest. They arrested her and forced her to
record a video saying that his son was not killed by the regime. We are speaking
of a regime that killed a 15-year-old, a 16-year-old and alleged that they had
committed suicide. These are cases that have been verified multiple times by
different outlets and rights groups. So when the Islamic Republic comes out and
denies these cases, I would take that with more than a grain of salt. Just
finally, what is the current situation? I mean, is there any evidence that these
attacks are lessening as the press of other countries are taking an interest? To
be honest, the Islamic Republic has never been in face of criticism from the
West. The four-decade history of the Islamic Republic is marred by executions
and arrests and beating protesters. So no, the Islamic Republic is not going to
change its tactics because international media is criticising them. Hosro
Isfahani of BBC Monitoring, thank you very much indeed. Now, the quantity and
quality of audio description services for visually impaired people has been
pretty much a regular topic of ours on InTouch. But over the weekend, a film
festival in Sheffield has been looking at an aspect of this which I don't recall
us tackling in the past. That is the lack of accessibility on films promoting
real-life adventure, outdoor activities and how it can be improved and extended.
One of the driving forces behind this festival has been Poppy Leverson who
explained what a contribution audio description had made to her appreciation of
films about her enthusiasm for sport and the outdoors. I mean, I grew up going
to these festivals. Being visually impaired, it was always a bit tricky. I could
see most things but not always the details. I'd miss things and my mum would
usually have to sit and whisper in my ear and tell me what the dialogue is. And
then when my sight deteriorated a bit and I became blind, I continued doing all
of the outdoors activities I loved. I continued climbing and surfing. But I felt
like I'd lost this key part of my culture which was going to these film
festivals. So, to be able to come to a film festival and have audio described
performances, it's actually really emotional for me because I feel like I've
been welcomed back into a community that I really cherish. I really love it when
I hear really great audio description. We've got a great one here called Art of
Grind with this actor from the UK who's doing this wonderful American accent and
giving it loads of energy. And it's just, it really fits with the storyline. It
just feels like my experience has been valued in the exact same way that a
sighted person's has. But perhaps what makes this festival particularly
interesting is that the pressure to improve this aspect of filmmaking seems to
be coming from the inside, that is, from the filmmakers themselves. Well, we're
joined by two of them. Danielle Selwood, who's been making adventure films for
many years and is the mum of Poppy, who we've just heard there. And we're also
joined by Tim Burton, not the man behind Edward Scissorhands or The Nightmare
Before Christmas, but the head of production at Coldhouse Collective, one of the
leading filmmakers in the country producing these kinds of adventure films. Tim,
if I can come to you first of all, we've given a clue as to why Danielle might
have felt strongly about this, but how did you get involved? Yeah, thanks very
much for having us. And hopefully you're not disappointed I'm not the other Tim
Burton. We'll get over it. Last year, we were commissioned by Berghaus, an
outdoor brand, and we started making a film about a deaf climber. And as we
started talking to her more and more, we realised that actually none of the
films that we'd made in 10 years were accessible to her. We realised we had to
change. And let me bring in Danielle on this point, because I don't believe the
significance of accessibility of your films dawned on you straight away, which
is interesting, since clearly you have been taking Poppy to festivals, but you
were taking her to festivals where she couldn't follow the films. Yeah, I mean,
it wasn't really until Poppy was registered blind two years ago, after her
eyesight deteriorated, that she started using audio description. I had no idea
about audio description. You know, it's way worse for me because it's my own
daughter, can't access my own work. So instantly, I just set about learning how
to do it, how to do open captions and how to do audio description. And how
difficult is it to do audio description? Because I mean, perhaps most people are
used to the idea of telling people kind of what's happening into the background,
but with quite a lot of dialogue to support it. But, you know, I can imagine
your films being a lot of howling winds and falling snow and all that kind of
stuff. How difficult is it to audio describe it in a meaningful way? For me, I
think it's really important to have a sort of a specialist input, so I
understand this industry, I understand some of the terminology. I work really
hard on even researching where a lighthouse is, for example, on a film, just to
make sure I'm describing that correctly, whether it's cast iron or whether it's
stone, you know, all these little things that kind of do make a difference to
the feel of a film. Obviously, you can't describe absolutely everything. So it's
also about choosing the things that are building a complete picture. You know,
the filmmaker has made the decision to put in even a split second of a dog
running by, you know, that is a conscious choice by them. You know, I do make a
point of bringing in as much of those little details that add the flavour. One
of the points you make about this is that the lack of access to these films is
discouraging people from activity and that the statistics show that disabled
people, including visually impaired people, are far less active than able-bodied
people, to use possibly an outdated phrase. I mean, is that really true? Surely
introducing people to activities is the responsibility of schools, local
authorities, parents. Are they really going to pick it up from these kind of
films? Well, we hope so. Obviously, the one amazing thing that we have with our
industry is a lot of this content goes out for free over social media. So, you
know, we're certainly able to reach a younger audience. I think also, you know,
there are a lot of people who go to these festivals to learn more. And actually,
sometimes I think that they become a little bit more inspired. Nonetheless,
perhaps unsurprisingly, it is people who already have enthusiasm for outdoor
activities who are going to be drawn to festivals like yours. People like John
and his sighted friend Lauren, who turned up this weekend. I do a bit of
everything. I'm a climber. I do sailing, hiking. Quite a few of the films are
foreign language films that they put subtitles on. And then they were totally
inaccessible. But to have somebody reading those subtitles out means I can
really feel as though I'm part of the film now. Before audio description was on
film, I could vaguely see the colours on the screen, but I had no context of
what was happening. My name's Lauren Bean. I'm John's friend. I often take him
to films. And it's just absolutely awful having to read out subtitles because
people around you are like glaring at you the whole time. So having audio
description is just, you know, next level, really. And I enjoy audio description
as well. There was a film I saw with waves and I just loved it. It really added
something. I think it's a great, great thing to have. Well, that's the state of
play with adventure films. But what about audio description in the film industry
more generally? What's the current situation? Our reporter Fern Lulham, a film
enthusiast herself, has been looking at that and she joins me now. Fern, what
have you found? Well, Peter, I think it's fair to say that your chances of being
able to enjoy an audio described film of the cinema are pretty hit and miss at
the moment. As a general rule, it seems that the bigger the film, the more
likely it is that it'll have audio description. But even if a film does have
audio description, then there's still the question of whether the cinema will
have the equipment provided to actually access it. So how seriously do you think
the film and the cinema industries are actually taking the need to provide audio
description? Well, this is something that Tim Calvert of the Audio Description
Association has taken a close look at. And I asked him whether there are any
actual legal requirements for audio description when it comes to film. There
isn't anything specific in law, just a requirement under the disability
provision of the Equality Act 2010. That's more from a cinema point of view,
though, for the cinemas to make reasonable adjustments. The actual studios and
the distributors, they're not really directly covered by this, given that
they're not the providers of services in the way that cinemas are. I've been
into a few cinemas and asked for a headset, and some of the staff don't even
know what audio description is, which kind of makes you believe they haven't had
an experience where someone has asked them for one in the past. The UK Cinema
Association has a website which tells you which cinemas are showing films with
audio description. At your average annual, I would say like maybe 80% of the
films are audio described. There is technology in development at the moment
around a mobile phone app, which will actually provide audio description through
your mobile phone. Tim Calvert. Fern, we heard Tim estimate that one of the
major cinema chains provide audio description in around 80% of the films they
show. I mean, are there any official figures on this? Now, I haven't been able
to find anything very recent. However, as long ago as 2014, RNIB made a press
release saying that around two thirds of English language films released in the
UK in the previous year, so 2013, were available with audio description. So it's
not inconceivable, I'd say, that you'd stand an 80% chance of seeing an audio
described film at a major cinema chain by now. Right. What about cost? What
about people, you know, who say, well, there's quite a lot of cost for this and
if there really isn't the enthusiasm for it, you know, why should we spend that
sort of money? Well, I've heard people in the industry say that it shouldn't be
because of cost, because some filmmakers actually seem to spend more on snacks
on the set than they would for providing audio description. So it puts it in
context. And I think cost should only really be an issue for some of the smaller
filmmakers and hence why most blockbusters these days do tend to have audio
description now. OK, we'll have to leave it there. Lots to think about. Danielle
Selwood, Tim Burton and Fern Lulham. Thank you all very much indeed. And that's
all for today. Do join us next week where we'll be speaking to Network Rail.
They'll be telling us whether this goal of 2025 for the full completion of
tactile paving at station platforms is actually realistic. In the meantime, you
can email your questions or queries about anything you've heard on this
evening's programme to in touch at BBC.co.uk. You can leave voice messages on
0161 836 1338 or you can go to our website, BBC.co.uk forward slash in touch.
From me, Peter White, producer Beth Hemmings and studio manager Amy Brennan.
Goodbye. And those details again, if you'd like to get in touch, the phone
number is 0161 836 1338 and the email in touch at BBC.co.uk. Coming up next
after the news inside, health will be reporting on a new weight loss drug
available on the NHS, which some doctors are calling as controversial as they
come. That's coming up in a couple of minutes. The patch on BBC Radio 4, one
producer, what was amazing to me as an outsider was how normal this was, one
random generated postcode. So I press that, press that button and a story
unfolding that you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you say? Everything
and anything. Unheard stories from across the UK.