TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Four hours straight. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Justin Webb
and Michelle Hussain. It's eight o'clock on Monday the 6th of March. The
headlines this morning. Ministers are preparing to permanently ban migrants who
cross the Channel in small boats from returning to the UK. One of the most
notorious prisoners in the country, Charles Bronson, will argue for his release
today at a public parole hearing. And elected mayors in the north of England are
meeting to try to thrash out a solution to continuing delays and cancellations
on the railways. The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. The government's planning a
major crackdown on migrants who cross the English Channel in small boats by
banning them for life from ever coming to the UK. The measure will be part of
new laws introduced to Parliament tomorrow. Refugees groups have warned the
scheme is unworkable and will leave thousands of people in limbo. The Prime
Minister is due to meet the French President Emmanuel Macron on Friday. When
it's expected, they'll discuss how to tackle the crossings. Here's our chief
political correspondent, Nick Erdely. Rishi Sunak has made stopping small boats
crossings a key test for his government and tomorrow he'll publish legislation
designed to show how he plans to deliver. It'll include a pledge to ban anyone
who comes to the UK on a small boat from ever re-entering the country or seeking
citizenship in future. The legislation will also stop those arriving on small
boats from claiming asylum in the vast majority of cases with a plan to remove
them to Rwanda or another country deemed safe. The government hopes that by
sending a strong message it'll disincentivise dangerous channel crossings. But
the Refugee Council warned that genuine refugees would be treated as criminals.
Labour's Wes Streeting told this programme the plans wouldn't work and amounted
to a cynical rehash of previous announcements. Some Conservatives also want the
Prime Minister to go further and withdraw from the European Convention on Human
Rights. Lucy Morton is from the Immigration Services Union representing Border
Force staff. She told us she was sceptical the scheme would lead to a big cut in
the numbers of migrants coming to the UK. You're saying to someone who is
leaving their country for whatever reason, actually at some point in 10, 20, 30,
40 years you might want a British passport. It may deter a few but that sort of
long-term planning is not a classic part of the individuals who make this
crossing. The BBC has learned the cost per seat of removing illegal immigrants
from the UK on Home Office charter flights last year was more than for a typical
first-class return to New York. The government spent £12.7 million on the
flights removing 1,500 people. Charities have described this as a total waste of
public money but the Home Office insists the spending is justified. Our Home and
Legal correspondent Dominic Cacciani reports. The figures disclosed following a
Freedom of Information request showed that in 2022 there were 62 flights
privately chartered by the Home Office to transport people out of the UK after
they had exhausted any right to remain. Each flight cost an average of more than
£200,000 or £8,000 per passenger. A return first-class ticket to New York
typically starts at £5,000. A quarter of the flights took off with 20 or fewer
passengers on board, including two flights with fewer than 10. The most common
destination was Albania, to where 874 people were returned. The Home Office says
many attempts to return people are blocked by last-minute legal claims but
critics say that's because officials are taking poor decisions that are
rightfully reviewed by the courts and ministers have failed to strike a returns
deal with the EU. WhatsApp messages leaked to the Telegraph suggest the former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock expressed concern during the pandemic that
relaxing rules on self- isolation would imply the government had been getting it
wrong. The paper prints what it says is an exchange from November 2020 with
England's chief medical officer about cutting the fortnight quarantine for
contacts of Covid cases. In one of his replies, Mr Hancock suggests he's worried
that people wouldn't adhere to the rules if there was seven-day daily testing.
In a statement, the former Health Secretary said the leaked messages give a
biased account to suit an anti-lockdown agenda. One of Britain's most notorious
prisoners, Charles Bronson, will argue he should be released from custody at a
public parole hearing which begins this morning. Bronson, who's spent much of
the last 50 years behind bars, admits using extreme violence in the past but
says he's changed. Our correspondent Sean Dilley looks at the background to the
case. Charles Bronson, who now calls himself Charles Salvador, admitted in a
recent Channel 4 documentary that he has, in his words, a horrible, nasty,
vicious and violent past. But now aged 70, he insists he's reformed. He was
convicted of armed robbery and wounding in 1974. Since then, he says he's been
responsible for holding 11 people hostage in nine different sieges, including
his own solicitor. Bronson's will be only the second parole hearing in public.
The Parole Board will only consider his release under licence if they believe he
now presents a low risk to the public. Elected mayors in the north of England
say rail users face losing more than 20,000 services this year if cancellations
continue at their current rate. One operator, TransPennine Express, has failed
to run a quarter of scheduled trains in recent months. The mayors are meeting in
Newcastle today to discuss the issue. Our correspondent Danny Savage reports.
Every evening, TransPennine Express publish a long list of services it won't be
operating the next day. Their timetable prior to amendments is a fantasy. Many
of their customers wake up early to see if their train is running and have to
make hasty plans to work around cancellations. Now the mayor of West Yorkshire,
Tracey Brabin, says based on the latest monthly performance figures, more than
23,000 services could be axed this year. She is calling on the government to get
a grip on the matter. Avanti, West Coast and Northern are underperforming too,
further eroding passenger morale in the north. TransPennine Express management
say they have a plan to improve. The government says it's made it clear things
need to. Police looking for five missing people who'd last been seen early on
Saturday after a night out in Cardiff have found three of the group dead. It's
thought they were involved in a road accident. Tom Howrigan has the latest.
Officers had been searching for the three women and two men over the weekend.
They travelled from Porthcawl to Cardiff in a Volkswagen Tiguan and the women
were last spotted at two o'clock on Saturday morning in the Clannadairne area of
the city. Late last night, Gwent police were still appealing for information on
the group's whereabouts. Then this morning, the force confirmed it had recovered
the Tiguan, which it's thought came off the A48. Three of the five people were
found dead. Two others were taken to hospital with serious injuries. Specialist
officers are supporting their families. The police watchdog has also been
informed. It's thought that firefighters will accept an improved pay deal today,
ending the threat of strikes. Members of the fire brigade's union voted to take
industrial action in January, but the walkout was suspended when the new offer
was tabled. Fire service staff will receive a seven percent wage rise backdated
to last July, with another five percent uplift coming this year. Speaking on
this programme, the FBU General Secretary Matt Wrack didn't rule out future
industrial action if conditions for workers failed to improve further. I think
for us it's a stage, it's a step forward, but it would not be the end of our
campaign on pay. Our service has significant underinvestment in the fire service
and that needs to be addressed. South Korea has agreed to compensate labourers
who were forced to work in Japanese factories during the Second World War.
Officials in Tokyo said the move would help restore healthy ties between the two
countries after years of strain, while the US called it a historic announcement.
But Korean victims groups want direct payment from Japan and a full apology.
From Seoul, here's Jean McKenzie. Relations between Seoul and Tokyo have been
marred for decades by issues stemming from Japan's colonisation of Korea. This
is one of the final sticking points. In 2018, South Korea's Supreme Court
ordered Japanese companies to compensate 15 victims of forced labour, but the
companies refused. Now Seoul has agreed that South Korean companies will foot
the bill. The victims and their families had wanted Japan to pay, but still this
is a diplomatic success. The deal should allow the neighbouring countries to
overcome a huge obstacle in their relationship and thereby cooperate more
closely on security at a time when mutual threats posed by North Korea and China
are increasing. Prince Harry and Meghan are believed to be considering an
invitation to the coronation after a statement from the couple suggested they
had been contacted about May's ceremony. Some of the 2,000 guests are being sent
emails asking them to save the dates ahead of official invitations being
dispatched. The team that found the wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton's famous
ship, the Endurance, has discovered mistakes in the official record of its loss,
which illustrate the difficulties of international communication in the early
20th century. Documents relating to the ship's £15,000 insurance policy,
underwritten by Lloyds of London, detail its sinking in 1916 rather than 1915.
Dr John Spears was part of the mission to find Endurance. He explained this to
the programme, to this programme, why the mistake occurred. Shackleton only
managed to get the news back to the UK when he finally got to the Falkland
Islands on the 31st of May, 1916. It was picked up by a paper, a big paper at
the time, called the Daily Chronicle, and they published in their paper that the
ship had been lost on April 9th, 1916. So the waiters at Lloyds didn't get it
wrong, it was the paper. That was Dr John Spears. Thank you. Ten past eight is
the time. Rishi Sunak promised last year that there would be legislation in 2023
to make it unambiguously clear that if you enter the UK illegally, you should
not be able to remain here. He also said that he'd spent more time on combating
channel crossings and on immigration policy generally than on other issues, any
other issue in fact, apart from the economy. So there's nothing surprising about
the announcements this week on small boats, though the lifetime ban on entry for
people who come across the channel illegally does look certain to be challenged
in the courts, along with the question of whether initial efforts to claim
asylum can be simply swept aside, given Britain's international obligations.
Those obligations and a range of practical issues will of course be on the
agenda when Rishi Sunak and President Macron of France meet on Friday. Let us
start with the channel itself and what is going on there, what has been going on
there, because we can talk to Matt Coker, who is a fisherman who regularly sees
the crossings and joins us now, I think from your boat, Matt, is that right?
That's right, yeah, I'm down in Dover. Tell us what you see. When you go out and
it's a calm day, what do you come across and what can you do? Well it's quite a
regular thing now and over the last few years it's got obviously a lot more
frequent, but I mean we often see small boats with many people in just casually
making their way across the channel and in the summer months when it is
exceptionally calm, you know, it's extremely busy. There's not a great deal we
can do other than we go over and see if they're okay and then pass the positions
to the Coast Guard and they'll then action, you know, a Border Force vessel to
go out and retrieve them. And if they're not okay or you're worried about them,
what do you do then? Well I have taken four people on board once from a boat
that was filling with water and brought them to the Border Force. They met me at
sea and took them and I have actually been asked to follow along behind a few
boats by the Coast Guard just because if they are bailing out and they're taking
on water and on a busy day they might not have enough assets, so to speak, to
get to every boat immediately and they'll ask us to observe the boats and I've
actually followed them all the way from the middle of the channel towards the
shore. When you look at, kind of, more generally in the round, so we had a big
year last year for numbers, have you got the sense now that it is sort of
entrenched as a thing, that the numbers are so huge that it's become a kind of,
as lorries were in the relatively recent past, that it's just become a way of
life for people and for the smugglers? Oh definitely, yeah, I mean it is
certainly around this area it's just it's the new normal really. Everybody's
used to seeing the boats, quite often you go out and you see empty boats
drifting where they've taken people off them and they've not had time to
retrieve the boats, they just move on to the next boat. You know it is busy and
it's standard that we see the Border Force all around Dover, they've got places
they stay, they've got all their equipment here and everything and it's just
like a new service really, to be honest. Do you, final thought, do you feel the
government's getting it right when it says what we're thinking of doing, he's
just saying to all these people who are coming across, whether or not their
claims are going to be acceptable or not, or would have been in the past, we're
just going to say to all of you, if you try this route you can't stay and you'll
never be allowed in. I don't know if it's right or not or not really, I mean I
do see the people firsthand and I see them up close and a lot of them, you know,
they don't look like they're fleeing from a war-torn country, I must admit, but
it certainly can't carry on the way it is because the strain on the services,
the money it's costing and it's unfair on the ships, you know, I mean these
ships coming down one of the busiest shipping lanes in the world, it's very
difficult for them to navigate around these small unnavigable vessels, it
wouldn't be allowed to take place anywhere else in the world I think, and I'm
sure if you enter another country anywhere else illegally, I'm not sure that
we'd have the same reaction as what we do at the moment. Okay well Matt
Kirkwood, thank you, we'll let you get on with your day now and I'm going to
turn to Sir David Normington, who was the Department Secretary at the Home
Office, which of course is a key department in all of this between 2006 and
2011. Sir David, good morning. Justin. There are some pretty big practical
issues to be resolved, aren't there, in what the government seems to be
suggesting? There are, I mean I do understand why the government is focused on
this, because we all want the small boats to stop, but this present policy,
which is going to be announced this week, I see two immediate difficulties with
it. One is at the heart of the policy is a gamble, that if you say it's illegal
to come in a small boat, people will stop coming. I think that's highly
doubtful. These are people, many of whom are desperate, they have fleed from
persecution, and being told that there's been a change in legislation in the
British Parliament, I don't think is going to make a big difference to them. And
secondly, if that's right, they will continue to come, and then the government
has to do something with them. It says it's going to detain them for 28 days,
and then deport them. But where is it going to detain them, because it doesn't
have the space, and where is it going to deport them to, because it doesn't have
agreements with enough countries that are safe. So there are lots of practical
issues here. It may be that when we hear the details this week, some of these
things will become clear, but it's really important when you pass legislation
that you have the follow-through, that you have the practical follow-through.
Otherwise it's legislation that just lies ineffectively on the statute. And that
you have the capacity, which would be required of the Home Office, which is
having difficulties, let's be frank, in coping with the system as it is, and
just processing asylum seekers. Well, that's what concerns me. The Home Office
has a huge backlog of asylum claims. It's now over 160,000. It also hasn't got
the capacity to return people. For every year since 2012, there's been a decline
in the number of people who failed at their asylum claims being deported, except
in the last year when there's been a slight increase. That means that a policy
which is dependent on deporting people is up against a practical problem that
there's nowhere to deport people to, and the Home Office doesn't have the
capacity to deport them. Except that, well, I want to start to interrupt, but I
would just wonder if Rishi Sunak, the suggestion we were hearing earlier in the
programme actually from a government minister, that Rishi Sunak, who has done
this deal potentially over Northern Ireland trade, has a grasp of the details,
has a relationship now, for instance, with President Macron of France, has the
Rwanda policy, which although no one has been deported there, it is up and
running, it's been okayed by the courts, at least to an extent, and actually
perhaps has a determination to do this that people at the moment are
underestimating? Well, we may be underestimating him and I'm going to listen
very closely to what he says this week. He has been giving a lot of attention to
this, he has some very good advisors who will be advising him on what to do, but
the practical problems here are very great. You say the Rwanda policy is up and
running, it's not up and running really, no one has been deported. It may be a
year before the courts determine whether it's a legal policy. So it could be
that we have another year, at least before anyone is deported under the present,
under the announcement that's going to be made this week. So actually what's
needed is to get a grip on the present system. We have a whole summer ahead, the
legislation that's being proposed won't be passed by then, so we have a whole
summer ahead when we need to get a grip on the present system. Sir David
Normanton, thank you very much. Let us turn to Lord Garnier, Edward Garnier,
Conservative Peer, former Solicitor General under David Cameron. Good morning to
you. Good morning. Do you take Sir David's points that actually there are
enormous practical issues that don't at the moment seem to have the solutions in
train? There are, I thought he said it very clearly. I put it this way, the
government have got to answer the question and then what? So you pass the
legislation and then what? And Sir David has dealt with that. But people like me
who wring their hands and say it's not good enough have also got to answer the
question, well what do you propose to do instead? And it seems to me that
passing a law in England or in the United Kingdom is a unilateral act which is
fine and I understand the politics of that and I can understand the political
pressure upon the government to be seen to be doing something. But nothing will
work unless we have the cooperation of our immediate neighbours. So for example,
this meeting coming up on Friday between the Prime Minister and the President of
France is key and there will need to be lots of those sort of meetings all the
way around Europe and in the Mediterranean literal. And we've got to think
about, for example, rebuilding Albania so that Albanians who are the second
biggest group after Afghanistan can stay in Albania which is a European country
rather than trek their way across to the English Channel. How much store do you
set by the meeting with Macron? You say it's very important. I mean the
suggestion is that this new relationship that Rishi Senak seems to be forging
with the European Union writ large but also with key figures in it could make a
real difference. Are we talking then about a huge amount of processing going on
in France and a real reduction that way so that this as a political issue just
goes away or is reduced? Well it certainly won't go away. The aim must be to
reduce it but you can't reduce it unless you have the cooperation of those
countries which are affected most by it. In our case obviously it's France and
the United Kingdom. It seems to me that having watched Rishi Senak renegotiate
the protocol, the Northern Ireland matter, we have there a man who's got the
intellect and the ability and the tenacity to get on and negotiate in a
civilized way with the president of France. No longer can we afford to just
shout at the French. They don't enjoy that and it doesn't get anywhere. We've
got to cooperate and we've got to reach agreements with the French and also
reach agreements with other countries which are between the source of the
refugees and our coast. It's easy to describe, I appreciate, and it's going to
be very difficult to work out but nonetheless it's an effort that has to be made
because coming down the road is not only a reaction which says well you've
passed this law and nothing has changed. All you've done is add to the expense
of detaining people in ex-military camps and so on but there's a general
election coming up next year and so there really is a hurry. There's a timetable
which the government has to meet if it is to get this thing sensibly sorted out
within a timetable. Lord Garnier, thank you and Sir David Normathan before you.
Thank you as well. The time is now 22 minutes past eight and there is something
unusual and intriguing coming to London's Young Vic Theatre in May. It's a
24-hour play involving one actor and a hundred co-stars, a hundred different men
who come and go over the 24 hours, are not rehearsed and most of them are not
even actors. The play is called The Second Woman and the central role will be
played by Ruth Wilson who was in Luther in his Dark Materials and whose previous
stage roles have included Hedda Garbler and she joins us now. Good morning Ruth.
Ruth can you hear me? Are you there? Slightly ominous silence. I think we can
assume she's not. Never quite know with actors. Better not last 24 hours going
like this. No I think we'll come back to it. Jonathan's also assigned to the
moment for the simple reason that he's not here we should explain. He's not
being difficult but he is actually coming. All sorts of people are coming and
going now but he is actually coming in. Kirsty? Oh Kirsty's walked in. Are you
ready for us to tell us about Start of the Week? Yes I am going to tell you
about Start of the Week. Thank you. So fantastic. This morning we have a special
edition 20 years on from the invasion of Iraq. We look back at what many regard
as the great misadventure which tore the country apart, cost many thousands of
lives, most of them Iraqi and gave rise to among other terror groups Islamic
State. We're joined by three guests each of whom in their own way was at the
heart of the conflict. Raith Abdul-Ahad is an award-winning Iraqi reporter who
witnessed the fall of Saddam and the violent fragmentation of his country. Emma
Skye at the time working for the British Council, just 34 years old, volunteered
to help post-regime change and ended up the governor of Kirkuk. And the BBC
security correspondent Gordon Carrera who cut his teeth here on the Today
programme. That's a special programme, special Start of the Week, the Iraq war
and its aftermath just after nine. Thank you very much. Sorry for bouncing you
into that Kirsty but you did save the day. And actually we do have Ruth Wilson
on the line now I'm happy to say. Morning Ruth. Hello. Hello. Sorry not to have
managed to get you a moment ago but very pleased to be speaking to you now. Now
I gave everyone listening an idea or at least my idea of the play The Second
Woman as I understood it but I have to confess I was struggling to get my head
around the concept. So you explain to us what it involves. Yes okay. So it's one
scene taken from a John Cazavete's film called Opening Night and that same scene
is performed a hundred times with a hundred different men over the course of 24
hours. And they are mainly non-actors. There might be a few actors dropped in
and I would never have rehearsed or met them before. So it's although it's
there's a scene there that those men have to learn and I have to learn. There's
no rehearsals and I would never have met them before. So it's completely
spontaneous. So does it then go in different directions around the script that
you will of course be very familiar with but they'll each be doing just once?
Yes and I think the idea is that it will be however they interpret that scene or
how they're feeling. These men wouldn't have stepped on stage before. Many of
them wouldn't have done. So for them it's an overwhelming experience or could
be. And it's how they interact with me in that moment and how they interact to
certain things in the script. And that will be constantly surprising for me and
for everyone in the audience. How are they chosen if they're not actors? There's
a big process by the young Vic which is the sort of auditioning process and
workshop process to see if they're sort of suitable and if they're up for it.
And that's already happened. So all the men are ready and ready and picked
already. Rehearsing at least rehearsing sort of their own their own lines not
rehearsing with you. Exactly. And so I mean the reason why I mean for me it's
like this. These are experiences don't come up that often. So to get the chance
to do this and for something it's interesting to me because I think as an actor
you're always looking for sort of breaking the artifice of performance. You want
something to surprise you or you want to feel spontaneous and that's when you
feel like something feels most truthful. And I think this will for like the
whole 24 hours will feel like that. It will feel surprising and there will be I
think connections with people I don't expect and some people I really won't get
on with. And the audience will be acutely aware of each of those interactions
because they're seeing the same scene repeated. So be really acutely aware of
the differences of the scenes. And so I think generally it will become a sort of
study of human connection or non-connection and interaction. And an exercise in
stamina 24 hours. How are you going to get through that? I have absolutely no
idea. I'm not sure I can really prepare for it. And I think that is the other
thing that's going to be interesting. And I'm interested in seeing how I'll cope
and survive those 24 hours. Every two hours I get a 15 minute break. But yeah
I'll be up there doing that same scene. So you'll see me at my most raw and
probably I'm sort of expecting to be at my most honest in a way where there
won't be an artifice. Any artificial performance will disappear within three
hours probably. Yes. And of course that you know how tired you are is bound to
affect how each scene plays out. And you know that comes into so many human
relations. You think of when people are shattered after having children or
anything like that. These kinds of where we are physically as well as
emotionally obviously affects our relationships. Yeah exactly. And I think that
you know if you think about the people you meet every day you interact with them
differently according to status or how well you know them. So I think this will
be similarly similar that those every man that comes on it will be a completely
different experience. And for the audience to they it's been performed before it
was performed in Australia a number of years ago. And the creators of the show
then said that the audience the audience become very connected to the actress
playing the part because you all together are anticipating the next man coming
on and wondering how they're going to deal with this scenario. And it is a sort
of study of power dynamics because it's a breakup scene and the man is breaking
up with me. But it's my domain. It's my you know I'm used to being on theatre on
a stage. I was rather assuming that the audience come and go. But do you mean
the experience from elsewhere is it that some people stay for the whole 24
hours. Well there are. So these tickets go on sale today at 12 noon and there's
two tickets available. There's a 24 hour ticket which means you can come and go
as you like over the course of 24 hours. So you can go home and go and get
dinner or go to sleep for a few hours and come back the next day and see me
still performing or the sort of timed entry tickets in the dead hours of night.
So the sort of from 930 p.m. to 10 a.m. and yeah you can come and go as you
like. So once you're in you can stay as long as you like. We can come along
before our shifts. Exactly. You could. Yeah. If you can't get a ticket. One
thing I must say is you can't get a ticket today. Most tickets will be available
on the day so you can queue up and get a ticket. And that's the best way
probably of getting a ticket to be honest. Good luck Ruth. It really sounds like
you're going to need it. 19th to the 20th of May. Thank you very much. At 29
minutes past eight to the Sport and Johnson ledger. Thank you. So Nick Robinson
your boys took a hell of a beating. A record victory for Liverpool against
Manchester United. Seven nil. Seven nil. It needs to be written out. S-E-V-E-N.
A Premier League scoreline to haunt United forever more. A scoreline of the
century. Not just the season. A super performance according to Liverpool manager
Jürgen Klopp. Eyeing up a top four finish with genuine expectation for
Manchester United. A humiliating come down from winning the EFL Cup final last
week. So what happened to the form team of Europe still in contention for
trophies in four different competitions? A question I put to Sir Alex Ferguson's
former first team coach René Mullenstein. I think not only the Manchester United
fans I'm sure that also Eric ten Haagen and all the players didn't see this
coming. And on the basis of the first half there was no reason to. Obviously
Liverpool scores you know an important goal for them just before half time. I'm
sure that ten Haag said at half time listen you know just make sure that we stay
in the game. We keep doing our things and we get our chances. But there was a
kind of a sloppiness if you look at a percentage of ball possession and passes
that was very very low. Giving easy balls away. The defending at times was
suspect and you know as soon as Liverpool got a second and they smell blood
basically everything they were creating was going in. How do you process it as a
coax though? Because Manchester United won the League Cup last week. They've
beaten Barcelona. They're rising up the Premier League and then this 7-0 their
record defeat. An equal record defeat. It will be hard to take because United,
clubs like United are all about writing history and this unfortunately will go
in the history books as well. But if you look at you know the whole season and
the whole positivity that ten Haag was creating with the team. The authority
that they put back in the games. The results they've had. You mentioned already
Barcelona winning the League Cup. So I'm sure they were coming into this game
with high hopes to getting the results. So to lose a game okay and you can lose
it Anfield. You can lose to a good Liverpool. But to lose 7-0 is extraordinary.
What will Eric ten Haag have learned about his players? Because you talked about
sloppiness there. I think what Eric has done really well with United. And United
is a club that should have always the highest expectations. And with the highest
expectations come standards and responsibilities. And I think what you saw this
game in terms of certain defensive aspects of the game of losing the ball easy.
That's questionable. But then secondly the reaction and Eric ten Haag is very,
very big on transition. You know you lose it but you react straight away. If you
can affect the ball you do that. If you do that if you can't you run back
towards your own goal to get bodies behind the ball to make it difficult for the
opposition to open you up. That didn't happen. Now in England they got a great
saying old habits don't die. This must have been for him a little bit of a wake
up call. It is an eye opener to making sure that listen I have another few
things to address here. Just a few. Phil McNulty's analysis on the story on the
BBC Sport Online. Very good. Highly recommending. Some great words. But at least
Man United continue to dominate the women's Super League. The England striker
Alessia Russo scored a hat-trick as they beat Leicester to go five points clear
at the top. And Arsenal won the League Cup beating Chelsea 3-1. Let's catch up
now on England's progress in their final one day international against
Bangladesh in cricket. Looking to wrap up the series 3-0. Strong start they made
but they've been made to work hard Kevin Howells. Yes they've just got another
wicket so it's five down now. 17 for two is a very good start for England.
Bangladesh that is batting of course then became 115 for three. Shanto was run
out for 53. Cool and confident work from Bhatta the keeper. Also Riyan Ahmed in
whipping the bails off on his debut. Musfako was bowled by Adil Rashid for 70
and Adil Rashid has just got a second wicket. Mamadoula for eight. A quick word
for Riyan Ahmed. 18 years of age. His first five overs of ODI cricket going for
25 runs. Very nearly got a wicket as well. But a steady start from him.
Bangladesh 163 for five in the 35th over. Thank you Kevin. World champion Max
Verstappen has sounded a warning to his Formula One rivals driving off into the
distance in the opening race of the new season in Bahrain. Catch him if you can.
Just like these two selections. Try Weatherby 350 number seven. Jetlegs and
Southwell 410 number five. Charging point. Jonathan thank you. To the weather.
Showery rain today. Sinking over central areas. Wintery on the higher hills.
Elsewhere patchy cloud and showers and of course cold cold cold. You're
listening to Today on Radio 4 with Justin Webb, Michelle Hussain and Alan Smith
with the news. New legislation to be set out by the government tomorrow will see
migrants who arrive in small boats removed from the UK, banned from future re-
entry and unable to apply for British citizenship. The Refugee Council said the
measures would leave thousands of people in limbo while the former Solicitor
General Lord Garnier told us the proposals wouldn't work without cooperation
from France and other European nations. The notorious prisoner Charles Bronson
will argue for his release this morning at a public parole hearing. Bronson who
spent much of the last 50 years behind bars admits using extreme violence in the
past but says he's changed. Elected mayors in the north of England are meeting
in Newcastle today to discuss the continuing problems facing the region's
railways. They say passengers face losing more than 20,000 services this year if
cancellations continue at their current rate. And police in Cardiff searching
for five people missing since the early hours of Saturday said they found three
of them dead in a suspected car crash. Their vehicle was discovered shortly
after midnight. Two of the group have been taken to hospital with serious
injuries. Alan thank you very much. 25 to nine now. Is our system of contracts
between fruit and vegetable producers and supermarkets to blame for the
disappearance of produce from supermarket shelves in recent weeks? That's what
the restauranteur Henry Dimbleby thinks. He's also a government advisor on food.
He is with us now as is Andrew Opie, Director of Food and Sustainability at the
British Retail Consortium which represents supermarkets. Good morning. Good
morning. Henry first of all what is the problem then as you see it? Well you
have to peel back the onion so the weather obviously is the starting point and
it's not just the cold snap. We had a 10 weeks of warm weather leading up to
mid-January which meant that a lot of the veg that had been planted came on too
soon and had to be dug back into the ground because there was a glut. Then we
had a cold snap which created a shortage. But why does Europe have veg on their
supermarket shelves and we didn't and we're putting in restrictions? The reason
for that is not just the contracts, it's the contracts plus the supermarket
culture. So if you buy an iceberg lettuce in this country it'll cost you about
70p, it'll cost you about £1.50 in Europe, peppers will be about three times the
price. The supermarket holds those prices down which means that not only do on
the margin suppliers not want to sell us their product, restaurateurs and market
stall holders go into Tesco, go into the supermarkets because it's cheaper than
the wholesale market. Then you have to have these restrictions, you have to have
rationing. This has always happened. Aldi and Lidl have made it worse but you
know back in spring of 2005 there was a bitter frost in Spain at the beginning
of March and exactly the same thing happens and it works the other way. In the
summer the supermarkets, if there's a glut say of iceberg, they refuse to raise
the prices because they want to have you know 70p as the signal price for an
iceberg and therefore farmers can't sell their gluts and the gluts get dug into
the ground. This is beginning to create long-term problems. First of all these
events will become more common because of climate change but also the amount of
investment that's going into horticulture in the UK is now much lower than the
investment going into horticulture in Europe and that may in the long term lead
to real problems with our fruit and veg sector. But as far as consumers and
household budgets are concerned what the supermarkets are doing is good isn't
it? Yes they're keeping price down. I mean not in the summer where they're not
not discounting for gluts. They're keeping price down but it is not a
sustainable solution to the problem of poverty to basically create a planned
economy and one of the most volatile, naturally volatile because of the weather,
sectors of the economy. You in the end will destroy that sector. So yes it's
great for consumers but you're effectively subsidizing poverty by destroying a
sector of our economy. Andrew Opie what's your response to that? Well I mean
first of all I certainly agree with Henry that this is a short-term disruption
due to weather. I do disagree with him on the issue around contracts and I think
what we need to put at the heart of this is consumers. So we're already facing
into 15% inflation at the moment. Consumers household income is being squeezed
all over and what supermarkets are doing is working with their suppliers and
putting their own profits into subsidizing prices to try and keep them down. You
know I don't think many consumers out there would welcome the fact that they
might need to double their prices for things like lettuce and cucumbers at the
moment. I think actually they'd be congratulating supermarkets for helping them
balance one of their budgets, one of their very tight budgets at the moment and
that's what supermarkets are doing. They are trying to find the balance between
rewarding their suppliers both here and in Europe to keep sustainable supply
chains but also fundamentally focusing on the crisis that household incomes are
facing at the moment. So you think that the system is sustainable? Absolutely
because I don't buy this argument that I've seen that supermarkets are not
listening to suppliers or not willing to change their prices. In the volatile
market that we've seen due to rising energy prices over the last couple of years
etc. supermarkets are pragmatists. They know they need to secure supplies at the
right choice and the right affordability for consumers so they have to work with
their suppliers and we've seen very, very frequent negotiations around price
with their suppliers particularly in this fresh produce type sector. Henry is
there another aspect to this which is that we've already moved so far away from
seasonal eating, at least most people have, where we want for example summer
vegetables and produce in winter and that means we're already quite far away
from the idea of prices will be lower when something, you know, there's a
particular crop which you have a glut of. I don't think so really. I mean I
could be incredibly frustrated which is why I'm talking about this. The whole
debate about this became about whether it's okay to tell people to eat turnips
in winter. Fundamentally and I put this to the retailers, why is it that we have
a completely different market structure in this country than in pretty much the
rest of the western world actually? The answer actually is that partly it's back
to our farmers. We don't co-operatize. So in Europe the farmers co-operatize,
they work together, they control the market more but I genuinely believe we're
in a situation where it's harming the market. Look at onions last year, we had a
very hot spell, low onion yields, wholesale prices were three times what they
normally are in onions. In Europe the farmers were able to invest that money
back into capacity. In the UK our onion farmers are on their knees. Andrew? I
don't agree with that and the difference here between us and Europe in many
countries like France and Germany, they have regulations that constrain the
retailers in the prices they can offer as Henry alluded to right at the start.
So they cannot sell below cost. Now we have a free market here where retailers
are balancing the support for their suppliers particularly in Britain together
with the real laser light focus on household incomes and how to keep prices
down. I think that market works best rather than seeing these huge fluctuations
in price that Henry alluded to there for lettuces right at the start of this
interview. I think we've got a very good market, supermarkets are pragmatists,
they know they need to invest in their supply chains and that's what they'll
continue to do but at the same time they will deliver amazing value for
customers. Andrew Opie from the British Retail Consortium and Henry Dimbleby,
thank you both very much. The time is 18 minutes to nine. It's a painful and
difficult time according to President Zelensky of Ukraine but he says his forces
are still holding out in the city of Bakhmud. The Russians have been attacking
for nine months which seems to be on the brink of being taken by them. We've
been talking to Vadim Adamov who is a drone operator on that front line in
Bakhmud. Last few days and last time in Bakhmud are really hard one. We are
constantly seeing the Russian using over and over sending the groups of 20 to 30
people. These groups are even unable to get to our infantry's position and it's
my job to direct artillery fire upon them. Every Russian soldier that can go to
war they are right now in Bakhmud and this is the reason why they are having
some kind of local success because they just threw everything at us and I mean
we don't have this amount of people in Bakhmud. This is what their tactic and
their war is about. Let's turn to Justin Crump, a defence and security expert of
20 years service with the British military. Good morning to you. Good morning.
It is grim isn't it? I mean really grim this fight. We were talking on Saturday
about it seeming to be over and yet when you hear it described like that this
small scale, very vicious but small scale stuff and the wider picture of
shelling as well. It doesn't look to be over anytime soon does it? I mean it's
certainly in the last days of what's been a very very drawn out and as you say
gritty and brutal battle. I mean really the fighting for Bakhmud started after
you may recall the Ukrainians left Severodonetsk and Lissachansk to the east.
That was sort of the last big Russian success over the summer and Bakhmud was
the next town in the way to the major cities in the Donbass, in the western
Donbass and it was never expected to hold for long. It's not even a great
defensive position. It is not a particularly significant town, city in Ukrainian
and yet here we are. I mean it's been a hugely drawn out conflict that's taken a
great deal of fiscal importance on both sides and in a way it didn't deserve but
it's become iconic. The trick is for the Ukrainians, can they bleed the Russians
out? Can they make the Russians pay such a high price for what is really a
meaningless objective much as the Russian community will celebrate the capture
and all of which just slows the Russians down, wears down their forces. Remember
these hundreds of thousands of new mobilized personnel Russia brought to the
front lines over the winter and Ukraine's just hoping that this is a price worth
paying. They can keep this balance in this horrendous fighting and eventually
yes they'll have to give up on the city and that's probably starting to happen
but I think it remains to be seen if the defense is actually the true strategic
success Ukraine needed it to be. Yeah because that's obviously is the crucial
question is that we hear a lot of people asking that question. It's very
difficult isn't it to answer it at the moment? No I mean with the data you know
being so unclear as we know it is I think you know anecdotally and on the visual
things we do have we're pretty sure that Russia's taken very heavy casualties
those sort of grim tactics you talk about the known use of human wave attacks,
the Wagner private military group contractors from prisons basically just being
sent straight forward and as the MOD said in the last few days I mean Russian
troops using shovels to engage in close quarter combat I mean it's hardly the
21st century war that one might have expected from a military that had Russia's
stature just over a year ago. So they've definitely taken huge casualties we
don't know what Ukraine's taken but I will point out that the Ukrainians are
training still in Poland, in the UK, in Spain, in the US now so they can clearly
spare the troops for training on new equipment and they've definitely been
holding a reserve back from the fighting they haven't had to commit everything
to this fight and so they've probably got something in the bag for the coming
months it's a matter of whether or not they can maintain that reserve until the
time when the ground gets better. Justin Crumb thank you. It is quarter to nine
a landmark high seas treaty was agreed at international talks in New York
yesterday where countries agreed to go from just over one percent to 30 percent
of international waters becoming protected areas by the year 2030. Farah
Obeidullah was there she's from the advocacy group women for oceans and joins us
now. Morning Farah. Good morning. How do you think this is going to work? Do we
know where these protected areas will be? No not yet but this frame this UN
treaty provides the framework and the legal mechanism to enable these protected
areas to be established so we don't know where they will be yet we you know we
science will inform those decisions and it will be a few years out yet because
obviously the treaty still needs to be ratified and that requires 60 countries
so whilst this is a huge victory for the ocean we still have a way to go before
it translates into effective protection. Yes actually there's a lot to do by
2030 which is when it's supposed to come into effect but do you envisage smaller
areas that are scattered across the globe and together make up the 30 percent or
do you envisage large parts of ocean which are already known to be particularly
vulnerable with overfishing? Well I mean ideally we want to see large swaths of
the ocean connected through a network of protected areas because a patchwork
simply won't provide the resilience and the sort of the protection that you know
migratory species for example need in order to receive that protection. Describe
that then geographically what do you have in mind? Well I mean you have to
imagine that the high seas so the area that we're talking about is almost half
of the planet and this means that there's a lot of diversity depending on you
know the temperature on the topography on where these areas are found in the
ocean so there has to be connectivity between these protected areas so that the
natural sort of migration of life both you know through the oceans and within
the oceans can happen. Of course there are other interests at play that you know
for example the regional fisheries management bodies or the body that's tasked
with regulating mining if that does go ahead in the high seas and these bodies
whilst you know they are already established and it's important that this that
they do not undermine the spirit of this treaty which is to protect biodiversity
on the high seas so there's still some sort of well you know it's not entirely
clear yet how the existing bodies will cooperate and collaborate with this new
treaty and so there's still some issues to be ironed out there. Does that mean
we don't even necessarily have a definition of protected whether that means all
human activity out? Right exactly yes so there is discussion about whether areas
should be fully protected of course we want to see fully protected areas but
this treaty as it's defined is really the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity so there's still some issues to be to be ironed out
and depending on where these areas will be and if they will clash with existing
bodies that regulate fishing for example yes but this framework does pave the
way to ensure that we can get effective protected areas. It sounds like a
starting point really with something as fundamental as what protection means not
yet being established. Absolutely so this is a huge victory 20 years almost in
the making but it is only a first step it still needs to be ratified by 60
countries and so that will still take a few years and by then you know we will
be approaching 2030 so it really is now time for governments to step up and
expedite this process and for example the UK is a member of the high ambition
coalition that pushed for a high level of protection for marine life. A high
ambition treaty and so I expect and urge the UK and other countries like the US
and Canada and my own country the Netherlands to make sure that we get this
treaty entered into force as quickly as possible. Farah Obeidullah thank you.
The time is exactly 10 to 9 a beautiful haunting novel in which nothing is quite
what it seems. Old God's Time is about what we live through what we live with
what may survive of us. That is what the publishers say about Old God's Time the
Irish author Sebastian Barry writer of it twice nominated indeed twice
shortlisted for the Man Booker Prize is here in the studio. Good morning. Good
morning. And the backdrop to it is a kind of horror story isn't it a horror
story that we've there's been plenty of non-fiction writing about. Yeah we're
incredibly familiar with it at some level but in another way it's a horror that
doesn't want to recede into history. Even recently in the last few weeks in
Ireland some of the old boys as it were of our supposedly best school came out
finally to tell of their awful experiences from the priests in their school the
spirit and fathers. So it's it just doesn't want to recede into history. This
man Tom Kettle would have had his terrible experiences in the 1930s. But for all
that now he's set in the 90s. He's a 67 year old fellow who has actually had a
victory I think over these experiences. Right. So this is your central character
looking back and looking back with what anger anguish. Yes being dragged back
really. He's just retired he's spent nine lovely months beside the sea in
Doherty in this little annex flat he's found for himself. He's enjoyed the
wicker chair. He's enjoyed as he says being completely useless. But then two of
his old colleagues come to ask him about a current case about priests that has a
route leading back into a case in the 60s that he was involved with. And
although he loves these young men coming to see him and all the rest of it it
completely undoes him because part of survival sometimes is suppressing and
putting away the terrible things that have happened to you which he has actually
achieved. So that is really what the book is is the unflowering the unpettling
of Tom's mind. Is that what Ireland is doing as well. I mean what's the balance
between suppression and examination. We're caught in a very strange position
with this whole history because the fact of the matter is that it was the
judiciary of the day that sent children to these places. I'm not even sure under
what statutes or laws somebody might tell me someday. It was the guardi. It was
the police and he has been a policeman all his life who would go and bring you
back if you ran away would believe nothing that you said to the degree of where
there is one case where a boy was brought back and then the other boys never saw
him. Never saw him again. So how frightening is that. It's not just about
clerical abuse is it is as you say it's about those who kind of enforced the
system. We think a lot about the Catholic Church but and the need for atonement
and for apologies to be made in the wider system. Is there enough of a
recognition that it wasn't just the the priests who were involved in all this.
You know in a curious way I felt my job was to be very clear about what happened
to people in those places because there is a sense that you can say it or you
can read the reports or not read the reports and the details vanish out of your
mind. And I was just trying to write it down in a novel so people wouldn't
forget. But you know there is there is a great sense of solidarity with people
now. You have to remember that when they were coming out of their institutions a
boy like Tom Kettle 16 years old put at the gate could never have got a job in
the guards. The only reason he gets one is because he's been in the British Army
in Malaya and he's learned how to shoot a long distance rifle and they value
that. You know so I think that there is a great sense of solidarity in Ireland
as long as you tweak the spider's web of solidarity. And I've been saying at my
events that some of the details are very hard to read but I was hoping that we
would be content or graceful enough to have them in our minds because there are
so many people who have them because they've been put in there and they cannot
get them out. And I know the book sound extraordinarily gloomy and the topic is
and yet as well there is humanity and there is a sense of a future. He loves the
world. He loves those young carpers coming to see him. He loves the wind and the
waves and the sunlight outside his picture window. He loves Dorky Island
stretching out in front of him. He has loved his wife to distraction and his
children equally. We don't know at the beginning of the book why he's on his
own. By the end of the book we know why he's on his own. And I think if I have
done my job at all you will love this man because his pact is with life and
survival. Sebastian Barry author of Old God's Time. Thank you very much. It's
five to nine now after Jonathan goaded Nick a second time this morning or was it
a third about his team seven nil defeat last night. I knew that we were in right
of reply territory and sure enough it's not a statement but an actual bonus
appearance that we're getting from Nick who I presume Nick you are licking your
wounds this morning. How are you. Can you leave a man to grieve in peace. For
goodness sake Michelle. I mean you wake up on a morning when you're not
presenting. You have the glory of being under your duvet and ice cup of tea.
There's a football hangover on the morning after the Anfield horror show before
you switch on the radio. Hope of warm and comforting words from your colleagues.
And what do you hear. Nick Robinson your boys took a hell of a beating. Thank
you very much. The Today programme. Look you know there was no shortage of
offers to come on air and torment you. We thought about Martha but actually
we've gone for Justine Roberts founder and chief executive of Mumsnet and in
very different spirits this morning Justine as a Liverpool fan. I'm absolutely
delighted obviously. And I'd just like to mention to Nick that I've heard that
Eric Tenhag has changed his name now to Eric Sevenhag. Well I congratulate you
warmly Justine and all other scousers. I usually put another word before
scousers but not on the radio. Yeah. Well what was so brilliant of course was
none of us expected it did it. And it's nothing like there's nothing like
handing it to the Manx when they've got a bit of confidence. When they think
when they literally Rio Ferdinand said he's never been so confident going into a
game at Anfield. And that seemed to bring out the best in us I think. Well give
us the analysis then. You've fallen for it Justine. We chose to lull the old
enemy into a false sense of complacency and you've fallen for it. Yeah. Well it
just I mean it was it was like winding the clock back to a couple of the last
few seasons for us. We've been very patchy this season. But I do think it was
the age old rivalry that brought out the best in us. And in fact I understand
that Mo Salah now has more bookings for celebrating goals against United at
Anfield. Since he joined us then United have scored at Anfield. Isn't that an
incredible stat. Nick are you regarding this then as a momentary aberration.
Well we hope so don't we. All I would point out is the last time Manchester
United won at Anfield which was in 2016 I was there taunting my friends in the
1-0 Wayne reading. I mean seriously this is why we love football. I know it's a
mystery to people. Many people who listen to the day program. Some of them. Many
people who present it too. Indeed. Many think I even bang on about it. But the
joy is also the horror. If it weren't for the horror there wouldn't be the joy.
The roller coaster is what makes it irresistible. Although today I'm going back
to bed after I've talked to you. And you're getting all poetic there for a
moment Nick. Just for just for a moment. Justine how do you think your team
managed to do this last night. I think we always had it in us. We had an
extraordinary season last season and we didn't have the preseason we should
have. We probably didn't sign quite enough experience in midfield and our young
players have taken a bit of time to adjust. But they they've really they really
brought it home yesterday. And I think it will kick us on now and we'll be in
the top four. And I think you know the people have written us off. I'm afraid
they're going to have to eat their words. And and for Man United Nick picking up
the pieces after this just embarrassing apart from anything else. Oh God it's
humiliating. It's absolutely awful. Thank God I'm living in London at the moment
rather than in the northwest. It would be a horror show. It's a reminder of one
important thing Michelle though. For all we talk about who buys clubs. This is
about 11 players on the pitch. And if they don't try and if they don't fight and
if they don't have the resolve. It doesn't matter how much money you've got.
Doesn't matter how much support you've got. What your history is. You're
finished. And it was a reminder of reality. Thank you both. Nick Justine thanks.
Saybl F