TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 And Mayday's continues tomorrow at the same time. Goods checked when entering
Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK. The Democratic Unionist Party has
boycotted power sharing at Stormont in protest. Ciarán Sloane, who owns a
delicatessen in Belfast, told The World at One... he hoped the new deal would
help improve the flow of supplies into his business. Companies that were
supplying us have had to put these huge delivery charges on to cover the cost of
the paperwork and then a lot of the companies there have just decided it's no
good, we're not going to bother. We had a company there we've been buying off
for about 20 years and they sent us a new brochure over. The whole product range
was cut in half because they couldn't get it over here. Anything that contained
milk was all out, anything that contained meat was out. The dissident Republican
group known as the New IRA has claimed its members carried out the attack on a
senior police officer who was seriously injured in Oma last week. Police say
masked men fired at least 10 shots at Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
who's in a critical condition in hospital. Six men remain in custody. The energy
regulator Ofgem has cut the price that suppliers can charge for gas and
electricity from April but typical annual household bills in England, Scotland
and Wales are still expected to rise. The nearly £1,000 drop comes as government
support is due to be scaled back. Ministers say they're working to protect the
most vulnerable. It's feared more than 100 migrants have died after their boat
sank off the coast of Italy yesterday. At least 62 people are known to have died
including 12 children. Many others remain unaccounted for. The supermarket chain
Lidl has become the latest firm to restrict the sale of fruit and vegetables
because of a supply shortage. Tesco, Aldi, Asda and Morrisons have recently made
similar moves. The government and suppliers are blaming extreme weather
affecting harvests in Morocco and Spain. BBC News. In half an hour here on Radio
4 we'll hear how a photojournalist who was severely injured in a war zone found
a new focus through cooking. Giles Dooley will tell us more in the Food
Programme at half past three. But first... Counterpoint, the general knowledge
music quiz chaired by Paul Gambacchina. Hello, you join us at the Radio Theatre
in London with another three music enthusiasts for the penultimate heat in
Counterpoint's 36th series. We'll be testing them with an eclectic collection of
questions covering every genre of music. They'll have to demonstrate the full
range of their knowledge if they're going to achieve a place in our semi-finals
which start a couple of weeks from now. Let's meet today's trio of competitors.
Hello, I'm Catherine Johnson. I live in Northwood in Middlesex and the first
recording I have acquired was a budget disc of the Peer Gynt suite. Hello, my
name is Mark Jones. I'm from York and the first record I bought was the Pushbike
song by The Mixtures. Hello, I'm Harry Shaw. I'm from Cheltenham and the first
record I was ever gifted was Hunky Dory by David Bowie. Welcome all of you and
the very best of luck. The opening round tests your musical general knowledge.
There are two points available per question. If the person asked can't answer
correctly, I'll open it up to the others for a bonus point. In the words of the
Temptations, get ready because here I come with the first question for you,
Catherine Johnson. Wales is a land long shrouded in myth and legend,
storytelling and music regularly combined to forge the culture. An event in
Cardiff marking St David's Day sees the BBC National Chorus of Wales recognize
the work of Welsh composer Grace Williams. Her four illustrations written in
1939 concern the legend of a woman of the other world depicted in the
Mabinogion, often portrayed as a horse goddess or as a beautiful woman on
horseback. What is that deity's name? Rhiannon. That's right for two points.
From Wales, let's head to the northeast of England for music from the folk group
the Unthanks. In 2019 they released a trilogy of song cycles, the second of
which is inspired by the poetry of Siegfried Sassoon. Which conflict is
remembered here? Mark Jones, which conflict was remembered there? That's the
First World War. That is correct. Everyone Sang was set to the words of
Sassoon's poem published in 1919. Harry Shaw released in 2013 which album by the
French electronic duo Daft Punk is named after the hardware component that acts
as a temporary storage space for a computer to handle data, usually referred to
by the abbreviation RAM. Random Access Memories. Correct for two points.
Catherine Johnson, time to randomly access your memory with some music. Upheld
by Stillness is the debut album of the 18 voice chamber choir Aura, which pairs
Renaissance gems with specially commissioned reflections. Here the ensemble
performed the Kyrie from the Mass for five voices, after which I'd like you to
identify the English composer of the work. William Byrd. That is correct for two
points. Mark Jones, the British rapper Stormzy's 2019 song Superheroes
references several people including Michael Dapa, fellow rappers Little Sims and
Dave, tennis legends Serena and Venus Williams and the British author of Knots
and Crosses who was Children's Laureate from 2013 to 2015. What's her name?
Mallory Blackman. That's correct. Harry Shaw. Stormzy's Superheroes also cites
one of the all-time great American vocalists. 2023 marks the 90th anniversary of
her birth and the 20th anniversary of her passing. Here she performs one of the
first civil rights songs in response to racially motivated murders in the early
60s. After you've heard Mississippi Goddamn, I'd like you to name her. Can't you
see it? Can't you feel it? It's all in the air. I can't stand the pressure much
longer. Somebody say a prayer. Alabama's gotten me so upset. Tennessee made me
lose my rest and everybody knows about Mississippi Goddamn. Nina Simone. It is
Nina Simone for two points. Katherine Johnson. Song inspiration of a different
kind. The Killers frontman Brandon Flowers told GQ magazine in 2009 about
writing one of his group's best-known hit songs. I was asleep and I knew
something was wrong. I have these instincts. I went to the crown and anchor and
my girlfriend was there with another guy. Which Killers song is he referring to?
Mr. Brightside. That's right for two points. Mark Jones. In March 2023, the
Royal Ballet revives a 2015 production choreographed by Wayne McGregor with
music by Max Richter and spoken word by Gillian Anderson. The ballet is inspired
by the novels, essays, diaries, and letters of a 20th century British writer.
After you've heard The Waves, I'd like you to name her. What I want to say is I
owe all the happiness of my life to you. You have been entirely patient with me
and incredibly good. I want to say that. Everybody knows that. As Virginia
Woolf. That's right. Harry Shaw, the German-born singer-songwriter and actress
Nico had roles in several films, including Andy Warhol's Chelsea Girls. Nico
made her official screen debut in which 1960 film directed by Federico Fellini?
Let's try La Dolce Vita. You try and you get it. Two points. Katherine Johnson.
2022 marked the 50th anniversary of the world-renowned soprano Jesse Norman's
debut at the Royal Opera House, where she appeared in Berlioz's The Trojans.
After we've heard part of her aria Malheurois, I'd like you to name the ill-
fated Trojan prophetess and daughter of King Priam she played. Cassandra.
Cassandra is the correct answer. Mark Jones. Over its 300-year history, the
Three Choirs Festival has premiered works by Edward Elgar, Arthur Sullivan,
Samuel Coleridge Taylor, Judith Weir and many others. To which three English
cathedrals does the name of this festival refer? Hereford, Worcester and
Cheltenham. Oh, you've got two of the three correct. So we'll give you one point
and we will go to Harry Shaw. Gloucester, Worcester and Hereford. And that is
right and you get a bonus point. Finally in this round, music for you Harry
Shaw. Laurie Anderson's eight and a half minute half sung half spoken
experimental single Oh Superman was a number two hit in 1981. For obvious
reasons we can't play it all though I'd love to but after you've heard several
ha a question will follow. Oh Superman Oh George Oh mom and dad Oh mom and dad
Anderson has said that the origins of the song lie in the words Oh Sovereign, Oh
Judge, Oh Father from an aria in L'Ecide, a 19th century opera by which French
composer? Massénais. That's right and that is why the full title of the song is
Oh Superman for Massénais. Let's see if your scores are super after the opening
round and they are in third place with seven points. Mark Jones lying second
with eight points. Catherine Johnson and in the lead with nine points. It's
Harry Shaw. In the second round of counterpoint our competitors have to choose
special subjects on which to answer their own individual set of questions. I'm
about to give them five categories to pick from of which they've had no warning
until this moment. They are Roll Over Beethoven, Choral and Chorus, Musical
Freedom and Human Rights, Animals in Opera, and the Fantasy World of Bernard
Herrmann. Harry Shaw you're in the lead at the moment what would you like?
Musical Freedom and Human Rights please. And for you Catherine Johnson? I would
like Chorals and Chorus please. That leaves three for Mark Jones which are Roll
Over Beethoven, Animals in Opera, and the Fantasy World of Bernard Herrmann.
Roll Over Beethoven. We'll start with Mark Jones and your specialist questions
on Roll Over Beethoven. Originally released in the mid 50s the Chuck Berry song
Roll Over Beethoven celebrates the supplanting of classical music by rock and
roll. 2023 marks the 50th anniversary of the release of a cover version by ELO
which features an opening quote from which Beethoven's symphony? The Fifth.
That's right. Beethoven's music was given an electronic makeover in 1971 by the
pioneer of the Moog synthesizer Wendy Carlos. It was produced in collaboration
with Rachel Elkind for the soundtrack of a controversial film based on a book by
Anthony Burgess. After you've heard the scherzo I'd like you to name the film. A
Clockwork Orange. That's right Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange. Leonard
Bernstein often quoted classical composers in his works. The melody of which
song from the musical West Side Story nods to the second movement of Beethoven's
Emperor Piano Concerto No. 5? Somewhere. That's right. Here's an adaptation of
Beethoven's Piano Sonata No. 1 which provided a 1965 Eurovision Song Contest win
for Luxembourg. I'd like you to name both singer and composer. Poupée de son.
I've no idea. Poupée de cir, Poupée de son was recorded by Franz Gall and
written by Serge Gainsbourg. Beethoven's music continues to inspire every genre.
In 2012 when hip-hop producer DJ Premier teamed with the rapper Nas for the song
Regeneration they combined it with a 1787 Beethoven work based on a Goethe play.
Which overture is that? Leonardo? No it's the Egmont overture. For your next
extract here's the Billy Joel song This Night from his 1984 album An Innocent
Man. The chorus is based on a second movement of a work by Beethoven. Can you
identify it? A Moonlight Sonata? No I'm afraid it was the Patek, the Sonata No.
8. And finally in this Beethoven themed round his Moonlight Sonata has been
sampled on a number of songs including Past, Present and Future by the Shangri-
Las and Piano Manai by Alicia Keys. For the song Because by the Beatles John
Lennon was inspired to use the piece after hearing Yoko Ono playing it on the
piano. What is distinctive about its use in that Beatles song? No I don't know.
It is played backwards. That is true. And Mark Jones in that round you scored
six points added to your previous seven you now have 13 points. Katherine
Johnson here are your questions. Choral and Chorus the Hallelujah Chorus closes
part two of which English language oratorio composed in 1741 by Handel? Messiah?
Yes. Panis Angelicus is the penultimate stanza of the hymn Sacris Solemnis
written by St. Thomas Aquinas. The first section was set to music separately
from the rest of the hymn by César Franck. Can you identify which tenor performs
it here alongside the Vienna Boys Choir? Placido Domingo. That was Placido
Domingo for two points. The first musical appointment of the 16th century
British composer Thomas Tallis was as organist of a priory in 1532. There he
composed Misa Salve in Tamaroto his earliest known work. The priory is now the
site of a college where a stone gatepost bears a plaque dedicated to Tallis in
which Kent town? Dover. That's right. From Dover College let's head northwards
to a Cambridge College for a setting of Psalm 51. Here's the Miserere which
provides the title track of Clare College Choir's album release of 2000. Can you
name the Italian composer of this work? Gregorio Allegri. That's correct for two
points. Which choral piece am I describing? Inspired by the text of a William
Blake poem it premiered at Winchester Cathedral on the 22nd of December 1982.
Now a common part of church services especially around Christmas it is also a
set work for the Edexcel A-level music examination. No I can't think of that.
It's Valam by John Tavener. Well I think it's charming that's the first time
that's been said by a woman on this program. You should have heard what I might
have said actually. Music again here's the Santa Monica based ensemble Globus
with Scott Siskun and choir. Madre Terra is an Italian song for the ancient
goddess of the planet. After you've heard it I'd like you to name that deity the
English translation of Madre Terra. Mother Earth. That's right and finally in
this round the critically acclaimed acapella choir Accentus was founded by the
French conductor Laurence Eckelbe, widely respected for her work in choral
music. Since 1998 the choir has been in residence at the Opera du Rhin which is
located in which geographical and cultural region of northwestern Europe? It's
in Strasbourg. I'm afraid it's not it's Normandy. Oh thinking of a totally
different place sorry. Okay but don't fret because you did very well in that
round. You got 10 points added to your previous eight you now have 18 points.
Harry Shaw here are your questions on musical freedom and human rights. A song
written in 1984 by the British musician Jerry Dammers and performed by the
special aka Protested Against the Imprisonment of which South African anti-
apartheid activist? Nelson Mandela. That's right. Here's a song about another
anti-apartheid activist. In 1986 I compiled an album on behalf of Amnesty
International featuring major artists united by the theme of humanity called
Conspiracy of Hope and included tracks by various artists including Elton John,
Sting, Dire Straits and Peter Gabriel. Here's Gabriel paying tribute to one of
the founders of the Black People's Convention in South Africa. Can you name him?
Biko. That's right Stephen Biko. Two benefit shows I organized on behalf of
Amnesty at the London Palladium involved artists including Peter Gabriel,
Jackson Brown and Joan Armatrading culminating in a finale of everyone
performing a Bob Dylan song. It includes the lyric I see my light come shining
from the west unto the east. What's the name of that song? Times are not
changing. No it's I Shall Be Released. Time for more music. Here's Mary Chapin
Carpenter with a song telling the story of a young army soldier involved in the
slaughter of hundreds of unarmed protesters. The track is called Fourth of June
1989. After you've heard it I'd like you to name the tragedy to which it refers.
For June 1989 refers to what? The Tiananmen Square Massacre. That is correct.
2023 is the 10th anniversary of the release from prison of which Russian
feminist punk band whom Amnesty International designated women as prisoners of
conscience. No clue, pass. Pussy Riot. In 2014 John Legend and Common joined
forces to release the song Glory. Originally it was used as the theme of a film
about the 1965 Montgomery marches for which it won an Academy Award for best
original song. I'd like you to name that film. Glory. Thelma. That's right for
two points. And finally in this round Same Love is a song by the American hip-
hop duo Macklemore and Ryan Lewis with vocals by Mary Lambert. Containing the
lyric it's human rights for everybody there is no difference. It was recorded
during the campaign for Washington referendum 74 which upon approval in November
2012 legalized what? This try cannabis. No it's same-sex marriage in Washington
state. Harry in that round you scored eight points added to your previous nine
you now have 17 points. And so these are the scores after the individual round.
Ryan third with 13 points is Mark Jones in second place with 17 points is Harry
Shaw and our leader with just one round to go with 18 points is Katherine
Johnson. Anyone could win it's fingers on the buzzer as we enter our quickfire
final round. Things can change quickly a correct answer wins you one point but
you lose a point if you buzz in and fail to answer correctly there are no
bonuses so fingers poised here we go. In band names which word follows swing out
and Shakespeare's and Mark says sister he's right. On which album does Jim
Steinman ask on a hot summer night and Harry says. Bat out of hell. Correct act
one of which Verdi opera begins on a stormy evening with the people of Cyprus
anxiously and Katherine says. Othello. Yes the composer Rafe Vaughan Williams
was the great nephew of which English naturalist widely known for his
contributions and Katherine Johnson says. Charles Darwin. Yes Moon Age Daydream
is a 2022 documentary film and Harry says. David Bowie. Yes which British folk
band's name comes from a character mentioned in the traditional song Horkstog
and Katherine says. Steelye Span. Correct which Robbie Williams hit shares its
name with a song from the musical Gypsy and Mark says. Angels. No I'm sorry it's
let me entertain you minus one. Pink Floyd's album cover for the dark side of
the moon features which and Harry says. It's a prism. Yes which singer's 10th
studio album is titled 50 words for snow. Harry. Capeless. You're right the
country music hall of fame and museum is situated and Harry says. Nashville. Yes
he's right what's the name of the long horn played by alpine villagers sounded
and Katherine says. Alphorn. Yes on which instrument was the composer Johannes
Brahms a virtuoso. Katherine. Piano. Yes which Roxy music album shares its name
with a mythical place and Harry says. Avalon. Yes the popular song from William
Walton's facade was used as theme music for which tv game show hosted by Joseph
Cooper. The tv game show hosted by Joseph Cooper was. Face the music in 2023
which singer from Pontypriddh marks a 60-year career after starting out as the
front man and Katherine says. Tom Jones. Yes and finally press agent Oscar Davis
and announcer Horace Logan are both credited as early users of which phrase
spoken at the end of an Elvis Presley concert and Katherine says. Elvis has left
the building. Correct Elvis has left the building but we haven't before we leave
the building there's just time to announce the final scores in today's heat of
counterpoint. Third with 13 points is Mark Jones runner-up with 23 points is
Harry Shaw and our winner going through to the semifinals with 25 points.
Katherine Johnson. So congratulations Katherine Johnson we'll be welcoming you
back in a few weeks time for the semifinal. Warm thanks and commiserations to
the other two of you for a most enjoyable show. Join us next time for the last
of the heats when we'll complete our semifinal lineup for 2023. Until then from
all of us here at the radio theatre goodbye. Music. Counterpoint is hosted by
Paul Gambaccini and produced in Salford by Paul Bagiorea and if you'd like to
put yourself forward for a future edition of the quiz you can request an
application form by emailing counterpoint at bbc.co.uk. On radio 4. Our Father
who art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is shared by
Christians around the world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this year's Lent
talks six people reflect on the words of this prayer. As we forgive those who
trespass against us. Sharing stories of forgiveness fatherhood and finding
heaven on earth. Lent talks on radio 4 and BBC sounds. Begins this Wednesday
evening at 8 45. Now on radio 4 it's time for the food program with Dan
Saladino. In my work as a photographer documenting wars and conflicts around the
world. I see in some ways the worst in humanity. This is Giles Dooley whose
photography and writing from conflict zones is unique. My work focuses on
families and focuses on individuals. I'm not really a war photographer in the
traditional sense. There's not pictures of tanks and planes and explosions. You
never see a picture of a man with a gun. You'll see families. You'll see a
mother brushing a daughter's hair, a mother feeding a baby, a father on the
floor doing lessons with his kids. And in the last decade or so more of what
Giles has captured of the people and places around the world impacted by
conflict has featured another important character. Food. I realized that food
was so important for these communities. It was a sense of calm, a sense of
history, a sense of connection to the places that they'd had to flee. And I also
realized for me being around the horrors of war, food was the opposite. Because
war is about destruction. It's about breaking communities apart. It's about
hatred. And food is about bringing people together. It's about community and
it's how we express love. That may sound a sort of cliched thing to say food is
love, but it really is. This realization that food could be powerful in
storytelling followed an assignment in Afghanistan that transformed Giles
Dooley's life. During that visit, I was out on patrol with a group of American
soldiers from the 101st Airborne. We were ambushed and as we were running for
cover, I triggered an IED, an improvised explosive device, which left me with
two legs missing and one left arm. Possibly the worst day at work you could ever
have. Having gone through what I'd gone through, suddenly I had a different
connection with the people that I was documenting. And people often say, oh, is
it because you meet people who've lost limbs? Actually, it's not to do with the
injury. It's to do with the suffering and the resilience that people see that
I've gone through hell in the same way that they have. And that we've both kind
of come through it in different ways. And that connection is really powerful.
And again, that's where food's great, because when I turn up somewhere, my first
question would be like, can I come back tomorrow and cook with you? And there's
always a bit of surprise that I want to do that. But firstly, it's showing I'm
really interested in your culture, in your stories, in your food. It's a very
leveling thing to work in the kitchen with someone and then share a meal. And
then over that meal, often it'll be them asking me questions like, oh, what
happened to you? And that is incredibly important now in the way that I work.
And I feel much more comfortable, actually, with people who have gone through
very difficult things themselves, because the conversations are much more
honest. To understand the role of food in his work today, we need to go back to
the origins of Giles becoming a photographer aged 18. I was such an angry man. I
was not good at school. I'm dyslexic. I've been held back a year at school. I
had no academic place at university. I didn't even know my A-level results and
had no intention of doing so. He did, however, win a sports scholarship. I was
the world's worst boxer. I thought I was great. I remember my coach saying,
Giles, you take a punch really well, because at 18, you take everything as a
compliment, you know, and I was full of bravado. But sport was my life. That
potential, however, was brought to an end by a car accident. And it was while he
was recovering in hospital that a relative gave him two gifts. And one was an
Olympus OM-10 camera, and another was a book by the war photographer Don
McCullen. Now, I'd never seen photographs like Don's, these black and white
stark images of the wars in Vietnam, the troubles in Northern Ireland, famines
in Bangladesh. I was so moved. I was crying. And I didn't realise photographs
could make me feel that deeply. I decided there and then that's what I wanted to
do. I wanted to become a war photographer like Don McCullen. Still in his teens,
the passion for photography took him in a different direction. I was 19. I had a
few friends that were musicians. They'd come and photograph our gigs. And
suddenly I was on the road photographing bands for magazines. What followed was
almost a decade working with bands including Oasis, The Black Crows, Pulp and
The Prodigy, alongside fashion photography. And then, in the early 2000s,
disillusionment set in. And during a photo shoot in central London, Giles
decided to walk away from that world. I got increasingly cynical about celebrity
culture. The rock and roll stories I threw all my cameras out the window of the
Charlotte Street Hotel and I smashed on the street below. Reality is I'm not
that rock and roll. In fact, I'm more Radio 4. And I had a little hissy fit and
threw them on the bed. But I discovered that day that the beds in the Charlotte
Street Hotel are some of the bounciest beds in London because it hit the bed and
bounced out the window and smashed in the street below. And I spent the next
two, three years drinking, substance abuse, depression spiralling. I lost my
home. I lost my marriage, everything. And I could see no way forward. And I
remember the lowest moment. I'm really not sure if I wanted to carry on with my
life or how I would carry on with my life. I wanted a fresh start, but I didn't
know how to get there. And that's when I remembered those two small gifts. I
remembered how I felt when I'd been given that Olympus OM-10 camera and the book
by Don McCullough and how those pictures had inspired me. And I realised that's
where I'd gone wrong. I hadn't followed that path. I started working as a care
worker. I was doing 24-7 care jobs and I would never take a day off, maybe six,
seven weeks. And then I'd use the money I'd saved to fund me to go off and do
the trips. To capture stories of conflict in places including Bangladesh, Angola
and Sudan. And at first I'd come back and people would not be interested in
those photographs. But after a couple of years of learning my trade, learning
how to tell stories, those pictures started getting published and yeah, that led
on to where I'm now. In a refugee camp in Uganda, Giles met a South Sudanese
mother whose determination and ingenuity with the little she had gave him new
insights into the power of food. I don't think I've ever seen food down to its
most basic in terms of survival, where she was given beans every day. And when I
met her, she was counting them. I had this photograph of her hand with the beans
in it and there was two pots and she was counting out the beans for each member
of the family for that day. And you go like, that is absolute survival. But what
was amazing is even in that situation, she was trading a few of those beans for
a type of dried fish, almost like a dried anchovy, that she would add in with
the beans. Because it gave it some flavour. In fact, it also turns out it
probably balanced the meal in terms of proteins. I remember thinking that when
you just give people survival food, the dignity of food comes in controlling how
it tastes, the flavour, the traditions. All those things are so important and
I've seen that again and again and again in places where people are dying of
hunger. It was in 2011 that Giles and members of an American regiment came under
fire in Afghanistan. And as they ran, Giles triggered an explosive device, which
turned him from being someone documenting a war into one of its casualties. I
don't remember a sound from that. I think my ears had been blown out, it was too
much. I just remember a white heat being surrounded, this white heat, and I knew
I was in the air. I was weightless and this white heat and then this loud thud
as I landed. I could hear a bird tweeting, I remember hearing that very clearly.
I never lost consciousness when I was injured. I remember landing on my side, I
could see the tree above me, I could see my legs had gone. In fact, I could see
parts of myself in the tree above me and I really thought this was it, it was
going to be over quite quickly. I always remember the greatest emotion was a
sense of loneliness. It wasn't really a pain, it wasn't fear, just feeling so
alone. I thought I'm about to die and there was nobody that I loved or loved me
next to me. I was very aware of just my life slipping away and I just wanted to
be held by somebody I loved and be close to somebody I loved in that moment. I'm
in a muddy field in Afghanistan, I'm a long way from home and I just wanted to
be near somebody that I loved and that loved me. And that's the one thing that
haunts me from that moment. The medics were amazing, the soldiers on the ground
were great, they put tourniquets on. I remember a sergeant leading the patrol
had a cigarette and he was kind of feeding the cigarette into my mouth because
obviously I couldn't hold it. And it was almost like a scene from a film and
you're watching these helicopters coming into the valley to pick me up. Very
clearly remember all of that. I got to Kandahar, which is the military base and
that's when I was put into an induced coma and I woke up three days later in
Birmingham in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. That was the terrifying moment
because I woke up and I wanted to scream. I was like, where am I? I didn't know
which country I was in. You know, intensive care units, bright lights, people
rushing around, bleeps going off everywhere, no context of time or there's no
windows. And I realized I couldn't speak because I had tubes in my mouth, into
my throat, in my nose. I couldn't sit up. I couldn't move my body. I couldn't
move my body. I couldn't move my body. I couldn't move my body, my throat, in my
nose. I couldn't sit up. My one remaining hand was in a plaster cast and I
couldn't move it. Very soon I realized the only bodily function I had was
blinking. And in fact, that would be the same for the next 46 days. And 46 days
I spent in intensive care. On two occasions, my family was calling in to say
their goodbyes and all I could do was blink. And I remember at first it was like
being thrown in the freezing cold ocean. Like I'm in a panic. I can't think
straight. And I soon realized I was going to have to build a world in my head
and build projects. And one of them was going through food and remembering some
of my favorite meals and then trying to break down what the ingredients was and
how was that made. Because it was the kind of activity that was really good to
do in my mind. And so I'd think of stuff that my mum had cooked, but also some
of the best restaurants I've been in, like Tokyo or LA. And I'd think of these
dishes and I'd think, how did they construct that? What was it made of? I needed
projects like that that I could really put my mind into detail, into intricate
detail and think about. And that was what kept my sanity because as I say, it's
scary intensive care units. They're rushing around, bleeps going off. And 46
days is a long time to go through that. Following the 46 days in intensive care,
Giles would spend another year in intensive care. And spend another year
recovering in hospital. You spend two and a half months with no food and you
spend a year without anything apart from hospital food. When you actually sit
and you're able to enjoy food again with your loved ones, that for me is the
most precious thing I was ever given. I remember sitting in my sister's garden.
My sister's a really good cook. And eating that food, having a glass of wine. I
remember every taste like it was turned up. It still is like that for me. Like I
feel that's the greatest gift I've been given is that I appreciate everything so
much more. It was only after a further six months, Giles moved into a bedsit to
live independently. Psychologically, that was probably the lowest point I hit in
terms of what happened to me. Intensive care, it's hard, but actually you're
driven by survival. Then you're in hospital and you just have this
determination. I'm going to get out of hospital. I'm going to learn to walk
again. You have these goals and then you reach them and suddenly you go, I don't
have a life. I've lost my home. My girlfriend broke up with me. I got no
financial payouts when I got injured. So I was bankrupt pretty much. I had
debts. All the magazines, all the agencies I used to work for, none of them ever
called me again to offer me work. I'm in this bedsit, which was really grim. It
was a very, very basic bedsit. I mean, it was so small I couldn't even get my
wheelchair in. It was damp on the walls. It was not a good place to be. And I
could see no way out of it because there was no solution. And I could see
myself, this could be my life. And I would just be sitting there day after day
after day. I remember even once in my wheelchair going to the local shop and
some people getting angry because I was blocking the way and somebody spat at
me. And yeah, that was the lowest moment psychologically, because you're like,
how do I rebuild a life now? Part of the answer, Giles realised, was cooking.
Food was something that I could spend the day doing, that it gave me something
to focus on, and was constantly surprising people's expectations. So anything I
could do that made people go, wow, wow, you did that? That for me was really
self-empowering. From the bedsit kitchen came increasingly ambitious meals he
would share with friends, family and neighbours, including the dishes he'd
conjured up in his imagination during the two months in intensive care,
including ravioli with crab and cockles. Because when I was a kid, we used to go
to West Bay in Dorset. We'd stay in the caravan on the holidays. You'd try and
catch crabs off the dock and you never would catch one, but you might get some
crab meat afterwards. And then in the back of the car, I was always given
cockles with vinegar in those little polystyrene cups with a toothpick. And that
was such a taste. And again, this is what I'd learnt during those 46 days when
I'm locked down in my own mind, where I could only communicate by blinking.
That's when I'd gone back through all these tastes and memories to take me back.
Because I think there is nothing stronger in memory than food. You know, I'm a
photographer, obviously I believe in visual memories, but there is nothing
stronger than the taste of something to take you back to a point in your life. I
started an Instagram, which I called the One Arm Chef. And I would take
photographs of the food that I was cooking at home because people always have an
opinion, oh, he's got one arm, he can't do this, he can't do that. And so the
One Arm Chef started as a kind of way for me to show people, look, actually I'm
capable of doing things that you wouldn't be capable of doing. I think this is
the wonder of social media, is that I'd post something on Instagram and people
I'd never heard of would go like, oh, wow, that's amazing. Tell me how you made
that. It was good and important for me to rebuild that confidence in myself. The
confidence that would help him return to his life as a photographer. What kept
me going was the belief that if I could find a way to take photographs again, I
would have my life back, my purpose. So even when I was in hospital, I was
trying to work out if I could do it when I was in a wheelchair, you know, could
I adapt a camera to go on it? There was no question for me that I would find a
way to return to doing that work. And one of the early assignments was entering
the conflict unfolding in Mosul, Iraq in 2014. Pushing deeper into Mosul, Iraqi
forces are now entering the city's residential neighbourhoods. People would be
very aware of the terrible fighting that happened between the Iraqi coalition
and ISIS. And I was introduced to this woman. I went to her house, the
grandmother came to the door, she was screaming. The family Giles had been taken
to had been living on the front line for weeks. During that time, most of the
adults inside the house had been killed, only one woman and her four
grandchildren had survived. The house itself was like the set from a sort of Tom
Hanks war movie, you know, it was blackened walls, bullet holes in the glass. I
remember this big fan that was melted. It was really just horrific, the
situation they were living in. And it was just now this grandmother with four
children. The woman wanted to tell her story, but instead of just taking out his
camera to take photos, Giles offered to cook for her. And you can see this woman
kind of did a double take, and she's like, why is this guy with one arm coming
to a war zone halfway around the world to cook with me? And for the first time,
she kind of paused and smiled. The only ingredients he could find were a few
pieces of frozen chicken and some rice. In the first hour, we were just trying
to break this frozen chicken to get it in a pot. We were hitting it with a
hammer, there was like shrapnel from this chicken flying around the room. But we
spent the day cooking, and neighbours started coming round, and helping and
bringing things, and something maybe they'd grown, or something they'd found,
because obviously there was a lot of food scarcity. The children were playing,
they were getting involved, and then we all sat down and we ate together. And
that's the moment I really realised that food was intrinsic to building a
relationship with people in these traumatic places. It's a sign of respect, it's
how you build friendships. And then added to that, I came back from that trip,
and my own trauma from both my experience and what I document really triggered
off. It went very dark and I couldn't sleep, I was having a lot of bad
nightmares, I was really in a bad place, and I didn't want to speak to anyone.
In fact, I hadn't even told anyone I was home. And out of nowhere, suddenly, it
was probably about 3, 4 o'clock in the morning, I just started cooking. And when
I say cooking, I mean like making bread, hand-making pasta, ravioli, and it was
an escape. And I realised that that was my therapy. All I thought about was the
cooking, and I got lost in it. It gave me respite from all the nightmares of my
work. And so, really on that one particular trip, two things, building
relationships when I'm there through food, and secondly, coming back and cooking
and having that as my therapy. Giles will now only take a photo of someone who
he's cooked with or shared a meal, and these families have become friends. Those
families on WhatsApp will send me pictures of food when they're cooking my
favourite thing. And I love that so much because all those families have
something that when I visited, they'd been cooking, I'd say, oh, I love this so
much. They remember that. And this is like eight, nine years later. And it has
me in tears every time, because I'll get this picture of some dish. They've been
eating it, and they thought of me, because they go like, we know Giles loves
this dish. And when they send me a picture of that food, that's them saying, we
love you. It's a really deep, deep connection for them to be in that moment. Of
that dish, and then you come into their minds. Yeah, and that means so much to
me. And that's, again, the power of food. Another assignment was to Zatari camp
in Jordan, home to tens of thousands of Syrian refugees. I was there when it
first started as a camp, and first people arriving, remember, through the
darkness in the first tents. And I saw it develop into its own kind of society,
really. And the main street is called the Champs-Élysées. And along there,
there's now, you even order pizza and kebab places. And there's one particular
place I always go in to get all the gossip, all the men there gossip and tell me
everything that's been going on. And I was in there a few years ago, and this
guy comes out, and he brings up this tomato. And he says, you have to taste this
tomato. It's the best tomato in the world. And I tasted it, and it was amazing.
And he said, isn't that the best tomato? I said, well, yes. And he said, yeah,
it's from Daraa in Syria. And I said, well, how did you get it here? And he
looked at me as if I was stupid, he said, well, the tomato smuggler. And I was
like, what? He goes, well, the tomato smuggler brings it, obviously. And I was
like, what do you mean? He goes, well, there's a guy that was crossing from
Jordan through the front lines, through ISIS-controlled areas to collect
tomatoes to bring them back from Daraa. I thought this was the craziest thing. I
was like, well, they are great, but you get good tomatoes in Jordan as well. And
funny enough, whenever I told that story to Syrians, they would at first look
shocked. What, there's a guy smuggling tomatoes? And then they would say, where
are they from? And I would say, Daraa, and they go, oh, it makes sense. And
again, that's the thing of food from home. And in a refugee camp, obviously,
people tend to just be given whatever is available, whatever is given out by the
NGO. And with that, people lose their self-determination about what they eat.
And I think that's so important. Of course, hunger has to be dealt with. But
also, preserving those cultures, preserving those traditions is so important for
people's mental well-being. And it strikes me that you are traveling to places
that we now, unfortunately, only know through stories of conflict. It is one-
dimensional. And yet, you are going in and through food, seeing a completely
different side of that culture and that part of the world. My friend Klopotenko,
who's an amazing Ukrainian chef, one of the great eccentrics, a genius, I was
with him a few weeks after the war started in Ukraine, or the Russian invasion,
shall we say. And he said to me that he felt guilty because he said, when I
think of Afghanistan, when I think of Syria, when I think of Iraq, he said, all
I can picture in my mind is war. He goes, I don't know about their food. I don't
know about their culture. I don't know about their music. And he felt guilty.
And he said to me, I don't want Ukraine to be seen in that same way. Of course,
I'm showing the disaster of war. I need to people be aware of the horrors of
what's going on. But I also show the fact that people are trying to preserve
their culture. Food is interesting because if you look at migrant communities
around the world, what is often the last thing left is food. You go to New York,
you go to Chinatown, you go to the Italian Quarter, you go to those different
areas, often language is gone. I know personally going to the Italian Quarter,
most people have never been to Italy. And a lot of Italians would get very angry
if they said the food was Italian. But they are holding on to food more than
anything. That is what is central to culture. And so when people are displaced
by war, being able to cook something from their homeland, is amazing. These are
themes Giles has transferred from photography to moving images in a series for
Vice TV called The One-Armed Chef, in which he tells food stories from places of
conflict, including Ukraine. Have most people left the village? I first went to
Ukraine in 2005. I had been documenting the conflicts. I've been documenting the
conflicts since 2014. And food is so important there. And I've seen actually a
shift in the last 12 months where I think traditional Ukrainian food has become
even more prominent. It's a war of cultural annihilation. What Russia is trying
to do is to take away Ukraine's identity. And so I don't think I've ever been in
a situation where people eat and have dishes almost as an act of defiance. You
know, eating something is to say, this is our identity. And we're fighting to
keep this identity. So food for Ukrainians is incredibly important. You know, I
remember going and meeting this woman who was living right on the front lines.
And it's actually very hard to even think about it now because that whole area
has been obliterated and we haven't been able to contact her and I don't know
what happened. When we arrived there, we were walking to a house and actually a
shell landed really near us. And it's mainly the elderly are the ones who have
stayed behind in these villages. And she cooked, yeah, some soup and we sat and
we chatted. And I don't know, it's just there is something so important for
Ukrainians about their land, where they grow things. This tradition of it being
passed down through families. They're so connected to the food. And it's
actually hard just looking back on some of those people I met because of what's
happened. You cooked with that woman? Yeah, well, she cooked for me. When you
sit with someone and you ask them to teach you, like, how do you make that? Tell
me what's in that. You're really curious, genuinely wanting to understand it.
That relationship is respectful. And I think that for me is so important. You
know, I'm an outsider. I'm somebody that's come to tell a story. And I have to
show respect to whatever community I'm with. And that starts with that meal. I
said that I was an angry man with a camera when I started. I wanted things to
change. And after my injuries, even more so, I wanted to be an advocate for
people. But I got frustrated that some of the people I documented, nothing was
changing for them. In Rwanda, I was there, I met an amazing woman called Olive.
I was there to tell her story about the genocide. She had gone to give birth to
a child on the day the genocide began. She was in hospital as the news came over
the radio what was happening. She is Tutsi. As Olive was giving birth to her
third child, her village was attacked. Her husband, her two other children, her
parents, everybody was killed. She only survived because she was in the hospital
giving birth. The hospital was then surrounded. It was actually nuns running it.
They managed to keep them out for two days, but eventually said, we can't keep
them out anymore. The Hutu will come in and take you away. Olive had to escape
and leave her baby behind. By the time Giles met her, she'd survived massacre,
malaria, and years of exploitation. But she had been reunited with her child and
was rebuilding her life, which involved growing and selling potatoes as part of
a cooperative. Giles wanted to help, but knew that just providing charity wasn't
enough. This I probably learned through my injuries, because I had amazing
support, amazing family, but nobody empowered me to walk again. I had to do
that. What I realized was that I could not empower Olive and her friends. I had
to break down the barriers that were stopping them empowering themselves. And
that was my role. And the two things I saw that were holding them back was land
ownership and the education to use that land to its full. And so I set up this
project called Land for Women, where we would set up cooperatives for 25 women
on each farm. And what is unique, we would change the power dynamic, because we
bought the land, and I don't even like to say we give it to them. I call it
returning. 3% of the land in Rwanda is owned by women, but about 90% of the land
is worked by women. So they've always been kept out of the dynamic, which means
they can actually make money. They're now the landowners, so they choose to work
with us, because they can tell us to get lost at any moment, because the land is
in their name. We have a five-year educational program that requires everything
from banking, because they've never had bank accounts. We want to make sure
they're not taken advantage of. But we also teach climate-smart farming. So, you
know, that means we don't have just monocrops. And so we had a great example.
There was a drought about a year ago. Crops were down across Rwanda. Our farms
were producing 70% of their normal yield because of this climate-smart farming.
And they cooked a meal for me. Amazing meal. Every part of that meal had come
from their land. For the first time, there's no malnutrition in that community.
There's no malnutrition in that community. They even give away about 30% of what
they grow to people in need within their community. That's their choice. It was
such a beautiful thing. And sitting there eating that meal, sharing the food
that they've grown on their own land, there'll be nothing better than that meal.
I've had a pretty amazing life. You know, when I look back on it, from being on
a tour bus with Oasis, to experiencing frontline combat in Afghanistan, to going
through a hugely traumatic injury, to sit with princes and kings, all sorts of
things in my life. Honestly, nothing gives me more pleasure than cooking a meal
for someone. And when I look to my future, I see myself with a restaurant
somewhere simple, just producing food, everything made by hand. And even if I
just had five or six guests, I think will be my ultimate happiness. Is that a
real ambition? Absolutely. Yeah, that's where I see things ending up. Simple
produce, probably taking a leaf out of the women in Rwanda and learning from
them. Feeding people. Feeding people, yeah. So, the Food Programme was presented
and produced by Dan Saladino. If you are using an internet radio or smart
speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're
listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.