TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Wednesday evening at 8.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 10 o'clock. In
the past hour, the Energy Regulator has announced its price cap on gas and
electricity bills will drop by nearly a thousand pounds from April after
wholesale costs fell. But typical households in England, Scotland and Wales are
likely to see their annual charges rise from two and a half to three thousand
pounds as the government scales back a support scheme put in place last year to
help families with soaring costs. The four hundred pound rebate on bills also
comes to an end in April. Dozens of charities have called for support to be
extended until the summer. Rishi Sunak is meeting the head of the European
Commission in Windsor today to finalise changes to the post-Brexit trade deal
with Northern Ireland. The current protocol sees some goods checked when
entering the country from the rest of the UK. The Democratic Unionist Party
believes that undermines Northern Ireland's standing. Our correspondent in
Belfast, Chris Page, says the DUP is also worried about how much power the EU
will hold in the new deal. In recent days, senior members of the DUP have been
speaking a lot about what they call the democratic deficit. That is, will
Northern Ireland continue to be under the jurisdiction of the European Union in
a legal sense? So as far as the DUP are concerned, they want full power over the
laws in Northern Ireland to be returned to London or here to Stormont, not be
made by Brussels. Supermarket bosses are due to meet the farming minister today
to discuss the shortage of some fruit and vegetables. The industry and the
government are blaming recent extreme weather for disruption to imports. The
Secretary General of the United Nations has called on countries to do more to
help refugees and migrants. Antonio Guterres was speaking at a meeting of the UN
Human Rights Council a day after around 60 migrants died when a boat sank off
the coast of Italy. The sci-fi adventure film Everything Everywhere All at Once
won several prizes at last night's Screen Actors Guild Awards. Honours went to
Michelle Yeoh, Ke Hui Kwan and Jamie Lee Curtis. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, it's
time for Woman's Hour with Nuala McGovern. Hello, you're very welcome to Woman's
Hour. Now you may have seen today the Marriage and Civil Partnership, the
Minimum Age Act as it's called, comes into effect, raising the legal age to
marry to 18 in England and also Wales. This follows years of campaigning to try
and stop child marriage and also the harm that has been caused by it.
Previously, forced marriage was only an offence if coercion such as threats were
used. Now it is illegal to arrange for children to marry under any
circumstances. The changes do not apply in Scotland and Northern Ireland, I
should say, where the minimum age for marriage will remain at 16 for now. In
previous generations, many people would have willingly got married perhaps at a
much younger age than today. The average woman, she's in her 30s when she
marries now. But for some of you, you did do it back at 16. We're going to hear
some of our listeners' stories, decades on of course, about how it did or did
not work out. You can text the programme. The number is 84844. Text will be
charged at your standard message rate or on social media or at BBC Woman's Hour
or email us through our website. If you'd like to leave us a voice note or a
WhatsApp message, that number is 03700 100 444. Also today, we want to talk
about women and gambling. You'll hear the story of one woman whose life was
severely impacted by her addiction. And we're also going to look at a new
report, it's also published today, that researched how women are affected by
gambling and also the crimes related to it. That is an aspect that hasn't been
talked about very much. Plus, 60 swims with 60 people to mark 60 years. That is
also coming up. But let me begin with the story of at least 59 migrants,
including 33 women and 12 children who have died. There are dozens more that are
feared missing after their boat sank in rough seas off southern Italy. The
vessel broke apart while trying to land near Cretone on Sunday and a baby was
among the dead, according to Italian officials. There are bodies that were
recovered from the beach at a nearby seaside resort in the Calabria region.
We're going to speak to Caroline Davis, who's a BBC Pakistan correspondent. But
let us begin with Annalisa Camilli, journalist for Internazionale magazine in
Rome. Thank you for joining us, Annalisa. Good morning. Good morning. What is it
that you're hearing at the moment from the Calabrian region? The situation is
that 60 migrants perished, but we fear that thousands of migrants dead now, 80
persons was rescued. And but according to an HCR, the boat departed from Turkey
and was crowded with 170 people, maybe 200 people, among them a lot of refugees
from Syria, Somalia, Iran, Afghanistan, but also people from Pakistan and Iran.
I understand. Sorry, Annalisa, just to interrupt you, and I know you mentioned
the figure thousands at the beginning there, but it is hundreds that people
expect were on this boat. Yes, hundreds, hundreds, hundreds of people, maybe. I
understand. I mean, I was struck by the number of 33 women and 12 children that
have died. What do we know so far about them, if anything? Yes, we know now we
are gathering the first interviews. Well, psychologists of Doctors Without
Borders, Red Cross are speaking with survivors, with women who are inside the
centres, and they are telling that the people who has lost their lives, they
were families. That's why there are so many women, because usually in Italy,
well, most of the migrants arriving by sea are men, young male coming from
Libya, from Tunisia, from sub-Saharan Africa. But this route, this particular
route departing from Turkey, that last year was 50% of migrants arriving in
Italy was coming from this route, using this old new route. Well, they are
families. That's why there were so many women among them, women and children,
because they are Afghani and Syrians and Irani families that was in Turkey, that
was travelling in Turkey. They cannot reach Europe through Greece, because in
the last few years, the route that connects Turkey to Greece is most dangerous,
is very dangerous. And also Greek authorities are pushing them back. Therefore,
this new route opened, departing from Turkey, as I told, it's a route that is
more expensive in respect of the other route. But mostly families are using this
kind of route. They are refugees from Afghanistan, from Syria, that was based in
Turkey. I understand. And Annalisa, we also have Caroline Davis joining us, the
BBC's Pakistan correspondent. Good to have you with us, Caroline. We do
understand there were a number of migrants on board from Pakistan as well. What
are you hearing? Yes, we are waiting for an official announcement from the
Pakistan authorities to say exactly how many they believe are on board and how
many people they think might have died. Earlier, they released an announcement
from the foreign office here saying that they were trying to establish contact
with families of the victims. Most of them, they believe, are from the Gujarat
district in Punjab. Now, that is an area that is quite common to have human
trafficking. That is an area where there were many reports of people being taken
from Gujarat and being trafficked into other parts of the world. But in terms of
the information here, it's still very patchy. We know that there are reports on
social media, photos being shared on WhatsApp as well, alleging to show those
who have died quite graphic images of the dead alongside pictures of their
passports or ID cards. And that is why some people are trying to identify their
loved ones. But it's still very difficult at the moment. Speaking to the
authorities here, they say that they are waiting for official confirmation from
the Italian authorities so that they can then continue with the process of
trying to identify and get hold of families. They've also said that they are
already starting and initiating an inquiry against the human smugglers
responsible. And they said that they have formed teams to arrest them. Let me
turn back to you then, Annalisa, the Interior Minister, Matteo Piantosi. He has
been visiting the scene. Is the research and rescue operation still being
carried out? Yes, the rescue operation is ongoing. They are searching for people
alive. But of course, the fear is that they can recover other bodies, other dead
bodies and not people alive. Because, well, the search, the weather was very
bad, is very bad today too. And the rescue operation was activated very late in
respect, because we know that Frontex, a plane of Frontex has seen this boat
hours and hours before they sank. But, well, the intervention of the rescue ship
was delayed. And the Frontex, just to tell our listeners, is the European Border
and Coast Guard Agency. So it's a government agency and people are trying to
piece this together of exactly how did it occur. But Annalisa, staying with you
for a moment, what is the Italian Prime Minister, Giorgia Maloney, saying?
Because she was elected last year partly on a pledge to stem the flow of
migrants coming into Italy. Yes, yesterday she said that she is shocked by this
shipwrecked. But basically, as the Minister of Interior, Matteo Piantadosi, she
said that this is happening because of the departure, because people are
departing and they don't, they don't should depart. But the point is that in the
coming years, starting in 2017, but her government has cracked down against, has
criminalized humanitarian boats and also rescuing boats. And the atmosphere
around the migration is very bad in Italy. Last week, the parliament approved a
new law against humanitarian organizations that do search and rescue at sea. And
basically, at the moment, there is no rescue boats in the Mediterranean. And
also the governative vessels are not operating like in the past. For example, in
2013, we had a big shipwreck in Lampedusa with 368 people from Eritrea dying on
the shore of Lampedusa. And then the government, the Italian government launched
the search and rescue, the mission Mare Nostrum. But since 2017, the situation
became very, very bad for rescuers. They were criminalized. And Giorgia Meloni
basically is continuing this criminalization against rescuers. Yes, and indeed
was elected partly on a pledge because it is popular with parts of the Italian
electorate as well. Caroline, is there discussions taking place between Pakistan
and Italy when it comes to the people that are leaving, going through Turkey in
this particular respects and then ending up in Calabria as this latest boat was
trying to do? So we understand that there are interactions, obviously, between
Italy and Pakistan and the authorities to be able to understand exactly what's
happening, who has been involved, but how much information is going between the
two, we don't know for definite. I think it would also be interesting to say
that the reports that are being shared on social media here are talking about
the fact that Pakistan families thought that their loved ones were going through
Libya rather than going through Turkey. So that is another point of confusion
about exactly what happened here. But yes, I think that the key point is that
many people find that they can't necessarily move on. They're hearing a lot of
reports about their loved ones potentially being involved in this disaster, but
they don't know for definite whether or not their loved ones survived, whether
they are among those who might have died until they get this official
confirmation through. And so there's a point of limbo for a lot of families
here. And Annalisa was telling me that an awful lot of women died in this
particular incident. We were seeing 33 women, 12 children. A lot of Afghan and
Syrian women were expected to be on that boat. Were people from Pakistan? Do we
know the demographic? I think it's really difficult to say without the
confirmation. The images that I've seen on social media have so far been images
of men, but that doesn't necessarily, of course, mean that there weren't others
who were on board the boat. But at this point, we still have very little and
confirmed information. And there's a lot of conjecture happening here among
social media channels, but also some more local media who are reporting on this
story as well, about exactly who was involved, exactly what has happened. So
still a really unclear picture from here in Pakistan. Thank you so much for
speaking to us. That's Caroline Davis, BBC Pakistan correspondent and Annalisa
Camilli, journalist for Internazionale magazine, which is in Rome. Just seeing
Angela getting in touch says, why is safe passage never discussed? The real
criminals are those who prevent people from just getting on a plane. Also, I
have been asking about a law that has come into effect today in England or
Wales, which is about getting married young. The law that has come in is about
child marriages and trying to stop children getting forced into marriage. It's
something that campaigners have been working on for a very long time. You may
have remembered some of those discussions. But we are also, in addition,
speaking to some of our listeners who have got married at the age of 16. And
it's probably a number of years on with some people that are getting in touch,
reflecting on that marriage and how it did or did not work out. So we are asking
you to get in touch with us. 84844. I'm seeing Jo got in touch. She says, when I
married, I was 16 and a half. My husband was 20. The marriage has been a
success. We're celebrating our 52nd wedding anniversary today. Another is my
friend set me up on a blind date, age 17, and her friend, he was 22. I thought
he was rather nice. It'd be lovely to go out with him. We will be married 39
years this 14th of July, Bastille Day. We have three beautiful children and
three beautiful grandchildren. So kind of two discussions that are taking place
there as we talk about that law coming into effect. But also some of you
reflecting on getting married young willingly, I should say. Let me move on next
to an area that perhaps isn't spoken about that much. A new report by the Howard
League of Penal Reform looking at links between women, gambling and crime. Women
whose lives have been affected by crime linked to gambling have spoken about
their experiences and also about how a lack of awareness among agencies at each
stage of the criminal justice system, from police stations to prisons, they say
it left them without the support that they needed. I'm joined by Dr. Julie
Treblecock, a senior lecturer in criminology at Brunel University London, who
was one of the researchers on this project, and also Tracy, whose gambling
addiction resulted in a 13 month prison sentence. Welcome to you both. You're
both very welcome to Woman's Hour. And let me start with you, Julie. The Howard
League set up this commission. This is back in 2019 to investigate the links
between crime and gambling related harms, as it described. Why take a look at
women specifically? Thank you. Yes, so we, through the series of the
commissioned research, there's been now three years of different projects that
have been commissioned. And I think the commission has done a very good job to
look at a whole range of issues relating to criminal justice, looking at issues
around policing, sentencing and also imprisonment. But through that research and
through previous research that's available, there's a real lack of understanding
about women and gambling, and particularly in relation to women gambling and
crime. So one of the things that our research tried to do was to really explore
that in much more detail and really to give women a voice about what's going on
in this area. And is there an aspect that came to the fore about why women
started to gamble in the first place? So one of the things that previous
research suggests and our research confirms is that some of the reasons why
women may gamble compared to perhaps men are often quite different. So a lot of
the women in our research report, you know, reported a number of different
reasons why they were gambling. But what perhaps they had in common was that
there was often a, what we call a constellation of different stresses and
traumas that was sometimes quite specific to women's lives. So women talk about
a range of different health experiences, financial challenges, problems with
relationships, sometimes quite controlling relationships, perhaps experiences of
domestic abuse. And, you know, sometimes problems at work and how these kind of
come together and, you know, in some respects end up driving gambling. But of
course, for those who develop a particular problem with gambling may then also
lead them to commit crime in order to fund that gambling. And what sort of
gambling? What are we talking about? So there was a range of different kind of
gambling amongst the women in our study. And that was one of the quite
interesting things that they often used a range of different gambling products.
Perhaps the most common ones were kind of electronic gaming machine kind of
shops, but, you know, essentially kind of bookmaker in the communities, but also
people going to casinos and increasingly also online gambling and online
gambling is quite a significant issue in relation to women. We know that more
women do gamble online. I want to bring in Tracy. Tracy, thanks so much for
coming on the programme today. What about you when you hear Julie talking about
some of the aspects of why other women began to gamble? What was your story?
First of all, thank you for having me here. The reason my addiction really
started was coming through a coercive marriage and a difficult divorce, having
to provide for two children to try and give them the things that their father
might have been able to give them, because whatever he did, he only allowed them
to keep at his house type of thing. So the odds were stacked against me from the
beginning. I had very little belief in myself or self-confidence. And I always
had the hope that there would be a big win, you know, that I could provide for
mine and my children's needs. You know, and that was always at the forefront of
my mind. What sort of gambling did you do? It was on the machine. So it was the
which is also one of the most addictive, really, because it's the fastest
playing game, as well as the in-sport betting and things like that, things that
are very, very quick. You get the results very quickly. And that was my point,
my play. I understand. And how long did it take you to realise that you could
have a problem? I always hid from the problem. I would refuse to accept that I
had a problem. It was only when my addiction and reality literally had a head on
collision. And I had to admit to what I had done to my employer that I realised
just how severe the problem was. And also because at the time that the crime
started, it's menopause setting. So this was also a very difficult, difficult
period you go through. And it's just as silent as the addiction itself. So it
was a crime that was committed because of your gambling addiction? Definitely.
Every penny taken went on this addiction. I understand. And they can be called
acquisitive crimes, Julie, that you have also looked into because the larger
ramification, the addiction in itself, of course, but then also how they might
then intersect with the criminal system because of crimes committed because of
the addiction. Yes, that's correct. So we were trying to really look at the
relationship with crime more broadly. So, of course, there is in our research,
you know, lots of women who disclosed having committed a financial or
acquisitive crime in order to support their gambling. But one of the things we
were also interested to look at was to think more broadly about crime and think
about some of the other experiences of crime that women may have. So, for
example, a few of the women we spoke to talked about quite coercive and
controlling relationships within the home, experiences of domestic abuse. So
essentially kind of experiences of victimisation that they felt were relevant to
them, increasingly gambling and ultimately going on to potentially commit a
crime themselves. So there was a kind of interesting dynamic and relationship
between gambling and crime. And again, some of the women that we spoke to
disclosed that they themselves, one woman talked to us about, you know, in
hindsight, how she herself had perhaps engaged in domestic abuse with her
partner because she obviously needed at that point to try and secure money in
order to continue gambling. I mean, a shocking part of your story, Tracy, you've
alluded to there that you were taking from a company that you were stealing due
to your addiction, but you ended up with a 13 month prison sentence. I'm trying
to... Go ahead. Sorry, sorry. I was given a three year sentence. I served just
over 13 months in prison. I understand. Five months on tag and another 18
months, which is coming to an end soon, on licence. And did you ever think when
you were gambling that it might come to that? No, no, I never ever saw myself. I
used to sit in prison thinking, am I really here? It's absolutely... I never
thought I would land up there and I never thought it would carry on for the
seven years that it did. My spiralling addiction was out of control. What about
when you were in there? I'm just wondering, Tracy, you know, when you meet other
people in there and that you're in there for a gambling related crime, was it
understood? Was there any help? No, absolutely not. There was absolutely no
help. The CJS and the public health sector are worlds apart, especially on this
addiction. There was no help. I was also there two weeks after I was in prison,
Covid struck. So the whole world was locked down. There was no mental health
help. Even though it was recognised that I needed it, I had to provide my own
help for myself. Oh, you mean by researching or trying to figure out how to cope
with the addiction? By looking into myself, by researching myself, you could
call it. We were locked away for 23 hours a day, so there was no real
socialising or looking at anything. It was all done from me. So it was the
nature I was able to see us. I was very fortunate to have an amazing window to
look out. I saw horses and open fields and it was amazing. And that nature
allowed me the quiet time that I needed to actually look into myself and find
out why the addiction had taken control and why I had allowed certain things to
happen in my life. And your understanding now is? My understanding now is to
bring as much awareness of the prediction. So let me turn back to you, Julie.
What are you looking for when you've completed this research or where are you
seeing that there needs to be changes? Yeah, thanks. I mean, we've made a number
of recommendations across the report. And I think as Tracey's illustrated very
well, there's a real concern through our research, but also previous research
that's been done by the commission, that there is just a real lack of awareness
about gambling at every stage of the criminal justice system. So many
participants talk about going to the police, telling them absolutely everything,
telling them about things that the police didn't even know about. And sometimes
almost kind of pleading and begging for some kind of help and kind of
recognition of the role that gambling plays. But at every point, as they move
from the police through to kind of prosecution and the criminal courts, and then
for those who end up in prison or under supervision, under probation in the
community, that lack of awareness and lack of screening and lack of
understanding about the role of gambling plays in crime continues. And of
course, because people aren't asking the questions about the role that gambling
may have played, people then aren't also being given the support. And I think
that's really important because it's got really, really significant implications
for people like Tracey, who are trying to rebuild their lives and recover from
the crime that they've committed. And of course, it's got implications much more
widely for society. You know, if we're not providing people with support with
their gambling and they come out into the community and those issues remain
unresolved, then, you know, we're not, you know, kind of ultimately doing what
we need to do to help people. And what about you, Tracey? I mean, when you came
out, then was the help there? Oh, no, no. I had to before I went into prison, it
was very difficult. I had to before I went into prison, it was 11 months. And in
those 11 months, I had sought help myself, which I got through the Gam Care
charity. And the counsellor stayed with me the whole way through until I went
into prison and then provided support for my husband, who also needed it at that
time. So coming out of the system, there was nothing. I already had it in my
mind that this is what I'm going to do. I'm going to share my story, tell it,
just let people know and recognise just how bad this addiction is and the
illness that it really is and the products that are so addictive and allowed to
be out there. How would you describe that addiction? I mean, about when you got,
if it's a craving, if that's the correct word, to go and gamble, even though you
knew it was a problem? You know, you're talking about a, I won't say a sane
mind, but you're talking about a mind that is in control. And you're talking
about a mind that is not in control. When you're in the grips of this addiction,
you are not in control. You cannot take a moment, as they say, to think about
it. It's not there. If you cannot use these terms with other addictions, drugs
and alcohol and all of it, you cannot use it with a gambling addiction. You
can't see the addiction and you can gamble all hour, day and night. But it's
hidden. That's why it's called the hidden addiction. It is, it's in you go play.
And today people walk around with casinos in their pocket. I did it in, on the
street. And there's, there's these shops are everywhere. I'm scared to go out on
the high street today because there's six, seven shops. You know, I thought, I
thought of you, Tracy, because I read your story a couple of days ago. And since
then, I've been walking around and every time I see one, I have thought of you
even before meeting you. And they are pervasive. There's no two ways about it. I
want to read some texts that have come in. Julie, perhaps you'd like to respond
to this. My daughter, 22, is addicted to gutches in games. It's a type of
gambling where you spend money to obtain a random item during game play. When
she was younger, she stole from me for this. She still spends too much time on
them. I wish I could help. What could he do? Well, it's a really good question.
I mean, there are, I think we found through the research, increasing numbers of
services that are out there. And I think one of, again, one of our
recommendations is about improving that visibility. So Gamcare is certainly a
really, really good service. And then there's many, many more kind of local
services that are providing useful support to people who are gambling. And I
think what that story highlights is just how gambling is changing so quickly.
And increasingly with things like online gambling, but also gaming, it's really
kind of starting to cause problems in many people's lives. Tracy, what would you
say to that person who got in touch? This is so sad. I've got, I've had my
11-year-old grandson. Tell me about stories that are happening within his grade
at school. It is so hard. People have got to get away from it. This is an
absolute, and I learned this word recently, and it means so much. This is a
pernicious industry that is governed, that needs so badly to be governed, but
governs itself. And this should never be allowed. There's no duty of care
whatsoever with this industry. And this needs to be looked at. It needs to be a
huge thing because so many youngsters, so many young men, women are taking their
lives because of this addiction. It is a serious, serious, serious addiction,
and it's not taken as seriously as it should be. And I do not have a response
from the industry today to some of the claims that you're putting forward there,
Tracy. But I take it that it's from your personal experience that you're putting
it across today. I want to thank both of you so much for coming in to join us.
Tracy, who's been sharing her story candidly about her gambling addiction, and
also Dr. Julie Treblecock, a senior lecturer in criminology at Brunel University
in London. Now, if you want to get in touch with the programme, and if you are
this morning, it's 84844, or indeed, at BBC Women's Hour on social media, or
email us through our website. I want to turn to new challenges. Maybe you've
thought about it. Maybe you've done it. Learning a new skill or maybe pushing
yourself outside of your comfort zone. Sarah Barnes decided to do that after a
diagnosis of osteoarthritis and coming up to her 60th birthday, Sarah set
herself the challenge of 60 swims with 60 people in her, yes, 60th year. Well,
the year is up and Sarah joins me now to discuss. Listen, first off, I believe
you're 61 today. Happy birthday. Thank you. Thank you, Niamh. And thank you for
having me on today. You're so welcome. And so what made you decide and how did
you come up with this challenge of 60 swims, 60 people in your 60th year? Well,
I'm a cold water swimmer anyway, and I swim every day in cold water. I didn't
want to be 60. I think basically I was very afraid of starting a new decade, and
it just seemed a very old decade. I remember my mom being 60, and I thought,
I've got to do something about this. I can't go into the year not wanting to
live it. So I decided to challenge myself. I've always challenged myself on
things. And I thought what I need to do is I was very worried about being alone
because I've just started being an empty nester. My son's gone off to uni, and
that scared me as well. And I wanted to connect with more people. So which is
why I chose 60 different people. And I chose the 60 different places because I
wanted to get out of my comfort zone and my little area where I am. There's a
lot of rural isolation where I am in the Lake District. So I kind of made
everything difficult for myself just to push myself deliberately. So where did
you find these 60 people? Good question. Not all of them were human. I'll say
that to start with. In Spain, I was in a river, swimming in a river, and I saw
this inflatable swan being played with by some kids. So in my best Spanish, I
asked them with lots of gestures, could I go on your swan? So there's some quite
funny video of them shoving me up onto this inflatable swan. And then I decide,
well, I'm swimming with a swan. Why not? 59 to go. And it pushed me. Yeah. And
there have been occasions like that. It's just evolved. It's been very organic.
But what about meeting all those people? What kind of stands out for you,
perhaps, is the most challenging moment during the year? I think probably
motivation. I did question myself, why am I doing this? Because it's quite a
lot. If I, you know, a number of weeks and so on, it's quite a lot to fit in
around normal life. And then the different places, just the fact of having to go
to different places. I decided that I could take one lake and different access
points. And if I happen to be at an access point I hadn't been at before, if
somebody came along, I would just say, excuse me, I'm doing this challenge.
Would you mind, you know, just paddling with me, sitting in the water with me?
And everybody I asked agreed to do it. You know, even non-swimmers took the
clothes off. And went in with me. I love that. I love that. I wonder, do people
say, you know, there's a lady down there and she might ask you to go swimming
with her. But it's good fun. Good. Did you make any friends out of the year?
Yes, I did. I met a lady. She's 80. She's called Elizabeth. I happened to find
her in a river pool one day. It was actually my mum's. It would have been my
mum's birthday. And Elizabeth just was in the pool. And my mum's middle name was
Elizabeth. And Elizabeth said, it's all right, I'll get out. You know, you want
to have this pool to yourself. I'll get out. And I said, no, no, please stay.
Please stay. And then I asked her if she'd be one of my 60th. And we've ended up
meeting again for swims. We've had coffee together. She phoned me up the old
fashioned way to say congratulations on the party. She phoned me up the old
fashioned way to say congratulations on the publication of my book, The Cold
Fix. And she's lovely. And it's just so nice. And it's inspired me. She's done
the Wainwright six times. And she started when she was 60. So there's a woman to
aspire to be like. Well, I'm wondering, you know, you've just turned or turning
61 today. Are there any more challenges on the horizon? Yes, I have. I'm going
to do one this year. I've just been told I'm going to have to have total knee
replacements, which I've spent six years trying to get over a previous operation
for osteoarthritis. So now this has knocked me back, I feel. But what I'm going
to do is try and swim in 61 tarns and waterfalls, but walk at least 20 minutes
to get to them. Because what I want to do is spend this year getting physically
stronger. And I'm going to do strength training, weight training, and I'm going
to challenge myself physically. I've met a lot of people. It's just to be as
strong as I can be going into my 60s. That's my challenge for this year. So
looking back, how was 60? It was fantastic, actually. That's what I want to
hear. Not a bad year at all. Well, listen, enjoy the rest of your birthday and
thank you so much for joining us. That's fantastic. 60 swim, 60 people, 60th
year. And I love this idea of the waterfalls in the year coming up, coming
ahead. And thanks so much to Sarah Barnes. Thank you. You're welcome. I want to
return to a story I was mentioning at the beginning of the programme, something
that so many of you are getting in touch about. Today, the Marriage and Civil
Partnership, the Minimum Age Act, comes into effect. Now, this act raises the
age of marriage and civil partnership to 18 in England and Wales. So that means
16 to 17 year olds will no longer be able to marry or enter a civil partnership
under any circumstances, including with parental or judicial consent. Now, the
changes do not apply in Scotland and Northern Ireland, where the minimum age for
marriage will remain 16. In Northern Ireland, parental consent is required for
those under 18, but not in Scotland. Ministers in Northern Ireland have
previously said they plan to increase the minimum age of marriage to 18. But as
you may know, with the devolved government not currently functioning,
legislation cannot be brought forward. But what is happening in England and
Wales today is a huge social change. The campaigners like Paisley and Mahmood
have worked for a very long time to stop child marriage. I was married at age 16
and it was a very difficult time. I was 16 and it was a really unique and
special time in my life. I was about to head off to college and I was coerced
into a child marriage. And this was to a man very much older than me. He was
almost twice my age, a pretty much complete stranger to me. And as I say, it was
such an important time in my childhood, in my development, and that hindered so
much of it, you know, my access to education and the opportunities that should
have been there for a young person my age. And about six months before that, I
had also seen my sister, Bernaz, who was 17 at the time, also coerced into a
child marriage. So I'd seen her go through it and then it was almost my turn.
But a very confusing thing to go through, something that no 16-year-old should
have to go through. So this law today hopes to put an end to stories like that
of Paisley and Mahmood, told there to our colleagues on BBC5 Live this morning.
Of course, we know that overall, the age at which people get married has gone up
considerably in the last few decades, and most people get married in their 30s.
That's the latest figures that we have. But we thought it would be interesting
on this day of change in the marriage laws in England and Wales to look back at
the experiences of some of you who got married willingly at 16. And so we asked
you to get in touch with your experiences. Was it a success or was it a decision
you came to regret? Are you still in that relationship or did it end rather
quickly? Many of you did send messages in, many of you continued to do so this
morning. But my next guest did, Judith and Jeanette, and they are here to tell
us what it was like to say I do at such a young age. All right, let's hear their
stories. Judith, why did you decide to get married at 16? And welcome. Yes.
Judith, can you hear me OK? I think you're on mute. I'm going to say you're on
mute. Give it there. You're probably being very polite for our previous guest.
There you go, Judith. We have you with us. My, my, that makes a change, not
being able to hear me. Yes, I got married when I was 16. And it was quite an
interesting set of circumstances. I'll need to take you through the story a
little bit. My parents were divorced when I was two or three year old, and my
mother did a sterling job of raising me as a single parent. And she met a lovely
chap when I was around about 11 who she married. And my stepfather suffered from
paranoid schizophrenia, which was really quite difficult for everybody, for all
of us, involved in that situation. And I did meet a chap who was older than me.
And I guess I saw him as a way of escape from a difficult situation. I left home
before I did my O-levels, my GCSEs. And at the age of 16, I found that I didn't
have any money, any access to money, and I didn't have any accommodation. And
the only way I could get either of those was actually by getting married at 16,
which enabled me to get into the benefit system and for me to receive a council
house. And that's 40 years ago. But that's how and why I got married when I was
16. And the marriage, how did it go? It didn't last. It lasted for around about
three years. And it wasn't in any way an unpleasant marriage. But I was just
far, far too young. And I feel at the time that I feel now there are far more
options available for people of that age who find themselves in difficult
circumstances than there were when I was 16. And for me, it worked. It provided
what I needed at the time. But it's definitely not something that I would
recommend or suggest to any other 16-year-old, because let's be honest, although
we do think we know everything at 16, well, I certainly did, you don't really.
And you are very vulnerable and very open to things not going well. I mentioned
there was a lot of messages coming in. One, I was married before the age of 17
to someone I believed was the love of my life. 13 months later, he walked out
and left me. I think we're too inexperienced to deal with conflict. Jeanette,
what about you, your story? Well, again, quite similar circumstances. I mean, we
both came back from difficult backgrounds. I think that the... And yes, we were
extremely young. But at the same time, we were in love. And if I'd have told my
16-year-old self I'd still be married 40 years later, I would never have
believed it, because my goodness, we had some really tough times. And I agree
with Margaret in the fact that I do think that kids these days aren't as
prepared, even though, yes, again, at 16 years old, I thought I knew everything.
I knew absolutely everything. I knew absolutely nothing. But in the same token,
I'm very much for this bill, because kids of today are not as life skill
prepared at all. And as for coercion, I mean, that's a whole different set of
complexities. Yes. You know, kids of 16 these days should never be able to be
forced into a marriage. I was lucky, as I said. It was your husband, Dave, who
messaged us, Jeanette. Let me read a little of what he said. My wife, Jeanette,
was a month short of 17 and I was a month short of 21 when we married. We knew
each other for 10 months and she was three months pregnant. Nobody gave us a
chance of staying the course. I'm happy to say we're celebrating our 40th
wedding anniversary in May. Three grown up children, five grandchildren. Not
saying it's been plain sailing all the way, but it worked out between us. What
is it? What does it feel like to hear those words? Um. It's lovely. After all
these years, you know, and we are still very supportive of each other. And we
still love each other, which is pretty remarkable in this day and age. So many
messages that are coming in. I saw another that maybe you'd resonate with you.
We married two weeks before my 18th birthday. We've been married 53 years in
April, but these laws would have stopped me. We proved our case. It doesn't
always work if you marry older. Needs to be done on individual cases. We must
prevent forced marriage, however. Back to you, Judith. You have a daughter. What
would you have told her if she came to you and said, I want to get married at
16? Well, I have a son. And if he came to me, I would have not wanted him to
have got married at such a young age because it's such a big commitment. So
that's you with the son. Sorry, Jeanette, I believe it's you that has a
daughter. What would you say? Absolutely not. But hang on, hang on. It worked
out. I know, but it's different. It's about individuals and how mature they are,
how they're prepared for such a big commitment because it's a massive
commitment. If my daughter had come to me at 16 and said, Mom, I want to get
married, I'd have done like almost to talk her out of it. Yes. What about, you
were pregnant, I understand, Jeanette, in the, for example, when you were
getting married. What did people say, friends, family? Was it expected of you to
get married? No. Well, I say no, but there was still a certain stigma about
being, going back 40 years, about being an unmarried mother. But it was a very
different time. I used to go to maternity appointments and they used to call me
Mrs. Dale, which was my maiden name initially. Because, you know, that's the way
it was then. Whereas now, I mean, so much has changed. But yeah, friends and
family. We didn't tell too many people initially. I told my parents and
obviously that went down really well. Yeah, you're being sarcastic. Yes, just a
bit. But at that point, my parents went all modern on me and said, we're not
going to allow you to get married. You can have the baby and Mum will bring it
up. And we said, absolutely no way, we'd have run away. You would have run away.
Yeah, I mean, getting pregnant was not a mistake. It was an intention. And I
thought, because my parents were quite old fashioned, I thought they'd be
charging me up the aisle. We wanted to get married before we got married. And
what about you, Judith? What was the reaction? Everybody was really shocked. It
was, for me, I wasn't pregnant. Funnily enough, actually, my mother was, my mum
was actually eight months pregnant with my sister, the two of us, when I got
married. Everybody was surprised. Everybody thought it was really quite
irrational. I lost contact with my friends at school. It was a really odd thing
to do. I'd been very clever at school. It was anticipated that I'd go on to
university or at least to go on and do my A-levels. And I wasn't in a position
to do that. So for me, I felt like it took me outwith of my normal group of
family and friends and set me up in a very different life. Now, I was very lucky
to be surrounded by some very good friends and some very good people who have
kept me clear in my life and seen me become successful. And but it was it was a
really odd decision. Not one of my school friends attended my wedding. Oh, I
think that's quite telling, isn't it? Absolutely. I was an outcast. That's how
it felt. I mean, gosh, that word's just come to me. But that is how I felt. I
was an outcast. I had done something outrageously difficult. To leave home
before my A-levels at that time was outrageous in itself. But to then to go on,
get married and not be pregnant, why would anybody do that? And I'll be honest
with you, when you reflect back, when I look at my class at school, I was clever
at school. I was in the top class. Everybody else in my class at school came
from private houses and had more financially than I did. And and therefore, I
don't think they were able to quite understand the situation I found myself in.
And at the time, mental illness and mental health was completely just not talked
about. It really was challenging. I saw one more message that came in just to
read to you. I was married at 17 because I was pregnant and escaping parental
divorce problems. I was married for 16 years, but only because I was seconded
abroad and wasn't able to take my two children out of the country without their
father's permission. The marriage was physically and emotionally violent. I
managed to escape when on leave in the UK and both my girls were in boarding
school. I was alone for 16 years, but have since been married for 32 years to a
lovely man. And our listeners seem to split down among those that it was a short
marriage and they got out or some of these that they felt coerced into it in
some ways as well, not in a way that's been talked about today in the news, but
in the sense of that they didn't feel they had another option. And then others,
many getting in touch to say that they've been married for a very long time.
Margaret saying, I was 17 when I married my husband of 23 years of age. 61 years
ago, we worked together for 42 years. A lot of give and take from us both. We
laugh together and do things for each other and watch out for one another. And
we hope to carry on for a few more years, God willing. Jeanette, you're
celebrating your 40th wedding anniversary this year. What are the plans and what
is the secret to a happy marriage? I think all of the last message you read out,
all of the above, you know, a lot of give and take and listening to each other
and just being there for each other, being supportive. And as I said, it was I
didn't intend 40 years ago to still be here, but hey, we're still here. Well,
happy upcoming anniversary to you. And thanks so much to yourself and also to
Judith for joining us and to all the listeners who got in touch. I want to
return to Afghanistan next. The Taliban's severe restrictions on women's rights
in the country, they're having a negative impact on the already struggling
economy. That's the conclusion of a study by the International Crisis Group, an
independent organisation that works on conflict and policy. And since women were
barred from university education and work, both in offices, donor funds have
become less likely to be invested in the country. There's many Western
politicians fear their voters will not accept the idea of their taxes helping a
country ruled by the Taliban, according to the researchers. I'm joined with the
BBC's Zarghuna Kargar to discuss a little bit further. Welcome, Zarghuna. How
can you get donors and donor money back into Afghanistan without empowering the
Taliban? That's what I was just speaking to Afghans before I came to the studio
to just get a latest update. And I was saying, like, how is that possible? And
some were telling me, like, we would like to tell the international community,
do not make the mistake that was made 20 years ago. Instead of giving aid, make
investment in Afghanistan. One person was telling me, like, there are women who
are, there were many, many women who were working in small businesses. They were
leading small businesses that were recruiting more women and more men. And they
have stopped because there is no investment for them. So they were requesting
that kind of help from the base, not like just giving aid. And also in our
country, in Afghanistan, 43 million population, two in three people need
humanitarian aid. So at the moment, it's the situation is quite dire and they do
need help. So they are requesting help from donor organizations on daily basis
with food, with winter supplies, and also on long term investment, which will
help the people. Maybe not, it will be including the Taliban government, but
from the basis, it helps people in general. What does it mean to the Afghan
economy to have a labor force without women, particularly, I'm thinking the
sectors they were heavily involved in agriculture, education and health care?
It's struggling. It is in crisis. Many, many men who are now at work, they are
getting half of their salaries, what they are getting. And since the Taliban
take over, the country has got poorer and poorer. I was speaking to one local
shopkeeper. He said he does get goods in his shop, but there is no one to buy.
There are people who need to buy it, but they don't have money to buy it. So at
the moment, Afghans are really relying on their family and friends who are
living abroad and sending them some monthly funds from the countries like the
UK, or they are basically sharing their own monthly income with their families
in Afghanistan, or people who had some money saved and they are spending that.
At the moment, it's that kind of situation. And there were a lot of poor people
in Afghanistan before. So those poor people are still getting poorer. People who
were managing to get daily life ahead a little bit, they are still managing it
with the help of people who left or who were evacuated. Well, leaving is an
aspect I wanted to mention to you because we were speaking at the beginning of
the programme about that terrible migrant disaster just off Italy. A lot of
women involved were here, 33. They think many of those could have been Afghan
women. Yes. So they continue to try and leave? Afghans have continued to try and
leave. They were leaving before the Taliban came and during the Taliban
takeover, Afghans are desperately seeking new opportunities abroad. And as you
say, in the migrant crisis, Afghans have always been there. Unfortunately, it's
a tragedy for Afghan families. I know someone very, very close recently who
drowned in Greece and he was a family member. It's a tragedy that Afghans will
never forget. But those who get abroad, they do get a better life compared to
what they have had in Afghanistan. And just in our last 30 seconds or so,
Zarghuna, I was reading that some women are trying to defy the education ban by
secretly learning, whether it's on online universities or in secret schools.
Yes, women have continued that through history in Afghanistan, through the first
takeover of the Taliban. And now secret schools are continuing. But also they,
those schools need help. Those schools need updated education and education
material. So those kind of helps are a must for Afghans and the people. So even
if it's happening underground, so to speak, help is needed in those aspects as
well. Very interesting. Zarghuna Kakar, thank you for joining us. On tomorrow's
Woman's Hour, we're going to speak about the uterus. How much do you know about
it? Well, Leah Hazard is a practicing NHS midwife in Scotland. She has this
fascinating new book called Womb, blending the scientific and the historical
research with women's experience, all about this amazing organ. So I do hope
you'll join me for that on tomorrow on Woman's Hour. Woman's Hour was presented
by Nuala McGovern and produced by Sarah Crawley. Studio engineer was Gail
Gordon. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever
changing. What is this? Scooter! The order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight
years late. But the midwives of Nunatta's house are forever constant. You've a
home here now and purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be
with you every step of the way. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Coming up after the news,
Alan Dean goes in search of people from all over the world spreading positive
messages on social media. From the icy wilderness of the Yukon Territory in
northwest Canada, to a nurse in Nigeria, to a community theatre group in Soweto.
It's strictly good vibes only in today's edition of Don't Log Off. That's in a
couple of minutes here on BBC iPlayer.