TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Applause Beeping BBC News at 2 o'clock. Ukraine's President Zelensky has said
he won't rest until those he called Russian murderers were brought to justice
for the invasion of Ukraine. He was speaking to mark the first anniversary of
the Russian invasion. World leaders have been marking the anniversary. Rishi
Sunak led a minute's silence from the steps of Downing Street. The Secretary
General of the NATO Military Alliance, Jens Stoltenberg, told the BBC that the
alliance must continue to support Kiev. President Putin is not preparing for
peace. President Putin is preparing for more war, for new offensives, throwing
in thousands of new soldiers and acquiring more weapons, including by reaching
out to authoritarian regimes like Iran and North Korea. So our response has to
be step up and sustain our support. There's been little mention of the
anniversary in Russia, but its former president, Dmitry Medvedev, said Ukrainian
forces should, if necessary, be pushed back to the Polish border. Northern
Ireland's main political leaders have met the Chief Constable, Simon Byrne, to
send a message of unity after the attempted murder of a senior police officer.
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is in a critical but stable condition
after being gunned down in Oma. The police investigation is looking at dissident
Republicans with a focus on the new IRA. Junior doctors in England are to walk
out for three days from the 13th to the 15th of March in a dispute over pay. The
government called the move disappointing. The SNP says all of the candidates
running to become the party's next leader and Scottish First Minister have
enough support to run. Three MSPs are campaigning for the job, Holyrood's Health
Secretary Hamza Yousaf, the Finance Secretary Kate Forbes and the former
Community Safety Minister Ash Regan. The publisher Puffin says it will release
what it calls a classic collection of Roald Dahl's books, alongside the versions
edited to remove certain potentially offensive words. Puffin says the 17 titles
will include archive material. BBC News. We have drama. At a quarter past,
Charlie has an experience that defies explanation and Sarah's fate is revealed.
He went in search of a fabled gateway to another dimension, but what happened?
The incident at Ong's Hat continues at 2.15. For now, it's the Archers and
Brookfield is giving their B&B a test run, but will Ms Pectoragool be the
perfect guest? She'll be arriving soon. Our first official booking. Ms
Pectoragool. Our first mock official booking, aka from Mrs Linda Snell. We
should sort out our online bookings. Let's walk before we can run, shall we?
It's not too difficult. We just create a web page like we have with the events
barn. In fact, it can probably be added to that. After carving. That's warmed me
up nicely. Dad! What? I hope you're going to wash that up. I'm regretting this
already. Hardly. It's a brilliant idea, a live, full test of the B&B before it's
up and running. We all need to make sure she has a brilliant experience. Right.
So is this where you roll out the red carpet? Sarcasm is the lowest form of wit.
She's not charging us for her time. She's taken a whole day and a half out of
her schedule. Well, we're not going to pay her for a night in a clean bed and
breakfast made for her. Dad! What? They're for the guests. There's a pile of
them. She's not going to miss one biscuit. Honestly, you'd think we're expecting
a houseful, not one person. This has to go really well. She's a perfectionist.
Or just fussy. You asked her to help. Don't I know it? All rise. Behave
yourself. Oh, Brian. This is lovely. We weren't expecting canopies. Well, truth
be told, Alice and Nolotando have been looking out for me. I told them I was
having you over and they came to make sure I did Jenny proud. We brought some
wine. Shall I go and put them in the fridge? Of course. You know where you're
going? Yeah. Kirsty, why don't you pour yourself a drink? OK, yeah, thanks.
Hello? Hi, Dad. I'm just checking in. Is everything OK? Yes, yes. They've just
arrived. Oh, good. Did I remember to leave the instructions for the oven on the
fridge? Yes. Yeah, I've been following them to the letter. OK, good. I'm so
sorry I couldn't be there to help tonight, but I have some business to discuss
with Aunty Lillian. Oh, don't worry. We'll be fine. No, yeah, of course you
will. I take it she hasn't thawed yet? Well, I'm sure she will in good time.
Yes. And pigs might fly. Well, you just enjoy your dinner and I'll see if I can
pop round later to help the clear up. OK, I'll see you later. Bye, Lily. Love
you. Bye. Bye. Everything all right? Yes, yeah, that was Alice. She's worried
I'll get the oven settings wrong. Oh, she's just looking out for her dad. Who
needs looking out for? Listen, I did want to say to you both again I'm so sorry
for falling asleep in your armchair. Oh, no, Brian. Oh, just don't say another
word about it. Anyway, today is about giving you a thank you dinner like Jenny
would. So I'm just going to nip into the kitchen, check the oven's hot enough,
so make yourselves at home. I feel so bad. Yeah. Especially after what you said
about our deal. I know. So he didn't say who he lost? No, but it was clearly
someone very important to him. Still pretty raw, I'd say. You meet new people
and you never know what experiences they carry with them. So you think it's like
a family member or someone? Could be. I mean, he was quite annoyed with me. I'm
not surprised he didn't share more. I wonder who it was. Please, just keep it
between you and me, Kirsty. I wouldn't want him to think I was gossiping. Of
course I will. There's nothing to tell anyway. Well, yeah, but the takeaway from
the conversation was about, well, Brian. I felt terrible for complaining. Oh,
no. I mean, what if that kid in our living room is the only quality sleep he
gets? Well, from now on, he's welcome to settle in the chair and watch nature
documentaries for as long as he likes. I won't be stopping him. Agreed. Linda.
Ms. Pectigrew. Yeah, sorry. Actually, please call me Innes. Right. Innes. Is
everything OK with your room? It's very charming. Great. But there is a problem,
I'm afraid. What is it? I'm afraid I've got a problem. I'm afraid I've got a
problem. But there is a problem, I'm afraid. Oh, what's that? These
complimentary soups. They're scented, which plays havoc with my skin. It's very
sensitive, you see. I'm sorry. I was wondering if you might have anything
perfume-free that I could use. Yeah, of course. Let me just check with my mum. I
would have bought my own. Only this was a last-minute travel plan, and I keen
forgot. I bet that's easily done. Would you like a cup of tea while you're down
here? It's freshly made. I don't drink caffeine after six o'clock. OK. Would you
like a biscuit? No, thank you. Oh, it's coming down in buckets out there. Dad,
you've let Bess in. What do you expect me to do, leave her outside to get
soaked? She's already soaked. Oh, dear. Is everything all right? No. It's far
from all right. I'm allergic to dogs. Allergic to dogs? Since when? Tissue,
please. Here you go. Thank you. There was nothing in the details that said you
had dogs. I'm afraid I've got a problem. I'm afraid I've got a problem. I'm
afraid I've got a problem. I'm afraid I've got a problem. I'm afraid I've got a
problem. I'm afraid I've got a problem. It's a farm. Sorry, I'll take her out.
There was no mention of dogs inside the house. Come on, Bess. Come on, girl.
She's got a dog herself. Correction, David. I gather Linda Snell has a dog. Your
guest, Enis. Enis? Enis does not. Are you going to get on board with what we're
doing or not? Are you serious? I am gravely serious. And a serious dog. And a
serious dog. And a serious dog. I'm not going to let you down. I'm not going to
let you down. I'm not going to let you down. I'm gravely serious. And a serious
allergic reaction of a guest is no laughing matter. Into the living room with
you. Good girl. Sorry, she's gone now. As am I. If you could please put the
replacement soaps in the bathroom before morning. Yep, I will. Yep, I will.
Thank you. It's my own fault for not double-checking when Alice called.
Honestly, Brian, it's not a problem. I put the oven up a bit so it'll be cooked
through any minute now. But the veg and potatoes are done and the beef
wellington's still not ready. Oh, it's fine. It all looks and smells delicious.
Oh, well, some thank you this has turned out to be with you having to help get
it served. Oh, that's a good sign, isn't it? Right, well, you both sit and I'll
get it out of the oven. No, no, no, Roy. Oh, let him. It would have been his
turn to cook tonight anyway. Well, you take it in turns, do you? Yeah, yeah, it
works for us. Doesn't it, Roy? Yep, certainly does. And this looks and smells
amazing. It all looks delicious. Thank you, Brian. Jenny would always have a
beef wellington in the freezer. Her own, of course. Not from a shop. So this is
one of Jennifer's? Yes, yes, it is. Wow. So come on, who can I serve first?
David, what on earth are you doing? No, sorry, I just had to use the carving
jack on one of the heifers. What? So I'm a little mucky and need to get changed.
You know, have a quick wash, Linda, if that's okay with you. In the kitchen?
Needs must. Apparently the family bathroom is to be kept nice for Innes.
Anything I can do you for? That's a tea towel. Well, what are you doing? I
thought Innes had gone up for the night. Dad? What's going on? Absolutely
nothing. I merely came down to see if you had some herbal teas, only to find
your father half naked, washing himself in the kitchen sink. Dad? Hang on, what
am I supposed to do when you have practically banned me from every other space
in the house? My clothes are covered in afterbirth. Yes, all right, too much
information. Is everything okay? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I had to use the carving jack
for one of the first timers. I was hoping she wouldn't need our help, but it
turns out the calf was back to front. But they're okay? Yeah, well, I mean,
we'll keep a close eye tonight, but they look fine. David, at least put on a
shirt or something. This is not an episode of Poldark. Give me five minutes,
Linda. Innes! I have been up since forever, and me and Ruth aren't going to be
getting much sleep tonight either. This is the busiest and most crucial time of
the farming calendar, so excuse me if I am catching my breath in my own kitchen.
There's the dining room for guests if you're offended by my long johns. Which
have seen better days. I'll put these in the laundry, Dad. Thanks, Ben. And then
I'll come and help. Maybe Mum can have a break? Um, no, it's actually probably
better if you stay with Innes here. Make sure she's got everything she needs.
Well, now you're almost dressed. At least I can look you in the eye. Ben, I
don't suppose you could fill a couple of flasks? Could you bring them up to me
and your mum before you go to bed? I'd better replenish the straw. Can't have
the calves on it if it's too damp. Sure, and call me if you need me, yeah? Yeah,
I will. Right, there. It's chamomile. It's supposed to be relaxing. Well. Er,
Innes, perhaps you could fill out the breakfast request form before you head
back up? It's going to take more than breakfast to wipe the image of your father
from my mind. Right, we've got apple strudel. Ooh. And a black forest gato.
They're both shop-bought, I'm afraid, but they come highly recommended. Oh, that
black forest gato takes me back. I'm so stuffed, but they do look good.
Excellent. Anyway, where were we? Ah, no, you were saying about the architect
you got working at Gray Gables, Roy? Yeah, Andrea. Yeah, she's been really good.
I was saying, the design for the new part of the building is really modern, but
somehow it complements the old part. Well, it looks like Ardill's done his
homework. It's a clever use of Gray Gables. Oliver's made a good call. Well,
he's obviously had to. We could all see how much business was struggling. Only
me. Oh, Innes. Oh, hiya. Hiya. You've just missed dinner. I only came to check
in. I've eaten with Aunty Lily and... Well, there's lots left if you want some.
Oh, no, honestly. Everything OK? Oh, it was delicious. Your dad's been the
hostess for the most of it. Dad, you've still got your apron on. Oh, yes, I
hadn't noticed. And neither of you have touched the pudding. Come on, help
yourselves. What are they meant to eat them with? What? Or on, for that matter.
The pudding's no good without plates and forks. Right, of course. I was just
about to get stuck in with my fingers, it looks so yummy. Don't worry, I'll get
them. I'm so sorry about this. Actually, we need a knife, too, or one of those
cake slices. Oh, that's just through here. I'll get it. I might just nip to the
loo, excuse me. Oh, it's a lovely meal, Brian. And desserts. It's OK, Kirstie,
you don't have to do that. What? I'm afraid if Jenny could see me right now,
she'd be mortified. Oh, that's not true. Oh, yes, she was a perfectionist. She
liked everything to be just so. And without her, I can't even serve pudding.
Jennifer liked everything to be just so, because that was her thing, not yours.
If you could do it all for yourself, she'd have had no one to spoil the way she
did. She did indeed. I suppose you think that's terribly old-fashioned and
awful, a woman looking after a man the way she did me. I mean, I'd give anything
to have someone like Jennifer waiting for me when I get in from work, instead of
Roy standing in the kitchen, making his infamous spag bol. It's a good job you
take it in turns. I don't know, you haven't tasted my pasta bake. It's been
lovely having you two over, Kirstie. Oh, it's been a pleasure being here. And
remember, Jennifer chose the life she had because she loved you. I miss her
terribly. I know. And I think if your Jenny could see you now, she'd be really
proud of you, Brian. Is it time for Lillian and Tony to bury the hatchet? We're
back in Ambridge at seven o'clock this evening. Our drama, the incident at Ong's
Hat, continues in a few moments. Then at 2.45, another primer on matters
financial. This week, Tim Harford will bring us the lowdown on jobs and
unemployment. Understand the economy is in half an hour. And Tim will be back at
4.30 this afternoon as well with More or Less. Of course, if you want to listen
to live radio, you can just say Play Radio 4. Music, radio and podcasts
available on most smart speakers. Just say Open BBC Sounds to get started. Drama
now on Radio 4, What Happened to Sarah Larson? and an excluding episode of The
Incident at Ong's Hat, The Other Side. Sounds like an experience. I just worry,
you know, if there's nothing and you've come all the way out here. I know. I'm
totally prepared for there to be nothing. That's what I want to find out. And
you won't be crushed if it's the latter. Sarah Larson was days away from meeting
Charlie Brill for the first time when this recording was made. A meeting that
would forever alter the course of her life. The pair had planned a trip to Ong's
Hat, a ghost town in the Pine Barrens of New Jersey, rumored to be the site of a
gateway to another dimension. Privately, Charlie assumed this was nothing more
than a fun urban legend. But Sarah had grown invested in the possibility that
the stories had some merit. I mean, at least it'll be an answer of some kind. I
don't know. Yeah, I definitely want some answers. Something concrete would be
cool. Yeah. Oh man, I'm going to get really excited now, Sarah. I haven't done
something like this in a long time. I mean, just like gone on a road trip with
anybody, let alone. It's going to be fun. For Charlie, the real draw was
spending time with Sarah, someone he'd gotten to know online and developed a
burgeoning, if one-sided, attraction to. Would this trip and its promise of
adventure and the paranormal be enough to forge a relationship? I think that
obviously, you know, this is about solving a mystery and finding clues and going
on an adventure, but just in case any part of that was also like, let's see if
we hit it off, I just wanted to be super clear that you seem like a lovely
person. I'm fully not in a place for anything like that. I just thought I would
barf that out in front of you. Okay, well, that's clear. But the more I learned
about Charlie, the less clear everything about him was. No, that is so, I get
it. I get why you would say that. You're not looking for a relationship or a
girlfriend. Who's got room for romance when there's legends to unfold? You're
not going to murder me. I promise, no. I mean, not on this trip. You're seeming
more dangerous. One of the things that I thought was very sad to find out was
that I do think Charlie went into this without evil intent. Detective Lou Stecco
is the lead investigator in Sarah's disappearance. I think it was a scheme to
make himself look good, but he didn't know that there is this subculture of
people who are not just playing out the Ong's Hat story, but they're almost
creating a real conspiracy around Ong's Hat and the Garden of Fork Paths. Stecco
would come to learn that one of those people, Randall Keller, had been posing
online as a figure in the Ong's Hat legend named Kit, allegedly the first
interdimensional traveler. Initially, investigators theorized that Keller,
a.k.a. Kit, may have been a stalker who'd followed Sarah and Charlie to Ong's
Hat. I am taking a road trip to Ong's Hat with a very new friend. But it
wouldn't be long before Kit was ruled out as a suspect....disturbing
developments in that story. That's right, Terry. Yesterday, the body of an adult
male lacking identification was found when hikers came across another egg-shaped
pod in the vicinity of Ong's Hat. The coroner would rule Kit's death a homicide,
and though his body wouldn't be discovered until after Sarah vanished, he was
already dead by the time she went missing. A strange case was about to get even
stranger. Hey, Charlie. What are you doing calling me? The schematic, the one
that Sarah had, it's a copy. And she tells me that you're the only one who knows
where the original is. Wait, is she with you? No. Where is she? Do you know? I
don't know where she is. I assume that you knew where she was. You didn't tell
her about us, did you? Kit was no stranger when he showed up at Ong's Hat. What
Charlie wouldn't comprehend until it was too late was that Kit had gotten
involved with individuals for whom Ong's Hat and the incunabula papers weren't a
legend or a hoax. They were real enough to kill for. Hey, Rodney, these guys are
after you. I don't know where they're going. Rodney, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. When
we last left Charlie, he was inside Sarah's home, searching for her copy of the
schematic. According to Rodney Asher, a group of men arrived in a black
Escalade. Three of the men went in, while one remained out front. I had been
through enough that I said to myself, this is where I get off. His first thought
was that someone had called the police after seeing Charlie climb through
Sarah's broken window. But this guy doesn't look like a cop. One thing I knew
was I didn't want to have any part in it. I just wanted to get away. Again, at
the time, I'm just reacting to what I'm seeing happening to me in that moment.
And if I'm thinking ahead at all, it's just, well, what can I do to help
Charlie? I'm not going to beat these guys up, but I can call the cops and get to
the bottom of what's happening here while staying a safe distance out of the
fray. After he tried to call Rodney, Charlie's abductors knocked him
unconscious. When he came to, he couldn't see anything. I could immediately tell
that I was in something mechanical. There was a vibration happening, and
everything was very tight. I could feel the shape of what I was in. My elbows
were against the side, and I just immediately could tell I was in one of those
eggs. I pushed on the hatch as hard as I could, and nothing happened there.
That's when I started to panic, and I thought, this is it. We ran the traffic
cameras in the area and checked business and gas station surveillance cameras to
see if anybody in a black Escalade around that time had pulled in, and
unfortunately they were just a dead end. We weren't able to track down a black
Escalade. For Detective Stecco, the phantom Escalade Rodney reported was
especially significant, given that the same make and model was glimpsed on the
night of the break-in at Sarah's home, caught on a neighbor's doorbell camera.
As for what motivated the alleged kidnapping, it seems Sarah's schematic of a
travel egg was at the center of it. No, that's not what she told me. I'm telling
you she didn't, so if you're saying that, then that means you don't know what
you're talking about. Okay. Stop f***ing around. People don't want the coffee. I
need the real thing, Charlie. How long is it going to take for you to get it to
me? I don't know where that is. Unbelievable. You are endangering Sarah. I'm
telling you. Give me the schematic, Charlie, or I'll send people to come and get
it. Much has already been made of the disappointment and rage many on the forums
felt after learning that Ong's hat was just a game. And in this case, I wondered
if Kit, in reality an ex-con named Randall Keller, had tried to pull a fast one
on the wrong people. What we do know is that whatever Randall tried to set up,
it backfired, and Charlie, for the rest of his life, he is going to regret his
part in this. On this particular day, we've been going nonstop, and the phone
rang. And it's Vince Barlow from Pemberton Township. Detectives Steko and Barlow
were sharing pertinent information on the case as Detective Barlow headed up the
investigation into Kit's murder. And he says, we had another attempted homicide
with one of those eggs, your boy Charlie Brill. Charlie, are you out here? A
search party was canvassing the state forest near Ong's hat when they discovered
Charlie. Charlie, Charlie. Rodney was there as well. I mean, he was really out
of it and covered in bruises and frantic. Charlie was lying on the ground beside
a hastily buried egg, sealed shut. Well, he swore that he had been trapped
inside of the egg. And again, I couldn't see how he would have been able to
escape from that thing. I couldn't even find a handle or a latch or a release.
Charlie's story of being buried alive inside an egg and somehow managing to
escape, which we'll get to shortly, is to this day a matter of mystery and
debate. There are those who doubt his story entirely, and for good reason, given
that there were many things about which Charlie was not forthright, the most
obvious being his relationship to Kit, a.k.a. Randall Keller. Okay, I'm going to
let you know what I've got. What do you mean? I've got a picture of Randall
Keller by an inter-burner phone that's been calling your phone number. I'm right
up next to him, and I said, Charlie, there's a serious problem too. We've got
security footage. We know when and where the burner phone was purchased, and we
know who purchased it, and we know how many times it called you, so we know
you're in this deeper than what you've told us. I didn't know he was Randall at
the time. I had asked him to just kind of surprise us while we were out at Ong's
Hat, and then he was supposed to go away, but he didn't. All right, we asked you
back when we searched your place. I had a lot to lose. At this time, I was still
worried about getting to spend any time with Brandon. Charlie was in a custody
dispute with his ex-wife. Brandon is his 4-year-old son. There were reasons that
I wanted to keep this kind of surface level. When I first was doing the
meditations and failing at them, I started to get very suspicious of the whole
thing, and I've always been, I guess, a little bit cynical, and so I didn't buy
any of this, but I was enjoying the whole thing. By the time I found Kit, I
thought this was kind of an experiment in group imagination. If you get enough
people even pretending to believe something, does it then take on a little bit
of truth? Of course, I never would have guessed how real it was. In the days
leading up to their trip to Ong's Hat, Charlie worried that all of the time he'd
invested in getting to know Sarah, in angling for an inn, romantically speaking,
would be for naught. When Sarah and I first started talking about this, I would
picture in my mind us going to Ong's Hat and it being a hike in the woods, and
we're going to come out of this with nothing and no reason to go on another kind
of adventure. So I thought, at the very least, I know it sounds crazy now, but
if somebody would just show up from this story, at least we'd have something
more to connect over and to go after. Whether or not a romance developed between
he and Sarah, Charlie was committed to making sure their day at Ong's Hat was
one she never forgot. Kit was someone Charlie had initially encountered on one
of the related Ong's Hat forums, Dark Planet Online. But unlike many of the
enthusiasts who swapped theories and shared experiences, Kit was there to make a
buck. Kit had this little side business on the forums where he would sell PDFs
of the materials from the incunabula papers. Such was the demand for the rarest
of the catalog texts that Kit may have actually done quite well for himself at
ten bucks a pop. Whether or not they were authentic scans is another question.
On the surface, however, Kit was exactly the kind of person Charlie needed to
recruit for his plan. Someone whose familiarity with the legend would sound
utterly convincing in front of Sarah. Perhaps too convincing. I see them giving
each other their numbers, and I'm like, this was a guy who was supposed to just
show up and say a few mysterious things and then never see him again. And I set
all of this in motion. So now I'm faced with a dilemma of, do I say something to
her or not? I was getting what I ultimately wanted. I was getting closer to
Sarah. And I know that if I say, hey look, actually Sarah, this guy, I set this
all up, that's the end. I will not hear from her again, and rightly so. Often, I
think back to that moment on the plane that Charlie told me about. He and Sarah
bound for Santa Cruz as she fell asleep. And her head rested on my shoulder.
When we landed, the announcement woke her up and we looked at each other. She
was so out of it, I don't know if she really had any idea that she was asleep on
my shoulder, but it was this nice little moment between us. After hearing the
truth about Charlie and Kit, I thought about Sarah as she drifted off to sleep
beside Charlie. If in fact she was letting down her guard, opening herself to
the possibility of something more with him, even something as simple as feeling
safe in his company, how far she was from the truth. And Charlie, sitting there,
a smile undoubtedly spread across his face, so satisfied with the way his plan
was coming together. If only he knew. Was all that was to come worth it for that
moment? My biggest regret is that I ever reached out to Kit, because that's when
I invited all these other elements into our lives. Traffic cameras in the
vicinity of Ong's hat captured video of a black escalate leaving the area on the
night of Charlie's abduction. The vehicle was registered to Peter Stingley of
Vincentown, New Jersey. When we served a search warrant on that house, we found
property of Sarah's. We found her laptop and we found her photographs that were
taken from her house in the burglary. And then we also got their computers. And
on their computers, we found that they had downloaded files and audio of all
these players involved in this, from Sarah to Joe Matheny to Kit. Stingley's
roommates, Brock Van Patten and Colton Thorne, were also active on the Forked
Paths and Dark Planet Online, which is where they first encountered Kit. Hello.
I am very interested in obtaining the suppressed illustrations from alternate
dimensions, especially the schematic for a transdimensional express. If you can
assist with this, I'd be willing to pay top dollar. Judging from what followed,
it seems likely that what Kit supplied them with was not what they were looking
for. The schematic from Sarah's home, taken at the time of Charlie's abduction,
was never recovered. With the arrest of these three men, there would be, to
date, no further discoveries at Ong's Hat. The egg Charlie alleges he escaped
from would be the last. Had these men, in their shared obsession, sought to
replicate the fabled experiments of the Ong's Hat scientists? Had all of this
happened because of a drawing of a schematic rumored to be the key to unlocking
travel to other worlds? And was there some truth in all of this, as incredible
as it seems? After all, Kit knew things about Sarah that she'd never shared,
unless somewhere she'd written down her account of a forest and a man who looked
like Joe Matheny. But for the men who burglarized her home, Sarah was the enemy.
They believed that Sarah, conducting these meditation classes, was just a front,
and they labeled her as some type of government spy who was collecting
intelligence on guys like Thorne, Stingley, and Van Patten. Analysis of the
Escalade turned up some forensic evidence, but not the evidence Steko was hoping
for. Though we found evidence of Charlie being in the car, we found no evidence
that Sarah had ever been in there, but these guys were meticulous, and you could
tell they had all kinds of cleaning supplies in the car, the car was obviously
washed routinely, and you could even smell the odor of ammonia in there, which
is something that's used quite often to clean a crime scene for evidence. These
guys have waived their rights, they've been Mirandized, nobody's asked for a
phone call, nobody's asked for a lawyer, which is odd. Suddenly there's a knock
on the door. There's a local high-priced Class A lawyer standing there, and he
says, stop interviewing my clients, they don't want to speak to you anymore. Who
knew that they were in our custody, and who knew that this was the guy to call?
Disturbingly, in Rodney Asher's account of what happened at Sarah's home, he
mentioned seeing four men get out of the Escalade, but there were only three
people on the lease at the home in Vincentown, and no evidence of a fourth
conspirator. Had Rodney been mistaken about what he saw, or was another perp
still on the loose? And it wasn't the only unresolved mystery. I still want to
know what happened to Sarah. Where is she? Where's her body? I think that Colton
Thorne, Peter Stingley, and Brock Van Patten know what happened to her, and they
just won't say. And I'll be honest with you, that pisses me off. If she's not
out there, if she doesn't hear this, if she doesn't contact us and say, hey, I'm
alive and I'm living over here, I sadly believe she's dead, and I wish I could
charge these three guys with her murder. Instead, they would stand trial for the
burglary of Sarah's home, for Charlie's abduction, and for attempted murder.
Charlie, too, would face charges. His lies had finally caught up to him. I
explained to the prosecutor that I believed that Charlie was culpable, but I
didn't believe that he had any malicious intent. And the prosecutor agreed, but
decided to charge Charlie with obstructing governmental administration.
Basically, it's obstruction of justice. And he ultimately went in front of the
judge and received probation for his part in this. For Rodney, the lies and
deceit were enough to permanently fracture his relationship with Charlie. And
still, there were questions. I did wonder whether this was some hoax that
Charlie was involved in, and whether they were trying to manipulate me into
making a film that would further their hoax. It less got me into believing in
the mythology around Aung's hat, and more about thinking that I didn't know if I
could trust Charlie anymore. I felt like a lot of this was being done for my
benefit. Joe Matheny, the legend's self-professed creator, resurfaced after the
arrests were made in Charlie's abduction. I rarely get a person accusing me of
all kinds of things, and the things that are happening to them are my fault, and
I'm invading their dreams, and you would not believe some of the stuff I used to
get. And I don't have people showing up at my door anymore. That's good. Good
for them, too. I have guns. Shocked by the recent developments, Joe wanted to
reiterate that he'd always intended the legend to be exactly that. What I wanted
to do was embed a legend using modern technology, and I think I did that. There
are kids that do legend trips looking for the Aung San Oshrom. There's YouTube
videos of them doing it, you know, and it's like, that's what I wanted, a
playful spirit of local legend. I mean, as long as there's always a place they
can return to, you know, and find that, oh, here's the guy, and he says it's a
legend that might not be a legend, I'm fine with that explanation. But for
Charlie, after everything, the legend and Sarah's experiences are very real.
What happened to Kit is what would have happened to me. She saved my life. She's
the one who at least gave me the framework, the tools, even if I didn't know how
to use them at the time. I mean, I get a second chance with my kid. I asked
Charlie what happened to him inside the egg. You'd think the knowledge that you
were about to die would make it impossible to relax, and somehow it was the
opposite. I felt this just warmth. I had to give up on what I thought was
possible. I started to think about what Sarah had taught me. Charlie closed his
eyes, steadied his breathing, and focused on Sarah's lessons. I started to feel
light. I started to see past my eyelids. Now we're traveling in our minds,
floating, drifting. When I rose up out of the egg, it felt different, and I
could tell it kind of looked a little bit like the Pine Barrens, but it was not.
It was a different place. It was a cedar grove. Charlie. And then I hear that
voice that I would know on any earth. It just says, Charlie, you're here. Here
in our world, without a body or a murder weapon, it's as though Sarah vanished
without a trace. But there is another theory about what happened to her, one
that Charlie's experience supports. I mean, I don't know that I'm ever going to
be able to reconcile what happened to me in that egg with everything else that
happened before and after that. I think these are always going to feel like two
lives that I've led. I would like to believe that Sarah got what she wanted,
that she found her way to another world. Because the alternative, I don't want
to think about. So how do I explain Charlie's story? Was it all a hallucination,
or the fantasy of someone consumed by guilt and regret? I think about what Joe
Matheny said inspired the legend of Aung's Hat, that when a collective believes
in something, it can manifest in reality. I don't think there's too much of
value, honestly, on the message boards these days. But there is this one small
group that has been sharing their experiences. To see other people who knew her,
people who took her meditation classes, they also shared the experiences that
they had of trying the meditation. They mentioned the ICS manual. Casey, Sarah's
co-worker and friend, also found herself drawn back to the forums. I can't tell
you if it's real or if it was just wish fulfillment, but a few of them did see
something. If the Institute of Chaos Studies didn't exist, does it now? If there
wasn't already a conspiracy to silence and control the truth, might one be
uncovered today? And had the ashram at Aung's Hat never actually existed? Has
someone since found a gateway to other worlds? Was it Sarah? Is she now another
part of this legend, someone to be whispered about with the same air of mystery
and wonder as Kit and her other forebearers at the ashram? A few of them have
been describing seeing a woman in the forest. She has a young boy with her. And
now that's her. For now, I believe all that remains of Sarah, in this world at
least, are her videos. If you would, help me now. Close your eyes and breathe.
We'll go there together. And for those of you who aren't ready, I'll be on the
other side waiting for you. This episode featured the voices of Avital Ashe,
Corey Brill, James Bacon, Rodney Asher, Joseph Matheny, Haley Taylor, Elizabeth
Seda, and Dean Wendt. A very special thank you to Ben Fineman. The incident at
Aung's Hat is created and produced by John Frischette and Todd Luoto. Inspired
by Aung's Hat, the Beginning by Joseph Matheny and executive produced by John
Scott Dryden. Featuring music by Blue Dot Sessions, Chris Zebriski, John
Frischette, Athenae, and Macrogramma. This has been a Goldhawk production for
BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC
Radio drama. The huntsman now purposefully directed his footsteps. Analyzing the
most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive. It's intensely physical.
This room. He just took your wallet, sir. You can go to different places and
tell the stories from different points of view. Dramatic Beats with me, Michael
Simmons-Roberts. Everything in British storytelling, film, television, owes so
much to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, tomorrow night at 8. This is
Radio 4. Now, what are the consequences of high levels of unemployment? A
question for Tim Harford in Understand the Economy. Welcome to Understand the
Economy, the podcast that takes you back to basics to explain how economics
affects our everyday lives. And today we're talking about jobs. You either want
one or you have one or you've already had one and you thought that's quite
enough of that. Thank you very much. I'm going to retire now. But that all
raises a question. If you have a job, you're employed. That's easy enough. So if
you don't have a job, are you unemployed? Is a student unemployed? What about a
retired person? This sounds like a job for the director of economic statistics
production and analysis at the Office for National Statistics. Unfortunately, he
agreed to explain it all to us. Here he is, Darren Morgan. So unemployment
covers all those who aren't in paid work, but who are available for work and are
actively looking for it. Employment means basically you are in paid work and
that's where the full time or part time. What about those who aren't in work and
also aren't looking for it? There's something called economic inactivity, which
basically says those not working, but they are not actively looking for it
either. Inactivity has been falling over a long period of time with the main
reason more and more women have been joining work. At the start of the pandemic,
that trend in inactivity quickly changed, though, and rose sharply. That made
sense, didn't it? As if you lost your job, there was little point in looking for
a new one when the economy was closed. However, it has continued to rise even
though the economy has reopened. And a key feature has been in those over 50 who
have left the labour market, either due to retirement or ill health. Darren
Morgan of the Office for National Statistics. I'm delighted to be joined again
by Richard Davis, professor of economics at Bristol University, director of the
UK's Economics Observatory and the author of Extreme Economies. Hello, Richard.
Hello. I wanted to pick up on something else that Darren Morgan told us, which
is the economic inactivity started to rise and has continued to rise since the
pandemic. So these are people who not only don't have jobs, they're not looking
for jobs. They're out of the labour force completely. So might be students,
might be retired people, full time parents. There are all kinds of reasons why,
but it is very puzzling that there are so many economically inactive people now.
Do we understand that puzzle? There are lots of parts to it. And if we look at
what happened during the pandemic, I think it gives us some big clues. So two
important ones. Darren set out the different categories of economic inactivity
are people that have decided to retire early or to not go back to work. So this
is people over 55, let's say, and we've seen rising inactivity there. And that
may be because people have re-evaluated what's important in their lives. The
country's been through this incredible shock. Many people have lost relatives,
been through stress and so on, and they've downplayed the amount they're going
to work. The perhaps even more concerning side of it is that people do end up
long term inactive when they are not seeking work because they're sick, because
of long term disability or because of long term mental health difficulties. And
both of those things are obviously going to rise after a pandemic. Richard, as
we speak in late 2022, there's a bit of a puzzle going on in the UK economy.
Unemployment is incredibly low. And yet everybody seems to agree that things
aren't actually going very well. So real wages are in decline. The government
can't seem to collect enough tax revenue to fund basic public services. And so
how can things be going badly when so many people who are looking for work have
found it? The answer lies in productivity. So you're right, unemployment is
really low. It's 3.5 percent. And on top of this, we have a vacancy rate which
is really high. So when unemployment is low, that means there aren't as many
other people out there looking for jobs that could replace me if I threaten to
quit. And so that gives me bargaining power with my employer. So if you're in a
job, you're able actually, because your bargaining power is pretty high, you're
able to kind of bid up your wage and to ask for a pay rise. So what's happening
is we do see people getting pay rises and actually quite strong pay rises. The
problem is that prices are going up much faster. Inflation is running at around
10 percent. And so the inflation adjusted value of people's wages is going down.
And so this is the kind of big picture reason why the economy is kind of in ill
health. Why can't people get even higher wage rises? Well, that's because wage
rises are justified not just because of your bargaining power, but it's also
justified by a more fundamental reason, which is are you becoming more
productive over time? How is your output in any given period going up? And
that's what hasn't been happening in the UK. So, I mean, to put it in simple
terms, if I can only produce 20,000 pounds worth of value for my employer, my
employer would be an idiot to pay me 21,000 pounds. I can have all the
bargaining power I like. I can demand 21,000 pounds, but the employer would
rather not employ me at all than pay me more than I'm producing, which is what
ties it back to productivity. And that's the sort of fundamental reason that any
business from a small business to a massive conglomerate has a justification to
give its workforce more pay and can do so without harming its bottom line. In
the situation you outline in which you're not becoming more productive over
time, but you're asking for ever higher pay rates, well, then something has to
give. Maybe the company has less profit or it has to cut back on investment, but
it's not sustainable in the long run. So the UK has its fair share of economic
problems, even though unemployment is near record low levels. But if you really
want to see an economic catastrophe, look at a time of high unemployment. Here's
Dr Victoria Bateman of the University of Cambridge with the story of a time when
unemployment reached appalling levels. On the 5th of October 1936, 200 men from
Jarrow, together with their local MP, Ellen Wilkinson, set out on a hunger
march. Their plan was to walk by foot all the way from Jarrow in the northeast
of England down to London with a petition. These men were angry. Unemployment in
Jarrow had reached as high as 70%. The northeast was reeling following the big
recession in the early 1920s and then the Great Depression on top of it in the
late 1920s and through into the 1930s. By 1934, the local shipyard, Palmer's
Shipyard, and the local iron company had closed down, creating serious job loss.
And families were literally starving. Families were hungry. They wanted to draw
politicians' attention to the fact that there was such a lack of work in the
area that people were being pushed into poverty. And so they took to the roads
and they spent the best part of a month walking town by town all the way to
London to present their petition to Parliament. So initially the marchers felt
ignored. They felt neglected. They felt that their demands and their month-long
walk all the way to London was being ignored. But actually this Jarrow march has
gone down in history and helped to draw attention to the plight of the north of
England, which was suffering really heavy job loss at the time. In the 1930s, in
the north of England, unemployment was about 29%. In Scotland, it was about 28%.
Whereas in London, further south, it was about 14%. And so that north-south
divide that lives on today can be traced all the way back to the 1920s and
1930s. Dr Victoria Bateman, Richard Davis, we've discussed our problem in the UK
now. It's not very high unemployment. It's very low productivity. So that means
that individual workers are just not producing much of value per hour. So why is
productivity in the UK low? Which, just to remind everybody, is the explanation
for why wages aren't going up. It's the explanation for why we can't all seem to
make ends meet, even though there are lots of jobs around. We do face this kind
of unique British productivity puzzle. I think there are a few things going on.
In the early years following the financial crisis, so let's say up to the
period, maybe 2015, one of the key culprits was the banking sector. We had this
problem of the credit supply to companies. And that's one reason people thought
that productivity was down. So everything from small businesses to medium-sized
companies were unable to access credit. And the UK's investment levels during
that period are not particularly high. So low investment means fewer new
computers, fewer newer machines in factories, and that's going to prevent your
economy from growing. Right. So that's the story up to 2015. The banking sector,
particularly hard hit, very concentrated, very big banks. And they're not
loaning money to businesses who could then invest that money in growing their
businesses, in buying new equipment. So come 2016, everything should be fine,
right? Yeah, the puzzle is why has it continued? Does the fact that the UK is
very reliant on services make a difference? I mean, just to explain myself, when
I think of the typical British economy job, I'm thinking insurance, I'm thinking
legal, I'm thinking advertising, the creative industries, computer games, film.
There are so many things that the UK economy does well that are services. And
then I think about, say, South Korea, or I think about Japan or Taiwan or
Germany. And I'm thinking making cars, making computer chips, making the
computers, making the phones. Also very high value activities, but a different
kind of thing, manufacturing, physical stuff rather than providing services.
Does that shed any light on this productivity question? I think it does. I think
it's important to realise that there's going to be a spectrum of industries in
which it's in some sense almost natural that in some you don't get productivity
rises. So the economist that gave this idea to us was called William Baumol. And
the example he used was of a string quintet. So five people playing violins and
playing Mozart's music to a known length of piece. There is literally no way
that you can make that more productive. You need the five people, you need the
five instruments, and you know how long the piece is. And so he set out this
idea as a reminder to economists that some things in the economy are going to
find it really hard to improve in productivity. And the issue is that lots of
the things that the UK does now, but also we think are going to become more
important, are sort of down towards the end of that scale. So think of the care
sector, for example. If somebody needs a carer, they need an actual human being,
a certain number of hours to be their carer. Well, that's highly tailored
individual care. It needs to be one to one. It's very close to the Mozart
quintet example. You can't suddenly ask that carer to be looking after two
people at the same time and expect the same quality of care. So this is why
something like the care system is going to be very difficult to increase
productivity without diminishing on quality. And very different at the other end
of the scale to your example, let's say Samsung in South Korea producing flat
screen TVs. And is there anything that we can do to improve productivity? So in
an economy like the UK, as we've discussed, the principal input actually is
people. It's people showing up for work and doing their jobs. And so the simple
answer to your question is we need to do everything we can in the economy to get
people doing their jobs as well as they can. And that means investing in them.
So it's everything from training for people, it's the machines they use in terms
of computers, those in the service sector, where we do still have manufacturing
and the UK still does have some very high end technical manufacturing companies.
We need to get them investing in bigger, faster, better machines. So it's doing
everything you can to get people as they're going to work to be as productive as
they can be. Richard Davis, thank you very much. So you might think everyone
having a job is a good thing, and I suppose it is. But it turns out that even
though lots of people have jobs, our wages still won't rise unless we make twice
as many things or just speed up that Mozart string quintet. Understand the
Economy was presented by Tim Harford and produced by Phoebe Keane. If you liked
it, you'll find their primers on inflation, interest rates and growth right now
on BBC Sounds. And Tim's back later this afternoon with More or Less, when we'll
be looking at how much taxes in Wales might need to rise to pay for increases in
NHS funding. And also asking whether 13 million women in the UK are really
menopausal. More or Less with Tim Harford at half past four. Humanity and how
the words of the Lord's Prayer have impacted people's lives. Lent Talks begins
next Wednesday evening at 8pm.