TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 podcast music radio podcasts listen on bbc sounds bbc news at 11 o'clock
charities have described the government's plans to stop people crossing the
channel in small boats as unworkable and vindictive new laws are expected to be
published this week stopping anyone who arrives in the uk on a small boat from
claiming asylum ministers say the law has to be toughened the head of the
refugee council enver solomon says the proposals will leave thousands of people
in limbo and won't stop migrants getting on boats we want to stop the boats as
much as rishi sunak does but this isn't going to work it's an attempt to try and
be even more draconian there's no way to detain people there's nowhere to deport
them to it's simply treating them as though they're criminals and it will be
hugely costly and will not solve the problem that the prime minister is trying
to solve it the unite union has called off strikes by ambulance workers in
england tomorrow and on wednesday to enter pay talks with ministers two other
ambulance workers unions unison and gmb have already paused their walkouts the
government says it wants to find a fair and reasonable settlement the greek
prime minister kiriakos mitsotakis has asked for forgiveness after tuesday's
train crash which left 57 people dead there have been clashes between police and
thousands of protesters in athens during the day with some demonstrators
throwing petrol bombs and police responding with tear gas a 59 year old station
master has been charged with manslaughter by negligence following the train
collision and appeared in court earlier a spokesperson for prince harry and
megan has suggested the couple have been invited to the king's coronation in may
the statement doesn't make clear whether the duke and duchess of sussex will
accept there's been uncertainty about their attendance since prince harry's book
spare revealed tensions with other members of the royal family in football the
manchester united manager eric ten hag says he's disappointed and angry after
his team were beaten 7-0 by liverpool in the premier league mohammed salah
scored two making him liverpool's record premier league school gold scorer bbc
news there are over one and a half million postcodes in the uk the patch on bbc
radio 4 we randomly pick one out so which one's my best clear the random
postcards and uncover a story there you probably wouldn't have heard about they
can't get the stuff to put them here let alone a new prison with 700 more staff
he said we know exactly what's up there we're looking for something that
shouldn't be up there the patch on radio 4 and bbc sounds when the police lock
these people up who looks after them well that's prison officers and it's all
done unseen on wednesday mornings at nine this is bbc radio 4 and now here's
clive anderson yes thank you hello and welcome to loose ends and a big week for
news so what's up apart from whatsapp this week brexit finally got done again
well certainly something or somebody got done elsewhere official policy may well
be changed because of the publication of thousands of matt hancock's whatsapp
messages in the daily telegraph matt i'm a celebrity get me out of government
hancock gave all this material to the investigative and famously indiscreet
journalist isabel oakshott policy changes likely brought in are to stop giving
confidential information to investigative and famously indiscreet journalists in
particular have nothing more to do with isabel oakshott quite definitely nothing
more to do with matt hancock this week on loose ends we have plenty to do with
the king of british rom-com richard curtis king richard is here to tell us about
this year's comic relief including his own appearance at the just for laughs
comedy festival in london this weekend for a more brutal style of humorist we
turn to the historian alice loxton whose new book uproar details the work of the
savage satirists artists and scandal mongers who tore into the great and good
the bad and the ugly in georgian britain a couple of centuries ago should gilray
crookshank and roland's be better known but does satire ever change anything we
have music from joseph and andrew o'neill is with me today who've you got for us
andrew i'm talking to ben bailey smith also known as doc brown about his new
podcast in shrink the box he and psychotherapist sasha bates psychoanalyze some
of tv's most iconic characters like walter white from breaking bad and fleabag
from um whatever that show is called excellent uh look forward to that we're
going to start with uh richard curtis cbe whose impressive career in comedy
includes writing directing or producing classic tv sitcoms and blockbuster
movies featuring stars such as rowan atkinson dawn french hugh grant many others
that's from the vicar of blackadder to four weddings and love actually and
richard is also one of the creators of course and prime movers behind comic
relief which has been combining comedy and charity good works and good gags
since 1985 and red nose day is back again this year on march the 17th so who's
hosting the telethon this year do you know for the first time not lenny yeah
he's doing a one-man play oh no we've got a blow to him not zoe ball addy
mcginnis aj adudu david tennant it's uh it's a good lineup the usual array of
stars you've managed to bring out yeah do you ever feel you want to to present
it yourself no it's i mean it's quite a safe job now but in the early days yeah
uh it was utter chaos and the worst job in the world and we always overran by
about an hour and hour yeah so no i'm very glad not to be in front of the public
well no i've had anything to do with it's always been a shambles and i've always
gone wrong it's been we did this thing where clive was meant to step from
channel four onto bbc one now lenny was to break through the wall behind me and
it we'd filmed it and everything and then and then it just we just overran and i
was the one who had to go and see sweet little clive was sitting there in his
suit and say it's all over it hasn't happened and you look like a fool because
you've stepped out of channel four and then there was a there was a moving film
from hold never mind i was able to sit and chat to prince edward for the rest of
the evening i was also wondering why he was there but but there it is now that's
that's going going back in time so so red red nose day this you've got yeah then
a new nose you've got we've got an amazing new nose so it's a kind of miracle
sir johnny ive who probably is the world's greatest designer designed the iphone
and the iMac and everything like that got it into his head that he wanted to do
a red nose i've got one here i know it's radio yes and so they actually had to
invent a new hinge and everything like that because it had to be sustainable and
it it's this kind of gorgeous plastic thing except it's not plastic oh it looks
like a christmas decoration like a christmas decoration and then clips onto your
nose and genuinely i would suggest i think it's collector's item yeah i think
there are um and go to amazon you can buy them on amazon everywhere yeah so go
to amazon and order one and you know it'll buy 10 vaccines and change your lives
but the point about those noses they're not plastic anymore they're made out of
exactly they're exactly well tell us about the money then where where does it go
who are you raising for because it's i i think people associate certainly i do
with sort of money being raised for africa yeah that is that that sort of
perspective is changing uh because i do think that people become increasingly
you know aware of how hard people's lives are here so you know in the uk we're
doing an enormous amount about cost of living crisis about food poverty about
mental health issues that have sprung from that i mean my take on comic relief
is you read the papers you think i can't do anything about all of this and
actually when you read about mental health when you read about ukraine when you
read about turkey when you read about food poverty if you buy that nose watch
that show give some money comic relief has got you know 20 years experience the
depressing there's no shortage of of places to spend the money cheeringly
exactly there is no shortage of places to spend the money there is no shortage
of people who really care and help and it's a brilliant thing like doc over
there who did one of our best things ever yeah i mean uh you know i met you in
the studio when ricky gervais and i were recording equality street it made us
laugh while we were recording it i couldn't wait to to get it out there in comic
relief but even before that you know from 2001 to 2008 i ran a youth club in
south kilburn and my position was funded by comic relief for seven years so it
gives you an idea of um it wasn't just it wasn't just africa now what about uh
just for laughs so you're you are appearing in that you are going to be on stage
are you chairing a discussion or presenting before i'm chairing a chaotic
discussion it's called comic relief the whole truth and anything but the truth i
think and i've got three of the sort of greatest victims of the chaos of comic
relief jonathan yeah ross who he presented for many years very very uh poor
presenting poor joe brand who at various times has dressed as a cheeky girl and
britney spears yeah sure um and then miranda hart who used to do these amazing
things where she'd go out every day and she once organized a wedding in a day
for comic relief and actually her first job was at comic relief it's going to be
i hope a really fun thing lots of clips i suggest you know as an alternative
possibly to church yeah yes uh for your listeners um go to the o2 on sunday well
your life is obviously is dominated by but you're in you know it's involved in
lots of philanthropic work comic relief and other things yes um i don't think
you've got religious beliefs what what motivates you to be trying to do good in
the world if i may put it like that you know i did go to ethiopia during the
famine in 1986 and the things i saw were so terrible and it kind of locked into
my brain the simultaneity of suffering that every day when we're having a good
time other people are fighting for their lives and then it's just kind of the
efficacy of it that's the thing you know the first time we did comic relief we
made 15 million pounds for a few comedians doing a bit of work one night because
look every day you see such massive injustice and you realize that people have
the power to change it so i'm obsessed by pensions because the pension companies
could make sure they're investing in wonderful sustainable things instead of oil
and pornography and arms you know and the un has a brilliant sustainable
development goals and they're probably better than the party manifesto so go for
it and we did remember we did live and make poverty history and we got 43
billion as a result of you know chris martin singing fix you that's not that's
not all of it but let's do it can i interrupt myself by the way and say just
very quickly in terms of funny uh this year's red nose day show is panning out
absolutely brilliantly of course you can we've got we've got i would be shocked
if you come on set actually it's a bit feeble this year honestly we've got you
know we've got a love island sketch actually shot in love island we're doing the
most brilliant traitors parody with you know lots of famous people in hoods um
i've revived tony robinson now in his early 90s to do a bedtime story as
baldrick so more black well what about your film career have you have you made
your last film have you are you actually we're just about to start another film
oh doing one with melissa mccarthy in new york in a couple of weeks but i'm not
i was a very poor director five i did well don't direct it then you can just
write it that's the decision yeah so somebody else is direct somebody who knows
more than the word zoom yeah uh is is direct i just want to go right back to
that my original starting point you see i you did used to perform years and
years ago with with roe and axton on stage but you've been a writer of gags for
other people to deliver gags and other material yes and what is it that makes it
satisfying to you to write the stuff direct occasionally uh but but you don't
want to be out there performing it yourself you know that you turned out yeah i
turned out to be bland as a performer um david bowie once came to see me and
rowan in a show there were only two of us and he came backstage at the end and
was introduced to me and had no idea who i was he'd been looking at me at my
face for an hour so no i'm very happy sitting in my room you get much more
talented people than you to actually bring them to life anyway so richard curtis
good to see you again uh red nose day is on friday the 17th of march thank you
for coming and telling us all about that by those noses by those noses by those
noses all right richard you made your point music now from the singer songwriter
something of a sensation joseph who's rapidly gone from recording single tracks
at his home in the suburb of glasgow to selling out that city's famous king
tut's wah-wah hut even before the release of his first ep joseph you've now
moved on to your first album permanent damage what are you performing for us now
i'm going to be performing just come home with me tonight yeah i've got
charlotte and james with me they're going to be singing and playing as well so
okay excellent okay then uh joseph take it away well pass me on the stairs you
didn't see me there pretend i didn't care i didn't care of course i still care
but i'm drunk in love to play the game i leaned in and you move away but you
linger all the same and i can't help myself but say well i know a kiss won't
make it right and there's no future left inside but i got no false open in my
mind but would you just come on with me to pieces of my soul burning in my
throat he's lining up your phone your phone your phone you're here but you're
already gone baby still i'm drunk enough to play the game i lean in and you move
away but i still love you all the same that's why i can't help myself but say it
well i know a kiss won't make it right and there's no future left inside but i
got no false open my mind but would you just come on with me to the heart has
finally left your eyes we once flew in summer skies and you were holding me so
tight will you just come on with me tonight but i know a kiss won't make it
right and there's no future left inside but i got no false open my mind but
would you just come on with me to the night but i know a kiss won't make it
right and there's no future left inside but i got no false open my mind but
would you just come on with me would you just come home with me would you just
come on with me thank you very thank you very much that comes with a perfectly
good video but if that's not in the soundtrack of a richard curtis film my
name's not ever freud so permanent damage is available now joseph that's j o e s
e f his tour kicks off at the empire musical belfast on the 10th of march uh
finishing up at the barrel and ballroom magalázaga on the 24th of march you can
check his website for all dates in between thank you very much excellent so
let's come to alice loxton who is bringing history to life for a new generation
of viewers readers and followers who've been seeking her out on history hit tv
youtube instagram tiktok and whatever else has been started up this week for the
more traditional market alice has now published a hardback book uproar a history
of georgian britain told through the lives of the artists and satirists who
lampooned the politicians and princes of the day as this country coped with the
king going mad american colonies going west france in revolt napoleon waging war
so i mean there's various artists you mentioned but chiefly gilray rolandson and
crookshank sounds like a halfback line for preston northend but but you think
they've been sort of overlooked or forgotten absolutely i mean these were some
of the most important artists of their day they shaped people's careers shredded
reputations and created myths that stand with us today you know the the idea
that napoleon was a short man came from the satirical prince of london from
these artists the victorians found these very unsavory and they were effectively
written out of history and so that's why i've written this book i was so shocked
that nobody knew about them when i was writing my university dissertation on it
but i decided to to write the book and hopefully this is a gilray renaissance so
the victorians didn't like him for all sorts of reasons because there's quite a
lot of rudery and breasts and and fat women and men in embarrassing situations
so it was the it was sort of prudish reaction absolutely yes um i mean queen
victoria ordered that some of the ones which had been collected by george the
fourth which she thought were absolutely filthy were actually destroyed um and
by the end of the century people were saying it would be absolutely out of the
question to ever publish these prints again even though at the end of the 18th
century they were the most popular things to go and see in london i mean the
crowds that gathered to see these prints they were described as veritable
madness and people had to push their way to the front with their fists so it was
a pretty lively scene at the day and then but then dickens was also a bit sort
of uh yeah words to say but but although one of one of the sons of these uh
illustrators and artists uh illustrated his book that's right so george
crookshank was the son of isaac crookshank who was one of the great georgian
satirists and george crookshank could not have been more different from his
father if his father embodied the georgian age he died after having a drinking
competition and you know drank a lot and created lots of vulgar prints his son
george was a pure victorian you know illustrated dickens's books um and
campaigned for t totalism so you know other end of the spectrum really yeah i
think people are familiar with these cartoons because if ever you've done any
history at school in a textbook there's always a cartoon with lots of labels in
napoleon william pitt here it's all labeled up in the originals anyway to to
make it clear what's going on that's right and we have to make those are nice
little you know islands of entertainment for some text you've got to get through
exactly i mean people are probably much more familiar with these images than
they realize um you know if i if you show people the image of the plum pudding
which has been used again and again by cartoonists today on the front of you
know things like the spectator or used in newspaper cartoons on the front of
your book and it's on the front of my book um but people probably don't know
that it's by james gilray so um i'm just trying to you know shine a new light on
on the name of these artists how did it work financially for them you say they
were the crowds gathering and so they made these drawings but did they sell
copies of them did people pay to to just look at them so they were engravings
and etchings and they were they were prints and they would be commissioned by
somebody who owned a print shop so one of them was a lady called hannah humphrey
who was a pretty impressive woman really yeah and she would commission the
prints and they would be on sale in the shop so you know wealthy wealthy people
could go in and buy their copy but they'd also display them in the print shop
windows in each each pane would have a print in it and so you know the crowds of
ordinary people who could never afford these prints could still see them and
that's what made them so brilliant that it was accessible to everyone they've
quite rackety lives something to sticky end with the alcohol and gambling all
the all the usual vices yes that's it yeah yeah exactly i mean you know there
are records of them um gambling away fortunes in um you know 36 hour worth of
gambling sessions uh or you know drinking vast amounts but they also suffered
from um depression and they you know some of them went mad um you know gilray is
tragic tragic figure really and that these great prints that he made would be on
display in the windows of london and he was in in his final years he was um you
know he went mad really and he you could see him in the print shop window above
and he actually um tried to commit suicide by jumping out of the window so it's
a very dramatic and um tragic in ways that's that's what this book is about but
you're generally interested in history and a presenter of history so what what
were you inspired by a teacher at school or have you always just liked looking
back to the past i mean i think i've always loved history uh i've always found
it very exciting but what's been most exciting recently and i think for new
historians is you know the world of tiktok and instagram and that's making it so
accessible you can kind of host your own channel yeah excellent it's a bit like
the music industry where you used to have to wait for a record company to to
find you now you can put it all out and someone picks picks it up you're doing
this with tv presenting but dan dan shows says you're the star of your
generation the next big thing in history so you're the new david starkey or the
new lucy worsley the new ajp taylor for radio four well i hope so you know i'd
love to i'd love to keep doing some presenting things well i mean you're i don't
want to stress your over you're very young so you've got a you could potentially
have a year decade ahead of you yeah i'm 27 so um you know hopefully but there's
lots of people like me you know i hope that there's a new generation of
historians who are embracing things in different ways jolly good so alice loxton
thank you very much coming up raw i put a say with a an exclamation mark in my
voice because uh you know uproar is out now and over to you now andrew ben
bailey smith also known as doc brown emerged from hip-hop slid effortlessly into
stand-up blossomed into acting then wrote acclaimed children's books and is now
inevitably and like all the rest of us doing a podcast so ben was it the same
for you did they come around in the middle of the night in balaclavas and tell
you you had to do a podcast or you get kicked out of showbiz yeah it was not a
million miles away from that you know i've just always avoided doing a podcast
that's for everyone's got one no one needs another guy hosting a podcast with
his famous friends you know and then i meet this psychotherapist yeah and she's
got the million dollar idea and this is it because it's not just two lads
chatting this is it's a solid idea what if we psychoanalyzed iconic characters
from you know legendary television shows you know and treat them as if they are
real people yeah and then and see what takeaways we can get and i was like okay
that's genius obviously pick the sopranos first because you know got that whole
meta thing of him actually being in therapy so she could analyze the therapist
and her tactics as well i was just in the process of finding a new therapist irl
so it was just it all sort of came together and it just felt right from day one
i mean you've picked the best haven't you i mean you have to do an awful lot of
re-watching you've got the wire you know queen's gambit i was just in the one of
the last star wars series and pandor people stopped me in the street every oh my
god amazing my favorite star wars i still haven't seen it because i haven't got
time because now i've got to watch you're incredibly just re-watching the wire
i've just got to re-watch all this old stuff but it's cool because there's loads
of stuff i i skirted over yeah you know stuff that we've got you know in the in
the near future like happy valley i'm not up to date on happy valley so i can't
wait to have a good excuse to sit down and watch the final season yeah it's
things like nurse jackie that i just never saw yep yep and then this is a
nightmare where you're going to catch up on series i have a guest on you know
who's in coronation street and you've got to start watching from 1959 it's true
so what we try and do is we'll just do series one we'll try and limit it to
series one we'll try and pick whoever we feel has the most complexities but also
the most mystery around them because we're trying to sort of speculate really
but we bring it into the real world almost immediately because we're talking
about issues that affect real human beings and i'm talking from my own personal
experience and sometimes i'll say oh you know this was going on in my session
with with my therapist just last week you know most of the series you've got are
current the sopranos being the oldest one in the current series i'm just
wondering how far back will you go i was thinking maybe norm from cheers yeah
absolutely good one top cat this is good adam west's batman there's just
absolutely it is endless and what i want to start doing is that kind of thing so
we're doing it tentatively in seasons of 12 right and i definitely want to do
like an unreconstructed 70s season you know i'm desperate to do reggie perrin
yeah you know basil 40 maybe do an entire comedy series you know huge
psychological i mean tony hancock tony hancock in hancock's half hour you know i
i think back to those characters and and the depth that the writers instilled in
them there's there's so much to dig into and obviously the listeners are giving
us suggestions every week people are really engaging with it absolutely yeah i
can't believe it into i mean basil faulty's problems are probably the same as
john cleese's problems do you ever do you ever kind of drifted to say well i
bumped into him the other day and i think he's cross yes i mean sometimes it
does get a little weird like we we did fleabag maybe episode three or four which
you were in and i was in fleet yeah yeah so then there's the question of okay
well i know phoebe how much of this is from personal experience but we just try
and we try and focus on you know intelligent writing in interesting characters
and what we can learn from them i can't believe you haven't seen and or right
and or is the that's what everybody says to me third best star wars thing it's
it's star wars which is still called star wars by the way not a new hope right
uh the empire strikes back and then and or it's incredible well that is high
praise indeed is there a toy around to it but do you have you know i went into a
room and it was just a huge igloo type tent and it had 360 slr cameras they
scanned you and i went in there and i did different poses and they scanned me
and they've got all the bits to make me amazing but whether it will ever happen
who knows so you've got so many strings to your bow right so like a lot of us
you've got this kind of multi-faceted career is there an opportunity cost like
for example you know you sort of started off as a musician slid into you know
expanded into stand-up are you still doing music are you finding that it's
really difficult definitely you know everybody thinks i do a million things i
really don't i just do one thing at a time yeah get really bored or get really
good at it to the point where i might become excessively famous and then i run
away okay it's what i did with stand-up there was one time 2017 i thought i miss
music so much i'm gonna get some musicians together and we're gonna get back in
the studio i'm gonna do a little comeback album and i said to my agents you know
i need to be out for like nine months to get this right and they were like what
are you talking about yeah you know how are you gonna make any money from that
how you know momentum if it's doing music and yeah but i did it i took myself
out of the game for a year went back in the studio created an album was really
happy with it booked some dates in went on a tour around the uk filled out these
venues got on stage and everyone was going where's the jokes every single gig
fell on its backside well thank you very much ben uh shrink the box is now
available where you get podcasts thank you both you andrew and ben that's the
loose ends tied up for another if you've just missed the program you want to
hear it again it's waiting for you in the treasure trove that is bbc sounds
including last week's interviews with danny sapani and tara fitzgerald well
thanks to this week's guests alice loxton and richard curtis joseph andrew neil
and ben bailey smith today's producer is tim banno and the studio managers are
andrew garrett and duncan hannant next week my guests will include soweto kinch
and juliet cowan but for me for now goodbye loose ends was presented by clive
anderson and you can find a longer version of the program on bbc sounds on bbc
iplayer step right in perfect timing the east end is ever-changing what is this
scooter the order has entered the 1960s barely eight years late but the midwives
of nanata's house are forever constant you've a home here now and purpose and
people who love you call the midwife we will be with you every step of the way
watch on bbc iplayer now on radio 4 in something understood samira ahmed
reflects on what being part of a crowd means to us as individuals if you count
the number of passenger journeys made through the ticket gates of london's
waterloo station it's the busiest in the country more than 97 million a year and
the number of passengers is the number of passengers in the air mostly commuters
and i'm usually one of them but today i'm up on the balcony under the grand
station clock looking down and savoring the motion and the patterns of all those
figures as i sip my coffee a strange service to all the fireplaces the
apparition of these faces in the crowd petals on a wet black bow ezra pounds in
a station of the metro why do i love watching the crowds that come through a
station like this maybe it's the way they become different tribes through the
seasons cheery groups with flags heading for the rugby at twickenham and then in
the summer peacock couples off to royal ascot the women in feathered fascinators
and heels their gentlemen in top hats and morning suits but most of the time i'm
part of the army of commuters with suits eyes down on smartphones and laptops
all strangers disgorged from crowded trains and yet sharing the same identity
and mission once we heard the shouts of police chasing a suspect running down
the concourse straight towards us the crowd suddenly froze i saw two male
commuters make eye contact with each other and wordlessly agree to trip him up
with their umbrellas a tumble an arrest and the two smiled shook hands an
unexpected crime busting partnership with a total stranger and then they merged
back into the throne standing on the corner people rushed by me shy ones and sly
ones the humble the proud how long must i go on looking looking for your face in
the crowd walking through the city the crowded old city thousands of faces the
quiet the proud how long how long will it take you yes to find my face in a
crowd i take my spectacles off before the ink lines of his limbs emerge from the
crowd before the smile closes his eyes below the clock at waterloo halfway
between a giacometti and a my son chinaman he stands so thin and waits yet i am
the fragile the much suited one this time shall we his question bleeds into the
departure of the 142 for fear of being early i am the one who is late who takes
the last few steps like someone who hasn't walked before but how are you i ask
and hold his hand for a moment in what i hope feels like a handshake we do not
touch thereafter we do not touch vesna goldsworthy on that moment when you find
the face you are seeking emerge from the crowd and blues singer brownie mcgee
that combination of individuals and then the dynamism of them gathered in these
places as if conducting an elaborate masquerade or minuet is something i find
very beautiful and i'm not alone in my love of crowd watching the edwardian
writer arnold bennett loved the bustle of the modern metropolis london and
especially paris thursday december 8th 1910 as it was pouring with rain this
afternoon i went to the gare d'orsay and had tea on the platform terrace of the
cafe and walked about for two and three quarter hours and really worked
excellently at the first book and was moreover all the time amused and diverted
by the phenomena of the terminus this is a most excellent dodge for wet days
december 17th i went into sensual peace again this morning to look at delacroix
and came across a great ordination service dozens of young priests in party
colored capes etc drinking the sacred wine with elaborate ceremonies music etc
they were all or nearly all tonsured a startling mummery right in the middle of
paris crowds of women i like the way bennett's journal entries record his
fascination with the different crowds he encountered on his travels observing
the hierarchies of workers who staffed the grand hotels and train stations
overhearing bits of conversation and imagining their stories as in his most
famous book the old wives tale he felt especially at home in france with what he
saw as the greater passion and openness and how they expressed themselves in art
and emotion music Edith Piaf's take on the crowd, La Foule, is certainly
passionate and open. Caught up in a heaving mass of revellers, she finds herself
thrown against a man and feels an intense love at first sight. But just as
quickly, she is pulled away from him by the very crowd that pressed them
together, that exciting, random possibility of love, cruelly snatched away. La
Foule, the crowd in French, is feminine, and it has often been labelled
irrational, fickle, hysterical, easy to manipulate, especially by men in power.
But fear of the mob is strong. The dawn of the industrial age brought riots and
revolution, over inequality and oppression, and over challenging the old ways of
worshipping. John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, was regarded as a dangerous
revolutionary and had his own terrifying encounter with a mob raised to lynch
him in the black country town of Wednesbury in 1743. To attempt speaking was in
vain, for the noise on every side was like the roaring of the sea, so they
dragged me along till we came to the town, where seeing the door of a large
house open, I attempted to go in, but a man, catching me by the hair, pulled me
back into the middle of the mob. They made no more stop till they had carried me
through the main street from one end of the town to the other. I asked, are you
willing to hear me speak? Many cried out, no, no, knock his brains out, down
with him, kill him at once. Others said, nay, but we will hear him first. I
began asking, what evil have I done? Which of you all have I wronged in word or
deed? And continued speaking for above a quarter of an hour till my voice
suddenly failed. In the meantime, my strength and my voice returned, and I broke
out aloud into prayer. And now the man who just before headed the mob turned and
said, Sir, I will spend my life for you. Follow me, and not one soul here shall
touch a hair of your head. Remarkably, John Wesley managed to calm the mob who'd
been baying for his blood and was freed. As he said in his journal, God brought
me safe to Wednesbury, having lost only one flap of my waistcoat and a little
skin from one of my hands. Oh, for a thousand towns to see My great Redeemer's
praise, My great Redeemer's praise, The glories of His grace. The triumphs of
His grace. The triumphs of His grace. How oft amid those overflowing streets
have I gone forward with the crowd and said unto myself, The face of every one
that passes by me is a mystery. Thus have I looked, nor ceased to look,
oppressed by thoughts of what and whither, when and how, until the shapes before
my eyes became a second sight procession, such as glides over still mountains or
appears in dreams. What say you then to times when half the city shall break out
full of one passion, vengeance, rage or fear, to executions, to a street on
fire, mobs, riots or rejoicings? William Wordsworth viewed the city's crowds
with a kind of awe. Perhaps that's not surprising that he was writing amidst a
time of revolution. The power and harmony of a Welsh male voice choir, a crowd
of individuals creating a wall of sound, rich with warmth, solidarity and pride.
One of my earliest assignments as a BBC radio news reporter was in 1992. I spent
the day on the streets of London with the estimated 150,000 people who'd come to
protest the government's planned closure of most of the nation's coal mines.
Marching behind banners and colliery bands, the camaraderie intensified the
emotions of that day. The pit closures went ahead, a way of life all but died.
But if you were there, the power of that day still echoes. The crowd expressing
a group emotion. They can express rage too. The American writer James Baldwin
witnessed the 1943 Harlem riots in New York City. An eloquent observer of white
racism against African American citizens, he reflected on the deep seated
malaise that saw rioters vent their fury on white owned businesses in their own
neighbourhood. Along each of these avenues and along each major side street,
bars, stores, pawn shops, restaurants, even little luncheonettes had been
smashed open and entered and looted. Looted, it might be added, with more haste
than efficiency. The shelves really looked as though a bomb had struck them.
Cans of beans and soup and dog food along with toilet paper, cornflakes,
sardines and milk tumbled every which way. And abandoned cash registers and
cases of beer leaned crazily out of the splintered windows and were strewn along
the avenues. Sheets, blankets and clothing of every description formed a kind of
path as though people had dropped them while running. I truly had not realised
that Harlem had so many stores until I saw them all smashed open. The first time
the word wealth ever entered my mind in relation to Harlem was when I saw it
scattered in the streets. But one's first in Congress impression of plenty was
counted immediately by an impression of waste. None of this was doing anybody
any good. It would have been better to have left the plate glass as it had been
and the goods lying in the stores. It would have been better but it would also
have been intolerable, for Harlem had needed something to smash. To smash
something is the ghetto's chronic need. Most of the time it is the members of
the ghetto who smash each other and themselves. But as long as the ghetto walls
are standing there will always come a moment when these outlets do not work.
That summer, for example, it was not enough to get into a fight on Lennox Avenue
or curse out one's cronies in the barber shops. If ever, indeed, the violence
which fills Harlem's churches, pool halls and bars erupts outward in a more
direct fashion, Harlem and its citizens are likely to vanish in a post-
apocalyptic flood. Stephen Reicher is Professor of Psychology at the University
of St Andrews. He has studied crowd behaviour for many years, spending time on
football terraces and with pilgrims at religious gatherings. When you look at
change in our world it tends to come about through crowds, through collective
action, whether we talk about the civil rights movement, the women's movement,
it's through crowds that the powerless can have a voice and can change society.
We have this view of the crowd and the revolutionary mob as something very
negative, don't we, through history? The mad mob is a way of discrediting
people. So when people challenge the status quo, those in power who on the whole
are those who write history tell them not that they have a legitimate point of
view, they tell them they're just plain mad, they're just out of control.
Imagine that you get into a train carriage and it's crowded. Physically there's
a crowd of people, but psychologically you very much think of yourself as an
individual. And then the train goes off and after a while it comes to a halt and
there's a long gap and then there's an excuse and then something happens. People
begin to think of themselves not as individuals but as aggrieved commuters
against the train company. People start talking to each other, people start
smiling at each other and it illustrates that profound psychological difference
between being in a physical crowd but thinking of yourself as I and being part
of a crowd where you think of everybody as we. And that sense of we-ness, of
shared identity transforms one's experience of the crowd and I think is at the
root of the crowd being a very positive experience in many cases for many
people. The Kumbh Mela, it's a huge Hindu festival, what many people call the
greatest show on earth, the largest crowd on earth, which happens every year in
northern India. Up to 100 million people attend over the month of the event.
It's incredibly crowded and we're told that crowding is bad for us. It's
remarkably noisy. The average noise levels are those which according to
international standards should harm you after about 10 minutes and people stay
there for a month. Not to find a point on it with only rudimentary sewage and
sanitary facilities, it's fairly dirty as well. So it's everything you might
think to be bad for us and we've been studying the pilgrims, the so-called Kulp
Vasis, and when they describe the experience there's a word they use time and
again, it's a word in Hindi, anand, and effectively it means bliss. It is
blissful. In the Mela, because people are there together with a common
understanding of what they're about, that they support each other in reaching
that goal, then they can truly live out the life of a good Hindu. I'll have to
take Stephen's word on the bliss of the Kumbh Mela. If a genuine terror of the
toilets keeps you away from Glastonbury and all the other music festivals, as it
certainly does me, you may have to as well. I'm thinking again about the
different tribes of a crowd I see come through Waterloo Station, especially
sporting tribes. It's easy if you're not part of it to not care or even to
sneer. But the sound of a cheering crowd in a stadium is humanity formed into a
sound wave. It sweeps over you and penetrates your heart and lifts you. Even
walking outside the stadium, just listening to that wave rise up can have the
same effect. It's easy for those born into a secure identity to forget that
joining such a tribe can be a vital initiation into a new life. Poet George
Surtees came to England in 1956 as an eight-year-old refugee after the crushing
of the Hungarian uprising. Here he is reading his poem, Preston North End.
Tottenham Hotspur versus Preston North End. Finny's last season, my first, and
my dad with me. How surprisingly well we blend with these others. Then the
English had the advantage, but today we feel their fury, sadness, and pity.
There were some bad years in between, a lot of down-at-heel meandering. For me,
though, the deep blue of Preston was ravishment of a more genteel, poetic kind.
They were thrashed five on, it's true, and Finny was crocked by Mackay. Preston
went down, hardly to rise again. But something got through about Finny, the
plumber, Lancashire, the crown, and those new days are coming. The crowd
dissolves, but we are off the crowd, heading into town under sodium
streetlights. This year Wolves will win the title, then Burnley. I will see
Charlton Law and George Best. The world revolves around them, and those voices
on TV reading the results. I'm being bedded in. To what kind of soil remains a
mystery? But I sense it in my marrow, like a thin drift of salt blown off the
strand. I am an Englishman, wanting England to win. I pass the Tebbit test. I am
Alan Lamb, Greg Ruzetski, Viv Anderson, the boy from the corner shop, Solshar
and Yap Stam. I feel no sense of distance when a tannoy plays Jerusalem, Rule
Britannia, or the National Anthem. I know King Priam. I have lived in Troy. Spem
in Allium, Hope in Any Other, by Thomas Tallis. A 40-part Renaissance motet
composed around 1570, written for eight choirs of five voices each. We talk a
lot about crowds now. Crowdsourcing, getting strangers only connected through
social media to fund films, art projects, even medical research. These are
virtual collaborations between people, crowds of people, who won't ever meet,
but who go about creating something which is often greater than the sum of its
parts. Would you rather be more than the things that you say? Just be the words
that you sing to yourself in your head when nobody's around? Or would you rather
be a part of the crowd or just a single sound waiting to be heard? Do you know
what I mean? Well, you could be one of the lovers or liars hiding all the things
that you do on the back of their heads. Well, it's just you and me. Because
everybody's got a little wrong in all the right places. Just depends on where
you are. Why you're hanging around. Patrick Watson's song Quiet Crowd seems to
offer the listener the choice of being quietly on their own or part of a crowd.
Pulitzer Prize winning American composer David Lang explores what it means to be
part of a crowd in his new piece for A Thousand Voices, Crowd Out. I'm
interested in the things that we lose when we are in this crowd. So I went to
the internet and I did a search on the sentence, when I am in a crowd, I feel.
And I compiled the autocomplete of that sentence so that I could just find the
things that maybe were universal about things that we all might have to remind
ourselves we were worried about when we lose ourselves in a crowd. And then I
made a giant text out of it. So the experience is all of these people coming
together to perform this piece, but what they're talking about is the things
that they themselves are losing individually by coming together in that crowd. I
made this piece so that it would have an element of community outreach. I made
it specifically so that it wouldn't need trained musicians to do it. There are
four different strands of music which go on simultaneously, four different
strands of instruction. And each of those strands has 250 people in it. They
talk together or they talk separately. There are some tunes that they have to
learn. And sometimes everyone, all thousand people, are supposed to sing one of
these lines together. And sometimes they're supposed to sing them individually.
The autocomplete gave me all of these incredible options. It begins, I draw deep
breaths. I feel more confident and calm. I lost it all. I do not waste my words.
I hate for all eyes to be on me. I start to panic. I feel so alone I could cry.
I start to sweat. I can fully submerge myself. I am always alone. I am alone. I
am most alone. And they came up in order. And I thought, you know, that's really
what this piece is about. About all of these people coming together and shouting
together, one thousand strong, I am alone, which just seemed really funny to me.
But it also seemed like the reason why we have things that bring us together in
the first place. We want opportunities to come together because we are terrified
of being by ourselves. I am alone. Always alone. Alone. Alone. An excerpt from
David Lang's new work, Crowd Out. It's easy to judge a crowd when you're outside
it. A mob, a swarm, a horde of screaming fans. When we're on the inside, we
might prefer to see ourselves as an audience, a union or a congregation. I
realise the positive power of a crowd isn't just about the power of numbers.
It's about sharing a love, a passion, a belief. And even though there are
elites, crowds within crowds, they are in the end all about finding somewhere to
belong. I'm in with the in crowd. I go where the in crowd goes. I'm in with the
in crowd. Dobie Gray ending this week's edition of Something Understood. It was
presented by Samira Ahmed and the readers were Maggie Mash and Fraser James.
Full details of the music and readings featured can be found on the Radio 4
website. The producer was Caroline Hughes and it was a whistle-down production
for BBC Radio 4. That programme was originally broadcast in 2013.