TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Does marriage really prevent men from heart failure? This is Today on Radio 4.
It's eight o'clock on Friday the 24th of February. The headlines this morning.
Ukraine is marking the first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion with
ceremonies across the country and a message of defiance from President Zelensky.
A minute's silence will be observed in the UK and Rishi Sunak will urge allies
to move faster to provide Kiev with military support. The Justice Secretary
Dominic Raab has said that criminals could receive longer prison terms if they
refuse to appear in court for sentencing. And nominations are closing in the
race to succeed Nicola Sturgeon. The BBC News is read by Alan Smith. People in
Ukraine are marking a year of war on the first anniversary of Russia's full
scale invasion. Ceremonies will take place across the country, remembering those
killed or forced to flee from the conflict. Speaking in the past hour, President
Zelensky said Ukraine had inspired and unified the world and he vowed it would
not stop until what he called Russian murderers faced punishment. Our
correspondent James Waterhouse reports from Kiev. On this morning last year, the
thuds of explosions and sight of 150,000 Russian troops crossing the border
marked the moment that Ukraine and the world changed forever. Despite being
outnumbered against one of the biggest armies on the planet, Ukraine would win
the battle for Kiev. It is, however, still fighting for its survival. Invading
forces occupy almost a fifth of the country and are throwing everything at
trying to take the eastern Donbass region. President Zelensky has described the
situation in the south as dangerous and the eastern front as very difficult and
painful. As the country waits for more Western hardware, such as tanks, to try
and break the deadlock, it's marking this anniversary with ceremonies across
Ukraine. On February 24th, millions of us made a choice, said Mr Zelensky in his
overnight address. Not a white flag, but a blue and yellow flag, not fleeing,
but facing. As fierce fighting in Ukraine continues, our Russia editor Steve
Rosenberg has this assessment of Moscow's appetite for further conflict.
Vladimir Putin had expected a swift victory that would force Ukraine back into
Moscow's orbit. But his so-called special military operation did not go
according to plan. Over the last 12 months, the Russian military has suffered
heavy casualties. The Kremlin had to declare mobilization to boost troop
numbers, drafting hundreds of thousands of Russians into the army. And yet, as
this war enters its second year, President Putin appears determined to push on.
He's confident that Russia has the resources to secure, eventually, a military
victory over Ukraine and over the West. International sanctions have hurt the
Russian economy, but what they haven't done is trigger economic collapse or a
Kremlin U-turn on Ukraine. And for now, there is little public pressure here on
Mr Putin to end the fighting. Many Russians believe what the state media is
telling them, that Russia's not the aggressor and that it's fighting for peace.
A minute's silence will be held across the UK at 11 o'clock this morning to mark
the anniversary. Rishi Sunak will observe it at Downing Street, where he's due
to meet Ukrainian troops. The Prime Minister will also hold talks with his
fellow leaders during a virtual meeting of G7 countries. Number Ten says he'll
urge them to increase military support for Kiev by providing longer-range
weapons. The European Union's foreign policy chief, Joseph Borrell, told us the
West had been too slow to respond to Ukraine's requests for help. Until now what
has happened is that first the answer has been always no, and at the end it has
been yes. And maybe this is one of the problems, that our answer has been too
much incremental, too much following the events, discussing before agreeing and
before implementing. The UK has announced further sanctions against Russia,
including an export ban on every piece of equipment it's used on the
battlefield, such as aircraft and radio parts. The new measures also target
senior executives at the state-owned nuclear power company Rosatom, as well as
bosses at Russia's two largest defence companies and four banks. The Archbishop
of Canterbury has warned that Russia must not be treated like Germany after the
First World War, once the conflict in Ukraine is over. Writing in the Daily
Telegraph, Justin Welby says Russia must be able to recover and be secure
without being allowed to repeat its aggression. The Archbishop also says Kiev
must not be pressured into an unjust peace. Speaking on Thought for the Day, he
said it was crucial to continue supporting Ukraine. As with the UK in 1940, the
uncertainty and horror of war with an apparently overwhelmingly strong adversary
is matched by leadership of skill and courage and people of endurance and
resolution. They want and need support of all kinds. It will cost us, and we may
be thankful that it costs us only money, not lives. Our international affairs
correspondent Paul Adams was in Kiev when Russia's invasion began and has been
back several times since. He reflects on the biggest conflict in Europe since
the Second World War. When a handful of distant explosions jolted me awake just
after five o'clock in the morning a year ago, a series of dire predictions
immediately raced through my mind. The prospect of Russian troops entering the
city in a matter of days seemed very real, and if Russia's invasion succeeded,
Ukraine might cease to exist as an independent democratic state. A year on,
Ukraine is still there, but the cost has been horrendous. We still don't know
how many thousands of Ukrainians have died. Thirteen million have lost or fled
their homes. Twenty-one million, more than half the country's pre-war
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance. As many as 100,000 Ukrainian
soldiers have been killed, probably twice as many Russians. Some of Ukraine's
towns and cities have been levelled. And yet, thanks to extraordinary national
resilience and a truly astonishing level of Western military support, Ukraine
survives. But the war is far from over, and the cost keeps rising. The Justice
Secretary Dominic Raab has said people convicted of serious crimes could be
given longer jail terms if they refuse to appear in court for their sentencing.
Mr Raab made his comments after a meeting with the family of Zahra Alina, who
was murdered near her home in East London last year. Her killer, Jordan
McSweeney, refused to attend his sentencing. Mr Raab suggested offenders could
even be manhandled into the dock against their will. I wouldn't rule that out,
but fundamentally, if a perpetrator is not willing to come and face the judge
and hear the sentence handed down by the court, then I think we should be
looking at increasing the sentence as an aggravating factor. Detectives
investigating the shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma on Wednesday
have arrested a fourth man. Northern Ireland's Police Federation says Detective
Chief Inspector John Caldwell suffered life-changing injuries in the attack. He
remains in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Police say the dissident
Republican group the New IRA is the primary focus of their investigation.
Nominations for candidates to replace Nicola Sturgeon as the leader of the SNP
close at noon. The winner will be announced at the end of March. Here's our
Scotland editor, James Cook. The SNP is holding a rapid contest to elect a new
leader before Easter, a pace which some activists worry will stifle debate about
policy and strategy. The two best-known candidates are under pressure. Humza
Yousaf, because his plan to fix the health service was criticised by an official
report, Kate Forbes for saying she would have voted against gay marriage, which
prompted several parliamentarians to withdraw their support for her. The third
contender, Ash Regan, resigned last year as community safety minister in protest
at the Scottish Government's plans to make it easier to legally change gender.
She sets out her stall beside the Firth of Forth this morning. One online poll
of SNP supporters suggests that despite a week of negative publicity, it's Ms
Forbes who may actually be in the lead. The owner of British Airways, IAG, has
returned to profit following the pandemic. It says it made an operating profit
of £1.1 billion last year, compared with a loss of more than £2.6 billion in
2021. Archaeologists have expressed concern that many historical artefacts
unearthed in recent years are gathering dust in warehouses because of a shortage
of space in museums. The government agency Historic England says a solution
needs to be found soon, before the stores are full. Here's Patrick Hughes. Some
of the most interesting archaeological finds are discovered during building
works. Archaeological contractors, hired by developers, can unearth anything
from finely decorated Roman metalwork to Bronze Age tools and pottery. The finds
are supposed to go to museums, but as many museums are running out of storage
space, it's becoming increasingly difficult for contractors to find homes for
them. Historic England say they are concerned that if storage space runs out,
councils will no longer be able to compel developers to excavate sites of
archaeological interest, and national treasures could be lost forever. The poet
laureate Simon Armitage has written a poem to celebrate the centenary of the
most famous steam locomotive in the world. It was 100 years ago today that the
Flying Scotsman set off on its first journey. It went on to become the first
steam locomotive to travel non-stop from London to Edinburgh. A copy of the new
poem will be displayed at the National Railway Museum in York, and Simon
Armitage will be reading it on this programme in a few minutes' time. It's ten
past eight in the UK, and it's ten past ten in Ukraine. On this day one year
ago, Russian tanks and troops rumbled across Ukraine's borders. Russian
warplanes attacked from the skies, and its warships opened fire from the Black
Sea. Millions were jolted from sleep, many shocked, many scared. And the world
was stunned as a member of the UN Security Council shattered its charter and
smashed the international norms we had come to accept as unshakable pillars of
our lives. One year on, Ukraine is still standing, supported by massive military
and moral support, and major financial and humanitarian assistance from
countries the world over, including Britain. Eight million refugees have started
new lives in new places. And those who stayed here in Ukraine have seen the
lives they knew and loved upend it. Everyone, from engineers to opera singers,
took up guns to fight, set up shelters, built drones, established networks to
help soldiers and civilians. A war to fight for the land of Ukraine has also
changed a people within. In a moment we'll speak to the Minister in President
Zelensky's Cabinet who's in charge of culture. But first this week I spend time
with three women whose lives, whose society, are no longer the same. The
timeless beauty of ballet. The flowing movements. The precise steps. Even here
at the Kyiv Opera, about two dozen dancers on the floor, men and women, they too
have been drawn into the brutal messiness of this war. My name is Bogdana and
I'm a ballet dancer. Ballet seems to be one of the biggest contrasts with the
brutality of war. Is that how it feels to you as a ballerina? When the war
began, I thought I wouldn't perform on the stage again. Now it's one of the most
important things for us and for people, to save our culture and save our souls.
But you wanted to also do your part to help Ukraine in this war. Why was that?
It's important to feel that I can help, that I'm not only a woman and a ballet
dancer. I'm someone who can be useful right now, even if it's just a little, for
someone. We joined all dancers from our ballet team from different regions to
help Ukrainians. We looked for ways to bring medicine and clothes for those who
needed it. To help people who were stuck in basements and couldn't leave their
homes. We traveled across Kiev from a smooth ballet floor to a floor of
shattered glass in a derelict warehouse. It's a building with gutted rooms and
blown out windows, the kind of building you see on front lines. But this is a
military training center. And that's the instructor's voice you hear, shouting
commands at a group of young women. Turning, aiming. Learning how to face up to
the enemy, which of course is Russia. They're all wearing camouflage, they're
all carrying rifles. The number of women in Ukraine's armed forces has more than
doubled in the last year. I want to protect my family and my country. I couldn't
stay behind and wait. I'm sorry that so many young men now have to fight for our
country. I want to join them. 28-year-old Olena has already been on the front
line three times. And she's preparing to go out again, even though she was
injured on her last time at the front when their building came under attack. And
she suffered a concussion that has indented her determination to continue with
this new life as a soldier, a medical doctor. Do you think it's different being
a woman on the front line than a man on the front line? We are a stronger nation
because we have both men and women on the front line. There are no divisions
between us. We are all there for the same purpose, to protect our country as
best as we can. We've come to a military base in southern Ukraine. We're in the
area of Kherson now. It's a part of Ukraine that's still occupied by Russian
forces. So they are several miles from here. But it's in a safe location. And
we're going to meet the most senior woman in the Ukrainian military, Lieutenant
Colonel Larisa Yakubchuk. They call her Chayka, which means seagull in
Ukrainian. Lieutenant Colonel Larisa is riding with her side gun, her walkie-
talkie, her green military uniform including a green beanie, their blonde hair
poking out. Really warm smile. But you can sense her toughness too. She's taking
care of the well-being of the soldiers here. She's a psychologist too. So we're
just going in to see her as she meets some of her patients here in Kherson. You
can hear the hubbub. A group of soldiers has arrived. They're all here to talk
to the chief psychiatrist, get a bit of some advice on the stresses of this war.
It's been a long, hard year. You've had a long experience in the Ukrainian
military, but now many more women are joining the military. Is that making a
difference to Ukraine, Ukrainian society, women taking on these roles? Sometimes
it's difficult for men to accept that their commander or deputy commander is a
woman. That's why I need to be a strong character to show them that it's not
just a woman in front of them. I always say, firstly, I'm an officer, then I'm a
woman, and then I'm blonde. But the changes inside Ukrainians, they have lost,
they have gained, they have laughed, they have cried. It's been a hard year. How
have Ukrainians changed inside? Because it will tell us about the future too.
During this last year, we changed. Now we know for certain who our enemies are,
who our friends and brothers are. We separated the light from the dark. The
light from the dark. Well, let's get some greater light on the changes in
Ukraine over the past year. We're joined by Oleksandr Tukhachenko, Minister of
Culture in President Zelensky's government. Thank you very much for joining us.
Nice to hear you. Your country seems to be a different country one year on. How
do you see what's changed in your country? I think you can't change a person.
You can't change a country in one day, even because of the war. Probably it was
in our spirit, probably we were like we are seen right now by the world. Only
differences that war probably speed up all our understanding of the life values
and will for freedom. The world's been inspired by how Ukrainians have stood up,
but it's also been a year of enormous loss, as you know. Entire cities smashed,
loved ones killed, electricity cuts, explosions. Many listening will ask how
long can you carry on like this before you say enough? Let's try to bring about
an end to this war, even through negotiations. I believe that until the moment
when Russian troops will withdraw their army from Ukrainian borders, we'll
continue to fight. There are two things which are hardly needed to finish this
war, sooner than later. This is of course weapons from our partners and friends,
and of course ability to work, because we are living in two worlds at the same
time, world of war and world of peace. For example, culture sector continues to
work right now, more than 50 premieres, more than 500 performances in Europe
since the war started. The number of people who are attending culture events in
Ukraine grew up last year for 10% despite the war. This shows the wish of
Ukrainians not only to escape from the war, but understanding that culture is
our identity, and this is what Putin is fighting against. Yes, you also seem to
see culture as a weapon in the sense of you previously called for a boycott of
the prominent Russian composer Tchaikovsky. Some would say, well, why punish the
Russian people? This is the war of politicians and President Putin in
particular. These people elected this president. These people are waving flags
two days ago, greeting his speech about war in Ukraine. It's also responsibility
of those who are not publicly claiming against war, against Putin. For us, there
doesn't exist good Russians. Probably there are some Russians who are publicly
opposed Putin and this war. Then we can talk. But until war is not finished,
it's not fair to say that official Russian culture representatives like Anna
Netrebko want to pretend that ballet and opera is something that Putin regime
look like. No, they are aggressors. That's very damning to say there are no good
Russians. We know many Russians left the country in protest against the war,
many protest in whatever they way they can in the country. They're your
neighbors. They're not going anywhere. Let's withdraw troops and let's be
punished by what they did in Ukraine. And then we can talk. And as I said, we
can talk with those who are publicly claiming against war and Putin. You
mentioned about the need for support and Ukraine is getting massive military,
financial and other kinds of support. President Zelensky thanks countries at
every turn, but he also keeps asking for more. What is the mood inside the
government? Frustrated with the pace of assistance, particularly when it comes
to, for example, fighter jets you're asking for now? No, we are very much
grateful for the support, first of all. But definitely our army need more modern
weapons like aircraft systems, first of all, to defend civilians, tanks to
continue liberate our territories and aircrafts to be sure that we can win this
war. So there is no frustration. Probably of course we're humans and there is
some fatigue, but we have no other choice except to continue fighting and to
win. Alexander Tkachenko, it's what everyone I meet in Ukraine tells me that
you're going to you believe you can win and win this war and you'll win it this
year. Thank you very much for joining us on the program today. The time now is
23 minutes past eight. A hundred years ago today, one of the country's most
romantic trains, Flying Scotsman, entered service and there are going to be lots
of celebrations to mark the centenary today in Edinburgh. One of those in the
Scottish capital is the poet Laureate Simon Armitage, who's written a new poem,
The Making of Flying Scotsman. He joins us now along with Judith McNichol, who's
director of the National Railway Museum in York. Morning to you both. Morning.
Morning. So Simon, I think you can choose what you decide to write a poem about.
So this obviously captured your imagination. Yeah, absolutely. I didn't know a
huge amount about the locomotive, but I really enjoy being drawn into other
realms of language and other worlds. And as soon as I started talking to the
people at Flying Scotsman about this project, just the passion and the
enthusiasm and then actually meeting it up close and getting to ride on the
footplate, it just struck me as this incredible coming together of both
mechanics and metaphysics. There's something very dreamlike about the whole
contraption and the experience of standing next to it. So I've actually
subtitled the poem, A Phantasmagoria. There's just something absolutely
incredible about when you're up close and personal with it. I love the way you
talk about meeting the train. It obviously has a really big personality for you.
Well, let me bring in Judith and just spell out for us why it was such a special
train. There's many reasons why it's very special, but it rolled out of
Doncaster Works a hundred years ago today. And it came out, operated for a few
months, and then in 1924, it was at the exhibition at Wembley where it was then
renamed Flying Scotsman and Flying Scotsman is actually a route. It's the 10
a.m. route from Kings Cross in London to Waverley in Edinburgh. But it's the
first time then a locomotive was called Flying Scotsman. And it was at this time
of style and sophistication and it was very emotive for people when they saw it.
But it then carried on a life. So it carried on operating on the East Coast Main
Line, but then in the early 60s, when steam was being decommissioned, it then
started a whole new life with various owners. It was owned by Alan Pegler, by
Sir William McAlpine, and they took it around the world. It went to America. It
then went to Australia later, as well as being the first steam locomotive to do
100 miles an hour. So it's got all of these firsts as well as this style and
sophistication. And that's reflected, Simon, isn't it, in your poem? Yeah,
absolutely. And I was also wanting to celebrate something of the analog world
and the clockwork world, world where we had an actual relationship with physical
objects. I think in the digital world, it's often a very detached and
dispassionate experience. And I also wanted to think of Flying Scotsman as an
emblem of when we could have pride and reliance on the railways. I mean, my
railway at the moment through Huddersfield is just absolutely shameful and
shambolic. We've covered that a lot on this program. Well, quite rightly. So I
was really taken with the idea that this locomotive represented a time when the
coming together of private endeavor and public transport still stands for me as
a symbol of those things. Well, we're very lucky because you're going to be
reading an extract. You'll be the first people to hear a long extract from your
poem. So perhaps you could read some of that for us now. So this is just the end
of the poem when the locomotive is finally made. In a nip of single malt, and it
coughed into life, Came from the tunnel's mouth, Shunted slowly forward,
Crunching inches and yards Under its vast steel circumferences, Straining,
hissing, the rippling bodywork Pouring with sweat, skirts trimmed With
petticoats of steam, The spherical venting cumulonimbus Into a blue sky,
Devilment glowing red in the lantern's lens, And stood there, all hide, horn,
bill, hoof, claw, fin and tail, As they fell to their knees, Astonished to find
this beast had wings, This creature could fly. Truly was a phantasmagoria. Thank
you very much indeed, Simon Armitage and also Judith Nicoll. And we're going to
make sure we'll put a full version of that poem, The Making of Flying Scotsman,
online. And from Flying Scotsman to Flying Sportsman, Gary's back with the
sports news. Thank you very much. Good morning. What a performance from
England's Harry Brooke and Joe Root in the test match. Brooke is 184 not out,
Root 101, with England 315 for three on the first day of the second test against
New Zealand. England had been struggling at 21 for three, Crawley two, Duckett
nine, Pope ten. It's Brooke's fourth century for England in six innings. He says
it's the best one yet. Yeah, I think so. Yeah, just the position of the game
makes that decision. Obviously the ones in Pakistan were amazing and yeah, they
were good fun to be out there, but they were all very flat pitches. Today I
wouldn't say it's a flat pitch. I think it's a good cricket wicket, but it's not
a flat pitch where you can just smack it everywhere, obviously. Let's speak to
Martin Spate, who coached Harry Brooke at school. Martin, a former county
cricketer. Good morning to you. Morning, Gary. You coached him at 14. What
potential did you see? Well, Harry always had huge amount of potential as a
cricketer. I look for a couple of things. Firstly, can he play the short ball?
And secondly, can a batter play off his pads? And at 14, Harry could do both of
those as well as a lot of other things. Yes, but what has made him so good so
quickly? I think his mentality. He practices incredibly hard. He's got a very
strict regime with his practice, and he knows exactly what he wants to do in
terms of his setup and how he wants to be. If he's set up and feels very
comfortable in that position, he then makes really good decisions. And you know
what? Once he's in, he puts the bowlers under so much pressure that they bowl
poorly at him at times. Yes, and I mean, he's building such confidence, isn't
he? Fourth Test century in six, on his way to a double Test century. The
confidence will be so high. You'd like to think so. Yeah. I mean, if it's not
high now, it's never going to be. But you know, I spoke to him on WhatsApp
earlier on today after he got his runs, and he's just normal. He just said, oh,
I hacked a few. You know, he's very down to earth and normal. What else did he
say? I mean, how long did you, how quickly after he'd finished, did you have the
conversation? That's amazing. Pretty much within 10 or 15 minutes of it raining.
It's a bit of a nightmare when he's in. So I was listening to it last night on
the radio. And then, of course, I couldn't go to sleep because he was in. And
then, so I didn't get a lot of sleep last night. So yeah. I mean, he seems so
grounded, Martin, because when he got his century, he just sort of waved his bat
and Joe Root was celebrating more. Yeah, he did. I think, you know, the other
thing with Harry is very grounded. And he will just see it as part of his
process of hopefully building a massive score for England to win the game. Yeah.
I know he sends, when he gets sort of man of the match often, he sends his
grandmother the bottles of champagne. I mean, it's a lovely story, isn't it?
Yeah. Well, that's Harry to a T. I mean, Wawa is the nickname for his granny.
She follows him everywhere. She's a pretty tough lady. She does all his washing
for him. So if you go by the cricket club, her garden backs right onto the
cricket club. There's not even a gate or a fence to stop you walking onto the
cricket pitch. And you'll see all of the shirts with Brooke on the back. What
was the name again? Granny Wawa? Wawa, yeah. Yeah, she's a wonderful woman.
Indeed. Granny's going to be happy this morning. Just a very quick thought. I
mean, two days ago, he was 24. How do you see the future for him? Well, you
know, he's obviously in the middle of an absolute purple patch. He's had a
wonderful year. He's batted today, hasn't he, with Joe Root, who you would say
is arguably our best test player of all time. And I would like to think that in
a slightly different way, he will go somewhere near to being as good as him.
Whether he's as good as him, time will tell. Martin Spade, thank you very much.
Cheers, Martin. Cheers, Gary. An impressive day for England, a very impressive
night for Manchester United, who are three through to the last 16 of the Europa
League after beating Barcelona 2-1. Andy Murray through to the semi-final of the
Qatar Open. He came from a set down to be a French qualifier, Alexander Muller.
Three games in Super League tonight. There's commentary on Leeds against Hull FC
on Sports Extra. Hull KR made it two wins from two, defeating Salford 24-10. The
tips, one for Warwick, half past two, number one. Orri the second, and then
Wolverhampton 7-15, number seven, send in the clouds. I really think that Granny
Wawa should have a racehorse named after her. She certainly deserves it. Yeah,
that's a great idea, actually. Somebody might take us up. Let's hope they do.
Now, Lauren Laverne is here to tell us what's coming up in 30 minutes. My cast
away this week is the Oscar-winning costume designer Jenny Bevan. I had this
wonderful grandfather, and he decided he wanted to take me to see my first
Shakespeare. I must have been 10 or 11, I think, and I'd never seen anything
like it. I was just entranced with the acting, the look of it, the storytelling,
and knew at that point I needed to be some part of it. There was something about
being part of that world that really, really was going to be important. Jenny
Bevan, she's my cast away on Desert Island Discs, this morning at nine. And a
look at the weather. Today in the UK, the patchy rain will clear southwards with
sunny spells and light showers behind it. Here in Keeve, it's grey, very cold
and cloudy. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Lise Ducetti in Keeve and
Martha Carney in London. The time now is 26 minutes to nine. Here's a summary of
the news from Alan Smith. Ukraine is marking the first anniversary of Russia's
full-scale invasion. President Zelensky said it had been a furious year of
invincibility and that Ukraine had inspired the world in its resistance.
Ceremonies are taking place to remember those killed or forced to flee from the
conflict. A minute's silence will be observed across the UK at 11 o'clock.
Later, the Prime Minister will use a virtual meeting of world leaders to call
for more military support for Keeve. Police have arrested a fourth man in
connection with a gun attack on an off-duty officer in Oma. Northern Ireland's
Police Federation says Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell suffered life-
changing injuries in the shooting on Wednesday. And the Justice Secretary
Dominic Raab is considering measures that will increase jail terms for people
convicted of serious crimes if they refuse to attend court to be sentenced. Mr
Raab made the announcement after meeting the family of Zahra Alina, whose killer
chose not to appear in the doc. Thanks very much indeed. The time now is 25
minutes to nine. As the war has escalated in Ukraine, so has UK military help.
How much further will that go? When President Zelensky came to the UK, he asked
for wings for victory, in other words, fighter planes. Today, Rishi Sunak will
say that Ukraine needs a decisive advantage over Russia. The government's also
announced a new package of sanctions against Russia this morning. I've been
talking to the Defence Secretary Ben Wallace and I asked why would these
sanctions work given that the previous ones don't seem to have deterred
President Putin so far? I think what does deter President Putin is a recognition
that he can't get his hands on the money he might like to refurbish his army
that has been incredibly damaged by this illegal invasion of his. And I also
think it's important to send a strong message to the international community
through sanctions is not going away anytime soon, which is another calculation
Putin was hoping for. Some of those individual sanctions are like obviously
banning individuals, but also some of it's about starting to recognize that
there are countries, there are companies active in Russia that we don't want to
be active in Russia because the Russians are taking their capabilities and dual
using them or, you know, using them into their military or to help the fight.
And I think we were quite clear that in these sanctions, if we've identified
Western companies or others that have either directly or indirectly been
supporting the war effort, then they too will be subject to those controls. So
those are actions against Russia. What about future help for Ukraine? We hear
that Rishi Sunak is going to say that Ukraine needs a decisive advantage over
Russia. Doesn't that mean air power as President Zelensky himself has asked for?
First of all, you know, what we should recognize is, Martha, there is the medium
term, the immediate and there is helping build Ukrainians resilience for the
long term. And, you know, as we go up the scale of the type of platforms that
have been gifted into Ukraine, things do get more complicated and not as easy
just to sort of fly away and use. And I think you'd recognize that over this
year, we started with handheld anti-tank weapons. Nearly a couple of weeks ago,
we announced an international alliance of tanks, Western tanks. And there'll be
over 200 of those going in, I think, have been donated or pledged. And you know,
these things get more complicated. So for example, if you gave fighter planes,
you have a number of challenges in the here and now. You could overcome them,
but that will take months or years to do so. So in the here and now, for
example, a fighter plane comes with about 200 people to support it. You know,
ground crew, engineers, pilots, also how you fight a fighter plane. So it's not
just about learning to fly one. And I'm sure the Ukrainian pilots are very good
pilots. I don't think they all need a huge jump to type. Let me put one
possibility to you, which is being talked about, is that Poland or other Eastern
European countries would give former Soviet mig fighters to Ukraine, planes that
pilots there are more familiar with. Then we in turn replace those backfill with
typhoon jets. Is that under active consideration? That is definitely always on
offer. Let's put it that way. I mean, if a country approaches us and says we'd
like to do that, the United Kingdom would be very happy to either backfill or
indeed cover with things like, you know, extra deployment of our aircraft to
cover for air policing or protect that country. That's already been happening.
It's been happening for the last nearly for the last eight, nine months in other
countries across Europe. And if you remember, I think back in March, there was a
public debate between Poland and the United States about whether they would gift
their mig 29s, if you remember, that was a... Which was vetoed, as I remember,
by the United States. You know, I think my point is that was back in March. You
know, that was a long time ago. And as we've seen in this conflict, never rule
anything in, another ruling anything out. But you're right on the right on the
on the central issue, which is if Ukraine needs aircraft quickly and able to
fight them quickly, then it is best to go down the route of acquiring aircraft
from Russian or Soviet manufacture, because that is what they already use. As we
talk about increasing military help for Ukraine and also talk of Russia possibly
and China offering arms to Russia, are there fears about the escalation and all
of this that we'll end up in a third world war without any conscious decision
ever having been taken? I don't think we're going to get anywhere near that,
Martha. I think the reality is everyone knows the parameters of what needs to
happen, which is, you know, Russia illegally invaded Ukraine. Russia needs to
come to terms with the fact that his campaign has failed so far very, very
badly. He's lost, we think, over one hundred and eighty eight thousand dead or
wounded troops. He's lost thousands of his armored vehicles. He hasn't captured
a single one of his objectives. He's lost generals and colonels by the dozens
and is in a very poor state, his army. And I think what he needs to realize is
that effectively he should find a way out of this. And at the same time, the
international community has demonstrated to the world and those people that were
doubting we would be a very strong alliance to stand up for our values. And I
think that doesn't lead out of Ukraine. You know, we have all of this is
contained within Ukraine. This is within the borders of Ukraine. That's where
the assistance is focused. Russia has not actually gone anywhere near hitting
NATO cities or towns, which some people might have thought at the beginning he
might have lashed out. I think that's because the NATO alliance is a powerful
deterrent. Thirty countries behind mutual self-defense deters Russia from that.
And I think what China is trying to do is what they did earlier in the year with
their very strong messaging to Russia about, you know, don't evoke, you know,
tactical nuclear weapons. If you remember, Putin was sort of saber rattling on
those. China and India have played that role of saying that this is not a good
way to proceed and you really need to go down the path of trying to settle for
peace. And I think actually, I don't think we're in a place where we're going to
get worse in these areas. But I would say that if China were to decide to arm
Russia, that might that would have a detrimental effect because Russia is the
aggressor here. And I think China, like us, all respect sovereignty. And what
about future threats? You've talked about war, hot or cold war coming to the UK
by the end of this decade. What exactly did you mean by that? Well, I didn't say
actually that the UK would be involved in it. What I said is I think over the
next decade or decade, you know, over the next few years, the world is going to
get more anxious, more insecure and more unstable. And I say that having done
three and a half years nearly as a security minister and now three and a half
years as a defense secretary where I've spent most of my daily life looking at
the threats. And I think we see, you know, conflict brewing either across Africa
and, you know, we've seen a growth in extremism in the sort of groups of Al-
Shabaab and things like that. We've seen great power competition growing between
the United States and China. And we've seen Putin get more and more aggressive.
So I think my point is that, you know, come the end of the decade or come mid
2030s, I think there will be whether it's a cold conflict or a hot conflict, I
think there will be potentially growth in conflict around the world. And we as
the United Kingdom are not sideline players insofar as we do care about our
global community we live in. And therefore, we should just be prepared that, you
know, we shouldn't take for granted the state we've all enjoyed since 1991.
Defense Secretary Ben Wallace, thank you for talking to us. Thank you. Yes, and
sketching a very difficult and dangerous landscape, the years which lie ahead.
And a lot of it leads back to Moscow. On Monday, President Vladimir Putin spoke
of a difficult watershed moment for Russia. In his annual State of the Union
address, he blamed the West and the Ukrainian elite and government for using
Ukraine as a military base to fight Russia, holding them responsible again for
this conflagration. It was a time, he said, which forced Russia to suspend its
participation in New START, the last nuclear arms control treaty between Russia
and America, which controls the nuclear arsenals of the two countries. And of
course, that speech was on the same day that the US President Joe Biden spoke in
Warsaw, hours apart, vowing that Russia would never see victory in Ukraine.
Never. It seems to underline, as we just heard Ben Wallace do, that the war in
Ukraine isn't just about Ukraine, and it is dividing the world. So how does it
look from Moscow? We're joined from there by our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg.
Steve, this moment, the one year mark, a time, I think, of rising tension
between Russia and Ukraine, but also between world powers. How would you
describe this moment? It's quite interesting. I've noticed a change in messaging
here in Russia in recent weeks. Do you remember when this all began and
President Putin was speaking about his special military operation, and the word
war was hardly mentioned in the state media here? Well, it's mentioned now.
They're talking about war. They're reframing it here as a war, but not a war
that Russia started. This is being presented now as a war being waged against
Russia by the West, by America, by NATO, by Anglo-Saxons, by the collective
West, all fighting in Ukraine to destroy Russia and divide Russia up into pieces
like Napoleon or Hitler. And this messaging is powerful. It is potent and it's
very persuasive, particularly all the references to World War II that you hear,
which are designed to strike a chord in Russians. So I think the Kremlin wants
Russians to think now that what is happening in Ukraine is like World War II. It
wants Russians to feel that what is happening in Ukraine is like World War II.
And it wants people in Russia to rally around Putin like they rallied around
Stalin in the war. But at the end of the day, lost in this kind of, well,
sandstorm of patriotic messaging and disinformation is the fact that one year
ago, Russia invaded Ukraine. Well, we've heard week in, week out your reports
from across Russia about how many Russians are rallying to President Putin and
his special military operation or war. As another year begins with what seems to
be the real possibility of a Russian spring offensive with more losses, will
that support for the President wane in any way? I suppose it depends what
happens. Certainly, the messaging in the state media is extremely powerful and
helps to explain why a large portion of the Russian public remains loyal to the
narrative that the Kremlin is giving them. That it is a just war. That's not the
only reason why I think a lot of Russians support what's happening. A lot of
what Vladimir Putin says in his speeches and a lot of what he does, does strike
a chord with many people here. So when Vladimir Putin talks about or criticizes
NATO for enlarging up to Russia's borders, that strikes a chord. When he talks
about Russians and Ukrainians being one people, that strikes a chord with many
people here. So propaganda alone doesn't explain why I would say two-thirds of
the Russian people still support what is happening. You remember, Stephen, the
first weeks of the war that many in Western capitals use this phrase, an off-
ramp. Give President Putin a way to pull back from this war. No one talks about
that now. It seems as though for him this is a war that has only one outcome for
him and that's a war he must win. Off-ramp? I don't think that's in Vladimir
Putin's dictionary. If it was, it's not anymore. This is not a leader who is
looking for a way out of this, I think, at the moment or looking for compromise.
That's the conclusion I reached listening to his State of the Nation address,
listening to his arousing speech at the big football stadium earlier this week.
This is a man who has taken the decision a year ago to invade a sovereign
neighbouring country. His special operation did not go according to plan. But
despite that, he is determined, I think, to push on, to raise the stakes if
necessary, to escalate, believing that he can secure some kind of military
victory over Ukraine and over the West. A dangerous moment. Steve Rosenberg,
thank you as always for your reflections. The time now is 11 minutes to nine and
let's return to Turnipgate. Both the Mirror and the Star have front pages with
the headlines, Let them eat turnip, picking up from the Environment Secretary,
Therese Coffey's remarks about cherishing seasonal produce like turnips. So
should we stop eating salad vegetables in winter? We heard earlier the
environmental arguments against flying in fresh produce to the UK or using fuel-
hungry greenhouses. We can talk now to Dr Annie Gray, food historian, known to
listeners on Radio 4. Good morning. Hello. Did we used to cherish the turnip?
No, we really didn't used to cherish the turnip. There's this great myth that we
all ate seasonally in the past and that everybody sort of cultivated their own
land and ate turnips when they were in season and enjoyed brassicas. And of
course, apart from the fact that an awful lot of fruit and vegetables that we
eat today just weren't around in the past, certainly not before the 17th
century, there's also the fact that poor people ate seasonally, which means that
if you were rich, you didn't eat seasonally. So for an awful lot of the past, if
you could eat out of seasoned fruit and vegetables, you did it because it showed
your status. And to do that, we had an enormous setup which enabled us to eat
almost anything at any point in the year if we were rich enough. So there's a
huge thing with pineapples weren't there and very expensive greenhouses in order
to grow pineapples. Exactly. So if you think about, I'm sure a lot of listeners
regularly visit National Trust properties and so on and so forth, and you think
about all of those kitchen gardens, acres and acres of glass. And at that point,
a lot of the walls, a lot of the greenhouses were heated by coal or you would
use horse manure. Of course, loads of horses in Britain at that point. It was
said that a man who had four horses could produce two pineapples every single
month to eat upon his own table. What about, I mean, given that most people
would though wouldn't be able to afford that and they would have had to rely on
things like turnips. Are there any interesting recipes which exist from the
past? No. No, I mean, British vegetable eating was appalling. I love food from
the past and I would be the first to extol its virtues. But we did treat
vegetables very badly. We tended to overboil them. And then if you were lucky,
you ate them with butter sauce or just plain butter if you could afford it. I
mean, the thing we tend to forget a lot of the time, I think, is that people
preserved a lot more. So even if you look right up really to the 50s and 60s,
preserved fruit and vegetables were what supplemented the seasonal stuff. So
rather than living on brassicas for the entire of the hunger gap between March
and May, we would eat pickled vegetables. Then canning came in, so it was tinned
vegetables. And then of course, there was the deep freeze craze. So everybody
bought frozen fruit and vegetables. And we tend to forget about that now because
there's this real emphasis on having our five a day and that all being fresh.
Although I suppose there are frozen foods, but I've come across a frozen, we get
tinned tomatoes, but not quite the same as fresh tomatoes. You don't get frozen
tomatoes or frozen cucumber do you? No, they're not. And there is something to
be said for trying to eat more seasonally. Of course there is. But I think
adding to that at the moment in particular, the fact that British growers have
openly said, well, normally they would be growing, they'd have planted tomato
seeds up in December to have tomatoes now, but they haven't done it because the
supermarkets are refusing to pay the price they need for that to happen. So it's
a lot more complicated than just saying, well, we should all eat seasonally. As
you've explained to us. Three ways are never easy. Dr. Annie Gray, many thanks.
I'm not going to share the turnip gratin recipe, which my producers sent me
because that does not look good. Thank you very much indeed for talking to us.
The time now is eight minutes to nine. And as we draw to a close this special
anniversary program marking a year since the start of the war in Ukraine, let me
go back to Lise in Kyiv. And Lise, you've been hearing from many different
correspondents, but of course, we've heard your reports too over the past 12
months. This must be a time for reflection for you as well. It is, Martha. And
what can one say but that earth shaking events on this scope and scale don't
come along very often. And thank goodness for that. But this has been a war
which stopped all of us, all of those listening to our program, stopped us in
our tracks, made us pause for thought. We all know more about war now, about how
we all overestimated Russia's military might, how we underestimated the
Ukrainians. We know a lot more about how a people, the civilians can come
together with this remarkable spirit and stoicism that you've heard some of in
this program. But for all of this light in this deep dark, there is enormous
loss. This is a catastrophe of our time. Cities erase, cities like Mariupol now
occupied by Russia and now being Russified, young Ukrainian soldiers dying day
in, day out in the same way that Russian soldiers are. And everyone from the
villages of South Sudan to the streets of Britain are directly or indirectly
affected by this war, by the prices for the food that we eat or the prices we
pay at the petrol pumps. And now at this one year mark, what we're hearing from
this program, despite the Ukrainian resolve that this is a war that they will
finish this year, it won't finish this year. This is a war that we will
experience the effects of for generations to come. We certainly will. Well,
thank you so much, Lise, for presenting today for us and for all those reports
that we've been hearing from you and all of our BBC colleagues throughout the
past 12 months. That's almost all from us. Our editors today were Samantha
Granville in Keeve, Laura Cooper and Purvi Patni in London. The studio director
was George Thomas. We're going to be leaving you now with reflections of one of
my own favourite writers. In fact, long before the war in Ukraine took place,
Andrei Kurkov, the Ukrainian writer, we've been hearing from on and off during
the year. And we asked him for his thoughts on the events of the past year. It
is difficult for me to remember life in pre-war Ukraine. It's not that I have
forgotten exactly. It's just that it now seems like a fairy tale, like something
I heard about as a child when I believed in fairy tales. My family and I loved
our road trips throughout Ukraine, including to the Donbas and Crimea. I wanted
my children to know Ukraine in all its variety, how the Donbas differs from
Zakarpattia and northern Ukraine from Bukovina. Many of the towns and villages
we fell in love with during our travels have been reduced to rubble or have been
occupied, seized by a tyrannical regime. The last 12 months are the most tragic
months in Ukraine's history. But can you compare tragedies? In 1932-1933,
several million Ukrainians died due to a famine orchestrated by Stalin. Only
openly discussed since independence, the tragedy is still a raw wound in
Ukraine. But can a past tragedy strengthen you against a current one, when you
see a large part of your country physically destroyed? In Mariupol, entire
apartment blocks with residents still inside shelled until they were unstable
structures and were pulled down by the invading forces, the dead residents still
inside. Tens of thousands of Ukrainian soldiers and civilians have been killed.
The Ukrainian prosecutor's office has already recorded more than 70,000 war
crimes committed by the Russian army and the Wagner mercenaries who will
investigate these crimes and when, if every day brings new atrocities. This war,
unlike any other, is being broadcast live to the whole world. Here the past is
fighting against the future, against Ukrainian culture and identity, here
representatives of Ukraine's elite must fight against professional criminals
released from prisons. These convicts were promised freedom if they survived six
months on the battlefield. Some of them have already returned home as heroes.
Some of those killed are buried as heroes in Russia's alleys of glory, next to
the graves of scientists, politicians and artists. Among the soldiers of the
Ukrainian army you find IT specialists, musicians, businessmen, poets and
farmers. They are fighting and dying for Ukraine every hour, every minute of the
day. They don't ask for rewards or privileges. All they want is victory in this
brutal war imposed on them, on us all, by the Russian aggressor. They say that
any anniversary is a reason to take stock. I do not want to sum up the results
and the consequences. The war is not finished yet. Any war ends with the
counting of the dead and wounded, the number of destroyed houses, schools and
universities, churches and museums. This terrible inventory will be drawn up but
later, when the war is over. For now, I can only say that the Ukrainians do not
give up. They believe in their victory. They are already restoring houses around
Kiev destroyed in March last year. They are thinking about the future after the
war, after the liberation of all Ukrainian territories occupied by Russia. As I
walk past the playground in Shevchenko Park, where one of the Russian missiles
exploded last October, I hear children playing in the sandbox using the F-word
about Putin. Kids will always pick up such phrases from their parents. I don't
blame their parents at all. The whole country thinks and speaks the same way.
And this phrase is one of the most common. But it makes me think of that lost
innocence. The fairy tale we lived in before this war.