TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15 with thousands of
episodes now on BBC Sounds. BBC News at midday. Labour have defended the
decision to offer a job to the former civil servant Sue Gray who oversaw the
investigation into lockdown parties in Downing Street. Some Conservatives say
the impartiality of her report into the scandal will be called into question if
she takes up the role as Sakia Starmer's Chief of Staff. Labour have said they
will abide by the decision of Parliament's anti-corruption watchdog, the
Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, which will decide the suitability
of the move. The Shadow Chancellor, Rachel Reeves, rejected suggestions of
impropriety. Sue Gray is somebody who has enormous respect from people across
the political spectrum, as somebody who for decades has shown the highest
integrity and standards in public life. The Labour Party has been looking for a
Chief of Staff for the last two or three months, well after the report that Sue
Gray wrote into Boris Johnson's partying at Downing Street. A court in Belarus
has handed a 10-year jail term to one of the winners of last year's Nobel Peace
Prize, Alice Bialiatsky. He was detained in the aftermath of mass demonstrations
in 2020 against the re-election of the country's strongman president, Alexander
Lukashenko. Amnesty International has condemned what it said was a blatant act
of injustice. With more, here's our correspondent Steve Rosenberg. The Russian
mercenary group, Wagner, says its forces have surrounded the east Ukrainian city
of Bakhmut. The area has been the focus of heavy fighting in recent weeks, with
Kyiv acknowledging that its troops are under severe pressure. Our Europe
regional editor Paul Moss reports. Bakhmut is now subject to constant gunfire
and explosions. Those who remain describe a population suffering severe
deprivation, while Ukrainian forces try to hold out against the Russian
mercenaries apparently now surrounding them. The claims by Wagner's Yevgeny
Prigozhin can't be taken at face value, but Ukraine has acknowledged that its
troops in Bakhmut are under severe pressure and may have to withdraw. Casualties
on both sides have been severe, all this for a city which many believe in the
end is of little strategic value. The MP Neil Coyle has apologised to the House
of Commons and agreed to serve a five-day suspension for drunkenly abusing two
people in a parliamentary bar last year. An independent expert panel said he'd
breached bullying and harassment guidelines, including using foul and abusive
language with racial overtones. Labour have already withdrawn the whip from Mr
Coyle, who represents Bermondsey and Old Southwark. He told MPs he hadn't had a
drink in a year and wanted to change for the better. I want to say how sorry I
am for the upset and offence my behaviour caused last year. I wish to
specifically apologise to the two complainants who were subject to my drunk and
offensive behaviour and attitude. I cannot apologise enough for the harm and
upset cause and am ashamed of my conduct frankly. It should not have happened.
Arctic Monkeys and Guns and Roses will headline the first two days of this
year's Glastonbury Festival before Sir Elton John tops the third. Some of the
other acts that will be performing include Christine in the Queens, Lewis
Capaldi and Cat Stevens. The festival's co-organiser Emily Evis said the
headline acts are all male because of an industry pipeline problem. And Ken
Bruce has presented his show on Radio 2 for the last time. He joined the station
in 1984 and made his mid-morning show the most popular radio programme in the
UK. Ken Bruce is leaving Radio 2 to join Greatest Hits Radio. BBC News. Now on
Radio 4, it's Antisocial. Hello, it's Antisocial. I'm Adam Fleming. Every week
we'll look at an issue that's being discussed on social media and we promise to
give you information you'll want to save instead of deleting straight away. This
episode, the publishers of Roald Dahl's novels took out all mentions of the word
fat. Then they sort of put them back in again. It triggered a big debate about
the right way to talk about weight. Are you honestly going to tell me that the
word fat will have children screaming with fear or unable to sleep at night?
What a load of cobblers. Hold on a second. I thought people had reclaimed the
word fat and it was okay to be fat now. No, our bodies are not trends. Our body
shapes are not trends. Does this look healthy? No. Just lose fat. I am so beyond
done with people having opinions about other people's bodies now. This happened
as Brendan Fraser is nominated for loads of awards for playing a severely obese
man in the film The Whale. At the same time, a photo shoot by the actor Lily
Rose Depp was dubbed the return of heroin chic, the fashion for super
skinniness. So in this program, there's a fight about what the science proves
about being overweight. We'll hear the evidence. There's a fat liberation
movement. We'll meet one of the activists. An injection for diabetes that leads
to dramatic weight loss is huge on social media. We'll read the small print on
the packet. And if you want to get involved in the discussion online, you can
use the hashtag BBC Antisocial. And with me live throughout the hour on
Antisocial are two people who come at this discussion from quite different
perspectives. From one of our BBC studios, we have Ella Siso, who goes by the
name Fat Girl Fashion Inspo on Instagram. Hi, Ella. Hello. So tell me the story
of how you ended up with the account Fat Girl Fashion Inspo. So it was about six
years ago. I spent a lot of time on Instagram and I just didn't see many people
that were like myself. So I was, you know, like plus size and I liked like
colourful, interesting style. But I didn't really see many people that
represented myself. And I saw lots of like, you know, generically slim,
standardly attractive women making great careers. And I always loved fashion. I
love taking pictures of myself and showing off my style. So I was like, well,
maybe I will go and be that person that I want to see. So I started the account
with the goal of kind of growing it into something. And yeah, I worked really,
really hard putting out lots of images and sharing my look and just being kind
of confident and happy within my body. So, you know, never spoke about wanting
to lose weight or not being the size I like or didn't really speak negatively
about anything about my appearance. I was just representing somebody my size,
wearing things I enjoyed wearing and you know, being happy and confident in
that. And you use the word fat quite freely. Yeah. Well, when I first started, I
think it was for two reasons, really. So the first reason was, it was a bit of a
defence. Because as I said, I hadn't seen people like myself, even though they
were about I just wasn't in that community. So I didn't really know of them. So
I decided to use it. I liked the alliteration. And I also wanted to reclaim the
word too. So I just wanted to take it and be like, well, this is what I'm
calling myself. This is just a neutral descriptor. Because I did think that
people would, you know, give me abuse and try and call me fat as an insult. And
I was like, well, I've called myself it now. So I mean, you can say it, but you
know, it's not going to have a negative effect on me. A bit of reclaiming. Yeah,
definitely. And are you part of this movement that's called body positivity?
Because I hear that phrase being used quite a lot online. Yeah, I mean, I would
definitely say so I think my account has a strong body positivity message. Just
about being able to accept yourself and be happy within your body and not let
your size hold you back from living your life to the fullest and enjoying
yourself. And, you know, specifically with my account, being able to wear
whatever you want. And I don't know if you're a big Roald Dahl fan, or if you
were when you were a kid, but what do you think about the word fat being taken
out and then actually put back in, in some versions? Well, I definitely was a
Roald Dahl fan. I think everybody was when I was growing up. I think things
should change with the times. But it just depends on the rest of the
connotations as well. Because if you would still putting a negative connotation
to someone for their size or appearance, it's still the same message, whether
it's the word fat or not. And yeah, I am kind of more concerned with the anti
semitic things that he said. So that's quite a concern when it comes to his
work. Although that takes us back to where you started by saying that the word
fat can be used in a neutral way. And you're okay with that. Right. So joining
me in the studio is Nazia Khatun, a fitness trainer. Hi, Nazia. Hi. What sort of
training do you do? So I use neuroscience and fitness to champion mental health
and self love. And it's embodying all of that to your real potential and who you
can become. And fitness is just a tool that I use. My own background came from
having an eating disorder. I'm from a Bangladeshi Muslim background. We never
speak about these kind of topics in our culture. So it's like literally, how do
we say it, brushed under the rug. We don't speak about mental health. There's a
lot of stigma and taboo around these topics. I was a fanatic about exercise and
everything. And it kind of backfires, fired on me later on in my life. What I do
on my page is totally away from what normal fitness coaches do. Like we see
fitness influencers showing butts and, you know, all these kind of abs and all
of that stuff. And it's really informing and educating the audience what real
exercise is about and how it can help us mental health. Again, give us an
example of that. Well, look, physical health and mental health are
interconnected. You can't take that away. OK, that's the biology of the body.
That's the design of the body. Your body is a natural pharmacist in itself, in
the chemicals that it produces, the happy chemicals, the negative chemicals and
everything. So when we use exercise, how can it enhance our energy levels? How
can it enhance our relationship with ourselves? And how we optimise in mental
health. Mental health has become one of the most scrutinising topics since COVID
as well. And we had a horrible wake up call with how much people were struggling
with their mental health. And I think people took control and ownership of
exercising. And just in terms of your actual training practice, how do you link
the mental and the physical? Because we know what a trainer is. You can, or you
have a picture of a trainer. It's like, give me 20. And what are you actually
doing? So I'm very, very different in terms of what a normal fitness coach
should be. There's a lot of love and compassion. It's a lot of coaching. It's a
lot of talking. And if you can explain to people why they're doing what they're
doing, right? Our thoughts dictate our feelings. Our feelings create a
behaviour, then habits. And that becomes a reality for who we are. And the power
of the mind, we haven't even tapped into it. The power of the body. To feel real
empowerment, you're going to understand the science and how we are made out of
to understand yourself, to master yourself, to educate yourself about yourself.
So most of my programs are done in a way where we don't talk about weight loss.
Weight loss is actually a by-product. I focus mainly on the source of self-love
and what it means to love yourself, which is nourishing yourself through food,
good food, movement, exercising, drinking lots of water, getting daylight. You
know, all these kind of things that we don't see that belongs in the facet of
exercise. And do you use the word fat with your clients? All the time. They use
it themselves. I'm not one of those people who's going to play into this idea
that we have to remove words that have been there for years and years and years.
And we've demonised certain things, certain words. And for me, it's about
saying, look, it's OK. It's OK to use those words without getting cancelled or
without feeling like you're fat shaming somebody. And there's a lot of trauma
behind a lot of people's issues that we need to speak about as well. Does any of
your clients ever say, please don't use the word fat with me? No, I have a very
open relationship with all my clients and I tell them this is who I am. And the
beautiful thing about being who I am now is I've had experience of an eating
disorder on both sides. I understand it on both sides, what it means to be
skinny, what it means to be a bit overweight, what it means to be depressed,
suicidal. And you have to save yourself first. And one of the things we do in
this society is we become victim and we start blaming other people. Oh, he
called me that you're not allowed. And we just start creating this group. Misery
loves company. You can remember this as well. So it's taking away people from
what parts of the brain that they're operating from. And would you count
yourself as a body positivity person? I love the movement. I'm not I'm going to
make this very clear. I'm all about being happy in your body, acceptance in your
body. I think it's a great idea. But I'm also very, very skeptical about the
whole how far we've gone with the toxic body positive movement. And that's where
the problem is nowadays that we need to speak about and actually make people
understand that this is dangerous. We're playing a very dangerous game now.
Okay, well, lots to discuss. And one of the main criticisms of body positivity
activism and this newfound sensitivity we seem to have as a society about our
descriptions of body shapes is that it minimises the very real problem of
obesity and all the health implications that come with it. We've now got Dr
Giles Yeo live from Cambridge, where he works as a research scientist at the
university. And he's also made several documentaries for the BBC about obesity.
Hi, Giles. Hello. Good afternoon. Thank you for having me. No, thanks for coming
on and just sort of sketch out your area of research. So I'm interested in the
genetics of body weight, on which one end of the spectrum just happens to sit
obesity. And so we're interested in why some people are small, medium and large
in this environment that we live in. So I study obesity and I study why some
people have obesity and some people don't. And what do we know scientifically
about why people put on weight? Like what is weight? What is weight? I mean,
weight is obviously just your size. Weight is a number on the scale. What is
obesity, however, is a more complex question. I mean, if you actually look at
clinical descriptions, people say BMI, body mass index, above 30. You know,
that's just a number. I think that we are becoming, we within the field are
becoming to be aware that obesity means carrying too much fat that it begins to
influence your health, which then obviously begs the question, how much is too
much fat? And that is where the nuance comes in, because too much fat is
different for different people. Okay, there's a few things to pick up on there.
First of all, BMI, body mass index. I mean, the fact is you can go to the NHS
website and type in your height and your weight and it will calculate it for
you. Do you think we should stop using that or we should just be careful how BMI
is used? I think BMI is very useful on a population basis because it's free. You
only need your height and your weight. And so as a policymaker, if you want to
track body weight within the population, BMI is the answer. The problem with BMI
is that on an individual basis, if you go to someone famously, rugby players
have the same BMI as someone who doesn't have as much muscle. So on an
individual basis, BMI is not particularly useful. You need to use other
measures. Okay, so we shouldn't get too hung up on it individually, but as a
country, we should be looking at it. Okay, so then to pick up on your point
about the individuality of this, give us a way of thinking about that. So, okay,
so I think we got a question about why is it bad to carry too much fat? And the
answer is because the safest place to store fat is in your fat cells, because
that's their role. But when they're not in your fat cells, they then go to other
places, such as your liver, such as your muscle, and it begins to cause
problems. You have type 2 diabetes, you've got certain heart diseases, things
start to happen, okay, for that. And so that's the problem with actually
carrying too much fat for that. And in terms of individuals, are you basically
saying that we all have our own healthy weight, and so therefore you can't apply
your healthy weight to someone else? Absolutely. So famously, East Asians, I'm
ethnically Chinese, South Asians, Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, cannot gain
that much weight before they become at risk of getting metabolic diseases, okay?
Whereas if you look at white people, or famously, Polynesians, for example, you
can get far larger before, on average, before you actually end up with the risk
of getting disease. And this is down to safe fat carrying capacity. So different
people carry fat, carry different amounts of fat safely. And that's the thing.
So the problem is, there are going to be skinny people with diabetes, type 2
diabetes, and people who are larger who are perfectly healthy, okay? But the
issue is the moment you surpass your own personal safe fat carrying capacity,
you will end up with illness. So that's the nuance, where you can have larger
people who are healthy, skinny people who are unhealthy, but if you surpass your
own personal safe fat carrying capacity, you will become ill. And what does that
mean for medical treatment then? Because really, that means just very, very
personalized medicine for everyone. Hugely personalized. I mean, I have to say
that this personal fat carrying capacity is relatively new science over the past
few years, actually done here in Cambridge, not by me, but done here in
Cambridge. And so what we, within the field, are trying to look for are
signatures, genetic signatures, because that's actually easy to measure, so that
we can identify what someone's safe fat carrying capacity is. Because then you
end up with a far more nuanced discussion about what obesity means, right? So
you can have someone who's slightly skinnier, but look, dude, you know, you
don't have the right safe fat carrying capacity. You have to be below this body
weight. Whereas someone who's larger and perfectly healthy, well, maybe you can
then have a different discussion with that person. We need more nuance in this
discussion, and so we need better science. We need to understand our safe fat
carrying capacity. Love that you would call your patient, dude. There's a phrase
I've been seeing a lot this week when I've been looking into this, and it's this
phrase, healthy at any size. I'm guessing from what you've just said, you think
that phrase is completely lacking in nuance. There is health at many sizes,
depending on who you are. There can't be health at any size because of this
individuality, right? As I said, because the moment you surpass your safe fat
carrying capacity, you won't be healthy. So there is no health at any size, but
there's health at many sizes. Giles, thank you very much for that. Stick around
and we'll discuss the implications of all of this with our guests. Nazia, you
were very enthusiastic about some of the things that Giles was saying there.
Yeah, because he said something like, when you surpass your own personal weight
gain, right, that's where the danger line is of what is healthy and what isn't.
And this is why I have a problem with people who are activists in quotation
marks and advocates of this movement. And this is where it becomes a very toxic
positivity movement, because why are you now promoting obesity and unhealthy
body images? And I always say this, I suffered from anorexia, bulimia and binge
eating. And the reason why I suffered from that was because back then we only
had magazines, we didn't have social media. It was Britney Spears on the front
pages, flat stomachs. I thought that was the idea of what it means to be
accepted in society. It was unhealthy. And we had this lady called Isabella
Caro, I think her name was, a Brazilian anorexic model who actually passed away.
And we banned a size zero, right? We're not allowed to have size zeros anymore.
If that is the case of a size zero and skinny models, why are we then promoting
the opposite of that? Well, we're going to come on to size zero probably a bit
later on in the programme when we talk about some of the labels that are being
used at the moment. But Ella, what's your reaction to hearing some of that
science then, that actually health and weight are quite connected when this
movement is trying to sort of disconnect them? I wouldn't say that the movement
is trying to disconnect them. I think it's really interesting what he was saying
about how it's so personalised. And that's, I think, like one of my main points
all the time. It's that you can't look at someone and know whether or not that
they are healthy. So it isn't about saying everyone's healthy or they're
unhealthy. And it naturally... No, but there's actually a slogan, healthy at any
size, which is saying that. Yeah, well, you know, I haven't promoted that
myself. Fair enough. I think that they have got, their points are really good.
You know, the general points of that campaign. But yeah, I guess it's
interesting to hear about the new science and how that can be applied. And
hopefully that gives people more of an understanding. And just to understand
that everybody's different. There's no set way for all people to be that makes
them, you know, the healthiest or the unhealthiest. And I really do believe that
there should be much more personalised healthcare. So I hope more comes out of
that. I'd really like to hear more about that research. And hopefully that kind
of proves the body positivity point that anyone can be healthy. But I also
really believe that people's value isn't their health. And lots of people are
disabled or, you know, have health issues that are out of their control. And
they're just as valid and deserving of respect as anyone else. And Ella, what do
you think of Nazia's assertion that body positivity is actually potentially
toxic because it's encouraging people to be too overweight? I, well, I don't
think that you can encourage people to be overweight. It's not the same as
encouraging people to lose weight or die of obesity. Lose weight or diet. You
know, I've made some videos in the past. One was actually a mock video of a diet
tea advert. And I called it obesity, saying that you could drink this tea and
you'd put on all this weight and get the fat belly you've always dreamed of. You
know, it's not a thing. Like, nobody does that. I think body positivity is
promoting that you are allowed to be comfortable in your skin, no matter what
size you are. You're allowed to be happy. You deserve respect and you deserve
all the basic human rights, the same as everyone else. And Dr Giles, what's kind
of the, what would be the medical scientific view of the body positivity
movement? Is it a positive thing, as it says, or a negative thing? So I think I
understand where body positivity has come from. I mean, because weight stigma in
this world is sadly endemic. Incidentally, just for those of you who don't know,
tomorrow, March the 4th, happens to be World Obesity Day. In which we're trying
to remove stigma away from obesity. And so I think I understand where it comes
from. And I think people have got to be comfortable in themselves. But I think
we've got to be a mature society and hold two thoughts in our head. That
carrying too much fat can be bad for you. But we're not blaming anybody who is
carrying too much fat. And I think that's the important message. And as a
scientist, how does it feel being in what seems to be an increasingly
politicised space? I mean, I think science is politicised anyway. And we are in
a polarised world. I think all we've got as scientists is we just have to just
keep saying that whatever this polarisation is happening, there is always a
nuance. And keep talking about the nuance. And I think most sensible human
beings will understand and hopefully embrace that nuance. And Nazia, is there a
danger that you're not being nuanced enough when you say body positivity is
toxic? Yeah, because this is where I find it quite hard. What does it mean to be
comfortable in your body? I see first-hand experiences and I deal with these
emotions that these clients go through. Men with erectile dysfunction,
fertility, not being able to conceive, not being able to run after your children
because your body's too overweight or you're having to carry extra flesh. Or
another one, I'm just going to say like men having man boobs. It's not natural.
Okay, this is not how the body was designed. And we didn't have this issue many
years ago. And all of a sudden, like if you looked at the statistics of obesity
and what's happening, it's costing the NHS over £6 billion. In the USA, it's
estimated like £173 billion goes on obesity and actually helping people with
diabetes, heart-related issues, liver disease, whatever you want to name it
under that umbrella of obesity. That money that we spend trying to cure people
could be spent feeding planet Earth 100 times over. We wouldn't have any issues
with starvation and poverty. So there's a fine line of when we keep saying be
comfortable with your body, right? If you are somebody who is promoting and
through imagery understand what the brain interprets as what is acceptable and
how we see it through our filters, that's the danger line of it. What are we
then promoting? And this has become a propaganda in a way of just acceptance. So
what are we actually accepting? We're accepting obesity is okay then. Well, you
know what? Let's listen to one of the icons of the movement. It's the pop star
and rapper Lizzo, who describes herself as a big woman. She is a great dancer, a
great singer, great performer, but she's also someone who divides opinion on
whether we should celebrate all body types. Let's have a listen to her at
Glastonbury. I love Lizzo. And I just think it kind of shows what we were
speaking about earlier. Like she's literally a dancer. She is exercising all
day, every day. I don't know if any of you have watched her show where she's,
it's called Watch Out for the Big Girls and she's like getting her backing
dancers for her shows. And it just shows you like the hard strenuous work that
they're doing. They're exercising all day, every day. That is their whole job.
And yet, you know, she's still big. So I think it just goes to show that people
are just naturally different sizes. People are born at different weights and
different heights. She works out all the time, but people will still hate on her
under every article that's posted about her. So yeah, they want her to lose
weight, but she's literally exercises every day, all day. Probably meant much,
much more than anyone who's commenting on it. Nazia? I absolutely am for people
who are big or plus size and everything. And if they're truly happy, clap to
you. But the flip side of it is not most people are. This is why we have a
pandemic issue with obesity. This is why we are having this discussion. That's
because one person like Lizzo is globally famous and, you know, she promotes her
physical health, being a dancer and everything. Does not speak for everybody
who's out there, who's of a plus size or maybe struggling with depression,
anxiety behind closed doors. And you know what the fascinating thing I want to
say as well, like, I actually work with a few and I have done in the past with
these influencers. When you're promoting certain things like this and you're
going home with a breathing machine to sleep at night because you can't breathe
properly or you can't walk properly because you got issues going on with your
physical body. That's the thing that we have to tackle. What are we promoting?
Again, I come back to this. What are we promoting and what is it for? Is it for
happiness? Is it promoting body positivity? And what are we looking at? What
angle are we looking at it from as well? I hope Dr. Giles Yeo is still there.
But I was just going to ask you, help us understand what's the link between
being an overweight person and seemingly being very active. Is that proof that
you are healthy or can you, is it all a bit more complicated than that? I think
we have a tendency to equate today's world, equate weight to health. Now, there
is a link between weight and health, but it doesn't mean that if you're heavier,
you're unhealthy. And doesn't mean if you're skinny, you are healthy. So I think
we need to think about health and it's going to be individualized. You have
Lizzo, who clearly is relatively healthy head of size. She can bounce about, she
can do a whole two hour show, what have you. She's clearly healthy enough to do
that. You're going to have other people, supermodels, who are not healthy, no
matter what they look like. So I think that it is a nuance, it is a nuanced
discussion, but there are going to be people the size of Lizzo who are very,
very, very unhealthy. And they need to lose weight. And so I think it's all
about the individual. But if someone like Lizzo is doing a two hour show and
bouncing about and clearly not out of breath and doing anything, she clearly is
healthy in her weight. Giles, thank you very much. We love nuance in this
program and it's been great having you on today. Thank you so much, guys. Thank
you. Now, one of the phrases we've used a lot already today on Antisocial is
body positivity. We're all getting used to saying it now. But what does it
actually mean? And where does the phrase come from? I spoke to Tigress Osborne.
She's the chair of America's National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance,
also known as NAFA. NAFA was started in 1969. Our founder, Bill Fabry, was a
young married man with a fat wife who he absolutely adored. And he was looking
around and seeing the ways the world was treating her, how that was affecting
her in terms of emotional ways, but also how that was affecting her in really
practical ways. Could she find clothes? Could she find a job? Those kinds of
things. And in 1967, in New York City, there was an event called the Fat In. And
there's about 500 people that gathered in Central Park, just sort of in the
style of that time of, you know, sit-ins and teach-ins and everything. And it
was a fat in just to show up and declare, it's okay to be fat. We can celebrate
being fat. And of course, the 60s was the flourishing of the civil rights
movement. Was there a link between that and the fat movement? There was
definitely inspiration there. NAFTA is the first organized and documented fat
rights group. And then of course, in other kinds of progressive and social
justice movements, there was fat leadership, in particular in the Black American
civil rights movement, who were talking about fatness as part of economic
oppression and racial oppression. And then in 1972, a radical feminist group of
therapists and others in Los Angeles, who were feeling like NAFTA was not
radical enough or was not pushing hard enough, they formed a group called the
Fat Underground. We are a group of radical fat feminist women. We see our
oppression as fat women as being inherent to sexism. We demand good health care.
The Fat Underground has done quite a bit of medical research. And in their Fat
Liberation Manifesto, the basic argument is that fat people are equal and
deserve the same protections under the US Constitution as any other citizens.
It's just basically, you know, a statement of like, we are people, we're not
going to sit down and shut up about the way that you treat us badly. Let's go
and let's do this in partnership with other oppressed peoples. What's the rule
of thumb you give people for using the word fat? How do you make sure you're
using that word in a way that is not offensive to you? If you're using it as a
neutral description, the same way that you might say someone has brown eyes or
blonde hair or that they are tall, then you're doing okay. We understand that
the word is loaded with a lot of trauma for people. So we often do tell people
we're trying to de-stigmatize the word by using it more. You can't end stigma
about something that you won't even say. NAFTA also played a role in reinforcing
that it's okay to use the word fat. I mean, it's been in the name of our
organization since the very beginning. And fat liberationists use it
enthusiastically and unapologetically. A weekend dedicated to fat pride, fat
liberation. 150 fat people, most of them female from all across the country,
come together in a kind of consciousness raising session. And is that an example
of body positivity? So fat activism is certainly the grand elder of body
positivity in many ways, right? It's not the only thing that inspires what the
modern body positivity movement as we know it. There's also inspiration from
queer rights movement, from other kinds of body discrimination, you know, people
who are disabled. But a lot of the language of early body positivity especially
comes from things like the fat undergrounds, fat liberation manifesto. Then
let's just pick out a few things that have happened over the last kind of 10, 20
years. One of them, which a lot of people know, of course, is the Dove campaign.
The campaign for what they call real beauty. We spend a lot of time as women
analyzing and trying to fix the things that aren't quite right. And we should
spend more time appreciating the things that we do like. Dove started doing
self-esteem work about 20 years ago. And they began creating media that was less
edited, that featured women who looked different than your typical beauty
campaign models. They did work around showing how beauty images are manipulated.
When that campaign launched, I was actually a high school teacher. And I used
some of their curriculum with my students around like showing how photos were
retouched or edited to give us these beauty ideals to aspire to that weren't
even actually real. Do you think you're more beautiful than you say? Yeah. One
of the things that we've seen with body positivity over the years, usually when
people use that phrase, they're usually talking about the sort of social media
movement that started on Tumblr and Instagram in the early 2000s. There was a
groundswell happening there. The body is not an apology. It is not a father's
backhand. And that started with Black women and femmes and with fat people and
with LGBTQIA people and disabled people really making self-created media to make
up for the places where the mainstream media leaves us out. You are not failing.
The body is not a cavity, not a hole to be filled, to be yanked out, not a
broken thing. And as that became more popular, it doesn't always look as Black
and Brown and queer as it did when it started and as disabled as it did when it
started. Thank you to Tigress Osborne. You're listening to Antisocial live on
BBC Radio 4, and we're also a podcast on BBC Sounds. If you would like to get
involved in our discussion online, please do so using the hashtag BBC
Antisocial. With me throughout this hour are fitness trainer Nazia Khatun and
body positivity activist Ella Cisseau. So Ella, do you feel like you're part of
a political movement? I mean, yeah, I would definitely say so. I don't feel that
myself I'm like really pushing or doing anything groundbreaking. Although it
does seem that some people who may be not involved might think that I was. I
think activist would be a really generous name for me. At the end of the day,
I'm just posting pictures of myself saying that I look nice and encouraging
other people just to enjoy their lives, enjoy themselves and not to be hard on
themselves, not to hate themselves just because of their size. Nazia, do you
feel that you're a part of a movement too? What movement would that be? Oh,
yeah, in a weird way, yes, because I'm all for body positivity. I'm not going to
shut anybody down for that. My problem, like I said, it lies in the body, the
toxic movement, the agenda that we've proposed nowadays showing up TikTok,
social media and everything without really understanding the facets of what the
body needs, your mental health. It's like you're building a house, the
foundation. If the foundation of that house isn't strong, that house is going to
crumble. So if the foundation of the human body isn't strong, and that comes
from nourishing yourself with good water, food, knowing what foods to eat, it
means you're going to have a healthy growing body, right? And again, it's I feel
like this is a psychological warfare on the conflict information that we have
out here. One hand, you know, to be happy. What does it mean to be happy? Then
we have this other side where social media is flawed. Look, I don't believe in
anorexia. I don't also believe in these bodybuilders who show six packs. I mean,
that's toxic because you can't attain that. It's not sustainable. And the flip
side... Why do people lap it up so much then? Because we look as humans, we love
looking at images and things. We like looking at pretty things. We like looking
at nice things. That's just us, OK? It's just the way the human is, right? And
when we look at it, we want to become that person. Then you go to the gym and
you're killing yourself because you don't know these people are on steroids,
performing enhancing drugs, etc, etc. That's when it becomes a horrible problem
for people who don't understand it. And on the flip side of it, if we are
promoting obesity, there has to be a general care of what are you saying. Self-
love is very different to promoting obesity and healthy, because that means we
are now confusing the young minds and young children. And there was something I
read on Metro paper the other day, and it really caught my eye. And it said
something like the UK government stopped putting around child obesity because it
is getting out of hand. One in five children are now overweight or obese. We're
losing young children before parents. That's where the problem is. And young
minds are vulnerable. Our prefrontal cortex of the brain doesn't even develop
till 25. So whatever we're feeding in, and our brain understands things through
images, what is the message we're getting? Ella? I have a problem with the term
promoting obesity, because as I said, it kind of takes me back to like, you
can't promote obesity. There's nothing for you to buy. I mean, you could go out
and put on loads of weight if you wanted to, but that's just not something that
people are doing. And yeah, I just think- Yeah, but I think Nazia's point is it
could prevent somebody from doing something that maybe they need to do for their
health. I just think that except being happy with your body doesn't prevent you
from doing something that's good for your health. It's all about the
individualistic approach that Giles was talking about, and what Nazia's touched
on as well. Like, I don't think, I don't go around being like, oh, well, I'm
fine. I'm comfortable in my body. Therefore, when I have this health condition,
I'm not going to go to the doctors. I don't, you know, not eat healthy foods. I
take my vitamins, you know, just because I'm saying, enjoy your life. Don't yo-
yo diet, you know, don't starve yourself. That doesn't mean I'm not taking care
of myself, and there's a big issue there with associating obesity or people
being fat and thinking it's the same thing as not looking after yourself. I
mean, I know that I, along with many people that I know online, regularly have
posted about going to the gym, doing exercises. I did loads of lives doing
workouts during lockdown, and it's not one thing or the other. I don't post
saying, you know, you must go and eat this ice cream now so you can be fat and
happy. Do you think there's such a thing as fat phobia? Oh, 100%, and it's
dangerous, and, you know, that's the thing. What actually is it? What form does
it take? I guess the same as any kind of discrimination. So the way that it
comes out most dangerously is when it's in the medical fields. You know, there's
lots of stories of people going to the doctors saying, you know, I've got this
pain or this issue, and they're just being prescribed with, well, lose weight.
They're not, they're being basically medically gaslit because they're not having
their problems listened to because people are fat phobic, and they think of
things one dimensionally, and they associate everything with weight. And as we
know from hearing Giles, who made really, really great points that that's not
the case. So yeah, fat phobia is dangerous in terms of people's health. Would
you say fat phobia, so your definition of fat phobia is it's not what
necessarily, like nasty comments on online or like other phobias we can imagine
in society. It's actually sort of a lack of care or a lack of understanding.
It's more subtle. I'd say it's both. It's multifaceted. So there's the dangerous
element where, the directly dangerous element where your health condition might
be ignored or not looked into just because of your weight. And there's the other
side, which is also, you know, dangerous of being bullied, being picked on, made
fun of. And that is all comes under fat phobia as well. Nazia, do you ever be,
are you ever accused online of being fat phobic? No, I'm often called fat
shaming. And fat phobic is a ridiculous concept. That's saying I'm scared of fat
people, right? Well, no, it's kind of, it's not phobia as in like a phobia of
spiders, is it? It's a phobia as in a phenomenon of being sort of anti something
or. Why are we calling fat phobic? It just doesn't make sense to me. Well, okay,
fat shaming then. So what sort of comments have you made that then were accused
of being fat shaming? Look, we, personal trainers, doctors, nurses, anybody in
that kind of environment, we're here to save lives. We're not here to, we have a
passion for human lives. Okay. And when we, well, I've been called fat shaming
because if I point out the obvious things that people are doing, for example,
obesity is, or overweight people, you're eating too much, a large amount of
food, junk food, processed food, sugar, okay? Lack of exercise. We are in a
lifestyle, society is now all about sitting down and everything's at
convenience. We have instant gratification. You press a button, food is
delivered to your house. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And we could talk about food for
hundreds of hours, but in terms of just fat shaming and how it works online. So
was there ever a comment where you made, someone said, oh, you're fat shaming.
And then you went back to your original comment and thought, well, maybe I was
too harsh. Yeah, I have actually. I'm not gonna lie because it makes me feel
worried. Like, am I being- What did you say? Well, it's trying to explain,
again, educating people. I'm not trying to be nasty. I was that fat girl once. I
was that anorexic girl once. I was also a boxer with an athletic physique. I
understand the pressure we have. And again, female body has been scrutinized
through God knows decades of years. And we don't, we put so much attention on
what is the definition of beauty and the standards of beauty. And you gotta
remember, I come from a background, from an Asian background. We are always in
the limelight of how amazing our body should look. Thin is beautiful and
accepted. Being fat is not accepted. So culturally, we already, I am already
inducting to you what I believe, what I think is acceptable as well. So that's
my own filter. But also like, you know, when you understand the functioning of
the body, like in Islam, we have a saying, leave the stomach one third for food,
air and water. And another thing we have is, do not make the stomach a graveyard
for animals, right? You need to understand how energy works. Everything in life
is energy. So our body needs to feel that. You need to feel it in the right way.
At the start of the program, we talked about the juxtaposition of an actor
playing a very, very obese man, but then Johnny Depp's daughter kind of bringing
back what they call heroin chic. Do you think it's actually becoming, and
actually there's a lot of comment around that Lily Rose Depp picture that
actually it's really unhealthy. Do you think actually we're going in the other
direction and being too skinny is now becoming a bad, seen as a bad thing? Being
too skinny is unhealthy as well. It goes back to, is it Ella? Yeah. What she
said about what is real health. Like, you know, you can be skinny and unhealthy
and you can be overweight and unhealthy. And weight should not be a barometer of
what is real health, really. There's a difference between health and fitness.
And either way is toxic. Being too skinny is toxic. Being overweight is too
toxic. And we have to address the mental health as well in this situation as
well. Okay. Well, now at this point in anti-social, we have to address the two
new anti-obesity drugs that are taking social media by storm. And I really do
mean by storm. And here to explain is producer Phoebe Keane. Hi, Phoebe. Hello.
So back in November, Kim Kardashian posted a video of herself squeezing into a
dress once worn by Marilyn Monroe. She was going to wear it to the Met Gala in
New York. I'm just so grateful that even for the opportunity. This prompted lots
of discussion online about whether she was using something called a Zempik. Kim
Kardashian has denied ever taking the drug, but the phrase has now got 300
million views on TikTok. And then another product called Wigovi got a boost when
the Twitter owner Elon Musk tweeted that he used it to stay in shape. So what
are Ozempik and Wigovi? And actually, how do they work? Do they work? Well, so
Ozempik is used to treat type 2 diabetes and Wigovi is used as a treatment for
weight loss. They're both made by the same company and they both use the same
main ingredient. So patients inject themselves once a week and it suppresses
their appetite. So they feel full, they eat less. So in February last year,
Wigovi was approved for use by the NHS, but only if the person has at least one
weight-related condition, so high blood pressure or heart disease and a BMI of
at least 35. Ozempik has also been approved for use on the NHS for people with
type 2 diabetes. And do we know how effective they are? And also does that
effectiveness come with side effects as well? Well, in trials, Wigovi helped
obese people lose about two stone on average. But as with all drugs, there may
be some side effects. So Wigovi say common side effects include nausea,
diarrhoea, vomiting and constipation. And they also say it may cause possible
thyroid tumours. So in the studies, it caused thyroid tumours in rodents. They
don't know if it will cause tumours in people. I have to say online, it sounds
like lots of people are taking these drugs, but not because they've been
prescribed by a doctor for diabetes. Exactly. That's the main concern, that
people are using the drug off-label, so they don't have a prescription. So a few
days ago, the New York magazine, The Cut, published an article quoting several
anonymous sources saying lots of the actors and models they knew were on it.
Obviously, we can't verify that ourselves. And the manufacturers of the drug,
Novo Nordisk, said they do not promote, suggest or encourage off-label use of
the medicine, and they're committed to fully complying with all the applicable
laws and regulations. What we can say though, is that the drug has become so
popular so quickly that the drug company can't make it fast enough. And they
just ran out in the UK and the US. Last year, they said it increased demand, it
led to a shortage and apologised that the supply couldn't meet the demand. And
another thing we can definitely say is that it's being discussed all over social
media and TikTok. This medicine has taught me for the first time what full is.
Week five done and I've lost 12 pounds in total. Painless, easy peasy, lemon
squeezy. If I can do it, you can do it. So it seems that for some, the skinny
look might be back. So the star of the TV series, The Good Place and podcast
host, Jameela Jamil, posted on Instagram that because of the weight loss
injections that most of her peers are on, the sample clothes that she's being
sent by designers are getting even smaller again, like they were 10 years ago.
And then she says, all you see is tiny people and then you think something's
wrong with you. Thank you very much, Phoebe. Ella, does the Ozempic craze show
that maybe the body positivity movement hasn't worked because people still
massively want to be thin and they'll use whatever tool is available to get
there? It's really, sounds really concerning to me. I would say that body shapes
have always been a trend, which is really, really worrying. And I think that
it's horrible that that's the case. Like it does feel a bit like body positivity
and being curvaceous was on trend. And now we're going back with the Y2K 90s
fashion back to like the heroin chic look. And I am really disappointed that it
seems to be going that way because I do think it's dangerous. Any kind of body
trend being a trend is gonna be bad for the majority of people because most
people won't fit the ideals. And I don't think that being skinny ever actually
went away, even in the height of this body positivity. I think that was always
the main goal for most people. But I'm really concerned that we don't know if
these injections are gonna cause tumours. Is losing weight really quickly
actually better than maybe getting a tumour? And also the health benefits of
losing weight really quickly are also negative from what I understand. Yeah, we
don't know for sure about the tumours. There's still some research to be done on
that. Nazia, what do you think this Zempik craze tells us about the state of the
world? It just goes to show how obsessed we are, again, with this idea of weight
loss and everything. One thing I wanna say to you, being in this fitness
industry, fad diets, trends, all of that stuff, the fitness industry and the
diet industry makes a profit out of our insecurities. And that's how they make
billions of money every single year. And it's just gonna get worse and worse and
worse. And I wanna say this up front, you gotta take ownership of your own
health, of your own mindset. Real self-love starts with how you treat yourself.
And I've been on this amazing journey for the last decade, if not more, getting
myself out of this idea of what I need to look like and how I need to fit in.
But at the same time, also, it's owning up and saying, listen, I have a problem
with how I look. And self-image is how we speak to ourselves when you look in
the mirror, it takes everything that we do. And this is why my programme helps
people to love themselves, take them away from fad diets, the trends. We're not
a trend. I agree with all of that, the body positive movement. And I think we
should feel empowered to celebrate who we are. But what is it that we're
celebrating? Again, that comes to the question of the individual. How do we feel
in our bodies? And how happy do we feel? Things like this, these injections,
again, it's an easy way out. And I agree with Ella, like how do we know we're
not creating more harm? Females stopping their periods, hair falling out, bad
skin. These are all symptoms of fad diets and these things that come up, it's
dangerous. Ella, one of the phrases I was introduced to this week is this idea
of body neutrality. Could you just explain what that is and whether maybe that
could be the answer to kind of bridge the gap here? Yeah, I mean, body
neutrality, I would say is the kind of ultimate goal. And that's something that
I've worked really hard towards as well. Just explain what it is first. So
basically, it just means the idea of being neutral with your body. So you're not
like, oh, I love myself, I'm amazing. But you're also not like, oh, I hate
myself, I'm awful, I need to change. You're just going about your day to day.
You're not thinking all the time about your body and what it looks like. You're
just living your life. And I think that would be like the ultimate goal for
everyone, really. Nazia, what do you think about body neutrality? I think it's
the first time I heard it this morning, actually. It's a new concept to me.
Yeah, in an ideal world, that would be amazing, not having to think about the
body. And it's easier said than done sometimes. This is why we need to teach
young people how to talk to themselves nicely, with kindness, with compassion.
Okay, you're the only person who's going to be living in your body. You're the
only person who's carrying this body around you. The body is the vehicle that we
have on planet Earth. And we need to start with, again, self-talk. And
culturally, we have different ideas of what it means to be acceptance of
yourself. And then we have society telling us how we need to look. And I need to
point something else out as well. Like when I work with a lot of clients, it's
hard for a lot of people to talk about self-love. I wasn't brought up being nice
to myself because I was taught to please everybody else. And that in itself
creates a lot of trauma for people, especially young people. And again, trauma
is something that we need to address as well, because food has become the most
accessible drug nowadays to comfort ourselves, to make ourselves feel better.
And when we can unravel all of these things, maybe then we can come to this idea
of body neutral, taking away the mess and having a better life. And actually
looking at people for who they are, not what they look like and everything. And
Ella, just in the body positivity movement, the other thing I've noticed a lot
this week is there's quite a lot of politics within it. Do you feel actually
there's quite a lot of arguments amongst people who you think should be kind of
on the same side? Yeah, I would say so. I think that's the case in most
movements as well. Because there is a big difference between somebody who might
be a size 16 or someone who might be a size 26 in terms of accessibility and
things like that. So I think that it can be difficult because people are
generally fighting for the same thing, but not everybody is affected in as much
of the same way. And do you feel that weight is becoming a kind of a big social
identity that people can almost kind of like sign up to? I don't think it's
something that you sign up to. I just think it's something that you can feel
like you have a space or you have a belonging and that's all that anybody really
wants, isn't it? Nazia? We spent last year 21 point, no, let me say this again,
21.2 million pounds antidepressant pills was handed out just in last year,
right? If we can teach people... It's probably more than that. Probably more,
yeah. And it's going to get worse as we go into this future as well. The funny
thing is, right, the irony is we have gyms everywhere now. You walk down,
there's a gym everywhere, right? And then on the other side, we have more
personal trainers trying to help change people's lives and everything. And then
we have the worst crisis of our health right now. The NHS is actually
struggling. And if we look at the real causes of it, it's literally about how do
we move people to take this ownership and responsibility and not feeling like
they're a victim because none of us are. We have the power. Our body is the
first gym that we live in. If we can just move and teach people to go and
exercise and eat well, then we are winning. Right. Well, that's where we're
going to leave it this week on Antisocial. Thank you very much to my guests,
Ella and Nazia, and everyone who's helped us on our journey today. We'll be back
next week with another subject to chew over. If you want to get in touch, please
use the hashtag BBC Antisocial online, or you can email us antisocial at
bbc.co.uk or listen to our back catalogue on BBC Sounds. Bye. Antisocial is
presented by Adam Fleming, the producers are Lucy Proctor and Ellie House. Now,
just before one o'clock, it's time for a check on the weather. And in the studio
today is Elizabeth Rizzini. Hello. Thank you very much, Arlene. Well, it's still
feeling rather chilly underneath, quite a lot of cloud today, but changes are
afoot and it will be turning colder still over the weekend with some even colder
air into the start of next week and the chance of some snow again to lower
levels, even possibly towards the south of England. Now for today, most of us
are seeing a lot more cloud around than yesterday. It is a largely dry day, a
few showers moving in across the Northern Isles. And for many Eastern areas,
Northeastern Scotland and East Anglia, there will be a few brighter spells, I
think, developing later on this afternoon, but the cloud never too far away and
it will be thickening at times for most of England and Wales. Northern Ireland,
it's cloudy and it's dull a few spots of drizzle here. A light to moderate
northeasterly wind blowing, but have added wind chill for North Sea facing coast
temperatures for most of us between six and nine degrees Celsius. Now overnight
tonight, there are a few showers moving into Northern Scotland and Northern
Ireland. For most of us, it is going to be colder than it was last night with a
more widespread frost, minus four, minus five degrees Celsius in central
Scotland, staying cloudy for much of central Southern England and Wales. More
cloud being pulled in from the North Sea too. So underneath the cloud,
temperatures staying just above freezing. Now on Saturday, the high pressure
moves away. We draw in more of a northerly wind across the UK and the cold front
slips southwards. So a few showers into Northern Scotland and also East Anglian
coastal areas, but elsewhere it should stay mostly dry, but there will be a lot
of cloud. Thickest in the east with the best of the sunshine tomorrow for
Western Scotland, Western England and Wales. For Northern Ireland, it's cloudy
here, but it should stay dry. Temperatures similar to today, six to eight
degrees Celsius. On Sunday, we start to draw in that colder feeling air. There
will be some bright spells. Watch out for a few showers falling as rain.
Temperatures between five and seven degrees Celsius with a widespread frost on
Sunday night and a lot colder with a chance of some snow next week. That's the
forecast. Thank you, Elizabeth. Now on Radio 4, prizes, prizes, prizes. This
year as part of Red Nose Day, you could win an iconic BBC treasure. How about
Pat Butcher's earrings from EastEnders? Heavier than you might think? Maybe a
House of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig Revel Horwood's 10 score paddle from
Strictly? Not that he uses it much. These are just some of the BBC items that
could be yours as part of Red Nose Day. Hey, not the microphone. To enter, find
out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward slash rednoseday.
We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You must be 18 or over
to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th March 2023. Good
luck. On 92 to 95 FM.