TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The Vietnam War. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. A boost for relations between the EU and Britain with a
deal over the post-Brexit status of Northern Ireland. Today's agreement delivers
smooth-flowing trade within the whole United Kingdom, protects Northern
Ireland's place in our union. We were both genuinely committed to find a
practical solution for people and for all communities in Northern Ireland.
Florida's governor takes away Walt Disney World's self-governing status after a
political row about sex education. The state of Florida is the new sheriff in
town. You've got to ensure that all these laws are applied. Our correspondent in
Ukraine gets access to Keeve's helicopter gunships. In the cricket, New Zealand
snatch victory from the jaws of defeat. And last year, Guy Savoie was said to
run the best restaurant in the world, but now he's suffered a painful downgrade.
This is Alex Ritson with The Newsroom on the BBC World Service. A full bulletin
is next. This is Danielle Jowowiecka with the BBC News. Hello. President Biden
has welcomed a deal between Britain and the European Union that means goods from
the British mainland, destined for use in Northern Ireland, will no longer be
subject to customs checks. The framework announced by Prime Minister Rishi Sunak
and the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen marks a notable
easing of tensions between London and Brussels. Our political correspondent,
Helen Catt, reports. It has been an encouraging start for Rishi Sunak. He told
the Commons yesterday evening that the agreement was a decisive breakthrough.
The tone of the two and a half hours of questioning which followed was markedly
calm. But some MPs are keen to examine the fine detail of what is in the
agreement. The Democratic Unionist Party has said it wants to study the legal
texts and will not be pushed into a hasty decision. Outside the UK, the new
framework has been welcomed by the US President Joe Biden, who called it an
essential step in protecting the Belfast Good Friday agreement, and by the
French President Emmanuel Macron, who said it was an important decision. Saudi
activists say that prosecutors have charged 10 senior judges with high treason,
which means they could face the death penalty. There's been no official
confirmation or comment from the Saudi authorities. Our Arab affairs editor,
Sebastian Usher, reports. The 10 judges were arrested almost a year ago and have
been held incommunicado since then. Six of those detained were former judges at
the Specialised Criminal Court, which deals with cases of alleged terrorism and
is where their case is now being heard. The four others were members of Saudi
Arabia's Supreme Court. The Dawn Group says that one of them convicted the
prominent women's rights activist Lujain al-Hathloul, while another sentenced
many of those put to death in a mass execution last year. But Dawn quotes a
source with knowledge of the trial, saying they signed confessions, but they'd
been too lenient. Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to normalising ties
through a European Union-brokered peace plan. After talks in Brussels with
Kosovo's Prime Minister Albin Kurti and the Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic,
the EU's foreign policy chief said they'd endorsed the agreement, but more talks
were needed on its implementation. Mr Kurti blamed Serbia for dragging its feet.
I have not signed the deal because the other party was not ready to sign it.
I've expressed my readiness and my willingness to sign the text. I believe it's
a pity the deal was not signed tonight, since we all agreed on it. The
confirmation of the acceptance of the deal should have been through signing it,
but it was the Serbian side's decision not to go ahead with it. More than 1,000
people have protested in central Tel Aviv against a riot by Israeli settlers in
the Palestinian town of Hawara. They condemned the far-right-backed
administration of Benjamin Netanyahu over its support for Jewish settlements in
the occupied West Bank. World News from the BBC. The media magnate Rupert
Murdoch has admitted in a US court that some hosts at Fox News endorsed the idea
that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from Donald Trump. The comments
appeared in a deposition as part of a $1.6 billion defamation suit by Dominion
Voting Systems, alleging Fox promoted the idea despite knowing it was false. The
Republican governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis, has approved legislation taking
control of public services in the special tax district surrounding Walt Disney
World's vast theme park. Signing the bill, he said, today the corporate kingdom
finally comes to an end. Nomi Iqbal reports. Since 1967, Walt Disney World has
used the self-governing Reedy Creek District to run its Florida theme parks. It
had unique control over development and other services within its boundaries,
something usually reserved for cities and counties. The creek is now in Ron
DeSantis' control, who announced there's a new sheriff in town. This comes
nearly a year after Disney spoke out against the governor's Florida bill, which
restricts certain classroom instructions about sexual orientation and gender
identity. There's been criticism towards the governor from Democrats and some
Republicans, saying punishing businesses for political speech was setting the
worst precedent in the world. Hong Kong is to drop its COVID mask mandate from
Wednesday. Masks won't now be required either indoors or outdoors. The
territory's chief executive, John Lee, said this was a clear message to show
Hong Kong was resuming normality. He said hospitals could decide whether to
require face coverings. The co-founder of one of Senegal's most famous bands,
Touré Kounda, has died in Paris at the age of 73. Ismail Touré formed the group
with his brother in the 1970s. Much of their time was spent in France, where
they sang in six languages, blending southern Senegalese melodies with rock,
reggae and jazz. BBC World News. You're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC
World Service with me, Alex Ritson. President Biden has welcomed the latest
attempt to solve one of the biggest problems posed by Brexit, how to treat
Northern Ireland. The Good Friday Agreement 25 years ago, which brought peace
between Protestants and Catholics there, eliminated the hard border on the
island of Ireland. And it was achieved with much hard graft from the United
States. But Brexit meant there had to be a trade border somewhere between the
European Union and Great Britain, potentially undermining the Good Friday
Agreement. An attempt was made to solve that problem by placing the trade border
between Great Britain and the island of Ireland. But it was hated by unionists
from the Protestant community who want Northern Ireland to stay part of the UK
and by their supporters in the governing Conservative Party. Now, though, the UK
and the EU have reached a new agreement, welcomed on Monday by the British Prime
Minister, Rishi Sunak. Together, we have changed the original protocol and are
today announcing the new Windsor Framework. Today's agreement delivers smooth-
flowing trade within the whole United Kingdom, protects Northern Ireland's place
in our union, and safeguards sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland. The
Windsor Framework, named after the town outside London where it was signed, will
scrap checks on goods destined only for Northern Ireland, but they will be kept
for goods heading for the Republic and beyond. The European Commission
President, Ursula von der Leyen, said that she and Mr Sunak had worked hard to
reach a breakthrough. We knew we had to work hard with clear minds and
determination, but we also both knew, dear Rishi, that we could do it, because
we were both generally committed to find a practical solution for people and for
all communities in Northern Ireland. There's a lot at stake for all parties. The
EU wants good relations with the UK, especially with the Ukraine war going on,
and Mr Sunak needs to get recalcitrant members of his own party to toe the line.
The unionists had pulled out of power-sharing arrangements in Northern Ireland,
and that threatened a much-hoped-for trade deal with the US. It's still not
clear if they'll rejoin, but Mr Biden said in a statement that the new deal is
an essential step in ensuring peace. He expressed hope that power-sharing would
soon be back up and running. John Kirby is the White House National Security
Spokesman. We're grateful that the two sides were able to come up with this
agreement in keeping with the Northern Ireland protocols. We believe that this
will help improve the prosperity of both the EU and the UK, and will open up all
kinds of now avenues for trade that were somewhat at risk. For more on the view
from the US, I spoke to our North America correspondent, Peter Bowes. Well, Joe
Biden often talks with a considerable amount of pride about his own personal
Irish roots. Defending the Good Friday Agreement is very close to his heart.
It's a big part of his political identity. His involvement goes back to the
1980s, when he was a senator pushing for greater US diplomatic involvement to
end the conflict. And then he pushed the Clinton administration to, again,
commit more resources to help broker the Good Friday Agreement in 1998, which in
his statement in the last few hours, he said he was deeply proud of the role of
the United States had played to help achieve, preserve, and strengthen the peace
enshrined in the agreement. And that's a widely held view here. There's long
been a broad consensus between Republicans and Democrats on the matter of the
peace process in Northern Ireland. And in fact, when Rishi Sunak held his first
meeting with President Biden, this was last November in Indonesia, he pledged
that Britain would settle the dispute with the European Union over Northern
Ireland by April, the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement. So news of
the deal is very welcome news to Mr. Biden. So keeping the peace is crucial for
Washington. But will this now lead to the trade deal with the US that Britain so
desperately wants? That is a key question. In his statement, Joe Biden applauded
what he said would be the economic opportunities that result from the agreement
for the people and businesses of Northern Ireland. He said the United States
stood ready to support what he described as vast economic potential for the
region. But there was no mention of a trade deal with Britain. But maybe the
developments over the past few days will help move things forward. And with that
anniversary in April approaching, there is speculation that President Biden
could visit Belfast, Dublin, and London to market. That will be a hugely
symbolic visit. And it may be an opportunity to further talks on the issue of a
trade deal between the US and Britain. Peter Bowes, the British Parliament is
expected to support the deal. But for power sharing to return to Northern
Ireland, the Democratic Unionist Party need to back the Windsor framework. Our
political correspondent Rob Watson says it won't be rushed into making any
decisions. Maybe more problematic will be the dilemma facing the Democratic
Unionist Party. That's the biggest pro-union party in Northern Ireland, which
essentially withdrew from power sharing on the basis that it didn't like the
protocol, it didn't like the post-Brexit trade agreements, because it made them
feel less British. So now I think the ball is very much in their court. And they
do have a genuine dilemma. There'll be plenty of their core supporters who say,
no, no, no, no, this whole new deal, even amended, it still treats Northern
Ireland different to the rest of the UK. So they'll be under pressure on the one
hand to reject it. On the other hand, there's a pressure pushing them and the
other way. And that is the sort of longer term thought of, well, if they reject
this deal, if they block a return to power sharing in Northern Ireland, won't
people in Northern Ireland and beyond start to say, well, Northern Ireland just
looks like a place that doesn't work? I mean, it's like a dysfunctional entity.
So the DUP has that delicate balancing act. But I think so far, Rishi Sunak will
be pleased at the way it's gone down in his own party. And I think that may
reflect, Alex, a certain sort of exhaustion over the issue of Brexit within the
governing Conservative Party. Rob Watson, EU leaders have hailed the progress of
the agreement and the Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadkar, said he hoped the
framework would gain support. But the view from Brussels is uncertain should
Rishi Sunak fail to sell the deal to the Unionists, as our Europe editor Katja
Adler explains. Don't expect big pronouncements from Paris or Berlin after the
carefully choreographed unveiling of the new EU-UK deal. The European Commission
president flew to the UK yesterday to stand side by side with Rishi Sunak,
promising a new beneficial chapter in bilateral relations. Now, she and the rest
of the EU watch and wait from the sidelines. They don't want to be seen as
interfering in a UK domestic debate. But if the revised deal is eventually
rejected, the mood music with Brussels, which believes it's made a considerable
number of compromises, may darken pretty quickly. Reopening negotiations would
be tough, Ireland's Prime Minister Leo Varadkar has warned. And if the UK
government returns to its earlier threat of acting unilaterally, a trade war
with the EU could loom large once again. Katja Adler. Today, the corporate
kingdom finally comes to an end. The words of the Republican governor of
Florida, Ron DeSantis, who signed a law which would give the state control of
public services in the special tax district surrounding Walt Disney World's vast
theme park. Mr. DeSantis said that for far too long, Disney's special autonomy
had given it an unfair advantage over other theme parks. So Disney loses self-
governing status. The state of Florida is the new sheriff in town. We've created
a state control board that is going to be responsible for governing this area.
You got to ensure that all these laws are applied. You got to ensure the debt is
paid. And you got to ensure the fair share of taxes are paid. Last year, Disney
criticised a bill in Florida banning school lessons on sexual orientation, a
move which angered Mr. DeSantis. Our North America correspondent, Nomia Iqbal,
is following the story. Since 1967, Walt Disney World has used the self-
governing Reedy Creek District to basically run its Florida theme park. So it's
had unique control over development and other services within its boundaries. If
it wants to change infrastructure, it just does it itself. And that's the kind
of power that's really reserved for cities and counties. But what happened was,
about a year ago, Disney spoke out against Ron DeSantis' Florida bill, which
basically restricts certain classroom instruction about sexual orientation and
gender identity. It wasn't law at the time. It is now. But there was real anger
about it, including amongst Disney staff. So the company then released a
statement vowing to help get the law struck down by the courts, which hit a
nerve with Ron DeSantis. And so here we are now, where he has cemented the
state's takeover of Disney's special Florida district. And now he gets to create
a board. He'll appoint people on the board to manage the district, and
effectively, Disney. In terms of the punishment, there's been real criticism,
not just by Democrats. There are also some Republicans who are worried about
what precedent it sets. They say if you punish businesses for political speech,
it's setting a terrible precedent. But for Ron DeSantis, this is a big victory.
We know that he is potentially going to run for the Republican presidential
nomination. And he wants to show that he's tough. Yeah, you say he's widely
thought to be likely to stand for president. Will this go down well with his
support base? I think it will. He's also on a book tour at the moment. And his
book, in it, he warns the entertainment giant about its political activity. So
this book, he argues that the former Disney CEO understood the risk that the
company faced when it weighed in against his efforts to restrict teaching about
sexuality and gender ideology to Florida students. And this was from
kindergarten to third grade. And it'll be interesting to see how well he does
outside of Florida. So in Florida, and I've spent a lot of time in Florida, he
is really, really popular. How well this goes down nationwide, we're still yet
to see that. Nomia Iqbal, you're listening to the BBC World Service. Our main
news, President Biden has welcomed the EUK-EU agreement on Northern Ireland
trade rules, saying it is essential for the preservation of peace there. Fierce
battles are continuing in eastern Ukraine as the Russian invaders try to cut off
the small city of Bakhmut. At the same time, an early spring thaw has turned
much of the front line to mud. That makes it hard for troops and tanks to move
around. However, in the air, Ukraine has been using low-flying attack
helicopters to hit Russian targets. Our correspondent in eastern Ukraine, Orla
Gerin, has been given access to one of the more secretive parts of the Ukrainian
Defence Force. A Ukrainian attack helicopter is just coming into land now.
Coming back after a mission to target Russian positions, we haven't been told
exactly where, but we know it was here in the Donetsk region in eastern Ukraine.
We're sitting now inside the helicopter with the pilot Roman. The aircraft that
you're flying, the helicopter, how old is it? And is it equipped with what you
need to fight this kind of war? I think me and this plane, we are like the same
age. I am 34 years old. So it's a Soviet time-produced helicopter. Of course,
it's not enough for now for us to win this war just using the Soviet time
equipment. So it's time to change it for something new. Do you ever think about
the fact that when you're asked, you're given a mission, you're sent to fire
weapons, do you think about the fact that there are Russian soldiers who will be
on the receiving end? There are no people on the ground, only our troops and
enemies. So if they come to our country with war, we are just protecting our
country. We are not aggressor. We are victim. If to win this war, we should kill
Russian soldiers, we are ready to kill them all. Well, the helicopters are now
being refueled and rearmed. This happens every time they come back. As soon as
they touch down, they're made ready for the next mission because the order can
come at any time. Paula Guerin. The Italian Prime Minister, Giorgia Maloney, has
said she's written to EU leaders urging immediate action to stop migrant boat
departures after more than 60 migrants drowned on Sunday when their boat sank in
waters off the south of her country. A search and rescue operation continues off
the Calabrian coast. Police believe as many as 40 people may still be missing.
Danny Eberhart reports. This tragedy is causing political repercussions. For
Prime Minister Maloney, whose right-wing coalition aims to curtail irregular
migration, the solution is stopping migrant boat departures and tackling the
people smugglers. Others criticise her approach, including recent legal
restrictions her government has imposed on how charity-run rescue ships can
operate. Such arguments will continue across the EU. But on Monday, individual
grief was on display, with relatives from a group of about 80 survivors visiting
a makeshift morgue in the town of Crotone to try to identify dead loved ones.
Nearby, local residents had placed flowers, candles and messages, one reading,
enough to death's sea. An imam held prayers in the open air. They were attended
by a Catholic bishop from a diocese not far away, Monsignor Francesco Savino.
It's time to reflect responsibly on this umpteenth tragedy, since we risk all
becoming complicit when we don't put into place different, high-minded policies
at European and national level. Couldn't we help and welcome migrants in a
process of integration in our territories? Some of those who died were children,
including a baby and young twins. The diver who recovered the twins' bodies said
the sight had pierced his heart. The UN says six children lost their families.
One humanitarian worker said a 12-year-old Afghan boy had lost both parents,
four siblings, and three other close relatives. According to the UN, most of
those on board were Afghan and Pakistani, with smaller numbers of people from
Iran, the Palestinian territories, Syria and Somalia. They'd travelled three
days from Turkey before their overcrowded boat broke apart just off the beach,
pitching them into the swell. International agencies say about 300 migrants have
died or gone missing in the Mediterranean so far this year. Danny Eberhardt.
Nigeria's two main opposition parties have alleged fraud in Saturday's
presidential election, following technical problems in the counting process.
With nearly half of the provisional results declared, the governing party's
candidate, Bola Tinebu, is in the lead from Lagos. Here's Mayoni Jones. The
opposition says it has evidence the machines malfunctioned in several states.
The head of the Electoral Commission has denied this and stands by the results.
This is adding to an already fiercely contested election. There was an upset
early on Monday when Peter Obi of the Labour Party won the highest number of
votes in Lagos, the state with the most registered voters. Mr Tinebu was the
governor of Lagos for eight years, and still has a large following here. He's
urged his followers to remain calm after isolated reports of violence in
Nigeria's commercial hub. Mayoni Jones. Let's turn our attention to sport, and
there has been an astonishing finish to the second cricket test between New
Zealand and England in Wellington. Richard Newman is here. Richard, what
happened? Yeah, it was tense, but New Zealand won by just a single run. Now,
there have been almost 2,500 matches in test history. This was only the second
time there's been such a margin of victory. The phrase all-time classic can be
overused in sport, but when you place it in that context, it really was. It was
only the fourth time a team has won after following on to. Yeah, the gasps in
the newsroom were extraordinary, and the result just kept swinging one way and
then the other. Yes, England needed 210 runs to win on the final day. The way
they've been playing, you bat them to do that. They did get off to a shaky
start, but Joe Roos and Ben Stokes looked to have them on their way, but once
they fell, it got really nervy. In the end, the number 10 and 11 batters, Jack
Leach and James Anderson, just couldn't get them over the line. Anderson, the
last one to go. And turning our attention to football, more success for Lionel
Messi. Yeah, Men's Player of the Year at the Best FIFA Awards, the current
iteration of the World Governing Body's annual awards. There have been several,
but it was nailed on after guiding Argentina to victory at the World Cup. The
former Arsenal manager, Arsene Wenger, was at the ceremony. He says Messi and
his old rival for these awards, Cristiano Ronaldo, have been a joy to watch.
When they will not be there anymore, we will realise what they have given us,
both of them. They're two different players, completely different players, but
two exceptional players who have shown the world for 15 years how great football
can be. And always a joy to hear Arsene Wenger's wonderful accent. Thank you,
Richard Newman, for the sport. Now... We have two preparations of oysters, one
that is crushed, seasoned with a little bit of herbs and olive oil. And here, I
would say it's a historical huitre-sonnage glacé, or oysters in a frozen pool,
because I make a jelly with the water of the oysters, which makes it much more
comfortable to eat. Not Arsene Wenger, but the French restauranteur Guy Savoie,
proudly detailing one of his mouth-watering meals. Food is a serious business in
France, especially when it comes to how restaurants are rated. Now, though, Mr
Savoie might be choking on one of his creations as he's lost one of his three
Michelin stars. Terry Egan is following the story. Yes, Alex, this is likely to
be a big shock for Guy Savoie. His restaurant, the Monet de Paris, was last year
rated the best in the world. He's also held Michelin's coveted top three star
status since 2002. But his fame goes beyond the kitchen. He's an ambassador for
the French art de vive, pointedly rejecting, for example, the fad for non-
alcoholic drinks. And he even lent his voice to the French version of the Pixar
film Ratatouille. But none of that has prevented this downgrading. Yes,
Michelin's latest edition is published next Monday, and this time the restaurant
will have not three, but just two stars. Now, the reasons are never made public.
They're communicated only to the chefs involved, but the decisions are carefully
considered. And as the head of the guide pointed out, they're supported by
numerous visits from inspectors. Such verdicts are particularly sensitive, all
the more so after another chef, Bernard Loiseau, a close friend of Mr Savoie, in
fact, took his own life when he lost a star. Another chef, Marc Veyrat, once
took the guide to court when he was stripped of a star. He said he never wanted
to see a Michelin inspector in his restaurants again. How has Michelin
approached this? Well, the case of Guy Savoie is seen as particularly sensitive,
and Michelin's boss contacted Mr Savoie to soften the blow before the news came
out. Because of the pandemic, no one's been downgraded since 2019. But he's not
alone. This year, one other restaurant was downgraded from three to two stars,
and about 20 others went from two stars to one. So Mr Savoie won't be the only
one crying into his suit. Terry Egan, finally! EMA by Ture Kanda That's the song
EMA by Ture Kanda, the Senegalese band made up primarily of the brothers Ismaila
and Seksitudian Ture. Now, though, Ismaila has died at the age of 73. Ture Kanda
The brothers, born in Senegal, completed their musical studies in Paris and
worked their way up through the music scene there. They toured Africa and in
1992 played for Nelson Mandela. Over the years, they played with Talking Heads
and toured with Carlos Santana. Ture Kanda are seen as one of the pioneers of
African music in France at the end of the 1970s, and they were representatives
of world music for everyone. This is the BBC World Service exploring the
seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash
has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to disadvantaged children,
children in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. These kids probably
have gone through some of the worst traumas and they don't have access to
counsellors or therapists. Ash and the seagulls aren't therapists, they're
clowns. So they do what they do best to help, escapism and fun. Give them
something to wake up excited about, give them something to go to bed giggling
about, otherwise what is the point? When the Greek government allowed children
in refugee camps to go to school, the kids who'd been working with the seagulls
did far better than the other kids. If they can believe themselves to be
limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into the next challenge of their
life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying Seagulls, Child's Play. Today
at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Huyen Phan Qua Mai is an acclaimed Vietnamese writer whose
new novel Dust Child portrays the lives of Amorasians, children of American
military men who were abandoned during the Vietnam War. We follow her as she
redrafts her manuscript over many months, making decisions about characters and
plotlines with the guidance of her New York publisher. Also, how will she make a
much-needed change to the all-important ending? Join me, Felicity Finch, for In
the Studio, After the News. BBC News with Danielle Jauowiecka. President Biden
has welcomed a deal between Britain and the European Union over post-Brexit
trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. He said it would help protect the
peace secured by the Good Friday Agreement. Northern Ireland's biggest unionist
party has accepted that the deal marks progress, but says there remain issues of
concern. The media tycoon Rupert Murdoch has acknowledged in a US court that
some Fox News anchors promoted the false notion that the 2020 presidential
election was stolen from Donald Trump. Mr Murdoch's comments were part of a
lawsuit taken out against Fox by Dominion Voting Systems. Japan is filing
criminal complaints against the country's biggest advertising firm Dentsu over
alleged bid rigging for Tokyo 2020 Olympic contracts. It's the latest corruption
scandal to emerge in the aftermath of the Games. Saudi activists say prosecutors
have charged 10 senior judges with high treason. They're apparently accused of
being too lenient in their judgments. Serbia and Kosovo have moved closer to
normalising their tense relations. The EU says both will endorse a new peace
plan, but they're squabbling about the timeline for signing and implementing it.
The White House has ordered all US federal agencies to wipe the Chinese social
media app TikTok off government devices within 30 days. Security concerns have
prompted the move. Congress is moving forward with legislation that would go
further, giving President Biden the power to ban TikTok outright. TikTok has
criticised the moves. Hong Kong is to drop its Covid mask mandate from
Wednesday. Masks won't be required either outdoors or indoors. The territory's
chief executive said high-risk facilities like hospitals could make their own
rules on mask requirements. And there have been demonstrations in Israeli cities
against a riot by Jewish settlers in the occupied West Bank on Sunday. More than
a thousand people protested in Tel Aviv. BBC News. During the editing process,
there were days I felt really boxed down with details because I felt the burden
of responsibility to honour memories, honour history and honour the real-life
experiences of the people. But in the end I said, OK, this is a work of fiction
and you need to bring it to life through your imagination. In front of the
church entrance, a woman sat, a baby in her arms, a small box in front of her.
The woman's face was gaunt but unwrinkled. She was too young to be his mother.
And that work of fiction is the second novel for Nguyen Phan Quy My, an award-
winning Vietnamese writer for her poetry and debut novel, The Mountain Sing,
which was published in English in 2020 and won the International Book Awards in
2021, as well as being runner-up for the Dayton Literary Peace Prize. It
portrays the lives of four generations of a Vietnamese family enduring many
hardships, something she understands well from her own upbringing. She's now
working on her second novel, Dust Child, and has finished the first draft, which
is about Amerasians, a term which I was not aware of until I met Quy My.
Amerasians are the children of American soldiers and Vietnamese women born and
abandoned during the Vietnam War. Most of them were homeless and they had to
live on the street, so they were called bui doi, the dust of life. This is In
The Studio for the BBC World Service. I'm Felicity Finch, and I'm going to be
following Quy My as she works towards completing her final manuscript. I was
just so happy. I think I couldn't sleep that night, you know, because it took me
six years to write this novel and it's so close to my heart because this story,
I think, is important to those who are still looking for their family members,
still suffering from the trauma of the Vietnam War, and I feel it has to travel
out there. It's the 8th of June 2021, and Quy My has only just heard that Bexie
Glick from Algonquin Books in New York, who published her first novel, has now
read the first draft of Dust Child and also wants to publish it. It was my best
hope that she would like it, but it was beyond that because she was so excited
and she thinks that my writing has gone up to another level. Quy My, I'm so
excited about the book. Thank you. Quy My is in Jakarta, Indonesia, where she's
been living for the last four years. Bexie's in New York, and they've invited me
to join their video call editing meeting from London. So let's talk process for
a sec. The structure, I think, is great. The issue is choosing, you want to put
everything in this book, and you're going to have to take some things out. In
other words, you want to tell the entire story of all the different experiences
that an Amerasian child can have and all the different kind of aspects of sex
work, right, and PTSD. Absolutely. I think I'm really greedy when it comes to
including everything into the novel because I have done so much research. I have
to include everything. Bexie then takes issue with the way Quy My depicts women
through the eyes of Dan, an American war veteran. Just when he's thinking back
about Kim and he's describing her physically, she's exotic with a tiny waist and
firm breasts. To me, that is such a stereotype of what every woman in the novel
is sexy and slim and exotic. And that's not your intention, right? No, no, no.
Okay, now I get what you mean. Yeah, and that can easily be changed. So, the
ending. Here's what I love about the ending, that Fong has a happy ending. I'm
going to question, and I don't have a solution. Unfortunately, we can't hear any
details about the ending as it's too sensitive and would be revealing too much
of the plot. I think the ending was shocking. Bexie, I think I should change the
ending. It would serve another purpose because I feel like at the moment all the
characters have PTSD. So, I think I should have one character who doesn't have
PTSD. I literally have that in my notes. See, we are great. It's good to hear
them so in sync as they conclude their meeting. Totally. They decide that the
publication date will be in spring 2023 and that Khuong Mai should deliver the
next draft in a few months' time. After the meeting, I have a quick chat with
Khuong Mai. I'm interested to find out where the inspiration for the book came
from. I had the idea about Das Chai when I read a story about an American man
who returned to Vietnam after more than 50 years. He was walking the street of
Saigon with an album of old photos, asking whether anyone knew the woman in his
photos. She was the mother of his child, whom he left behind in Vietnam. And she
went on to tell me... An Amerasian whom I met when I was little. I didn't talk
to them. Actually, I joined the neighbourhood children in saying bad things
about them because at that time they were considered children of the enemy. So,
I always have this regret inside of me and I wanted to find out what happened to
them. As well as working on the revision of her manuscript, Khuong Mai has
another big event happening in her life. She's moving with her husband to
Kyrgyzstan where he's taking up a new job. So there's a lot to be sorted before
they leave in a few weeks. I catch up with her to see how she's getting on with
her editing. It's affecting my writing a lot. So at the moment, all of my
routines are upside down because, you know, I have to deal with packers, arrange
for the shipment and so on. And this period is very emotional, filled with
anxiety because I haven't been vaccinated yet and the COVID case numbers are
rising really fast in Indonesia. How are you feeling now, at this moment? So
every day I've been doing meditation and I also leave out certain chunks of time
that I work on my novel because working on it calms me, you know. In a way, I am
also in the mindset of my characters because they are also on the move. None is
settled at home and there are significant changes ahead of them. So I can
understand their anxiety, their fears. What is your usual writing routine? My
ideal writing day would be, you know, to get up early in the morning, like five
o'clock, do meditation and write for a few hours and then do some exercise. I
like to read and do my research in the afternoon and in the evening. You're
surrounded by books in the room you're in at the moment. Is this where you do a
lot of your writing? Yes. I work in this room every day. In front of me are
trees. You know, I feel that trees and nature give me so much positive energy.
So I have a lot of flowers and trees on my balcony where I look out onto. So one
of the most difficult things about moving is that I won't have my library with
me. So that makes me very anxious. I have a lot of materials in here, a lot of
handwritten notes. So there's lots of resource material that you're actually
taking with you on the plane? Yes. It wasn't easy to get them because there are
very few books written about the Amur Asian experiences and also experiences of
their parents. So I searched for them. So they're very precious to me. Khumai
hopes to arrive in Kyrgyzstan by the 1st of September and to be reunited with
her shipped books by the beginning of October. It's 7th of July 2021 and I
receive an unexpected audio diary from Khumai. She's leaving Jakarta much sooner
than planned. You can hear the ambulances going by my apartment. The pandemic is
really terrible here so I'm leaving in two days for Vienna. I will meet my son.
You know, seeing how many people are coming to see me. How many people are dying
around me. It's really tough. It reminds me of how precious life is. Two days
later she sends another. I'm currently at the airport and boarding my plane in
about five minutes. And it is sad for me to say goodbye to Indonesia. I'm really
emotional to leave. It's now the 9th of September. I'm actually holidaying on a
small Greek island but I'm determined to try to speak with Khumai as I know
she'll just have arrived at her hotel in Kyrgyzstan where she will be staying
while looking for a permanent apartment. So Khumai, you arrived in Bishkek in
Kyrgyzstan just a few days ago. How has the time been for you since you arrived?
It has been amazing to discover a new country and to find out how similar it is
to Vietnam. I have been able to dive into my book and I've been working on it
every day. I can show you where I sit and write next to. I can open the window
and sit here and write. You know, I just want to say that because at the moment
I'm so deep within the process I don't want many interruptions. OK, good luck
with all your writing. Thank you so much. You're listening to In the Studio on
the BBC World Service where I'm following writer Huyen Phan Khumai as she
creates her second novel, Dust Child. I catch up with Khumai near the end of
September and hope to find out about the nitty-gritty of her editing, what she's
working on at the moment. So I'd like to talk with you about some of the changes
I am doing right now. At the moment I am showing the transformation of Dan and
his observation of Vietnamese women at that time that they are no longer sexual
objects or exotic but they are people with agency. So it's kind of fun. The
biggest question Bexy has is about the ending of the novel. When people
challenge me, it makes me go back and reflect and find solutions. The ending of
this novel shocked me when I wrote it. But the second ending now, it is
something more active on the part of this mother. The choice that she makes for
her own children to protect them. So the ending is more thoughtful. I haven't
shown Bexy yet, but I'm confident that she will like it. Having caught up with
Khumai's editing progress, I want to know more about her. When did she realise
she wanted to be a writer? My mother used to tell me a lot of stories. Even
though we were poor, she made sure that I was rich in my soul. I loved
storytelling from that time. My father brought home a lot of books because he
was a literature teacher. So both of my parents are instrumental for me being a
writer. During those times, I was bullied, I didn't have friends. So I fell in
love with reading. I could escape all the poverty and all the discrimination and
desperation. So then I dreamt of being a writer from that time. Khumai was born
in 1973 and grew up amidst the devastation of the Vietnam War. I wondered how
her background influences her writing. I am in awe of the things that I
experience. They are really important to me being a writer. At that time, things
were really, really difficult. I had to do many types of things to be able to
survive. So I used to get up at 4 o'clock in the morning to go to the rice field
and ponds around my house to catch little shrimps. I would sell them in the
market or to the neighbours before I go to school. And coming home from school,
I would be making bamboo curtains or sewing carpets. And during the weekend, in
the afternoon, I would be working on the rice fields. You know, the reason why I
need to write about women and mothers in my books is that I see how wars and
historical events impact women. For example, as a child in South Vietnam, when I
went to school one day, I saw a commotion ahead of me. A mother with two sons
who had gone to war and who had not come back decided to kill herself by hanging
herself. And I saw her body dangling from a branch of a tree. And she had been
waiting for years for her sons to come back. And, you know, there were so many
stories like that surrounding me, you know, during my childhood. And I felt
like, you know, I need to write about these things so people know about the
horror of wars and conflict. In literature, in English, there are so few books
written by Vietnamese with the Vietnamese stories in the centre stage. So that's
why I felt compelled to write this book in English. At the beginning of October,
Khuong Mai sends her revised draft to her publisher, Betsy Glick. It's already
been read and critiqued by her husband and children and her agent, Julie
Stevenson. Two months later, on her way back to Kyrgyzstan, after a whistle-stop
book signing tour in the US, Khuong Mai is passing through London. The visit
coincides with Betsy having just finished reading the new draft. So there's
another video call scheduled for the 13th of December, just as Khuong Mai's feet
touch the ground here in the UK. Khuong Mai, how is it that you're upright?
Yeah, I arrived a few hours ago, so I slept like two hours. But it's fine, I'm
excited. So anyway, first of all, your revision is fantastic. The book is great.
The book is gripping. I think the ending is really good. The ending totally
works for me. Of course, there are still some kind of bigger editorial
conversations to be had. One of them has to do with the pacing and the length. I
do feel strongly that you need to cut a bunch of words. Yep. But there are a
couple of places where I feel like there's a conflict between Khuong Mai, the
teacher, speaker, educator, promoter of world peace, and your story. You may
have to not teach us all as much as you want to teach us, in service of the
pacing and the plot. So that's truly all I have, I think. Thank you so much. I
really appreciate your honest comments. I mean, I feel a lot of pressure, you
know, because The Mountain Sink is successful. And I feel like, how do I live up
to these expectations? And I remind myself every day that this second book has
to be good. So you are here to help me do that. So thank you very much.
Together, they agree on a date of the 1st of February 2022 for delivery of the
final draft. It's January 2022. And with the next deadline looming, I feel it's
time to make contact. Then an email arrives out of the blue. Hi, Felicity, I
have COVID. I will ask Betsy for an extension and can't do any recording with
you now. I'm sorry to read this, as I know how impatient Khuong Mai will be to
finish this final revision of Dust Child. And then I hear from her. Hello, today
is Wednesday, February 2nd. Unfortunately, I'm feeling a bit sick today still.
COVID has made me weak and exhausted, so I can't do so much editing as I would
like to. But I'm trying my best. My daughter, who's a great reader and writer, I
woke up this morning to her message that said, I stayed up until 3.30am to read
because I can't stop. She really likes this novel. She also told me, Mom, I like
you to open your novel with a poetic sentence because you are a poet. So I just
wrote this, which is now the new beginning of my novel. I may polish it a little
bit more. Life is a boat, Nhanh Nha had once told Phong. Once you depart from
your first anchor, your mother's womb, you could be pulled away by unexpected
currents. If you can field your boat with enough hope, enough self-belief,
enough compassion, and enough curiosity, you will be ready to weather all the
storms of life. So today I'm going to work on the beginning. I plan to send the
manuscript tomorrow as I race towards my deadline. Hello, today's Thursday, 3rd
of February. I'm feeling a bit better today. I'm rereading the entire manuscript
and seeing what I can improve further. And perhaps cut down some scenes and
descriptions so that I can reduce the word count. My aim is to send the novel by
6pm. Wish me luck! It is now 9pm. I missed the deadline. I ended up spending 3
more hours reading through the manuscript again. So now, yeah, I'm excited to
send this away. Let me click. Yes! Bye, manuscript! See you again soon. Good
luck! And that was where we left Khmer when we first broadcast this programme in
May 2022. It's now February 2023 and Dust Child is about to be published in the
US and the UK. So we thought it would be a good opportunity to check in and find
out how Khmer is feeling. Yeah, I mean the excitement is huge. There's just a
lot of, you know, postings and sharing on social media at the moment. So, what's
happened Khmer Mai since the last time we spoke, which was in February last
year, when you handed in your final draft? Were there still changes that you had
to do? Yes, so many changes. So, you know, when I handed it in, I progressed to
the next step, which is copy editing. Important details such as line spacing,
capitalization of words, correct use of punctuation marks to ensure that the
book is free from spelling, grammar mistakes and factual mistakes. So then after
that, the manuscript was sent to the managing editor who had it laid out in a
PDF format like a real book. So I held it in my hand and I went through it and I
read it from the first page to the last page. And it gave me such a different
feeling because reading a printed book feels much more serious and official
compared to reading a computer file. So I spotted quite a few more things that I
wanted to improve upon. So I went on to do some more major edits. And I kept
working on it until the very last minute when the book was sent to the printer,
which was on 16th of December, 2022. When you went back to make the changes,
were they then changing some of the narrative, changing the way some of the
characters were? I cut out a few things that I thought were not necessary and
extended some parts which deepen the characters and highlight the internal
conflict. And also I did a few things to improve the language by adding more
imagery to make them more expressive, more poetic. But it's incredible that all
these changes you make right up to the very, very last minute and then there's
no more you can do. There was one moment I realised this is the moment of
celebration. I worked for seven years on this book. I mean, if I was not given a
deadline, I may never have finished this book. I've actually just received a
copy of Doth's Child. I have it here in my hand, you can see. So I'm interested
to know, because it's got a beautiful cover. I mean, it has an image of two
Vietnamese women in beautiful dresses. One is in orange and one is in blue. It
has great impact. And when you look at it more closely, you see some grey
helicopters in the top right corner. And then there's a sun going down, a
sunset, or maybe it's a sunrise just behind the mountains. How did you come to
the decision of this cover? I now have two amazing covers for Doth's Child. One
for the US edition and another one for the UK edition. So both covers started
with a process of brainstorming the ideas with my team to express our wish of
what can be included on the cover, such as images, colours. My publishers then
work with design artists in designing these covers. So, you know, the UK cover
that you're holding has the images of two women. They are the two sisters who
are the key characters in the novel. And the helicopters are there because, you
know, the novel is partly set during the Vietnam War. And then my American
veteran character worked as a helicopter pilot during the Vietnam War. The UK
cover has a blue colour. So this is the colour of peace for me, and peace is an
important message of my book. The novel is going to be published in the US on
the 14th of March and in the UK on the 20th of April. So how are you feeling at
this moment, knowing that the publication is so imminent? So currently, Doth's
Child is being translated into Italian, Dutch, German, Croatian, Swedish,
French, Russian and Spanish as well. So, you know, it's very exciting and I feel
very thankful and I'm enjoying all of the support. But I think I also, you know,
don't want to satisfy myself, you know, because I think as a writer, I need to
always look at my work critically, you know, and see the areas that I need to
improve and also continue to improve my craft. So look, Kwame, it's been so
lovely to talk to you today, and it's been fantastic to follow you on this
amazing journey that you've been on with your second novel, Doth's Child. Thank
you so much, Felicity, and thank you for reading my novel. I can't wait to hear
your thoughts. You've been listening to In the Studio with Huyen Phan Kwame on
the BBC World Service, presented and produced by me, Felicity Finch. The
executive producer was Rebecca Armstrong. And if you enjoyed that, then there
are plenty more episodes on our website. This is the BBC World Service and
here's Harriet Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. It's the
story of a lovely young woman who desperately in need of work submits to the
sexual demands of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins
to change, growing more and more like the body of a pig. World Book Club with
Marie Dariuszek. Saturday at 12 GMT. At bbcworldservice.com, heart and soul. I'm
Peter Maggio, and I've left the Catholic Church to embrace traditional African
spirituality. Some call it devil worship, including members of my own family in
Nigeria. So what will they say when I travel back home to tell them? Newsday is
next.