TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Watch on BBC iPlayer. The UK Government has always viewed plans as the latest
in a long line of unworkable gimmicks. But the Science Secretary Michelle
Donelan, insisted it was time to get a grip on illegal migration. It isn't ok if
you travel here illegally if you've traveled across a number of say countries
before they then make that journey. It is important that the government tackles
this head on that's why we're bringing forward that legislation and details will
be out over the next few days and the Prime Minister have been very clear that
this is a top priority for this government. The former Solicitor General and
Conservative peer Lord Garnier said the proposals wouldn't work without
cooperation from France and other European nations. No longer can we afford to
just shout at the French. They don't enjoy that and it doesn't get anywhere.
We've got to cooperate and we've got to reach agreements with the French and
also reach agreements with other countries which are between the source of the
refugees and our coast. Police in Cardiff searching for five people have found
three dead and two seriously injured two days after they went missing following
a night out. A car was discovered crashed near woods on the outskirts of the
city in the early hours of this morning. Our Wales correspondent Hal Griffith is
at the scene. A large police cordon surrounds the wooded area in St Melon's.
Fire crews are also at the scene. It's understood that the car may have been
here for well over 24 hours before it was discovered. The three women and two
men inside were last seen at 2am early on Saturday morning. Their families took
to social media to ask for help finding them. The case has now been referred to
the Independent Office for Police Conduct in line with normal procedure. In the
past few minutes the former Metropolitan Police Officer Wayne Cousins has been
sentenced to 19 months for indecent exposure. He's already serving a whole life
sentence for the rape and murder of Sarah Everard in 2021. Cousins had admitted
to three counts of exposing himself. One of the offences took place just days
before he killed Ms Everard. Talks aimed at resolving the dispute between train
companies and the RMT union appear to be on the brink of failure ahead of more
strikes planned for next week. The rail delivery group has written to the union
saying talks could stop if its latest pay offer isn't put to members. The RMT's
National Executive Committee has rejected a so-called best and final offer of a
5% pay rise and another 4% dependent on changes to working practices. The TV
channel GB News has been found in breach of broadcasting rules over claims about
Covid vaccines. The broadcaster Mark Stein made allegations about the third
vaccine that Ofcom says were materially misleading. David Zilatay reports. In
April 2022 Mark Stein broadcast claims on GB News that the third Covid vaccine
increased people's risk of serious illness, death and contracting Covid. His
analysis, based on comparing raw data between those who'd had the third vaccine
and those who hadn't, was – Ofcom says – materially misleading. The people who'd
had the vaccine were on average older, had poorer health and were more at risk.
GB News denies misleading the public, saying it was merely challenging the
status quo and official narratives. Mark Stein, meanwhile, has parted company
with GB News after he said he was asked to pay any Ofcom fines that might arise
from his show. Cricket and England men have been set a target of 247 to win the
second one-day international in Bangladesh. A few moments ago England were 114
for four after 24 overs. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. We have a brand new
drama starting this afternoon and continuing throughout the week, a near future
thriller about the power of AI, data manipulation and democracy. Galapagos is at
2.15. But now it's time for you and yours with Winifred Robinson. Hello, welcome
to Radio 4's Consumer Programme today. As the wait continues for the
government's white paper on gambling reform, we hear how problems are affecting
some university students. Yeah, I got the student line, I think it was the 4th
of January I got the payment. It was supposed to last me for that term and it
all went within 24 hours. We look at a new VAT scam where your home is flooded
with letters from the taxman. The first batch that we had of 580 we actually
sent back through the post saying not known of this address. But they kept
coming. And you'll see the bundle here in front of how many we've got, which is
over 4000, believe it or not. And three years on from the start of lockdown,
have you kept the online shopping habit for groceries? What do you enjoy about
shopping online? I don't have to carry loads of shopping bags. That's all
really. If you want to let us know how you're getting on with that online
shopping for groceries, email us now, youandyours at bbc.co.uk. If you're on
Twitter, you can just tweet us, hashtag youandyours or text 84844. This month,
the government's expected to introduce a statutory levy on the gambling industry
to fund services for gambling addicts. Draft legislation is also expected to
introduce tighter financial checks. It's been delayed for almost two years and
when it comes, it'll be the first overhaul of the laws governing the gambling
industry since 2005. The extent of gambling harm is disputed. The regulator, the
Gambling Commission, says that about 0.2% of British adults were problem
gamblers at the end of 2021. A separate survey for a gambling charity by the
polling company YouGov put the figure at 2.8%. That would be more than a million
people. Now research among university students for two gambling charities,
GamStop and YGam, suggests that more than seven out of ten have gambled in the
last 12 months, with one in five borrowing to do it. We'll hear from one of
those charities in a minute. First Ash Bray spoke to us about his gambling
addiction. He gambled heavily at university and eventually lost more than
£40,000. He's now training to be a mental health nurse and he campaigns to raise
awareness of problem gambling. So I remember when it was my 80th birthday, I got
an online account and that's where things really began to spiral because I was
able to gamble anywhere, anytime. So I didn't have to, you know, it wasn't like
I could only gamble in a betting shop. I could literally gamble in my lectures,
on the bus, on the train, everywhere. And that was the beginning of gambling
consuming my life for about seven years. I'd been going into a betting shop
since I was 16. I had a fake ID. So that's probably where the gambling had
started. I was really into sport and you think you can win money. So I think
putting those two together and being really competitive, I thought, okay, I can
win some money and enjoy the sport at the same time. But the problem was, was
that even if I did win in certain areas, I would always end up losing. So I just
couldn't stop the gambling once I started. I had a student loan and my parents
were paying my accommodation at the time. And when I first went to university, I
was 18. So I was lucky enough that they were able to do that. So yeah, it wasn't
a financial problem at the start, but then obviously it did become a financial
problem. At one point, I gambled my whole student loan that was going to last me
for a term within 24 hours. So I was left with no money. So yeah, I got the
student loan, I think it was the 4th of January, I got the payment. It was
supposed to last me for that term. And it all went within 24 hours. Two things
you really need to gamble are time and money. And when you're at university,
often you do have a lot of time on your hands and you might always have a lot of
money. But if you have some money, you can gamble. So that's where I see it's a
big problem. I go to football every weekend and there's always people that have
got bets on around me. Everyone's talking about gambling and that's absolutely
fine. I'm not anti-gambling, but that is where things can start to slip. It's
not only just gambling, it's the crypto, it's the trading, it's all these other
areas now that are advertised. I'm sure there's plenty of people that fall into
that trap and end up with no money. Bray, Ash, well, Dr. Jane Rigby is the Chief
Executive of the Young Gamers and Gamblers Education Trust, YGAM, and it
commissioned the research I mentioned. Dr. Rigby, good afternoon to you and
welcome to you and yours. Why would so many students be gambling? Good
afternoon, Winifred, and thank you very much for having YGAM on your programme
today. This is a really important subject and we were aware that students might
be particularly vulnerable to experiencing harms related to gambling. So we
carried out this research to try and understand a little bit more about that
question, why are they engaging? There's a number of reasons why people might
start to gamble and not everybody does experience harm, but our research has
shown that a vast number of young people in universities are experiencing harm
and we think that there is much more that we can do to prevent that. Well, in
your survey, one in five said that they had borrowed to gamble. We asked the
government about that and they said that the survey sample of university
students you've used was made up of volunteers that were recruited online and
that that would have attracted a disproportionate number of gamblers and that's
why you found these elevated rates of problem gambling. What do you say to that?
We carried out our research through an online survey company called Censuswide.
We didn't advertise that the research was about gambling particularly until
they'd taken the first screening questions to check that they were university
students. Any survey that's conducted online will typically attract people who
are particularly digitally illiterate and there could well have been some
limitations due to the survey design, but we had over 2,000 students take part
and we think that the sample size is sufficient that we can have some confidence
in the data that we found. So of those more than 2,000 students, what proportion
of them did you find had a problem with their gambling? So we found that 71% of
them were engaging in gambling, which is slightly less actually than last year
where we found that 80% of the students that we sampled were gambling, so
slightly less. But we did find that about one in four were, according to the
screen that we used, which is called the Problem Gambling Severity Index, about
one in four were experiencing harms at the highest level. Now the government
told us it's determined to protect those most at risk of gambling related harm,
including the young, and it's working to finalise the details of its review.
What would you like to see to protect students in particular from problem
gambling? Well in relation to the hopefully soon to be published white paper
that's reviewing the Terms of the Gambling Act, we want to see a much stronger
focus on education and prevention. So we would argue that prevention is better
than cure. We don't think anybody would disagree with us on that. And we would
like to see a significant long-term investment in prevention activity. The
Gambling Act review and the funding that goes to research, education and
treatment can often sometimes overlook the education part. We talk a lot in this
country about research and treatment services in relation to gambling harms. But
we think that much of an individual's exposure to risk in relation to gambling
isn't really within their control, so we need robust regulation to ensure that
people are being protected, but also effective education so that they understand
the risks and understand how to approach, particularly when we're talking about
university students dealing with a transition to a new way of life and
potentially with more time and money, as Bray alluded to in your case study. We
need to ensure that they're alert to the risks and able to be resilient to
those. Dr Jane Rigby, Chief Executive of the Young Gamers and Gamblers Education
Trust, thank you. Well sticking with students, new research commissioned by the
BBC suggests that 49% of them are putting part-time work before their studies. A
survey of around 1,800 undergraduates in England by the education charity the
Sutton Trust found that almost half had since September missed a lecture, a
seminar or a workshop to earn money to deal with the rising cost of living.
Heidi Parker is a second year student in Leeds and she's juggling her course and
two part-time jobs. It's pretty hard to balance it with uni sometimes when I'm
working like four shifts in a week. Some of the things I have to do is like
apply for extensions on my assignments just to make sure I can get it done
because I'll come home from work, go straight to bed, wake up, go to work again,
so sometimes it is difficult. Heidi Parker in Leeds, well the government says
it's already contributed £276 million for universities to distribute in
assistance grants to students in England and it's increasing the level of
maintenance loans in England later on this year by 2.8%. Today a new documentary
The Cost of Learning goes live on the BBC iPlayer looking at the results of the
survey and at the situation for students. The BBC Digital reporter Christian
Johnson presents the documentary and Carl Cullinane is Director of Research and
Policy at the Sutton Trust which did the research. Carl Cullinane, why are
students then, would you say, putting paid work before their studies? Like a lot
of areas of society are really feeling the pain at the moment. The cost of
living has increased for everybody and obviously particularly so among
essentials like food and bills and students are reaching out to the only ways
they can deal with these increased costs and paid work is one of those. But
there's also a variety of other things that they're doing that our data is
showing like cutting down on essentials, skipping meals, cutting down on
socialising and some are even moving back home with their families in order to
cut costs. The rise in maintenance loans and the financial help the government
described that has been given to universities to distribute to people in
hardship, how far will that go? Well the evidence so far is that it's not
reaching far enough. The government has certainly invested in increased hardship
funds but the evidence is showing that students are still suffering. Almost one
in three students report skipping meals. So there needs to be a combination of
both increased investment in these hardship funds but also increased awareness
from universities and from the government that young people can access these
funds because the students themselves don't always know that this money is
available to them. There's also a long term issue in terms of the levels of
maintenance support that are available to young people. The maintenance loan has
not been increasing with inflation and is being gradually devalued and the plans
for next September is that it will only rise by 2.8% which is substantially
below the inflation and the government really needs to look at that. The Welsh
government is planning to increase the maintenance by over 9% and the English
government really needs to look at that too. Christian Johnson, the students who
took part in this survey, what did they say? I think the main thing for students
is concern not just for now but for the future as well. So the three students
who feature in the BBC iPlayer documentary are all in their second year in Leeds
and they're already struggling now but come September, as Carl says, maintenance
loans are going up by 2.8% but inflation clearly is a lot higher than that.
They're already worried about how they're going to pay their rent next year, how
they're going to afford their food shop next year. Heidi, who we heard from a
few moments ago, says she's already starting to try and save for her rent from
September, several months away, but she's so concerned about how she's going to
be getting by in her third year of her university degree that she's already
trying to save up. Christian, how does taking paid work affect the degree that
you come up with in the end? How does it affect your student life generally?
Well Heidi isn't an isolated example as the research from the Sutton Trust shows
and the main concern for students who are working at the moment is how it's
impacting on their studies. Heidi has had an email from her university asking
why she's not been attending lectures as frequently as she used to and she is
seriously concerned, as many students are who work, about the impact it's going
to have on their studies. Clearly missing seminars and workshops might mean that
they won't get a result that they might otherwise do but they feel that they
need to go and earn this money to pay their rent, to make sure that they can go
and get their food shop on a weekly basis. Six in ten students have told the ONS
that the maintenance loan doesn't cover their living costs so this is clearly a
problem for students all over England. Carl Cullinane, the University Admissions
Service UCAS is reporting record numbers of students now opting to live and
study at home and their survey suggests it's because young people at school are
worrying about the cost of living. Is that one solution then, to go to a
university near where you live, live at home if you can? That's certainly a
solution that young people and families are finding to deal with the situation
but that doesn't mean that it's ideal. That introduces all sorts of geographical
inequalities in terms of the access to universities. If you live in a big city
with lots of really high-ranking universities that's perfectly fine but if you
live in rural areas or, you know, parts of the north and midlands, commuting to
a university or commuting particularly to a good university is not really an
option for you and that causes all sorts of problems. You also see that
university isn't just about the learning and the classes, it's also about the
experience, the activities that you take part in, the friends that you meet, the
networks that you build and people being able to live away from home, experience
life away from their family and give their whole life to the university
experience and take part in all that university has to offer, societies and
sport etc. is of huge benefit on top of the academic learning and if you are
living from home you're much less likely to gain all those kind of benefits and
so the benefits of going to university are going to be much less for those
people. Carl Cullinane from the Sutton Trust and Christian Johnson from the BBC,
thank you both. In a moment we'll bring you the first interview with the
Magistrates' Association about what's gone wrong with the way prepayment energy
meters have been fitted without consent in people's homes. Energy firms need a
court order from magistrates, a warrant, to break in and fit these meters. A
Times investigation found agents working for British Gas breaking into the homes
of vulnerable people, something that isn't allowed under the rules. British Gas
has apologised and Ofgem, the regulator, is investigating. One magistrate, Robin
Canberra, has told BBC Newsnight that he resigned because he felt unable to
check whether vulnerable people were being protected. When I started as a
magistrate six years ago, the energy companies would come to court reasonably
frequently requesting warrants of entry. We would be able to ask the energy
companies some questions and we would from time to time decline the application
for a warrant. Over time the process around how these warrants were considered
changed and rather than looking at individual applications, we would just get a
list, a list of addresses. If you are a person who is in acute financial
distress and a court is going to consider granting the power to a private
company to enter your home and install a prepayment meter, you'd want to know
that the courts are taking that decision really seriously, that they're giving
it serious consideration, that they're asking questions and none of that is true
anymore. And I simply got to a point where I just couldn't imagine going into
court and putting my signature to one of those warrants. Robin Cantrell-Fennick,
a former magistrate, speaking to Newsnight. Since 2019, the number of
applications for warrants to enter people's homes without their consent has
risen sharply to nearly 370,000 last year. And over the same period, the number
refused has gone right down from more than 1,800 to just 56. That's all types of
warrant though, it's not possible to separate the ones that are for energy
prepayment meters. But we do also know that at the same time there has been a
big increase in the number of people forced onto these prepayment meters. The
Magistrates Association hasn't spoken about what's happening until now. Mark
Beattie, the National Chair, agreed to talk to you and yours and I asked him
whether the law allows magistrates to scrutinise these applications properly.
The way the Act, which is an Act from 1953, is written is that magistrates must
issue the warrant if the information has been received. The arrangements around
vulnerability, as I understand it, are in the Ofgem Code of Practice and we are
told by the agents of the electricity company that all of those procedures have
been followed when we're presented with warrants to approve in court. So what
that other magistrate told Newsnight, Robin Cantrell-Fennig, you know, the
reason that he left was because he felt he was unable to check. He says when he
started, energy companies would come to court and magistrates would be able to
question them and establish whether there might be vulnerable people on the
premises. But over time, the process changed. And you're saying the process has
been the same since the law was set in 1950. What was it, 1953? 1953. Obviously,
in 1953, there was no concept of prepayment meters and the legislation talks
around disconnection and obviously things have moved on to prepayment meters.
What I would say is that in the days before Covid, he's correct that the utility
companies would come to court with bundles of paper, including copies of the
letters that they have served on the various householders. During Covid, in an
attempt to reduce the number of people coming into court, that went online.
Obviously, online, you cannot see the bundle of papers that would have been
supplied previously. But we do hear under oath or affirmation from the utility
company that all of those letters have been properly served. If magistrates
courts then are approving thousands of these applications in a matter of
minutes, there's no way the magistrates could be doing the due diligence, could
they? They are trusting the companies to do that. Do you think whoever decided
that that would work and would be just was being a bit naive? I think that
magistrates courts are not in a position to check every single one of the
hundreds of thousands of applications that we receive. No, but it doesn't sound
like you're able to check any. Well, we're able to check some. I think what I'm
trying to say is that if that's something that's wanted, then the appropriate
resources in terms of magistrate numbers and court capacity would be needed.
Because clearly, there are many applications that would need to be individually
reviewed. And that is not the arrangement at the moment. We have been told by
the debt help charities that these hearings take place in private rather than an
open court, and that this paperwork tends to be sent to particular courts and
that those courts could be miles away from where people live. How are customers
supposed to challenge them? So as I understand the Ofgem process that the
customer is written to on a number of occasions, enabling them to challenge the
debt, they're able to pick a court close to them for the hearing to occur. And
if they require a hearing in person or if they request a hearing in person, that
will be accommodated at their local hearing centre. So wherever their local
court is. So when Robin Cantrell-Fennick told the BBC the changes to the court
system, you say post Covid, mean that magistrates now do nothing more than
rubber stamp these warrants. He's right, isn't he? The ones that are
uncontested, we will approve in bulk. The ones that are contested will receive a
full hearing. And you're saying that it's up to people to lodge their
disagreement with having the force fitted meter when the paperwork comes through
to them telling them that these cases are going to court for warrants? That's
correct. And the paperwork to request a hearing is included with that
information. How often then would one of these warrants be contested by an
individual customer? I think I would say infrequently. I don't have any numbers
that relate to that. If you use an example where you get more contested cases,
it might be liability orders for council tax or business rates. So these
hearings do occur, but I would not want to suggest to you that it was frequent.
Well, I guess it can't be if only 56 warrants were refused last year. And you
say that those numbers are not just all people who are having warrants brought
to break in for prepayment meters. Correct. It must be virtually never then?
It's very, very infrequent. My experience as magistrate in North London is that
it's very, very infrequent that people will come. Ofgem's ordered this practice
of force fitting the meters to stop. That is until the end of this month. The
chief magistrate has also stopped the issuing of any of these warrants to force
fit prepayment energy meters in England and Wales. How long will that last for?
Do you know? No. The senior presiding judge has instructed that no cases are to
be listed until he changes that instruction. If we're going to carry on with the
system as it is, do you think that you do need more time at least, or perhaps
even more powers to challenge the energy companies when they make these
applications? Magistrates will do what is asked of them. The checking of their
compliance to their Ofgem license is not something that has been conceived of in
the magistrates' courts before. And with the volume of warrants that you've
mentioned, that would require appropriate resourcing in terms of magistrates and
legal advisors. That would not be insubstantial in terms of cost to the court
system. But if that is what others decide they wish us to do, magistrates will
follow their oath and do that. You know that point you made about these laws
dating back to the 1950s, and they used to be used to break into people's homes
and disconnect them. I guess that doesn't make these laws in themselves
unsuitable on the face of it, if your purpose in breaking is to fit a prepayment
meter. Well, I think if you look at the Ofgem statement, they have two types of
issue with the sector, one of which is the breaking in and fitting prepayment
meters, and the second is the conversion of smart meters to prepayment meters.
Neither of those concepts were around in the 1950s, when the utility companies
were publicly owned, and disconnection was the way in which the government of
the day ensured that it received the payment of bills. It would seem to me that
more modern legislation might be more appropriate to deal with the changing
circumstances. That was Mark Beattie, the National Chair of the Magistrates'
Association in England and Wales speaking to me a bit earlier. If you've ever
bought or looked to buy a flat, you will know that they're almost always sold
leasehold. A company owns the freehold and appoints management agents to collect
service charges for the upkeep of the block and communal areas, and for insuring
the building. There have been complaints about steeply rising maintenance costs
for flats. The Housing Secretary, Michael Gove, has promised to get rid of
leasehold altogether in England and Wales. So can it really happen? Sarah in
London told us about the drastic increase in charges that she pays for her flat.
We were told that our service charge was going to double, so increased by
£2,000, which I don't think anybody would budget for. You can budget in terms of
what it has previously been and make sure that you have that amount of money
saved, but for it to suddenly double, I think that put a lot of people in
difficulties in terms of how they were going to pay it. Each month it's at
least, I think, about £300 extra you've got to find to save to make sure that
you can pay the same amount next year, but there's no guarantee that it's going
to be the same amount. I mean, if it doubled again, it would be, I think,
completely unaffordable for people to pay, but I don't expect it to double
again, but I don't expect it to go down and it could increase by another £500 or
£1,000 and that is even more money to have to try and save a month. That's
probably the biggest expense for me per year and I don't really see anything for
it. Obviously, the building still stands, it is maintained, it's kept clean, but
to pay a huge amount of money more than, say, what your holiday would be or any
kind of luxury item that you could possibly conceive of buying on a yearly
basis, I don't think you really see anything for it. It's money you've worked
hard for that you hand over and you don't actually see anything for it coming
back to you, I wouldn't say. That's Sarah who's buying a flat in London. Well,
Lee Shapiro is a residential property solicitor with the law firm Owen Mitchell.
Good afternoon to you. Hello. So, Lee, if you ended the leasehold system in
England and Wales then, would it give people like Sarah more control over the
level of charges that they pay? I think it's a little difficult to say that that
would be the straightforward answer. The problem, well, when you buy a leasehold
property, the reason for it is because it's a way of living communally with
other people that also own a leasehold property in the building and in your,
each of the leases will set out the obligations for all of the landlords, for
the landlord as to what they have to do under the lease, what work they have to
do to maintain the property, keep it clean, keep the gardens, et cetera, keep it
looking good. And it will also set out what the leaseholder's obligations are.
So, that's normally to certain rules they need to comply with but also what they
need to contribute towards. Just to get rid of the leasehold system, we won't
completely get rid of that because the difficulties we will still be the same,
that people have to get together to pay to keep the buildings in the way they
want them to be. And the system at the moment has got a lot of protections in it
but people don't necessarily understand all the rights that they have in order
to make sure that they're paying the right amount. The body that represents the
companies that own the freeholds to flats, the Residential Freehold Association,
told us that scrapping leasehold will impose unwanted burdens and legal
responsibilities on leaseholders and make things like building maintenance more
expensive overall. Might they be right? I think it can do, yeah. At the moment,
you've got lots of different options as a person buying a property. It's not
always just an independent freeholder that owns the property. So, if you want to
have those rights and you want to have a better say in managing the building,
then you can certainly find property that works that way. So, you can get
together with your neighbours, in most cases, as long as your building
qualifies, to buy your freehold if you want to have those rights and
responsibilities and take control of the management of your building. If you
don't, and many people want to come home from work in the evening and not worry
about the maintenance, etc., of a building with their neighbours, then actually
the leasehold system as it works now can work very well for people because there
is someone else that's responsible for that. I think it's really important for
people that want to buy a leasehold property in a flat to understand not just
what the building looks like, but also what the obligations are and how it is
managed, and if it's important for them to have the rights and to be involved in
that control to look for a building where it is leaseholder managed. And there
are plenty of those where they've bought the freehold already or you can get
together with your neighbours, in most cases, to do so. But it tends to be,
doesn't it, just in smaller blocks, though, because if you're in a huge block of
flats, doesn't a certain proportion of you have to get together and want to do
this, run the place for yourselves? Absolutely. So the building would have to
qualify in the first case and you'd also then need a majority of leaseholders to
get together to do that. But if you haven't got a majority, then you're going to
struggle for people to get together to work, to make it work anyway. And it does
work in the bigger blocks. What happens is the leaseholders would have a
committee get together and then they would appoint managing agents. So you'd
have a similar position, but you get to choose who those managing agents are
rather than a third party freeholder. The alternative of common hold, which is
what the government's been proposing, would be the same. And for the large
buildings, you'd also end up appointing different managing agents. So the costs
would have to follow and have to be reasonable anyway. But with the leasehold
system at the moment, you've got lots of options to challenge them if they're
not fair and reasonable. Some people think the idea of scrapping the whole
leasehold system for flats is just unrealistic and can't be done. What do you
think? Well, I think at the moment you have got different people as freeholders,
whether they're individuals who own the freehold of a building, whether they're
companies, whether they're pension funds, whether all different sorts of people
that have an asset. You can't, in my view, just take that away without fairly
compensating them for losing that asset, which is what happens now with the
enfranchisement process. So leaseholders get together by the freehold and
compensate the landlord for it and the landlord then disappears. So just to take
it away, I can't see how you can legitimately do that because you're taking away
something someone owns and I don't think anyone would think that would be
acceptable. You said earlier on that people who are unhappy about the charges
don't know their rights. You mean their rights to appeal to tribunal? You've got
different options. So the first instance, if people aren't happy with the costs
that they're seeing on their service charge demands, they need to understand
what is being included in that. Are they being charged for items that the
landlord's entitled to recover under the service charge provisions? Are they for
the right kind of thing? So the first instance, I would speak to the managing
agents to check what they are. Are there major works that are happening? If
they're major works, have they been consulted on properly because the
leaseholders have a right to be consulted properly, either for major works or if
there's long-term agreements? And otherwise, the landlord can't recover over
certain limits for either of those. So they do need to make sure that they have
complied with the legislation properly. If they're still not happy and they
don't think they are getting the right services for what they're paying or if
the works haven't been reasonable, then yes, they do have a right to go to the
tribunal, which obviously can be expensive. So they do need to be careful with
that. But they do have those rights to do that. Lee Shapiro from Irwin Mitchell,
thank you very much for coming on. It's 24 minutes to one now and you're
listening to You and Yours on BBC Radio 4. I'm Winifred Robinson on Radio 4 and
on 5 Live next month, we're going to be looking in depth at rented housing and
all the problems that can surround it. We want to hear your story so that we can
build up a picture from you about the current state of the UK rental market. If
you're a tenant, tell us what impact the cost of renting is having on you. If
something goes wrong, is it dealt with? If you're a landlord, tell us about the
pressures that you're under. And if you're looking for somewhere to rent, how
hard is that? We'll be assigning our best journalists to investigate some of
your stories and then you'll be able to hear them as part of the Rental Health
Project at the end of March. So please do get involved in this big conversation
about renting. You can email us please, youandyours at bbc.co.uk. Now we've been
investigating how easy it is for criminals to set up fake companies, a company's
house, and register them to your home without any checks at all being done by
anyone. We have found whole streets all over England and Wales where every
single house in the road has had a company set up, much to the shock of the
homeowners. Well the companies were being set up mostly by criminals looking to
take out loans or business overdrafts and then just run away with the money. And
now a slightly different version of this fraud is emerging, resulting in the
flat belonging to one man in Cardiff being inundated, and I really do mean
inundated, with debt collection letters all from the tax office. Anna Little is
the producer of BBC X-Ray in Wales and she has been looking into this. So Anna,
tell us what it is that you have found. Hi Winifred. Well a couple of months ago
we did a story on X-Ray about the issues with companies' house that you just
mentioned and a viewer called Dylan Davies got in touch with us afterwards to
tell us that he's received thousands of letters from HMRC and debt collectors
that were all addressed to his property in Cardiff. The letters were for the
attention of about 200 different companies, most were Chinese looking names, but
what's different about this story compared to the company's house story is that
all the businesses at Dylan's had been VAT registered there. I directed a short
film for BBC X-Ray and went along with the presenter to meet Dylan in person.
Well I discovered it the first week in November, the first batch on the 7th of
November roughly. The first time I opened the post box there were 580 letters,
all HMRC brown envelopes, so that scared us a little bit. The addresses were of
this premises but they were all different names, they were addressed to
different people and different companies. They were new VAT registration numbers
for new companies. The first batch that we had of 580 we actually sent back
through the post saying not known of this address, but they kept coming and
you'll see the bundle here in front of how many we've got which is over 4,000
believe it or not. And we just gave up posting them back. We've had letters
coming since then and they've been demands for payment, some have had checks in
them. We were worrying because it is quite stressful because you're not sure of
the implications of it, you know, and nobody would listen to us and take us
seriously. It was really extraordinary and I've never seen anything like it.
There were huge piles of letters all connected to VAT. So he gave us permission
to open the letters. Some were confirming the VAT registration of companies at
Dylan's address. Others were confirming the companies had moved their VAT
registration there. There were HM Customs and Excise monthly VAT certificates.
But most worryingly, there were hundreds of letters from HMRC and debt
collectors chasing those companies for unpaid VAT. And in total, it added up to
about half a million pounds in unpaid VAT. All the companies registered to his
address without his knowledge. And he told us he's tried to get help, but
eventually he just gave up because it was just too complicated. I've opened some
of these and you will see debts asking for £300, £25, £8,000. It's mind
boggling. It's got to be millions, isn't it? Because I don't know if this is
happening to anybody else. If other people have got the same bundle in their
house, it's another multi-million pound. But it's hard to believe that when
you've got this many envelopes coming through from HMRC, that there isn't
something in HMRC's system somewhere that picks that up as being something
weird. And it's hard to believe that a postman is putting 4,000 letters through
another box with all different names on them. Why are the post offices having to
pick that up? And why isn't there something that the post office then advises
HMRC that something's going on, you know? But it doesn't seem to work. So I
arrived here today to meet you and we've got another few hundred envelopes in
the post box again. So it's... where does it end? I don't know. And what did you
do with these letters? Sat and stared at them for a little bit because I
couldn't believe the bundle that was here. But eventually decided to put them in
a plastic bag and take them down to Carrie Faye Police Station, which I did, and
went to the counter at the front desk. Two ladies there, very nice ladies, but
they basically didn't want to know. They said there's nothing they could do
about it. I should deliver them to HMRC or ring HMRC. Bit of disenchanted and I
went away. When I go back home, I ran crime desk in Cardiff again. They
recommended I get in touch with Action Fraud, but I telephoned Action Fraud. And
after about an hour and 10 minutes, we had a reply. And they said, go online. So
we tried that then. The trouble is that when you go online, it tells you to put
in the name of the wrong address or the wrong person. But when you go 580
envelopes, I didn't know where to start, so I gave up on that. But to my
disappointment, then a few weeks later, I'd letter back from Action Fraud saying
they looked into it and they didn't feel there was a line of inquiry that they
could or any authority in the United Kingdom could pursue. So basically, that
was the end of that. So I know that you have investigated what's going on here.
Have you managed to find out why these letters are coming to Dylan? Yes, so this
is slightly different to the issue of foreign businesses stealing people's
addresses to register their companies. What's happening here is foreign
businesses have found a way to avoid paying VAT on goods or products that they
sell to customers in the UK. And the way that they do this is by pretending to
be in the UK at the point of sale. So how the HMRC rules work are, if the
product you're buying is sold from within the UK, the seller here is responsible
for paying any VAT that's due directly to HMRC. But since 2021, the law says
that if an item supplied here by an overseas seller and sold through an online
marketplace like Amazon or eBay, then it's those online marketplaces who are
responsible for collecting and paying the VAT, and that's directly to our
government. So that was introduced a crackdown on tax evasion by sellers outside
the UK. But by pretending to be selling products within the UK, these companies
registered at Dylan's address are avoiding having to pay the VAT deducted by the
online marketplaces. And they're able to do this because amazingly, HMRC does
absolutely no checks on companies registering for VAT here in the UK. And of
course, that explains why Dylan's address was so easily stolen. So all this
means the UK Treasury is chasing huge amounts of unpaid VAT, money that the
government could really use right now. And poor Dylan has a ton of debt
connected to his property. I worry about the implications of it all in terms of
credit rating, etc. Whether there's the possibility of somebody connected with
all this breaking in here when there may be families staying here. Whether
bailiffs will knock on the door and take what we've got here. I did write to
company house as well and asked them to look into this. They had nothing from
them either. It's such a big operation, worldwide operation. Is there a risk of
violence somewhere along the line? I don't know. Does somebody want all these?
There's checks in them. So there's somebody going to come and look for these,
isn't it? Where are HMRC? They're following all the people that haven't paid
their tax bill at the end of January and they owe them 60 quid or something.
They'll chase them. But this is multi-million pound, it must be, isn't it? And
nobody's taking any entries of that. And he's in a horrible situation, isn't he?
When you've managed to contact HMRC on his behalf about this torrent of letters
going to his flat, what have they said to you? Well, we contacted them two weeks
ago and they said that they were looking into it. We provided them with copies
of some of the letters sent to Dylan's address. They still haven't confirmed
exactly what's going on, but they have said that it does indeed appear to be
fraudulent activity. Anna Little, thank you. And we'll be watching your
programme BBC X-Ray on BBC One Wales at eight o'clock tonight. You can see it on
the iPlayer. Graham Barrow is an expert on financial fraud, particularly by
companies. You might know him from his podcast, The Dark Money Files. Graham,
hi. Thanks for coming on to you and me. So first of all, then, how have people
trading from China who are selling goods online chosen Dylan's flat in Cardiff?
A good question, Winifred. I mean, more so now, actually, there's another flat
in the same block that's also been targeted, I've since discovered. So, you
know, there's potential for somebody local who's acting on their behalf, but it
could just be completely random, which is scary, isn't it? It is scary. If the
companies are using fake addresses, then, to register for that, it wouldn't
inspire much confidence, would it, in the goods that they're selling us online?
Well, no, and that's a really good point, because a lot of these goods have the
capability to hurt us, because they are electronic goods, they are DIY goods. I
was looking at telescopic ladders. Now, you want to know one of those isn't
going to collapse on you when you're up the side of a house. And if these goods
are being sent in through such poor checks, it really is concerning. You can
understand, can't you, why Dylan is scared and upset? Oh, totally. I mean, there
is a real risk of, you know, as he said, bailiffs or debt collection agencies
knocking on his door. I mean, these VAT registrations are registered to his
address. So, legitimately, the debt collection agencies will believe that's a
legitimate place to go and collect the debt. Wouldn't you expect that hundreds
of Chinese companies registering for VAT at a single flat in Cardiff might set
some alarm bells going on HMRC's computer systems? Well, it's more of a klaxon
than an alarm bell. I mean, not just that, but they're changing the address
every three months. And I've been able to track some of these, and it is every
three months, which is the VAT return period. So, it's clearly designed to keep
moving the addresses on when they come to get the VAT. Graeme Barrow, thank you.
Three years ago this month, we went into the first COVID lockdown. One of the
shocks was the difficulty shopping for food. Suddenly, people told they must
stay at home, desperately needed home delivery. Demand was so huge for grocery
delivery slots that some of the supermarket websites crashed. Here are some
listeners who called us about trying to get a delivery shot in those early days
and weeks. I've rung the number that you quoted on the website, getting on for
75 times now since Monday morning. You just can't get through. I've tried
looking again on the website this morning to see whether the page has been
updated. No. It refers you to the help section. You go through the help section,
and you come back and it says, please ring the same number. We were just
horrified when we logged in on Monday, and there weren't any slots this week or
for the next two weeks. We just thought we were stranded. We couldn't get our
bulk shopping any other way. Because I already had accounts with Sainsbury's and
Waitrose, I kind of thought, okay, well, hopefully we'll get some luck there.
So, right at the very beginning, I managed to get a Waitrose delivery, which we
had about three weeks ago now. Every time I've gone onto the Sainsbury's
account, it's just said, we don't recognise you as a vulnerable or an elderly
person. I found it so confusing, and I made all these choices, some of which
have come up, which I don't want at all. I got quite muddled about it all. And I
can't have a delivery until the 27th of March. Now, I've got enough food for
three days. Fraser's talking to us about shopping for groceries online in the
early days of the first lockdown. Fraser McEvott tracks how we shop. He's the
head of retail and consumer insight at the consultancy company, Kantar. Fraser,
good afternoon to you. Tell us then, what happened with online shopping for
groceries in the pandemic? Just prior to the pandemic, about 8% of grocery sales
were online. But then during the pandemic, that pretty much doubled. And as your
listeners there were saying, there was a real need from particularly people who
are vulnerable to get groceries delivered. And then even people who weren't in
that very vulnerable group didn't really want to go out to the shops that much.
And we're trying to shop less frequently. And getting a bulk shopping was a
really, really good idea. Now, it did take a while for the supermarkets to ramp
up the logistics of doing that. And they did a pretty good job. But it took them
several months. So in those early days of the pandemic, it was pretty hard to
get a slot online. Let's just hear what some shoppers in Manchester had to say
about this. Paul Holloway asked them their attitude now to shopping for
groceries online. Wonderful, they're really good. I like the fact that I don't
have to go trailing around the shop. It just arrives and you put it away and
that's it. Is this something you were doing before the pandemic? No, no, since
the pandemic. Don't do it every time, but quite regularly, really. Really, for
our groceries, we would mostly still just go to the supermarket. Did you during
the pandemic? Yeah. How did you find it? All right. I mean, it still wasn't our
main thing because my husband's a key worker. So you still went, could go to the
shop. I find it's a bit frustrating because they do the kind of like replacement
item things and they're not always the right thing. And I'd rather go to the
shop. Since we've had twins, we've sometimes used online groceries. Yeah. And
it's something we discovered during lockdown. Saves you a bit of time, does it?
Yeah, absolutely. But you still need to do the lists on your phone, which I
don't like as much as picking in the grocery. They're reasonably reliable, but
what we found more recently is that you often get fruit and veg that has got
very limited sell by date times associated with it and dairy produce and things
like that. Do you use home deliveries a lot? For stuff I can't get locally. And
during the pandemic, did you book deliveries online? A couple of times had to
because we were both seen as completely vulnerable, so we weren't allowed out.
But since you've not changed your behaviour, you like to get back in the shops?
Yeah, definitely. I like to spend the cash locally in the local shops. I don't
have a computer. I don't do anything like that. I'm too old fashioned. I like to
go to the shop and see what I'm getting. What do you enjoy about shopping
online? I don't have to carry loads of shopping bags. That's all really. What
about those substitute products? They're all right. Yeah, I'm not that fussy.
Some shoppers in Manchester. So Fraser McEvoy, you said that before the
lockdown, 8% of us were shopping online for groceries. It quickly went to 15%.
Then the supermarkets geared up. What did it peak at? Well it peaks at about 15%
of the market. That was the peak then? Okay. Yeah, that was the peak. So the
near doubling from the 8% of the market. And at that time, in any given four
weeks, about a quarter of the nation's households were shopping online, which
now has fallen away back since then, because I think you heard from your
contributors there, you know, not everybody wants to do online shopping. There
are a few niggles with it. But what really changed during the pandemic was many
people undertook online shopping for the very first time. And many of those were
older shoppers as well, who typically didn't need to go to the shops. Online
shopping had always been for families with young children who didn't have the
time. And once you set up the password, once you set up the favourite list and
you've tried it and found it's not that difficult, a good proportion of those
people have stayed. So yes, online shopping has fallen away, but it has been
turbo boosted in the longer term by the pandemic sales. It's interesting that
you've mentioned that, because I asked our listeners at the start, you know,
what they think about it. You said, you know, older people have taken it up.
This one from Tony in East Sussex, haven't set foot in a supermarket for years.
We now get two deliveries a week and we're retired. We live in a quiet rural
area. We find it suits us really well. In the summer we grow a lot of our fresh
veg. There are no crowded car parks, no long queues, no surly stuff. Don't even
have to put my shoes on to shop. So you said it's fallen back a bit from 15% to
about what then? Well, that sounds idyllic, doesn't it? So it's fallen back to
12% today. So it's about half as big as again as it was prior to the pandemic.
And that effect that was described there, if you know, I'm not going to go to
the shops, has had a sort of a long, a wider, not just online shopping. People
are shopping less frequently than they did prior to the pandemic. Now it could,
so about one in 20 shopping trips has disappeared. People don't make them
anymore. And that could be one of two reasons. So one is, you know, changes in
lifestyle. So, you know, it may be people working from home or choosing not to
go to the supermarket quite so often. We now know that the weekend is less
important for shopping. And actually the week is busier if people are working
home, they can pick it up there. And also, perhaps some people during the
lockdown discovered that they could get by without going shopping quite so often
and decided they've got some better things to do with their time rather than
popping out to the shops four or five times a week. Here's another listener,
Lynn. I have shopped online for years. Since the lockdown kicked in, this method
of grocery shopping has been my lifeline. We live in the sticks. The round trip
to any large supermarket is 20 miles. And for those people who live near a local
high street, one of the other pandemic effects was the people shopped, even for
their groceries, they did more shopping locally. Has that stuck? That effect has
pretty much dissipated, to be honest. So the, you know, the local corner stores
did really well during the early days of the pandemic. So people weren't allowed
to go very far from their home and people didn't want to go. So just popping
into the local store was a really good idea. And quite often the stocking was
good there because they weren't subject to the same shortages that some of the
large supermarkets were seeing with some empty shelves. Do you remember when it
was impossible to pick up pasta or perhaps fresh tomatoes or tinned tomatoes?
The convenience stores weren't subject to quite the same rush, but that seems to
have able to weigh the effect that little bit. Apart from we do have this effect
of people, you know, working at home more. So, you know, it's easier if you are
not in the city just to pop out during the week and perhaps to your local store
then. How important then have groceries that are sold online become to
supermarkets? Well they are quite important. So, you know, they make up sort of,
you know, not quite just over 10% of sales and for some supermarkets
considerably more. But remember for a supermarket, it's pretty obvious they
don't make as much money every time they deliver some shopping compared to when
you go to the supermarket and pick it up yourself. Even if there is a delivery
charge, remember, they've got to get someone to fill up the trolley in the
store. They've got to get someone to drive that truck to you. And those trucks
are expensive as well. So, supermarkets have to do online shopping, but it's not
their most profitable way of doing business. Fraser McEvock from Kantar. Thank
you very much for that. We've had some emails in, lots of emails about online
shopping, mainly from people saying that they love it and they're sticking with
it. But we've also had some emails in on the student cost of living. We were
talking about students having to juggle jobs and local, sorry, juggle jobs and
university. This one from Claudia Moore. My granddaughter's at Roehampton
University. She studies biomedical sciences, has three lectures a week and two
jobs. And it works out well for her. She says university is a life lesson. Well
that's it from us for today. It's our phone-in tomorrow and tomorrow we're
asking about childcare. We'd like to know how is childcare working for you?
Childcare costs are much higher in the UK than they are in other countries,
making it harder for women in particular to stay in the workplace and to
progress in their careers. Childcare providers have written to the Prime
Minister Rishi Sunak, asking him to make childcare a priority in the spring
budget. So we would like to know how are you coping with the costs and whether
the childcare you need is available where you live. You can email us about that
right now. Here's the address, youanyours at bbc.co.uk. If you get in touch,
leave us a phone number because we'd like to be able to call you back. I'll be
back here tomorrow just after the midday news to take your calls. Thanks for
listening today. You and Yours was produced by Tom Mosley. The studio managers
were Amy Brennan and John Cole. Let's get the lunchtime forecast now with the
details here. Stav Diné, our solar staff. Hello there, VG. Thank you very much.
Good afternoon to you all. It's going to be quite a wintry week of weather in
store across the UK's Arctic, northerly, setting across all areas over the next
few days. Now there is going to be the risk of some disruptive snow in places
from around midweek onwards, but there does remain uncertainty on the details
for this. So certainly it's worth keeping abreast of the forecast and heading
online to check out all the latest weather warnings, which are changing all the
time. Now for the rest of today, it's certainly going to be a two way split with
the northern half of the UK cold with sunny spells and wintry showers and the
southern half less cold but cloudy with outbreaks of patchy rain. So for
Scotland, the best of any sunny spells are likely to be reserved for you, but
we'll see frequent wintry showers setting in across much of the north and the
northeast. There's few of them will tend to spread inland at times, but there
will certainly be some accumulations increasing over the higher ground of the
North Highlands and in towards the Grampians. Now through the central belt and
southern Scotland, it's likely to stay dry through the afternoon with some good
spells of sunshine, but it will be a cold day, breezy, even windy across coastal
parts of the north and the east. Temperatures will range from around one to five
Celsius. For Northern Ireland and Northern England, it's mostly cloudy, few
patchy light rain at the moment. However, skies will tend to brighten up, I
think, as we move through the afternoon, but it will start to turn colder and we
could see a few wintry showers setting in across parts of Northern Ireland,
maybe Northern England as we head into the evening. Temperatures today around
five or six Celsius. For the rest of England and Wales, another mostly cloudy
afternoon with patchy rain. Winds will tend to be light and temperatures range
around six to eight Celsius. Now through tonight, it stays cloudy with a mix of
rain, but also some heat, hill, sleet and snow across South Wales, parts of
Southern England. The rest of the UK, though, will see clear skies. It's going
to be cold and frosty with further wintry showers affecting coastal parts of
Northern and Eastern Scotland, North East England and Northern Ireland. That's
your weather. Stav, thanks very much indeed. There's a crisis in UK music
education. In today's climate, there's a lot less funding available to support
many young musicians who would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch,
a musician myself, and in a new three-part series, I'll be finding out why the
future of British music is under threat. If you don't have adequate provision in
our schools, that is going to have an impact on the talent pipeline and it is
going to have an impact in terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it
in danger of becoming an elitist occupation? Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds starts tomorrow morning at 11.30. On FM, on digital radio and on BBC
Sounds, this is Rathbone.