TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The act of feeding that gives us so much pleasure. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. It's 4 hours GMT. This is The Newsroom with
me, Charlotte Gallagher. Coming up... These comments were irresponsible, they
were repugnant, they were disgusting. They've been strong allies for years, but
the special relationship between the US and Israel is now under pressure. We
find out why. Also, the mystery of Havana syndrome. Routed all, both Russia,
where I think a lot of the fingers were being pointed, and of course Cuba, were
over and over dismissing the claims that they were involved. And... Find out why
the Romanian government are deploying this artificial intelligence. And Meghan
and Harry are asked to move on from their UK home. All that to come, first the
news. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced
comments by Israel's far right finance minister, Betzel Smotrich, who had called
for the Palestinian village of Huara to be wiped out. The village in the
occupied West Bank was the scene of a rampage by Jewish settlers on Sunday,
after the earlier killing of two Israelis. David Willis reports. Betzel El
Smotrich, who leads a pro-settler party, was quoted as saying he believed the
village needed to be, as he put it, erased. Mr Smotrich later said his comments
had been misinterpreted by the media, but he nonetheless doubled down by saying
that Huara had become a terrorist outpost, as he put it, for those intent on
launching attacks against the Jews. In response, the US State Department
spokesman Ned Price called the comments irresponsible, repugnant, and
disgusting, and called on Benjamin Netanyahu and other senior Israeli officials
to publicly disavow them. Foreign ministers from the G20 group of major
economies are meeting in the Indian capital, Delhi, with the divisions over
Ukraine likely to dominate the agenda. India, which holds the G20 presidency,
has taken a neutral stance on the conflict. Leila Nathu reports. Tensions
between G20 nations over the war in Ukraine were clearly on show before foreign
ministers had even taken their seats around a shared table. The UK's foreign
secretary, James Cleverley, said he would call out Russia, while Germany said it
would firmly oppose any propaganda from Moscow. Russia's foreign minister,
Sergei Lavrov, meanwhile, who has already met his Indian counterpart in private,
is expected to strongly criticise the West, according to the Russian embassy in
Delhi. The schedule for today's meeting includes sessions on food security,
development cooperation, terrorism and humanitarian assistance, a reflection of
India's effort to focus discussions on the needs of poorer nations. The Greek
Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, says a committee of experts will
investigate the causes of Tuesday night's rail disaster, which saw two trains
collide, killing at least 43 people. Mr Mitsotakis said everything pointed to
human error being to blame, but rail union members say there had been repeated
warnings that safety systems weren't working properly. Mr Mitsotakis has
promised to get to the bottom of the incident. Justice will do its own work.
Responsibilities will be assigned. Meanwhile, the state will stand by the
families of the victims. We will mourn our children, our siblings, our friends.
We will remain united in this tragedy as well. And then we will bow our heads
and clench our teeth. We will work to ensure that this never again that I heard
in Larissa is not an empty word. I promise you that. Estasia Master has been
arrested and charged with negligent homicide. World News from the BBC. The
leader of North Korea has said that farms must meet their grain production goals
without fail amid reports that the country is facing a food crisis. At a meeting
of the ruling party, Kim Jong-un called for better irrigation systems and
machinery and said all farmers should focus on increasing their per hectare
yield. New York City has agreed to pay just over $21,000 each to hundreds of
demonstrators who were penned in by police during racial justice protests in
2020. It follows a lawsuit brought by five of the demonstrators who accuse
officers of a brutal response to the protests that followed the murder of George
Floyd. Researchers on Easter Island have found a previously undiscovered moai,
one of the Pacific Island's distinctive stone statues, in a dry lake bed. It was
found by a team visiting the area around the Ranu Rakraku volcano, where several
of the monolithic human figures were damaged in a fire last year. Archaeologists
say they hope there may be more of the statues at the site, which was until
recently underwater. Ornithologists are celebrating the sighting of a dusky
tetrica, that's a yellow-throated songbird, native to Madagascar which was
feared to have become extinct. The bird had not been seen since 1999, as the
BBC's Tracey Burcham reports. The dusky tetrica was once on the top 10 most
wanted lost birds list after eluding scientists for 24 years. Now, three of the
rare ground-dwelling songbirds have been sighted in recent weeks during an
expedition into the remote rainforests of northeast Madagascar. Excited
ornithologists say the discovery may cause a rewriting of textbooks, as the
birds were seen on rocky banks by mountain streams, not previously thought to be
its natural habitat. Scientists say this may explain why they haven't been seen,
or indeed heard, for so long, as the sound of rushing water would have drowned
out the birds' calls. That's the latest BBC News. Hello, you're listening to the
Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher. The US has
been a strong supporter of Israel for decades, sending it billions of dollars in
aid and providing political support. But comments by Israel's far-right finance
minister, Betzal Smotrich, have incensed Washington. He called for a Palestinian
village to be wiped out, that was Huwara, which had already been ransacked and
set on fire by Jewish settlers after two Israelis were killed. Ned Price from
the US State Department called on the Israeli Prime Minister to condemn Mr
Smotrich. These comments were irresponsible, they were repugnant, they were
disgusting. And just as we condemn Palestinian incitement to violence, we
condemn these provocative remarks that also amount to incitement to violence. We
call on Prime Minister Netanyahu and other senior Israeli officials to publicly
and clearly reject and disavow these comments. Mr Smotrich later backtracked,
saying what he wanted was a heavy price to be exacted against what he called
terrorists in the village. I spoke to our correspondent in the US, David Willis.
I think this warning is in line with those from the UK and the EU, Charlotte,
who both expressed concern over the violence in Huwara and have called on Israel
to tackle such settler rampages. Like them, the United States is well aware that
the current government is the most right-wing in Israel's history. And despite
calls by some Israeli politicians, the Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu among
them, for people to not take the law into their own hands, there are those who,
like the gentleman you mentioned, Betzel al-Smotrich, who have made no secret of
the fact that they want to see tougher action taken against Palestinians in the
West Bank by this new government. And the Biden administration fears a further
increase in violence in the run-up to Ramadan, of course, at the end of this
month. And it wants to calm the tensions arising from this latest outbreak of
violence in the West Bank and the protests surrounding judicial reform in Israel
as well. Yes, because Mr Biden did warn Mr Netanyahu not to go ahead with those
planned changes to the judicial system. So it's not the first time they've
issued this warning to Israel. It's not. And the White House, as I say, very
much hoping to calm the situation. Hence the State Department's repudiation of
Betzel al-Smotrich's comments as irresponsible, repugnant, disgusting, and their
call for Mr Netanyahu and other senior Israeli officials to disavow those
incendiary remarks. But Mr Smotrich is one of Benjamin Netanyahu's ultra
nationalist, ultra orthodox allies who've secured top positions in this new
government. He's a firebrand settler leader who's now in charge of much of the
Israeli government's policy in regards to the West Bank. And despite accusing
the media of misquoting him, as you mentioned, over the comments about how the
Palestinian village of Huwara should be wiped out, Mr Smotrich has also said
that he believes that village has become a terrorist outpost, as he put it, for
those seeking to launch attacks against Jews. And he's urged tough action
against militants and their supporters. So despite those weekend talks in
Jordan, after which it was said that both sides had agreed to de-escalate the
tension in the region, there really is little evidence of that on the ground.
And that is worrying officials in the Biden administration. I just wanted to ask
David, how difficult is this balancing act for Joe Biden? Because he doesn't
want to alienate supporters of Israel in the US that perhaps might vote
Democrat, but he also wants to send a strong message to Israel. Is that quite a
difficult balancing act for him? It is. And you're absolutely right. There's a
lot of support amongst the Jewish diaspora here for Democrats. And so he doesn't
want to alienate them. But at the same time, as I mentioned, this is the most
right-wing Israeli government in memory. And he clearly has some concerns about
the direction it could take or looks to be taking. That was David Willis. It's
now been three years since the coronavirus pandemic began in the Chinese city of
Wuhan, and we still don't know how it happened. The FBI now says Covid-19 most
likely started in a Chinese government-controlled lab, though it hasn't offered
any fresh scientific evidence. And other American intelligence agencies have
drawn different conclusions. Our correspondent John Sudworth was in China when
the outbreak began. He's now in New York and told me more. This all came about
as a result of the intelligence review that President Biden ordered back in
2021. And we have known for some time that the FBI's position was to conclude
with moderate confidence, they said, that the lab leak was the most likely
scenario. What's interesting in recent days is that we have heard that the US
Energy Department has changed its intelligence assessment now to come around in
support of the FBI position. So things are shifting a little. We are told that
four intelligence agencies still believe that the natural origin for Covid, the
idea that it somehow crossed naturally from animals to humans, perhaps in a
wildlife market in Wuhan, four agencies believe that that is the most likely
scenario and two are undecided. What do you think this will do for China-US
relations? Well, I mean, could it get any worse? I suppose you have to ask. You
know, you can hear in the Chinese reaction that this will not go down well in
Beijing. They are accusing the United States of political manipulation on this
question. Although what we can say, though, I think if we had to sort of step
back from that, that those obvious questions that some scientists have suggested
might by this stage at least have begun to be answered, you know, might the
virus have been discovered in a host animal in China? Well, apparently not.
China says there has been no clues to a natural origin found in that regard.
Could patient samples in Wuhan hospitals in the weeks and months before the
outbreak give us clues as to the origin of the virus? Again, China says it has
found nothing. Might China have investigated the laboratories in Wuhan to see
what samples they were holding and what sort of experiments were being
conducted? Well, if it has, it hasn't told us. And I think it's in the absence
of information that the intelligence agencies are struggling to come up with
anything that looks like a consensus. You obviously were in China for part of
the pandemic. What were people saying at the time? You know, were people looking
at the lab in China or the wet market? And how do you think they'll be taking it
normal Chinese people that the US are accusing this lab leak? It's a really
interesting question and quite a complicated one. I mean, at the beginning,
absolutely, questions were being asked on the Chinese internet about the
possibility of a lab leak. In fact, that's where I first saw the possibility
being raised. That was very quickly, as you might expect, nipped in the bud by
the Chinese censors. And China has had huge success since in shifting the
narrative. Before I left China, back in early 2021, almost anybody you spoke to
would say that they now believe that the pandemic did not begin in China. So
forget lab leak, forget natural origin. China has pushed back in terms of its
own propaganda very effectively at the very idea that it started in China at
all. That was John Sudworth. Next, a mystery illness called Havana syndrome has
baffled doctors and the intelligence community since it was first reported in
2016. Diplomats at the American embassy in Cuba started complaining of severe
headaches, ringing in the ears and nausea. At first, Washington claimed the
symptoms might have been the result of malicious actions by a foreign adversary.
But a new US intelligence assessment now says that's highly unlikely. The
symptoms, though, are real enough, as the White House press secretary Karen
Jean-Pierre agreed. We understand that people truly went through an ordeal. And
that's something that clearly our colleagues and their families had to deal
with. So our commitment and the president's commitment to the health and safety
of US government personnel remains unwavering. And this is why the departments
and agency will continue to provide timely care on the metal as we look at the
medical care and make sure that the reports are thorough, support research
efforts and process Havana Act payments as requested. Our Cuba correspondent,
Will Grant, has been telling me more. The decision that was reached in this
intelligence report, which was at least two years in the making, involved seven
different intelligence agencies, is that there wasn't an sort of unnamed hostile
foreign government behind it using some kind of previously unknown sonic weapon,
as was perhaps believed at one stage, or possibly as some kind of byproduct from
electronic surveillance of US diplomats in Havana. And you lived full time in
Havana at the time of this Havana syndrome. What were people saying to you? And
how worried were people? It was very, very worrying for those in the diplomatic
service at the time. I remember other diplomatic teams were very concerned about
their staff. And, you know, it was it was something that was causing a ripple in
Havana, no doubt about it. I mean, what was interesting is that the Cubans right
from the very start were at pains to point out that they didn't believe it was
anything that could be linked to some kind of foreign government on their soil,
acting either in conjunction with the Cubans or on their own to attack US
personnel. They were very clear about that. And we understand that Raul Castro
specifically spoke to the US ambassador at the time to make that point that he
had nothing to do with it. And, you know, as far as he was concerned, Cuba
wasn't involved. So it was, of course, later used as a pretext by which to shut
down, essentially shutter the US embassy in Havana. Almost all personnel, except
the very, very skeleton staff were were sent home. Of course, a lot of those
staff had been affected. Many of them had their careers curtailed. They've
subsequently received compensation from the US government. But throughout it
all, both Russia, where I think a lot of the fingers were being pointed,
particularly in Congress, and of course, Cuba, were over and over dismissing the
claims that they were involved in some kind of, you know, coordinated attack on
US personnel. Despite the fact that there are lots of different embassies in
Cuba, it was only US staff, no other country involved, or were they? It was, I
think there was a suggestion at one point that maybe one or two Canadian staff
had also been affected. But essentially, yes, it was only US staff. And then the
reason, of course, that that it then became dubbed Havana syndrome. But the
reason the kind of pressure eased from Cuba is because it became very, very
apparent that it was then appearing elsewhere, all over the world, wherever the
US had embassies, or there were military personnel affected, people well beyond
the purview of anything to do with US-Cuba relations. It was clear that it was
something that stretched well beyond the Caribbean. That was Will Grant. Rail
workers in Greece are going on strike today, in mourning and in protest at what
they say is official neglect of the railways. It follows a train crash a little
over 24 hours ago, in which at least 40 people were killed. It's not just rail
workers who are protesting. This was the scene on the streets of Athens last
night. Police responded. That was the sound of tear gas rounds being fired. The
accident happened when a passenger train on its way from Athens to Thessaloniki
hit a freight train. The transport minister has already resigned and a
stationmaster who's been charged with manslaughter by negligence has
acknowledged mistakenly routing a train on the wrong track. Our correspondent
Nick Beek spoke to us from outside a hospital in Larissa. This is one of the
hospitals where survivors have been treated. But it's also a place where
relatives have been coming to give their DNA so that their missing loved ones
may be identified in the hours or days to come. I've just been talking to one
surgeon here and he says that those 43 people who have been identified, it's
believed they were in the third and fourth carriages. And when you look at the
images of the first and second carriages, which were all but destroyed, it
really does mean that the number of people who have been killed here is likely
to increase. The Greek prime minister has described this as a tragic human
error. But for many people that simply doesn't cut it because there have been
repeated warnings about the state of the railways here. Lots of people it would
seem have had safety concerns. And so what we're seeing tonight is as well as
the mourning, a real sense of anger. And there have been some protests in the
capital Athens, peaceful and otherwise. And as the country enters three days of
national mourning, many people are saying this simply isn't acceptable. And some
are wondering whether any sort of investigation on a national level or here in
this city will really do it justice and do justice to the people who have died.
So this is a dark day for Greece. This is the worst railway disaster in its
history. That was Nick Beek. While Russia will be under the spotlight at the G20
meeting in India this week, its deputy foreign minister is in Geneva today to
attend meetings at the United Nations. Despite some attempts to isolate Moscow,
diplomatically following the invasion of Ukraine, Russia remains a permanent
member of the UN Security Council, a position which grants Moscow power and
influence among UN member states. Imogen Foulkes sent this report from Geneva.
If Russia wanted to prove it is still a player on the world stage, Geneva is a
place to try. Sergei Ryabkov will address the conference on disarmament. He is
expected to defend Moscow's decision to abandon nuclear arms reduction talks.
Later, he'll speak to the Human Rights Council, just days before UN
investigators publish a report into possible Russian war crimes in Ukraine. Mr
Ryabkov knows he will face some hostility. Last year, immediately following the
invasion, many diplomats walked out when Russia got up to speak. Imogen Foulkes,
the Romanian government has turned to artificial intelligence to learn what its
citizens think. The prime minister introduced what he described as the world's
first AI advisor, as cabinet ministers looked on in amusement and horror. Anna
Aslan reports. Romania's prime minister surprised his cabinet when he introduced
the country's new honorary advisor, a mirror-like structure with a beeping
interface. As the AI advisor was switched on, a face and words appeared on the
screen, while a calm, computerized voice said, hello, you gave me life and my
role is now to represent you like a mirror. Named ION, the Romanian word for
mirror backwards, the robot then asked what it should know about Romania. Unlike
other AI bots, such as chatGPT, ION can't have a conversation with the user. It
responds by saying things like, I understand, I'm listening to you and I'm
learning. The mirror screen will be taken on a tour across the country, and the
robot will be able to communicate with the user. ION will constantly monitor
social media for relevant posts. Once ION's collected enough data, it'll analyze
it and draw up government reports on what Romanians want, which would inform
public policy. But it's not clear how the AI will make these difficult choices.
Critics have urged caution, saying the public needs to know how to make these
difficult choices. The AI will be able to communicate with the user, and it will
be able to make the right choices. Critics have urged caution, saying the public
needs to know how the algorithm will decide what's prioritized from the messages
received. They're also worried that technology could easily be misused or
spammed. That was Anna Aslam. Let's get some sports news now with Paul Saris.
Gabriele Martinelli scored twice with Bukayo Saka and Martin Odegaard also on
the score sheet as Arsenal thrashed Everton 4-0 at the Emirates to move five
points clear at the top of the English Premier League. The Gunners boss, Mikel
Arteta, was delighted with the win against a tough side. This league, that's a
different story. And we had a big proof of that when we played at Goodison. And
this team played at Anfield and it made it really difficult for Liverpool as
well. So we knew that. So really pleased with the performance, the maturity and
the quality that we showed today. Elsewhere, Liverpool were 2-0 winners over
struggling Wolves at Anfield, thanks to goals from Virgil van Dijk and Mohamed
Salah. The English League Cup winners, Manchester United, came from a goal down
to beat West Ham 3-1 and set up an FA Cup quarterfinal against Fulham at Old
Trafford. The United boss, Eric Ten Hag, was pleased with his side's resilience.
Once again, this team showed character and personality. And when you come down,
and especially after Sunday, after all the good celebrations, after also all the
positive criticism, and then doing something with players, with the team, and
you have to deal with it. Elsewhere, fourth-tier Groomsby Town beat English
Premier League side Southampton 2-1 at St Mary's to reach the quarterfinals of
the FA Cup for the first time in 84 years. They travel to Brighton next.
Sheffield United will host Blackburn Rovers in the last eight after a 1-0 win
over Tottenham at Bramall Lane. Burnley beat Fleetwood Town 1-0 and go to
Manchester City next. In cricket, the former England bowler Tim Bresnan used a
racial slur towards Azeem Rafiq's sister. The first day of a hearing into
allegations of racism at Yorkshire County Cricket Club has been told. Rafiq
claimed Bresnan used the term towards his sister Amna during a media day at
Headingley in 2014. Bresnan is not taking part in the disciplinary process and
denies the allegation. And the France prop, Mohamed Awas, will miss the rest of
the Six Nations Championship after being banned for four weeks following his red
card against Scotland last weekend. Paul Sarahs. Prince Harry and Meghan have
confirmed they've been asked to leave their home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in
the grounds of Windsor Castle was given to the couple in 2019. But that was
before they announced they no longer wanted to be working members of the royal
family and began giving interviews and writing books which embarrassed
Buckingham Palace. Our Royal Correspondent Sarah Campbell reports. Frogmore
Cottage is where Prince Harry, Meghan and their children have stayed on their
infrequent trips back to the UK. Sources close to the couple say they thought of
it as their forever home, a gift from the late Queen. That they've been asked to
leave is, the BBC understands, a source of disappointment. One concern of theirs
is understood to be safety and security. Where now will the prince stay with his
family when visiting the UK? The logistics are still being sorted out, with
financial issues to be resolved. Not least that the couple paid £2.4 million
back to the Treasury to cover renovation costs and rent. Buckingham Palace says
this is a private family matter. Reports that Prince Andrew has been offered
Frogmore Cottage have not been confirmed. Sarah Campbell. Finally, when
scientists in Australia saw whales feeding in a certain way, it reminded them of
something. That was the way ancient sea monsters were described as acting in old
Norse sagas. At first, they thought it was just a coincidence. Now they think
the feeding technique, which scientists thought had only developed recently, was
noticed by ancient poets. Terry Egan joins me now. Well, Charlotte, as you know,
old literature is full of weird and wonderful creatures, among them from Norse
mythology, the Huff Gouffer, which sounds like something out of J.K. Rowling or
Lord of the Rings, you know. Now, I hope you haven't just eaten anything, but
the Huff Gouffer was described as luring fish into its jaws by vomiting and
emitting a particular smell, then trapping the fish in its mouth. The Huff
Gouffer appeared in the Norse sagas, but might go back further than that. There
are hints of sea monsters doing just this in Greek manuscripts from around 300
AD. But what scientists have now realised is that this is exactly the way some
whales have been seen to behave. Humpbacks and brideswells, they use a technique
called trap feeding. It was identified after 2010, and in 2021, hundreds of
anchovies were filmed jumping into the whale's mouth off the Gulf of Thailand.
So how did these writers of these ancient sagas know about this? Well, the
suggestion here is that medieval seafarers a thousand years ago might have seen
the whales behaving in this way. Why the fish jump in is not really clear, but
it could very well be that the whale belches up half-eaten food, and that gives
off this particular irresistible smell described in the ancient texts.
Irresistible to the fish, of course. The weird behaviour described there is just
whale behaviour that we hadn't noticed before, but funnily enough, our ancestors
did. And there is a more serious side to this too. While it might be the whales
are copying one another, pollution could also be a factor. It's made food
scarcer, and in areas that are more polluted, whales might be using this method
to skim food from the top of the ocean. Thanks, Terry. I do hope anyone
listening to this wasn't eating when you were saying all that then. You've been
listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte
Gallagher. News next. This is the BBC World Service, and here's Harriet Gilbert
to tell you about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France to talk
about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pigtails. When it
was published in 1996, it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist
pamphlet. It's a feminist book, it is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I
hope. It's the story of a lovely young woman who is a bit of a pervert. It's the
story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands of the director
of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change, growing more and more
like the body of a pig. At some points she is very animal, at some other points
she is very human. She oscillates according to the level of aggression against
her. She's not stable, nobody's. It's a story of that, you know. World Book Club
with Marie Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. On the BBC World Service in just a few
minutes. There's something really wonderful about having a wild creature trust
you. Humans have fed birds for millennia, scraps from the table, and more
recently, in some cultures, buying food for them. So why do we do it? I'm Ruth
Alexander and I'm exploring what it is about the act of feeding wild birds that
gives some of us so much pleasure. That's the Food Chain after the news. BBC
News with Gareth Barlow. The United States has denounced comments by Israel's
far-right finance minister, Betzel Smodrich, calling for the Palestinian village
of Huara to be wiped out as repugnant and disgusting. A Palestinian was killed
when Jewish settlers rampaged there on Sunday in an apparent revenge for the
killing of two Israeli brothers. Foreign ministers from the G20 group of major
economies are meeting in the Indian capital Delhi with the divisions over
Russia's invasion of Ukraine likely to dominate. India has taken a neutral
stance on the conflict. Greece's prime minister says a team of experts will
investigate the causes of the country's worst ever rail disaster which has
killed at least 43 people. He said human error was probably to blame but rail
workers say the network suffered from official neglect and they'd repeatedly
warned about it. They're striking nationwide on Thursday. Power has largely been
restored across Argentina. More than half the country was left without
electricity after a fire west of Buenos Aires hit high-tension power lines and
put a nuclear power station offline. The leader of North Korea has said that
farms must meet their grain production goals without fail amid reports that the
country is facing a food crisis. The World Food Programme believes 40 percent of
North Koreans are undernourished. Researchers on Easter Island have found a
previously undiscovered moai, one of the island's distinctive stone statues. It
was discovered in a dry lake bed. Ornithologists say a rare songbird, the dusky
tectra, has been sighted in Madagascar for the first time in 24 years. There had
been fears it was extinct. A new analysis shows that last year's NASA mission to
change the course of an asteroid by smashing into it with a small spacecraft was
surprisingly successful. It caused the space rock to speed up its orbit after
impact four times more than predicted. World News from the BBC. Hello and
welcome to the Food Chain from the BBC World Service. I'm Ruth Alexander, out in
my garden, putting some food here on the patio for the birds. Some sunflower
seeds here and some porridge oats. I actually normally go down to the canal to
feed the ducks but the outbreak of avian influenza means that that's not advised
at the moment. So I'm going to see if I can tempt my feathered friends to this
little offering on my patio. Feeding birds is something I get a lot of pleasure
from, as do many other millions of people around the world, although there are
probably just as many millions who don't and might find it a rather odd thing to
do. So why do we do it? There's something really wonderful, isn't there, about
having a wild creature trust you? And that's genuinely a profound experience.
It's for many people a genuinely spiritual experience. And it's so delightful to
watch them and hear them also. Small little sound but if there are many you hear
it much better. In this programme we're going to be exploring the joy of feeding
birds. Not only why we do it but how we do it and whether we even should. Right
it's a beautiful morning in Minnesota. Three degrees Fahrenheit, I believe
that's around what is it like 13 below celsius but it's sunny out. I'm going to
be giving the birds some suet and peanuts today, restocking the feeders. I like
to give birds some high fat foods especially when it's cold out, they really
like that stuff. This is Dan the Barn from the midwest of the United States.
Right now just off the porch I can see a black-capped chickadee, a bright red
northern cardinal. They're all waiting for me to leave the porch so I'm gonna
let them get to it here. Feeding birds is somewhat in Dan's blood. I remember my
grandfather, he lived in New Jersey in a township called Little Lake Harbor and
we'd go to visit and as a child I remember he had several hummingbird feeders
and every day he would go out there and he would clean and put in fresh nectar
and I just have such a fond memory of that. My grandfather passed eight to ten
years ago and that's one of my key memories I have of him. I'm not the most
spiritual person but I would say there's a legend or a tale or it originated
somewhere that northern cardinals, bright red northern cardinals, appear to
people sometimes when a lost relative is checking in on them and I remember when
both my grandpas passed that within 24 hours a bright red cardinal was somewhere
in my yard or I'd hear it singing and I felt like that was very significant and
special to me. Dan discovered the joy of feeding birds for himself as the Covid
pandemic took hold. It started for me in earnest in mid-2020 where I was
spending a ton of time indoors isolated from most people in my life and I was
with my fiancée, now my wife, at the time but outside of that it could get a
little lonely so I think naturally a lot of people like myself you know started
to look out their windows and just naturally in the summertime I noticed the
bird sounds in the morning and I was like oh that's really nice and then we
moved into a bigger apartment and I noticed that the apartment had a balcony
with a few hooks that they must have been using for gardening but I used it. I
bought my first bird feeder and I've never looked back since now I have multiple
bird feeders from that same apartment balcony it's escalated from there and a
really good outlet for my mental health in particular to get closer to nature.
You say you feel it's been good for your mental health, how so? For me I've
always felt really good when I'm in nature or outdoors. I notice if I'm outside
at the beginning of my day I usually have a better day and if I've had a not so
good day if I spend some time outside that really helps and this is really just
an easy way for me to have another connection to the outside world. It's a
really easy way for me to feel more connections with the different types of
birds in the area and nature in general and that's kind of escalated for me to
feel like I'm a bigger part of the overall ecosystem too and I've gotten so much
out of it. I would describe myself as a more uptight and more naturally anxious
person. It's reduced my anxiety quite a bit just through having this outlet. I
feel a lot more just at ease through this hobby. It's been incredibly beneficial
for me and I like to think it's beneficial for the birds too. How much does it
cost you? Is it a cheap hobby? I would say it is an affordable hobbies compared
to other hobbies that I've had or I've noticed. I probably spend in American
dollars anywhere between $100 and $200 a month on bird feed. Whoa, a month?
Yeah, per month. And the caveat there and another thing that I've found really,
really cool is that I've also reached out there a couple local senior centers or
memory care centers in my neighborhood and I noticed that they had empty bird
feeders so I was like, well why don't I try sharing this hobby? I thought
they're going to say no but I offered to fill their bird feeders and I've been
doing that for a year now on the weekends. I go and I just filled their bird
feeders too and that brings me a lot of joy. And funny story, I was cleaning out
my bird feeder last week and I don't know how this got there but I kid you not,
there was a quarter in the base of the bird feeder. So I told my wife, I was
like, I think, did a bird bring me? They've left you a tip. I'm like, how do I
train them to bring me dollar bills next and this can kind of go into the bird
seed budget. That was pretty cool. I don't know how it got there but I know I
didn't put a quarter in the bird feeder so somebody left me a tip. They'll need
to bring down quite a few dollar bills if he's to break even. Feeding birds is
big money. It's an absolutely gigantic business. This is Professor Darryl Jones,
an urban ecologist in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, who works for Griffith University
in Brisbane, Australia. In America, it's worth $4 billion a year. Four billion?
Four billion American dollars every single year. And here's a statistic that I
just think is extraordinary. If you took a coal truck, a wagon full of coal, and
took out the coal and filled it up with bird seed, you would need 112,000 wagons
for the one year's worth of food that is put out for the birds every year.
That's how much food is put out. It's just beyond comprehension. How did you get
so interested in bird feeding? You'd be perhaps surprised to learn that in
Australia, even though bird feeding happens all over the place, in Australia it
is generally regarded as something you shouldn't do. The general thing that
everybody knows is that you really shouldn't feed the birds. I grew up with that
and when you're a biologist and an environmental person, you hear that all the
time. It's not what you should do. The birds will become dependent on it. It'll
be terrible for disease, all kinds of reasons. So does that mean that people in
Australia don't feed wild birds? No, it doesn't at all. That's the hilarious
thing. Even though everybody knows they shouldn't do it, they still do it, which
is, there's something really fundamentally going on there. There's something
about connecting with nature and all that sort of stuff that I've been really
interested in for a long time. Darryl, I have to confess, I don't think we
should go any further before I tell you, look, I feed birds. I love it. I feed
birds too. Do you? Yeah, of course I do. Absolutely. So let's talk then about
why we do it to self-confessed bird feeders. Why is this such an appeal? One of
the reasons, one of the most salient reasons is that people want to see these
wild animals up close and by putting out food, they'll come to you. It's so easy
to do. You put out some food and truly wild birds come. They don't have to come.
They don't need to come, but they come and visit you, you know, and nature comes
to you. And that's genuinely a profound experience. It's for many people of
genuinely spiritual experience. And people told me with tears in their eyes,
just how much they enjoyed that, that incredible experience. And yet you say we
shouldn't be doing this. So why shouldn't we feed birds when it feels so right?
I haven't said anything about whether you should feed birds. I just wanted to
point out the general attitude in Australia is that you shouldn't. And the
reasons are the same around the world. The birds will become dependent on food
that we provide and therefore they won't find their own food. The disease can
spread that we feed the common birds anyway, so it's not doing any good. Had
vermin are attracted. You know, there's a whole array of all simple reasons.
Some of them turn out to be real and some of them turn out to be completely
fictitious. And I'll say straight away that there is absolutely no evidence
anywhere in the world of the birds becoming dependent on the food we put out for
them. That's a really good thing to know because on average, it's about 7% of
their daily diet comes from the food that we put out. So the birds that are come
to out your feeder at home, that's not their food. That's not their meal. It's
just something they do on the side. So are you giving us a green light then we
can go ahead and feed the birds in our garden? Absolutely, if you do it
properly. And it depends on what you feed them. It depends on how you feed them
and it depends on why you feed them. And as long as you've thought about it, you
can feed them without any problems. Avian flu means some places are actively
discouraging people from feeding wild birds at the moment. But if it's safe to
do so, what's okay bird food? Not bread, Darrell says. Better options are seeds,
suet, oats and mealworms. So what are the do's and don'ts? Probably the most
important thing of all is to have a clean plate, if you like. You're inviting
some friends over for a dinner. You wouldn't ever serve up the meal on the
plates you used last night but never cleaned. And that's absolutely critical
because the one thing that is really important and is undeniably a serious thing
is the spread of disease. We do something really unusual and unnatural, if you
like, when we put out food in one place that many birds will come to visit.
Often birds from different species will all congregate in one place every day.
So if any of those birds are infectious and some will inevitably be sick, that's
the obvious perfect place for it to spread. Professor Darrell Jones. When I
approach my house from the car, it's like a little garden with grass and trees
to the right, birch trees. This is Bilgejál Valtýr's daughter, transporting us
to her cottage in Iceland. And of course there's snow, a lot of snow in the
wintertime. And I hear the birds and they fly away when we get there and then we
hear them again. And I have a feeder hanging in the trees and I just stand in
the window and watch them and I sit outside and watch them in the snow and take
care of the feeder, clean it. So it's just lovely. And then you go for a walk
like with my dog and when I see all the birds flying around just by my house and
in that area because I don't think everybody is feeding the birds there, but
many probably are. Bird feeding, Bilgejál says, is very popular in Iceland as
the winters are so harsh. The most common bird there is something that we call
Þauðunnur týttlingur in Icelandic. I think it's in English common red poe. And
it's a really small bird with a red breast and has a beak like a fin. And during
the wintertime they come to our summer house. I have a feeder there. We are not
staying in there all the time so we use sunflower seeds mostly for them. We also
have blackbirds there. They are quite new in Iceland. I feed them apples and
grapes and raisins. And in the wintertime we have sometimes hundreds of birds in
the trees and flying around and they just make this beautiful little sound and
it's so delightful to watch them and hear them also. Small little sound but if
there are many you hear it much better. Tell me a little bit more about why you
feed them because you could just admire the birds. Why is it that you want to
feed them? It's something I grew up with. I think most people, many do, many do.
And it's very important for the survival of the birds. We have a saying, you
have to take care of the small birds and that has reference to much more than
birds. You have to take care of the people in your society also. So yeah I would
say it's something I grew up with. It's the right thing to do also and it gives
you pleasure and joy to watch them and do it. It's interesting that you say it's
the right thing to do because in some countries people say no you shouldn't feed
the birds. It's not the right thing to do. Well I would say like this winter
when there's snow and frost, December and January, it was extremely cold and
some people going to the ponds that are frozen and the bigger birds like swans
and geese, they were frozen to the ice so they were helping them out and feeding
them. They don't have anything to eat. I think this is very important, vital for
the survival of the birds. But this has been done for years in Iceland. Do you
think there's any reciprocity in the relationship? Do you think the birds are
giving you anything? Yes of course. It's peace of mind. It's very relaxing to
listen to their little humming singing and it's very good for your soul. It's
very good for stress levels and watching them fly and argue and like birds are
so. Mjölgjár Valtisdóttir in Iceland. You're listening to The Food Chain from
the BBC World Service with me Ruth Alexander. This week we're reflecting on the
joy of feeding birds. Just popping out into the garden to see who's about. It's
a bit drizzly, a bit wet. Now let's grab our waterproofs and join Anthony Tienan
in his garden in Surrey, a leafy part of south-east England. Just wandering over
to a rose bush. Not many roses on it in middle of February but just see who's
around. I can see a little robin popping through the rose bush. There you are, a
sparrow, a robin. I think it might be a blue tit as well. They all seem quite
quiet. Everyone's supposed to be looking at me waiting to see what I'm up to.
Anthony is an early adopter of some pretty snazzy bird feeding technology. It is
just like a normal bird feeder box. So you put the seeds in the front and they
fall down from the back but then there's a secretly positioned camera in the
middle of it that then takes film and photos of the birds when they arrive. I
think they can slightly see themselves in the camera which means then they also
have a bit of a look which as well as getting them chomping away on whatever
they're eating you actually get some amazing sort of shots of a slight
aggressive look, not horribly aggressive but just like what's going on here? So
yeah it just looks amazing. How much do you reckon you spend on your hobby? Too
much. Like Dan who we heard from at the start of the programme, Anthony came to
bird feeding as a kind of tonic during the coronavirus pandemic. I worked in the
ambulance service. I'm not a clinician but it was extremely pressurised. You
were doing seven day working and it was really challenging. We lost a number of
colleagues, we weren't able to deliver the care that we wanted to for people
because of the pressures and what was happening and I think that just being able
to come back to something so normal and look at it and go gosh thank goodness
there were birds that you could look at that distracted you and thank goodness
it continued. The world was just continuing as normal in a subset of that world
and during Covid I think everyone also noticed birds were louder because you had
less planes, you had less traffic and less noise and I think you heard the birds
more and I think that bit of just coming you know home from work or having that
day off and you could feed the birds, you could see the birds, you could hear
the birds. I think it was just something a bit of a connection really and a bit
of a special connection. A connection with nature. With nature, with the birds
and the beauty. I mean they're just so beautiful aren't they birds and sometimes
I can't understand the sort of science of these tiny little things and how they
manage to survive and it's just so tiny and they're so beautiful and they have
to eat this and they have to do that and they have to nest and breed and think
how do they really do that how do they really do that when they're so tiny. And
you say that you yourself get a kind of resilience from these resilient little
creatures. Yes, yeah definitely. I feel that connection with them. It does sound
slightly mad. I don't have pets so it's almost like having pets that aren't
yours that you know you can feed, you can have that connection with and I don't
think you could ever not look at certain birds and just be overwhelmed by their
beauty. However many times you know you could look at little robin or blue tit
or whatever. Gosh it's just so beautiful. Anthony Tienan said the act of feeding
birds can have a calming effect on us, give a sense of perspective in an
uncertain world and some people, orthodox Hindus for example, find spiritual
significance in it too. What effect is all this feeding having on the birds
themselves though? If you're introducing that much food which is all completely
additional to whatever the natural food is going on, that's going to have huge
implications for the birds that feed on it. Professor Darryl Jones again. There
is a whole community of birds which now feed and live only in the city because
there's so much food around. Gosh so in feeding birds we're even changing their
habitat. Where they choose to live. Absolutely there's no question about that.
The sheer abundance of artificial food if you like or additional food or
supplementary food which we provide, that means that those birds that love that
food will stay more likely around the suburban environment than they will go out
into the countryside. So that's going on at the same time as there's big changes
going on in the countryside with the loss of hedges and use of chemicals to kill
the insects. So outside the towns and cities there's really terrible changes
occurring which aren't good for biodiversity and birds in particular. But in the
cities it's very different because there are people putting out feeders
everywhere and all that sort of thing. So yeah there's a lot going on. And it's
changing not just their habitats but the birds themselves. The birds that have
access to the food not only live longer and are more likely to survive winters
better, they have more breeding attempts and they start earlier. So through
their lifetime they'll have many more birds, baby birds, than the other birds
that don't have the feeders. And does that matter? I mean is it just a good
thing that those birds are healthy, they're having more offspring, there are
more birds for us to feed? You would think that that would be a wonderful thing.
Surely if we're getting more birds that would be great. But it's not. It's not.
It's not. If we're getting more birds that would be great. But it's also we need
to be aware that it's not just the sheer numbers of birds, it's the community of
birds. So a healthy community of birds will have a certain number of seed
eaters, a certain number of insect eaters, a certain number of carrion eaters, a
certain number of predators, a certain number of woodpeckers. You've got to have
the full array to have a true ecological balanced ecosystem going on. I'm quite
torn now. I felt encouraged at first that I could, when the bird flu outbreak is
over, carry on going to the canal, throwing the porridge oats to the ducks and
the geese who seem to enjoy it. But from what you're saying it's clear that that
activity will be having an impact on those birds, wider bird populations and in
fact the ecology of the area. So should I be feeding the birds? I think the
horse has long ago bolted, but especially in the last 40 or 30, 40 years, when
this has become such an organised and well supplied industry. So I would
encourage you if you feel that you enjoy interacting with the birds, then by all
means keep feeding. And the only thing I would do is just suggest that there are
things that you shouldn't feed, too much saltiness, too much process, too much
fatty food, those kinds of things. But your oat porridge is absolutely perfect.
There is another way though, a maybe less interventionist method. I'm Fung Sing
and I live in Singapore. Singapore is a city state and we are very densely
populated. We're about 30 percent more densely populated than London is, but at
the same time there's been really good city planning to enable us to have lots
of parks and gardens. And we are in the tropics, we're in one degree north of
the equator, so almost all sorts of things grow here and attract a variety of
birds. So it's lovely. Fung Sing doesn't have a bird table or a saucer or any
kind of feeder. We found that leaving bread out doesn't really attract the
birds, but if you plant the right plants, the birds will come. And it's more
natural that way. It's probably healthier for them as well because it's the
natural kind of food that they would look for. We have spider hunters. They're
tiny little olive-coloured birds with long beaks and they'll hover next to the
calatheas and dip their little bills into the flowers and suck the nectar. So
it's really lovely to watch them and they squeak. So you hear squeaking, you
know that, oh, the spider hunters are back. Who do you think is getting the most
out of this feeding relationship, then, you or the birds? I think probably me,
especially when we feed the birds. I think when we bring food to feed the birds,
then I think it's the people that really benefit more. There's something really
wonderful, isn't there, about having a wild creature trust you. And I think deep
inside all of us, we want to be trusted and we want to be useful. We want to
care for something else. And so when you've got a bird that isn't forced to
perch on your finger, but it comes and it wraps its little claws on your finger
and you feel the brush of its feathers against your hand, you can see very close
to its face, you can see its little beady eyes and its beak. I think it's really
lovely. And you can even smell the bird. I know this sounds strange, but you
know, the smell of sparrow is quite nice. So you have birds feeding out of your
hand? Well, when you go overseas, yes. When we go traveling and some of the
birds are bolder and they will come and they'll perch on your hand. And that's
lovely when they do it of their own free will. They just, you know, land on your
hand and you're able to really look at the bird very closely in a way that you
would not be able to from a distance. Yes. And why feed the birds? Why not just
watch them? Why feed them? Why is that the thing you feel compelled to do? It's
a good question. Because it's not just birds. I like feeding all sorts of
things. I mean, we'll go to the zoo, we'll feed a giraffe and we'll pay $5 for a
carrot to feed the giraffe in support of the zoo. But it's not really in support
of the zoo that that's why we do it. We do it because we want to feed the
giraffe. And it's also lovely to have friends over, isn't it? And to feed your
friends and to serve them a lovely meal. I'm quite an enthusiastic cook,
actually. And I enjoy having friends over and feeding them good food. Yeah. So
it's an extension of that. The birds are your friends. I think so. It's an
attempt to gain trust, isn't it? Friendship and trust. The whole idea is that
you get to know the bird and the bird gets to know you. It's like having a
friend. So yeah, I think so, definitely. And the birds also bring us food. Do
they? Yes, because... So this is a reciprocal relationship. Yes, it is. Although
I don't think the birds are doing it on purpose. But I've got a beautiful curry
plant right next to my kitchen door. And it's grown really big. It's taller than
I am now. But yeah, that's a gift from the birds. I think one day a bird pooped
in my pot and it became a curry plant. And now whenever we cook curry, and
that's very common in Singapore, being in the tropics, we just pluck a few
leaves and we fry, we crush them and we fry them and we make curry. And yeah,
it's curry that the bird helped us out with. Fung Sing Wong in Singapore. My
thanks to her, to Professor Daryl Jones, Dan DeBarn, Anthony Tianan, Bilia
Valtisdotir and all who got in touch with us about the joys of bird feeding on
the BBC World Service Facebook page. Back in my garden, I've not had any
visitors dining on the oats and sunflower seeds yet, but I can hear them in the
bushes in the tree. So I remain patient and hopeful. We'd love to hear about the
joys you get from feeding birds or any other creatures out there. Please do
email thefoodchain at bbc.co.uk. And you can also subscribe to our podcast where
you often get an extra portion of goodness. Search for BBC Food Chain. From me
and producer Elizabeth Mai, thanks for listening and join us again next week.
Will they succeed? Join me, Alex Last. and a writer Andrei Kirkov explains why
Ukrainian culture has become a thing of the past.