TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 summer, but in the meantime you can catch up with all five series so far on BBC
Sounds. E-Zoned firm blamed an unprecedented rise in energy costs and demands to
be greener. Unions have warned it'll have a devastating impact on steel
production across the UK. At least two people have been killed and more than 50
are missing after a coal mine collapsed in northern China. Local media and
government agencies described it as a landslide. President Xi has ordered a
search and rescue mission and instructed authorities to do everything possible
to search for those trapped inside. And London Underground drivers have
announced a strike next month in their dispute about pensions and working
arrangements. Members of the Aslef Union will walk out on Wednesday 15th March,
which is the day of the Chancellor's Budget. BBC News. James Gallagher gets his
sperm counted for a special programme on male reproductive health. That's coming
up in half an hour. But now on BBC Radio 4, time for Moneybox Live with Adam
Shaw. Many thanks. Hello, good afternoon. The cost of living crisis,
unpredictable markets and the end of the tax year fast approaching. Well, it all
means that a lot of people are looking at their finances and investments. Add to
that, there have been calls to limit the tax-free lump sum people can take from
their pensions and to increase the state pension age so effectively you have to
work for longer before you retire. According to one piece of research, Internet
searches for pension questions have now hit record highs. So today we're looking
at pensions, investments and indeed any of the financial questions which may
have been bothering you. And if you have a question or a concern, you can email
us right now at moneybox at bbc.co.uk or you can tweet us at moneybox. Well,
with me to answer those questions are Sangeeta Chawla, Managing Director for
Pensions and Savings at the investment group Standard Life and Chartered
Financial Planner, Kirsty Stone. Welcome to you both. Sangeeta, if I could start
with you, this time of year, I understand traditionally been a time when people
do re-look at their pensions. That bit of research I mentioned came from you.
Why is that? Why is it now that people start reviewing what they have? We tend
to find that this time of year, it's tax year end. People often get pay rises
also at this time of year. And there's also some fortunate people that get
bonuses. So all of that generally lends to people thinking more about their
pensions. And already in January, we saw double the amount of Google searches on
pension terms compared to any other month last year. So that's generally why.
Double? Double. You threw that away as if it was nothing. Double. That's
extraordinary. I mean, does that reflect, you think, a big concern? I think it
reflects the fact that people are thinking much harder about their savings
because of cost of living. So they're looking at all aspects. And I think the
industry and the government are doing a great job in terms of publicising how
pensions can work harder for people. So I think that's all lending itself to
people looking at what they have in their money. Kirsty, I mean, I talked about
the worries that people are having, but in some sense, that may be unjustified.
Because if you have a look at the FTSE 100, I think since October, I was looking
this morning, it's up 14, 15% on the face of it. It looks actually things are
fine. Yeah, I wouldn't go as far to say things are fine, but they absolutely
have recovered quite considerably from the lows that we experienced last year. I
think the FTSE 100 in particular has been a standout as a top performer in 2022.
But if we look globally, there's still some some way to go to be back to where
people may have been in 2021. I was going to say it depends on your timeline
here, because even if it's been a big rise, even the FTSE 100, which I know you
say is only part of the market, I think that only takes us back to the level of
2020. So it depends when you're judging this from. But okay, an interesting
landscape to paint. Well, let's go to our first listener, Jason tweeted us this
morning, but joins us on the line. And really, Jason, I think a fundamental
question, which is really important you have. So just explain what that question
is. Yeah, so your tweet, and I just said, Well, I'm 52 now, but I don't even
have a pension. I've never really thought about it. It's that bad. Right. And
you haven't had a pension, because you haven't thought about it. It's not you
have thought about it and didn't feel you could afford it or anything. It's just
didn't didn't dawn on I've just, it's never I've always been freelance. And I've
never even really thought about getting one, you know, just kind of, it's just
something that always really passed me by. Right. And you're now worried? I'm
not, to be honest. I probably should be. People will probably say, oh, you
should be worried. But strangely enough, I don't let things worry me too much.
Well, I think that's very sensible. It is not my job to sit here going, you
should be worried. So, so let's see if that view is shared by Sangeeta and
Kirstie. I mean, Sangeeta, first of all, should he be as laid back and as
chilled as he appears? Well, it really depends on what other savings and wealth
he has. But in terms of thinking about pensions, it's never too late to start.
And some of the benefits of having a pension are largely tax orientated. So if
you put £100 in as a basic rate taxpayer, it only costs you £80. And if you're a
higher rate taxpayer, putting in £100, it only costs you 60. You also get that
benefit of taking part of your money out as tax free cash at the end. And for
some people, if they're working for an employer, they obviously get free money.
So there are tax advantages to having a pension to think around. And that's
important because it's up to 40%. So it doesn't matter from that point of view
whether the pension fund itself is great, you could put it in on one day. And if
you're a higher rate taxpayer, you get 40% just put in there by the government.
And if you're over a certain age, you could almost take that out straight away,
couldn't you? Well, it does depend, yes, on what age you are and when you can
take your money out. Obviously, it's 55 now, but it's going up to 57. But if you
think about the state pension age being 66 now, and that's also increasing.
That's why I say it's never too late to start really to fund that income.
Kirsty, we've seen a lot of talk on social media amongst younger people that
they say, look, the pension age is getting later and later. This is all
pointless because by the time I've retired, the pension will be so late, I'm
probably dead by the time I'm allowed to take my money. So I mean, I know you
have no better idea of what's going to happen in 10 years time than anybody
else. But is there a difference between the state pension age and the age at
which you can draw your private pension? Yeah, absolutely. So for those younger
individuals, legislation is in place that they won't be able to touch their
pension until they're 57. In my experience, the clients that I engage with and
advise, very few of them would choose to work to state pension age. So quite
often, there's a period of time where they're solely reliant on their savings
and their own personal pension wealth in order to fund their retirement
expenditure. So, you know, I'm relatively young and I'm not banking on the state
pension to be paying my income when I want to retire. So I have to make
provisions ready so that if I want to retire at 60, rather than 68, I'm going to
have to fund that solely myself. Look, and this is a complicated area and a lot
of people may not know a lot about it. So I'm going to ask you something almost
impossible. I don't know whether you should do this as a double act, Kirsty or
Sangeeta, or individually, but people will have heard perhaps of defined
benefit, defined contribution, company schemes, pension schemes. Can you give me
a one minute 30 sort of summary of what that landscape looks like? Yeah, I'll
give that one a go. So in terms of a defined benefit pension, that's typically
more like an NHS pension or a teacher's pension. And the difference there is
that that type of pension will guarantee you an income at a certain retirement
age, regardless of the value of a pension that might be elsewhere. So they'll
say if you've worked for us for 30 years, we're going to pay you X amount a year
for the rest of your life. And that's guaranteed. A defined contribution pension
is something that every individual that is employed should be having moving
forward. And a defined contribution is another way of saying a personal pension,
or sometimes a SIP, a self invested personal pension. Now that type of pension
is solely based on the contributions that you and your employer are paying into
that. And it has a capital value and is invested. And at the end of your kind of
working life, when you come to retire, that will have a value. And that value is
what you have to make last for the rest of your life in terms of drawing down on
that as and when you need it. Okay, there's lots more details. And we've
probably going to come back to this. But I want to come back to Jason. Jason,
have you changed your mind? Are you still not going to have a pension? Well, I
don't know. I mean, some of the things they're saying about getting 40% you
know, sounds pretty good. So it may be worth looking into. Okay. Yeah, good
stage. It seems quite late. But you know, so that's why it's never too late.
You're still a young man. Jason, you're still a young man. Okay. All right.
Well, good. I'm glad we gave you food for thought if nothing else. And thanks
for tweeting and indeed getting in touch with us. Thanks, Jason. Well, there's
lots of people have been in touch and let's move to our next caller, Peter, who
took early retirement. But I think you're joining us on the line. Hi, Peter. I
think you've been particularly concerned about a loss of value in your pension
pot. Is that right? Yeah. Hi, Adam. How you doing? Good. I mean, I had a, I was
part of a corporate scheme about 15 years ago, and the company got taken over.
So they transferred all the pension liabilities to a company called E.ON in
about 2010. That pension's gradually been growing over the years. And in 2021, I
got a valuation and it was worth £79,000. I was going to take it at that time,
but for different reasons, I didn't. And then, you know, things went on. And in
January of this year, 2023, I checked the valuation of that pension and it was
down to £53,000. It dropped £26,000 in, you know, about 18 months. And if that
wasn't bad enough, I checked it just before I came onto the show, when I checked
it yesterday, and it's now down to £50,000. So I've lost £29,000, about over a
third of the pension in less than two years. You know, I thought I was doing
okay in my retirement planning. And then the pension industry have just totally
screwed me, basically. Okay. I mean, one should say, one's not entirely clear
that that is the case. You seem to be blaming the pensions industry when, as we
all know, and it's boring to say, but these investments go up and down. And, you
know, once invested in the fund, as we were talking about earlier, but I can
feel your frustration and anger. I can feel that. Sorry, when I had the
estimation in 2021, they gave me a quotation and it said, if the fund does well,
it will go up by 3.5%. If it goes badly, it will go down by 2.5%. 2.5%. I know
funds go up and down. Yeah. And it's worse. 30% in less than two years. All
right. I feel where you're coming from. Kirsty, are you surprised by a fall in
value? I'm not surprised by a fall in value. Unfortunately, as we've alluded to,
stock markets have decreased over the last two years. It is obviously very
concerning and quite distressing if you are hoping to draw from that
immediately. What I would just raise the question is understanding how you're
going to draw from this pension when you choose to do so. Is it a case of
drawing as and when you need it via what's called flexible drawdown? So drawing
kind of smaller amounts each year or each month? Or is it the purchase of an
annuity, which is a guaranteed income for life? If it's the former, so if you're
looking to gradually draw down from that pension, this pension will continue to
be invested for a longer period of time. Okay, so you've got time to stay in the
market and hope that we see a recovery in what's going on. Now, that is easy to
say on paper, emotionally and understandably, it's not nice to see the values
going down. So it would just be understanding the timing of how and when you
need to draw from this pot at this moment. And Sangeeta, I mean, I think
Kirsty's referred to this, but I don't think Peter's taken his pension. So there
is time perhaps for the value to go back up. We're seeing markets bounce, even
though there is a risk to this. Absolutely. So I mean, I think if you withdraw
right now, all of it, then you've locked into that loss that you've experienced,
which is hard to take. And if you can, as Kirsty was just alluding to right now,
if you can afford to sort of leave it in there, there's time for it to recover.
I think what's happened over the last 18 months is market conditions have been
very extreme. So COVID started it, then Ukraine, we've had cost of living,
inflation and all those things have left the markets, both money invested in
equities and also money invested in bonds. Bonds usually provide the protection,
but because interest rates and inflation have been high, that hasn't worked too.
So it has been a very strange market and that doesn't help you obviously in how
you feel about it. But if you can delay withdrawing from those savings, you've
probably got time to recover. And the market's doing well so far. So yes, I
think what was perhaps annoying Peter so much was that he was given a sort of
example of if things go badly, yeah, you know, you'd lose a little bit and
they've gone a lot worse than he was expecting. So let's put aside, you know,
what's ever happened to his particular pension fund. But in general, does one
have to be rather careful with these predictions because they can overshoot and
undershoot? Well, in this case, seemingly rather dramatically. They can. And I
think at the stage when you're at, you've got to sort of think about how much
can you afford to lose? And I think there's not a lot of focus that's given on
that. So people don't often think about how much can they afford to lose and the
emotional side of that, that taking, you know, losing 20, 30,000 is hard. So
yes, I think it's perhaps a case of revisiting what risk is in there and
thinking about whether that's appropriate. And on charges, Kirsty, if I could
ask you about this, I mean, the fund manager, the pension company will take a
charge regardless of whether the fund does well or badly. But could you give us
a sense for people looking out there in the market of the range of reasonable
charges? So people will know, well, that's a cheap charge and that's an
expensive charge. Can you give me a sense of what you feel that range should be?
Yeah, definitely. So look, there's normally two people that you're paying in
this situation to be invested in a pension. Okay. You're paying the pension
provider to hold the pension for you and also the fund managers who are running
the underlying investments that you hold. So it's normally split into two parts.
Some people may consolidate that into one total fee. Now, most people will get a
competitive rate through their employment. So a lot of group personal pensions.
So those pensions you get from your employer can be quite cheap. So if we're
talking about a low cost pension, that can be anything from kind of 0.4% per
annum. Okay. If you're looking at the more expensive end, I would not be looking
to retain a pension for a client if the total charges are above 1% in
particular. And there's an initial charge on top of all of that, isn't there?
Potentially, actually, I would say there's a lot of pensions out there that
don't charge initial kind of additional contribution pensions or anything like
that. So those initial charges are kind of not really welcome in the industry
anymore. So it's worth understanding how punitive those charges are. Understood.
But 0.4 to 1% a very broad range here. Very broad. Right. We've had an email
from Jane in Wales who has a small nest pension, which is a sort of government
set up system. Very popular, has £32,000 in it, retires in 2027. When I use
their online calculator to estimate its value, I see that the value has dropped
to £30,700, so lost £1,300. She went online to ask about why that had fallen,
didn't get a clear answer. She says, I know that things go up as well as down.
But really, the question is, well, given that I've made this loss, should I move
this money? Is that possible? Is that easy? Sangeeta, just generally, how easy
is it to move? It is fairly straightforward to move your pension to another
provider if you know the provider you want to move it to and you have all the
information available to you. The question will be the reason that you're
actually doing it for. And quite often, if you actually hold your pensions and
transfer it into one place, if you have multiple, you can actually improve the
way you can control and manage that. And that's really helpful. And Kirsty, I
know, I mean, I don't know how much I'm revealing here. I've been on Weight
Watchers and they say, don't check your weight every day, check it once a week.
Is there a similar piece of advice for pension watching that actually it's not
constructive to do this every month or so? Yeah, I would agree with that,
particularly when markets are very volatile, it can become all consuming. If you
are young enough to not need your pension for several years, then I would
discourage people from looking really regularly. But that's on the assumption
that you're invested in a pension in the right way for you, for your needs and
goals and objectives. So making sure that the fundamentals of how you're
investing are correct, and then letting the investments do what they need to do
over a period of time. But yeah, I think people probably have better things to
do than be checking that every single day. Well, they may not have better things
to do. I mean, because this is so important. But the advice is like, actually,
these are long term investments. So weekly looking at them isn't helpful. That's
a fair summary of what you're saying. Yeah, absolutely. I would add in yes on
that, that I completely agree. Totally. There's no point in looking on a weekly
basis. But I would encourage people to look once a year if they've not
necessarily if you're in your 20s, but certainly older than that, then you know,
it's good to sort of just know if you are on track. And that's probably the
message I would want to give that do look once a year so you don't get those
nasty surprises. Yes, well, at least once a year I would have thought. But
Sangeeta, I want to ask you a question actually that no one has asked. And I
want to ask it because no one's asked. And I wonder if there's a lack of sort of
awareness of this. And I've heard a lot about writing your pensions in trust and
how, although it can be a little complex, the details of this, but how it might
save your family after your death a lot of money. Now, there's not enough time
to go through this in detail. But is this something you think worth looking
into? And how should people go about it? Thinking about what happens to your
pension when you die is really important. And having a trust is one avenue to
certainly think about. So we encourage it. What most people don't realize is
that to get the tax benefits from pensions, it's not considered as part of your
estate. And because of that, it's really important that you actually nominate a
beneficiary. So that's the first thing that people should look at doing and
nominate a beneficiary for every single pension that you have and tell us, tell
your providers whether you've got missing children, you're divorced, because
spouses is another thing to think around. Once you've done that, it's then to
consider what do you need to do with the money on when you die? What do your
what your family want to do with it? And there are circumstances in which having
a trust can really help people. And another circumstances it doesn't, but it
really depends on what the beneficiaries feel they need to do with that money.
But it's a question to ask. It's a question to absolutely ask. And the first
step is really understand and nominate your beneficiaries. That's the first step
in the process. And it's easy, is it? I mean, I'm just not... Having a
beneficiary is straightforward and you can do that with every provider. And we
certainly all providers encourage people to do that regularly. Okay, brilliant.
Carol joins us on the line. Carol, hello. And I understand this is actually
about your husband's pension, isn't it? Was he just not keen to... He wasn't
keen. He was radio shy. He thought I could do it better than him. Okay, let's
give it a go. So what is the issue of concern or the issue you want to raise? So
the issue is that he has a couple of private pensions from earlier employment
and he started a new job at a university and found that he could transfer those
pension pots into the university's final salary scheme. So he asked for
illustrations of that. And the university's pension provider sent him paperwork
to fill in and he filled all that in. And a year later, over a year later, the
transfers have still not been actioned and he's been chasing it regularly. So
the question is, how long should a pension transfer take? And at what point is
it reasonable to complain, for example, to the pension ombudsman about a delay?
Okay, good question. Sangeeta, how easy should it be to transfer a pension
system like this? So transferring pensions can take anywhere from about three
weeks to a couple of months, I would say. I would say that if you're struggling
to get the information or the transfers happening, then you should certainly
think around writing to the providers and documenting that. That's the first
step. And in most cases, I would say that would resolve the issue without having
to take it further with the pensions ombudsman. But Kirsty, may have some views
on that as well? Yeah, I think the key thing is lodging that complaint with the
pension provider. So the receiving scheme who might be taking too long to
support you in that transfer. So before you can take any higher, you do have to
have made a complaint directly to the pension provider. If their response to you
is not adequate, you can then go to the ombudsman, the financial ombudsman. I
would caution that at the moment, timescales for the ombudsman to address these
issues is around a year. Okay, so it's not a quick fix. But fundamentally, if
the service you're getting from those pension providers isn't good enough, then
you do need to raise the complaint and raise the complaint through them in the
right way. And I was gonna say in the right way, this is more than just on the
phone going, I'm very angry, because all the companies will have a formal
complaints procedure. That's what you should ask for. That's what you should
write down. Is that what you're saying? Absolutely. And just make sure you're
keeping notes of all those times you have been contacting the providers as well.
So every time you're having, unfortunately, all the times you're calling them,
make a note of those. So you've got a record if you do need to take it further.
And I mean, this has taken a year, which sounds like an extraordinary state of
affairs. And Caroline and her husband didn't seem to have complained yet. I
mean, they're very, very patient. Very patient. Kirsty, in your experience, how
unusual is that? That is an exceptional situation. I have known pension
transfers to take several months, you know, three months for us is a long period
of time. And that's when we would be starting to be very concerned about what
they're doing. A year is very long. So I would definitely be thinking of raising
a complaint in this area. Carol, is that helpful? Does that encourage you about
what you should do next? Yes, that's really helpful. I think, you know, the
staff at the university themselves have been helpful, but they seem to come up
against the blocker of their pension provider just not responding. And, you
know, so they say they're treating it as really high priority, but then they
just don't hear anything. Well, maybe just explaining that you're about to take
this to the ombudsman might just hurry things along a little bit. Yes, we did
that at the beginning of February. So, and as good luck, we will raise this
priority again, but I don't know how much higher it can go. Well, okay, well,
take I mean, do take it to the ombudsman and do stay in touch with us and tell
us how that goes. I'd be very interested to hear what happens with them. But
thank you for raising it. And as Angita and Kirsty were saying, good luck with
it. Well, we're joined now by Sarah. Sarah, hello, welcome. What's your
question? Hello, I'm in my 60s. I have a portfolio consisting of a pension,
which is in a SIP and ISAS, which is on a fidelity platform. For the last 10
years, it's been managed by an ISA and for the last six years, an investment
management company, in addition to that, has managed the funds and that piece I
know has cost me 1.07%. The performance last year was poor and since 2016,
cumulatively, their performance has been below a benchmark, which the ISA has
given me, the average ARC, sterling balance index. So, I don't feel I'm getting
value for money. And I would like, I have two questions, basically. What could
be the risks or implications of me moving my funds away from the ISA and the
investment company? And if I do move my funds and take charge of them myself, is
there any basic advice you'd give me in terms of where to start? Okay. Well, why
don't we go to Sangeeta first about moving the funds away and the risks and
benefits of that. What's your take on that? Thank you. Yeah. So, I think the
last few years, again, been tricky and I can understand the frustration that
you've got there. So, I think if you're thinking about moving it away, the two
questions to ask are, do you want to move it away to a similar arrangement
elsewhere or do you want to start managing it yourself? And if you're managing
it yourself and making those decisions, it's really a few things to think
around. First of all, the amount of money that you have and the knowledge, do
you feel you can make all the decisions necessary about markets and funds to be
able to monitor and manage that? Do you want to take that decision or do you
want to trust someone else? So, those are some of the factors to think around if
you wanted to start doing it wholly yourself. If you want to start thinking
around moving it to another area, there are a number of things to think around
which would be who to go to. And I think Kirsty would probably have a few views
on that. Yeah, so look, so in terms of just the logistics of doing that, so it
would be sourcing an alternative provider and finding someone who's
competitively priced but also offers quality as well. It's not just going for a
cheap kind of budget option. You want to have enough investment choice and
option to be able to do the things you want to do. I think the key thing here is
obviously there's been a lack of, well not a lack, but a loss of trust and
confidence in your existing advisor, which is unfortunate to hear. No advisor
like myself wants to hear ever from our clients that they're unhappy. I'm sure
that you've raised those queries with your financial advisor already. I
personally am going to say this, but I know the value of advice and having a
financial advisor in your life, particularly an independent one. So, I would
explore the option of speaking to other independent financial advisors to
understand whether there is someone who is more aligned with what you're hoping
to achieve, but can also evidence a service, a cost and a performance that is
more in line with what you would hope to achieve. It does sound like you have
raised concerns already about performance, which is understandable. That
benchmark that you've mentioned, which is asset risk consulting, is very
standard across the industry. So, if your financial advisor is not looking to
alter those investments based on continued underperformance, I would question
the independence of that advisor you have and whether there's someone else that
can support you in being truly independent there. Okay, brilliant. That's a very
full answer and it takes us almost out of time, I'm afraid. Sarah, thank you for
raising that. And indeed, thank you, Sangeeta Chawla from Standard Life and
Chartered Financial Planner, Kirsty Stern. Thanks to all of you, from all of us,
for your calls and emails. And you can listen back to this programme, if you're
confused by any of the details and want to go through it in more depth, on the
BBC Sounds app in a couple of hours. Paul Lewis is here on Saturday with
Moneybox and Felicity Hanna is here this time next week. Until then, from all of
us to all of you, take care. We hear more and more about artificial
intelligence, exciting examples of what it can do, like pass a medical exam or
write an essay on constitutional law. But amazing as it is, humans can already
do such things. There's got to be more to it than that. So on The Bottom Line
this week, we ask what is the real business of artificial intelligence? For
business, where will it really make a difference? How should professions from
architecture to zoology be applying it? Join me, Evan Davis, for The Bottom Line
tomorrow evening at half past eight and on BBC Sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4, time
for Inside Health. James Gallagher gets his sperm checked for a special edition
about male reproductive health, which includes some sexual language. OK, so this
is the oncology suite. So if you just follow me. Thank you. Hello there and
welcome to Inside Health. Just take a seat on the chair for me there. So this is
room three. This is where you'll be producing your sample today. This edition,
I'm doing a test that I'll be honest, is both intimate and intimidating. Can I
just please firstly get you to confirm your name? James Gallagher. Perfect. And
can I get you to confirm which test you're here for today? Semen analysis.
Perfect. Yeah, we're talking sperm counts and whether they're falling.
Basically, just to say that you must produce your sample via masturbation only.
Try not to use any lubrications or any saliva if possible. If you do need
lubrication, give us a call and we can provide you with a sperm friendly
lubrication. Just a couple of things to note on the form. You will need to
confirm whether you've had a fever in the last three months. I have not.
Perfect. You will need to state your abstinence, which should be between two and
five days. It is between two and five. This is the specimen pot. Once you're
done producing your sample, just pop it into the clear specimen bag there and
then you can give us a call. Thank you very much. I'll leave you to it and don't
forget to lock the door behind you. Thank you. That's a good tip. Hello. Hi. How
are you? All done. Good. Right, so if I could just take your sample. At a time
of production, I'll just pop that on there. And did you manage to get the entire
sample into the container? Yes, I did. Okay, I'll show you the way out when
you're ready. I'm ready. Perfect. Thank you very much. Take care. We'll find out
my results in a moment because today we're investigating what's happening to our
sperm and whether it's getting harder to have children. Professor Cheryl Homer
from the Fertility Clinic is going to do the analysis. But first, we're joined
by a couple that she's helped, Suzanne and Richard. Welcome to Inside Health. So
take me back. When did you first start thinking about having children? Richard
said, I've been thinking about it. Given our age, why don't we both just go and
get tested? Because if there are any challenges that it'd be good to know
because then we can get them addressed. So we were trying to be proactive about
it, I think. And Richard, what were the results for you when they came back? So
I remember where it was actually. I was walking to the car and it was Professor
Homer. She said, oh, I've got your results and there's some good news and some
not so great news. And I was like, OK. You know, and it was that all of a sudden
I didn't turn the ignition on in the car and I was like, well, what's the not
good news? She told me my count was low, my mortality wasn't that great. And she
explained everything in great detail. I was like, this is not what I was
expecting. And my mind started racing and I messaged Suzanne. And Suzanne, what
was going through your head at that moment? I kind of feel punched in the side.
I just remember that. I still look lurching, my heart dropping. They said it's
so low that there's almost zero chance of you conceiving and that only chance
would be through IBS. But that was very slim. This is not what I wanted to hear.
You know, having had that conversation with Suzanne, having realised I'd met the
love of my life and I wanted to have a family and we were that little bit older.
Did you really feel the burden of that? Yes, I did. And I think as a man, we all
think we're a bit of a stud and, you know, we will spend our youth trying not to
get anyone pregnant and everything. And then actually it doesn't always mean
that you can get someone pregnant because you might have an underlying problem
that you are not aware of. And I thought as a man, well, what can I do? We're
going to hear from Suzanne and Richard again shortly. But for now, Professor
Cheryl Homer from Andrology Solutions and the University of Kent has come into
the studio. So we're investigating whether sperm counts are falling and Cheryl,
you've got my results. Shall we go through them? Sure. I'm delighted to do that.
So from a sperm point of view, the three main things we're looking at is the
count. So that's just the total number. Funnily enough, you'd think it was just
the total number, but it's the parameter that seems to be more related to your
fertility for some reason is the count per milliliter of ejaculate. OK, so like
the concentration. The concentration, exactly. And your concentration is
borderline. It's not what we would call low, but it's borderline, on the lower
end of normal. We also report the total count as well, which is the total number
of sperm in the entire ejaculate. And that was also borderline. So what that
immediately tells me is that your testes might be not functioning 100 percent
because that's where your sperm are made. They're going OK, but they could be
doing better. Now, this isn't crushing me because I've had my children. And so
kind of like, but I can imagine that you would have conversations where this is
really relevant to people's lives. So when you have a borderline count, the
thing about sperm parameters is that they aren't a sort of cliff edge where you
have a reference value. And if you're at that level or above everything's fine.
And if you're below it, it's a disaster and you're infertile. It doesn't work
like that because a lot of people have sperm counts that are below the reference
range and are perfectly normally fertile. And then there are a lot of people who
have counts in the normal range and they can't get their partners pregnant. So I
think we have to get it into proportion. Don't panic. Thank you. I think it is
very important that if we start to see something that's a little bit borderline
or not quite right, we need to start asking questions. Why is it that the testes
aren't functioning 100 percent? Now, are you looking at things in my life that I
might be doing that could be the reason for that? Or can I go like I'm in the
twilight of my 30s now? I'm not 18 anymore. Does that have an impact? So I think
age does have an impact. There are some papers that have reported that semen
quality can decline with age. I don't think 30 years old would be considered the
point at which we would expect to see things deteriorating. Twilight of 30s. I
wish it was 30. No, absolutely not. And I mean, theoretically, men should be
fertile their entire lives. See plenty of cases where that definitely happens
late into old age rock stardom. But I think if I were to be presented with a
person who was having difficulties conceiving, I wouldn't want to put this on
the back burner. I'd want to know why. With this one in particular, with the
count, you need to be very scientific about this and say, what is causing this?
And there could be a lot of things that are causing this. Yes, of course, your
lifestyle is important and it is a factor, but it's rarely the sole problem. So
when you're looking at me and those results, what are you thinking? Well, first
of all, one of the things that's really important about a semen analysis is that
it is a marker of your general health. If you are unwell, one of the first
things that happens is your fertility starts to decline. Certainly infections
can have an impact, particularly if they raise temperature in the body. So high
temperature would also be a potential cause of a low sperm count, which is why,
you know, you read a lot in the media about wearing cotton boxer shorts because
you don't want to wear tight underwear to heat your testes up. You don't want...
Laptops on your lap. Laptops on your lap. Cycling, which I know that you do. I
do. Not everybody is affected by these things. But if you are heating up your
testes, depending on your physiology, it can possibly affect your sperm. Because
of course, why are your testes outside your body? Because they need to be a
little bit cooler. That's right. So even just heating them up a couple of
degrees causes potentially a huge problem for sperm development. Do you know
what the leading known cause of male infertility is? I don't. So strangely
enough, a lot of people think it's lifestyle, but it isn't. What is it? The
leading known cause is varicocele. I don't know what that is. So that is
literally, it's like a clump of varicose veins in the testes. And what it does
is it impairs blood flow in the testes. So you get an engorgement of blood from
the body, which is at 37 degrees, and it heats the testes up, which should be at
33 to 34 degrees. So it heats the testes up to 37, and it causes a lot of heat
damage. So we're aware that heat damage impairs sperm, but when you have a
varicocele... And here's the body doing it to itself. That's it. I'd very like
to come out. Well, as you can hear, Richard and Suzanne's story had a happy
ending. You're a little chatty chappy, aren't you? So how did they get there? I
read everything and I found out through Sharon as well, that it not has to do
with the temperature of your testicles. And at the time, my lifestyle was very
healthy, so I had not huge worries there, but I was consuming a lot of coffee. I
was biking a lot. Then I thought, okay, well, what are we going to do? And I saw
putting peas on your testicles was a great thing. So I went and bought some
bird's eye peas. I was going to say, I've put frozen peas on many parts of my
body, but... Exactly. That's a new one. I mean, these peas stayed with us right
to when we had Freddie actually. I hope they just got binned at the end. They
were loyal. Yeah, they did get binned. They weren't cooked and they haven't gone
into any industry. So the peas were there and it was summer. So it was really
hot. And I suddenly realised that actually tight boxer shorts are really bad for
you. So I changed all my boxer shorts. When did you find out you had a
varicoseal? I actually did know I had a varicoseal. I remember a doctor years
ago saying, you know, you should keep an eye on that because you might need to
have it operated on in future. But it never changed in shape or size. So I just
kind of ignored it really. What was the varicoseal like? Was it something you
could notice, something you could see or feel? Yeah, you could see it and you
could feel it. I mean, actually, if I'm honest, it's like a bag of worms with
one particular large worm underneath the skin. Suzanne, had you ever heard of a
varicoseal before? No. It transpired that it was a grade three varicoseal, which
is quite high grade. And that was contributing to the heating of the testicles.
So for the majority of the day, when I didn't have a pair of like ICPs on my
testicles, they were actually getting heated. And the fact that it's such a
major contribution to male infertility. Was it easy to have it removed? Yeah, it
was over in a blink of an eye and cut off the blood supply to this particular
vein. They insert a spring, which he looks at, he describes it as the spring
that you find in a pen. And then tell you to lead a normal life. I remember
Richard Coming Home super excited because he felt we'll be back in the game.
With a bunch of flowers in one hand and a bag of frozen peas in the other,
right? Exactly, James. How long did it take after you had the operation and
you're doing all those other things? I was having cold showers. I was jumping in
cold plunge pools. There wasn't a thing I didn't try. Suzanne, correct me if I'm
wrong. It was just over six months, wasn't it? Just over six months that we
could see naturally. Yay! Yes. Which was pretty special. I wish you many nights
full of sleep and rest. Well, thank you, James. Knowing that you won't get them.
Well, I'll take the one we've got then. Thank you very much for inviting us. If
you do have a varicose seal and you have fertility problems, it's present in
about 40% of infertile men. You need to get it checked and you need to discuss
with your doctor whether you can get it repaired. What I find fascinating about
that, Cheryl, is that is something I have never heard anyone discuss. Exactly.
Cheryl, when I did the sample, I had to have abstained from any form of
ejaculation for a very set period of time. It had to be at least two days in the
clear, but no more than five. Why that window? If you have a short period of
abstinence, your testes don't have enough time to output more sperm. So when you
actually come to produce your sample for analysis, it's too low count. So we
need to wait two days for it to recuperate. And what about at the other end? The
other end is also very important because sperm don't live forever. You're making
sperm every time I'm talking to you now. Every second you're making a thousand
sperm. A thousand? A thousand sperm a second. I can't help looking at my watch
as the second hand ticks round. Would that be just then a load of dead sperm?
Exactly. So we need to get it just right. And again, it's important for why
people are infertile. A lot of people are not having regular intercourse.
They're saving it up for ovulation because they think the more they save it up,
the better it is for ovulation. But of course, you're removing about 50% of what
you have inside you every time you ejaculate. So you are basically clearing them
out. So the more often you ejaculate, the more you get rid of the dead sperm and
the more fresh and alive they will be when you want them to fertilise your
partner's eggs. There are a couple of other things though that you look into,
aren't there? Because it's not just the sheer number of sperm in there. It's
kind of like what the individual sperm themselves are looking like. So it's
about what they're looking like and also the way they're moving. Now, your
motility, the percentage of sperm that are moving, looks very good. It's well
within the normal range. And they're moving what we say is progressively.
They're progressing, they're moving forward. So they're getting somewhere. The
problem is that they're not moving fast. If you look at the comment... They're
moving forward but slowly. They're sluggish. So that's one issue that I'm
thinking, they're not happy chappies, are they? And the other thing too that's
quite telling is the shape of the sperm, the morphology, is not great. Yeah, I
saw that headline on the report. The phrase 98% abnormal is one to terrify
anybody. I think a lot of people are absolutely terrified by this and they
absolutely focus on this as the main thing. One thing to understand is that
morphology is probably the least correlated with your fertility out of all the
parameters that we look at. The other thing is that the reference value is only
4% normal forms. I find that remarkable. Take any man off the street, the most
fertile person you'd come across and you'd be like, as long as 4% of your sperm
are okay, we think that's normal. But think about it. You're producing millions
and millions of sperm. Why do you produce millions of sperm? One of the reasons
could be that the majority of them are pretty ugly. They're not able to get in.
So when we do the shape analysis, and again, it doesn't mean they're abnormal
inside. It doesn't mean they're genetically abnormal. We're talking about just
the shape. So, you know, it's like looking at a car and if it's a bit bashed in,
it still might be able to drive. Although I do have to say that there are
certain types of morphological defects that we know are associated with genetic
abnormalities. And actually, your type of morphological defect can be associated
with stress to the testes, including heat damage. I'm suddenly thinking about
the New Year's episode of Inside Health when I was submerged in 40 degree water.
It doesn't help. Well, it may have helped other parts of my body. It's a great
one if you want to go back through the episodes on BBC Sounds. How much can you
trust a snapshot at one moment in time? Like how variable is someone's sperm
quality? Like if we did this in six months, would you expect it to be identical?
We wouldn't. If you've got a borderline value like this, I would probably say to
you, let's just make sure you're not doing anything silly in your lifestyle and
let's just recheck it again. And it does take three months for the sperm to
recover to anything that you're doing to it. Cheryl, I'm curious because how
many years have you been looking at sperm? Gosh, I'm ancient. So at least 30
years. And you're very much at the sharp end of it. So you're not looking at
what's happening to the general public. There's this big debate and argument
about whether sperm counts are going down. What does your experience tell you? I
think that there still seems to be a trend for decreasing sperm counts. I think
from the literature that I've read, that appears to be the case. Professor
Homer, thank you. Now, whether sperm counts are actually falling feels like a
really important question and one that we should have the answer to. And yet
it's the source of massive debate. So let's thrash it out because I'm joined by
two people who really don't agree. Professor Alan Pacey from the University of
Sheffield and Professor Richard Sharp from the University of Edinburgh. So Alan
and Richard, welcome to Inside Health. Thank you. Thank you. So I'm going to ask
you, first of all, let's try and get this as simple as possible. Alan first, are
sperm counts falling? I think the case currently is unproven. Richard? On
balance, I would say that they are, but I recognise that we can't prove it
conclusively one way or another. And Richard, when we say sperm counts are
falling, do we mean they're falling for every single person or is it just a
small group that having really big drops in their sperm count and therefore
that's bringing down the overall average? The best evidence we've got is that
it's a change affecting the whole population, not just a subset. OK, so let's
try and tease apart why you've both looked at the same evidence and come to
slightly, subtly different conclusions. Like Richard, do you think there is a
case? So just describe it for me. A number of studies over the past 15 years or
so have all shown that when you analyse sperm counts from men unselected for
their fertility status, sperm counts appear to be lower now than they were in
the past. And that's based on many thousands of individual men. And when you say
unselected for their fertility status, that means this is just when you're
looking at Joe Public? Absolutely. Because if you were focusing on men who had
fertility problems, then you would expect that they would have a lower sperm
count than the male population. Alan, you look at those same bits of scientific
research and don't come to the same conclusion. Well I see the lines on the
graph going down, but what I find really difficult is the fact that over time
we've changed our technique and there's been a lot of emphasis over the last 20
or 30 years to improve our sperm counting or our sperm quality measurement
technique. And of course, if we haven't kept our technique the same over time,
then you have to ponder whether it's technique rather than biology. I'm not
going to lie, the moment I opened my report and found out that 98% of my sperm
were abnormal, I was having a bit of a moment. I think that's perfectly natural.
And I've seen many, many hundreds of men that have had the same reaction. I
think that particular measure of sperm health and assessment of size and shape
is so terribly difficult to do. OK, but if I were to just look at the study that
came out towards the end of last year, it was published in Human Reproduction
Update, and it was a big study looking across 53 different countries across
multiple continents and seemed to come up with this consistent pattern. And the
numbers in it feel terrifying. Like concentration of sperm falling from 101
million per mil down to 49, so more than halving. Total sperm counts falling by
62%. I mean, probably terrifying. Lots of couples trying to conceive. Yeah, it's
scary. But we haven't seen in that graph that people have moved hugely from the
normal to the abnormal where we might have clinical concern. And that's why, for
me, this is still within the realms of measurement error. I would disagree
because although I recognise what Alan is saying, and there is truth in it, the
way that people first came to wanting to measure sperm counts to determine if
there had been a fall with time was to do with other aspects of male
reproductive health changing for the worse over a similar time period. And the
leading such change was in testicular germ cell cancer, which has increased
progressively across the board in many countries. And it is a disease of young
men, remarkably. So when people then put their focus on sperm count, it was in
that context. And Richard, we've heard a lot about varicocele today, or
something that was really new to me. But do we know if that's going up in
incidence over time as well? It's a condition that's actually quite poorly
diagnosed and not reliably diagnosed in every centre. So you would need very,
very good data to actually evaluate whether there had been any change. Well, let
me ask a completely different, well, subtly different question then. Are we more
concerned about male fertility today than we were 20 or 30 years ago? Richard?
I'm concerned because leaving aside whether sperm counts have fallen, the
situation that we have today is that in men of reproductive age, there is
something like one in five, one in six men, depending on where you live in
Northern Europe, who has a sperm count that is low enough to negatively impact
their fertility. It doesn't render them completely infertile necessarily. But in
a modern context of where couples are only starting to try for a family when
they are in their mid-30s, and I'm particularly focusing now on the female
partner being in her mid-30s, her fertility is in progressive decline and is
already reduced by 30 to 60% compared with in her 20s, early 20s. Combine that
with a partner who has a low sperm count, which will mean that it will take him
longer to impregnate his partner than if he had a higher sperm count. That's a
recipe for increasing infertility because time isn't on their side. Alan, do you
share that analysis? I do. We should absolutely be concerned because the example
that Richard gave about increasing incidence of testicular cancer, the data is
really clear and there's no way that you can argue your way out of that one and
that concerns me greatly. So it suggests that something is happening to the
testis or the developing testis to mean that in older adult life there are more
likely to be fertility concerns. Whether that manifests itself in dramatic
changes in sperm count, I don't think is the important question because of all
of the reasons that I think that that data is difficult to understand. The
ageing stuff is really important but I want to slightly put it to one side
because that's people's choice and often guided by society, it's not always a
choice. But I'm just slightly more interested in whether there are environmental
factors or the things that we're either doing to our own bodies or are being
done to our bodies that are affecting our fertility. It depends on what point
those things are being done. Adult men, couples interested in their fertility,
always focus on the question about what they are doing now and what they can
change now in their lives. And actually the evidence suggests that there's
actually very little in terms of lifestyle influences on adult fertility. Where
it gets more interesting and where I'm going to hand over to Richard because
he's done more work in this area are potential exposures of the foetus before
the male was born being a really sensitive part of that process. So Richard,
when I'm thinking about my fertility, do I really need to be thinking about what
my mum was doing, you know, 30 plus years ago? It does appear to be that and of
course there's nothing that you can do about that in retrospect. So the best
evidence that we have is that there is a critical period during early foetal
development. So when the foetus is tiny, just a few centimetres long, that the
foetal testes at that time start to produce testosterone, the male sex hormone,
and it's that that brings about the masculinisation of the body, otherwise it
would develop as a female. And it's that process that appears or may be going
wrong. And we know that if it does go wrong, then it results in a cascade of
changes which can increase the risk of having one or more male reproductive
disorders later in life and potentially sperm count reduced fertility in
adulthood, although that is the one that's the most difficult to study. Of
course, if we're talking about consequences in terms of sperm count in
adulthood, we've got to wait 20 or more years before we see what has happened.
You could start the study Richard, then your grandkids could finish it off. Best
of luck with trying to get funding for that. I read a lot as well about
endocrine disruptors, the fact that we live in a far more chemical world and
it's those things that are getting inside our bodies and affecting fertility. I
think the jury is very much out on that. The majority of the people who work on
this are absolutely sold on this being the case. I am far from convinced. In
fact, I've become less and less convinced as time has gone by that that is the
primary mechanism that we should be looking at. Alan, if you were to take a pair
of 25 year olds today and a pair of 25 year olds in the 1960s, does it take
longer for them to get pregnant now? The basis of your question is at the heart
of what we call a time to pregnancy study. And one would predict the 25 year
olds in modern times today would take longer, but that might be due to a variety
of reasons, including sexual frequency. And we know that sexual frequency in
people today is lower than it was 30 years ago. And there's data to show that.
So I'm not sure that that will necessarily give you a handle on the sperm count
question. I can't help but be struck though by it feels like the consequences of
not knowing the answer to this are huge. Like if sperm counts are falling as
precipitously as some of these studies claim, and that was projected out into
the future, a journalist like me would be forgiven for writing end of human race
type headline. It's going to take more than just good science. It almost takes a
good political will to get behind this. Do we need to know the answer to whether
sperm counts are falling? That's a really good question. I would like to know
the answer because I think it would give one more element of evidence to whether
male reproductive health is under the level of crisis that we think, but
arguably we might be able to answer that question through other means. So
fertility rates, disorders of the male reproductive system, such as testicular
cancer. We could look at how the uptake of assisted reproduction is around the
world. So there are big, big, massive hundreds of thousands of pieces of data
that doesn't rely on the sperm count that are proxies of male fertility. And we
could be doing more with those. And we can never go back in time and check sperm
counts from the past using modern techniques. So I think that to some extent,
it's a question that we are always going to be debating and never completely
resolve. Richard Sharp, Alan Pacey, thank you so much for coming on the
programme. Thank you. Thank you. And thanks as well to Professor Cheryl Homer
and especially to Suzanne, Richard and baby Freddie. Everyone at the Inside
Health team wishes you years of parental joy to come. Now I think the debate
about sperm counts is going to continue to rage, but it's clear male fertility
is something we all need to pay more attention to. See you next time. Inside
Health was presented by James Gallagher and the producer was Erica Wright.
Matthew Syed explores the passion and the pain of music in Sideways in just a
moment. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via
third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
Sounds. Three tonnes of gold, every ring, every watch. If you're looking for the
gold, it's all around you. Inside Health.