TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 is on with me, Gordon Carrara, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, next Monday to Friday
afternoon at 1.45. This is BBC Radio 4. It's 5 o'clock. Time for PM with Evan
Davis. Hello there. The Home Secretary sets out what she sees as the problem.
Let's be honest. There are 100 million people around the world who could qualify
for protection under our current laws. Let's be clear. They are coming here.
Suella Braverman thinks she has the solution. We'll look at what she's proposing
and see how other countries deal with growing numbers of asylum claims. We'll
also ask Labour what they would do. Also on PM... Wheeee! Wheeee! Not everyone
is as happy with the snow as that. Prepare for a cold night. We'll get the
lowdown on the cooldown. We're here from France where there's been a day of
disruption. And what's going on inside US governments as divisions emerge on the
causes of Havana syndrome? Let's remember the Defence Intelligence Agency was
doing work on telepathic remote sensing for espionage into the 1990s. So you can
get bits of the US government that do quite out there stuff for a long time,
even after it's shut down elsewhere. We'll assess what we know about the causes
of Havana syndrome. But we'll start with the BBC News read today by Tina
Ritchie. The Home Secretary has insisted there's an obvious and urgent need to
reform immigration law after setting out the government's new plan to cut down
on the number of people crossing the Channel in small boats. Suella Braverman
told the Commons the illegal migration bill will ban people entering the UK
illegally from claiming asylum or returning in future. The minister said the
legislation wasn't a solution but a con that risked making the current chaos
worse. Here's our political correspondent Damian Grammaticus. Suella Braverman
claimed the government needed powers to remove those arriving on small boats to
safe third countries as otherwise 100 million people could qualify for
protection in the UK. They are coming here, she told MPs. The plans mean the
migrants would not be able to claim protection under modern slavery laws. And if
they arrived as unaccompanied children, they'd face deportation when they turned
18. Labour's Yvette Cooper called it government by gimmick, a rehash of old laws
already implemented that hadn't worked. Ms Braverman could not say where
thousands of arrivals would be detained while they awaited removal or which
countries would accept them. And in a letter to MPs, she said there was a more
than 50% chance the legislation did not comply with the UK's international legal
obligations. The court has heard that the shooting of a nine-year-old girl in
Liverpool was the result of a pre-planned and ruthless attempt to kill the
gunman's intended target. Thomas Cashman is accused of the murder of Olivia
Pratt Corbell in August last year, as well as the attempted murder of Joseph
Nee. Our North of England reporter Rowan Bridge is following the case at
Manchester Crown Court. Opening the case for the prosecution, David McLachlan KC
told the jury that Thomas Cashman had fired three shots at Joseph Nee, hitting
him once as he walked near Olivia Pratt Corbell's home. Mr Nee then ran towards
the house after Olivia's mother, Cheryl Corbell, opened her door to see what was
going on. The prosecution say Thomas Cashman chased him, firing several shots,
including one that went through the family's front door, through Cheryl
Corbell's wrist and hit Olivia. Seconds earlier, the court heard Olivia had
screamed, Mum, I'm scared. Thomas Cashman denies murder, attempted murder,
wounding with intent and two firearms charges. Hundreds of thousands of people
have taken part in rallies in France in the latest protest against government
plans to raise the pension age from 62 to 64. Union officials say blockades at
all eight French refineries have stopped fuel deliveries across the country.
People travelling to France from the UK have been caught up in the disruption,
with flights, ferry crossings and rail services all affected by strike action.
The chairman of the US Central Bank has said it's likely to have to raise
interest rates by more than expected. Jerome Powell told a congressional
committee that the Federal Reserve was prepared to move in larger steps if
needed to control inflation. His comments caused the dollar to rise in value and
share prices to fall. Supporters groups have welcomed an offer by UEFA to refund
Liverpool fans who were caught up in the chaos outside the Champions League
final in Paris last year. European football's governing body said it recognised
the negative experiences of fans who were penned in and sprayed with tear gas by
French police. Last month, an independent report said UEFA bore primary
responsibility for the incident. Thousands of Eurovision fans have suffered
disappointment after tickets for the first song contest to be held in the UK for
25 years sold out in 90 minutes. Others say tickets for the final were snapped
up in 36 minutes before all six preview shows and both semi-finals also sold
out. The event's being held in Liverpool in May. Nicola from Cheltenham was one
of the unlucky ones. I don't know which is worse, the heartbreak or the anger. I
knew that ticket sales were going live at 12 o'clock today and at 12.01 it
crashed and at 12.07 I got back on. I kept refreshing and refreshing and I got
down to the queue and then it said I am number one in the queue and it went hang
on your turn has come and then I got the message telling me that all tickets are
sold out. Nicola, the frustrated Eurovision fan. We'll be talking to another one
later in the programme. Now the government set out its plan for deterring people
from arriving on small boats into the country today. It's built into its new
illegal migration bill published this afternoon. It has been condemned as an old
plan that hasn't worked. It's been condemned for lacking compassion. And it's
not clear it's legal because we have international obligations such as the 1951
Refugee Convention and even the government isn't sure its new law will withstand
the scrutiny of judges. But it is a plan and at its heart is making it clear
that you don't get to stay if you arrive the wrong way. Home Secretary Suella
Braverman laid it out in the Commons. They will not stop coming here until the
world knows that if you enter Britain illegally you will be detained and swiftly
removed. Removed back to your country if it's safe or to a safe country, a safe
third country like Rwanda. And that is precisely what this bill will do. That is
how we will stop the boats. Mr Speaker, this bill enables detention of illegal
arrivals without bail or judicial review within the first 28 days of detention
until they can be removed. It puts a duty on the Home Secretary to remove
illegal entrants and will radically narrow the number of challenges and appeals
that can suspend removal. Only those under 18, medically unfit to fly or at a
real risk of serious and irreversible harm and exceedingly high bar in the
country we are removing them to will be able to delay their removal. Any other
claims will be heard remotely after removal. So Suella Braverman spelling it out
in her statement today. There is a problem with the plan which is where you
return people if they're not given permission to stay and for those thinking
returns are the answer that has by past experience in this country been easier
said than done. But I'm joined in the studio by the BBC's home and legal
correspondent Dominic Casciani and first of all Dominic, I mean there is a sort
of deja vu about this isn't there. We have heard we're going to get tough on
those arriving by boat. What is new in this plan? Yeah, I mean you're absolutely
right Evan. So a lot of the policy rhetoric around this and the way it's been
presented that we have to stop the boats was heard by, well it was heard in
Parliament under Priti Patel when she just over 18 months ago launched her
Nationality and Borders Act which the government promised would solve the
problem. Now the thing is this, it didn't go as far as some in her party wanted
it to go. This bill goes the full distance and that's where the difference is in
this and I'll talk you through some of the measures. If you arrive under this
bill from France, so you're coming from a safe third country on a dinghy, the
Home Secretary will be under a legal duty to remove you from the country and the
way that will work is you will be detained straight away, you won't have
recourse to bail for 28 days, at the end of that period in theory you will be
removed to another country. Now I can come on to the practicalities of that in a
minute but that's the big, big difference to where we've been before. You'll be
disqualified from using various claims such as human rights protections or
saying you're a victim of modern day slavery and there'll be a limitation on the
types of claims you can bring before judges which the government says are used
by lawyers to drag out the process. Now I've got to be frank, we've only had
this bill about an hour now, it's 66 pages long, we haven't found the detail on
that yet. It's incredibly dense so you really need two law degrees and then
something on top of it. But it definitely goes further than where they would be.
Okay, so it is further. It was interesting because Suella Braverman wrote a
letter to Conservative MPs setting out the policy justifications for it but also
saying she's not sure about whether this is legal and I have to say when you
read the sentence that she used there were so many negatives, double negatives,
not incompatible, we may not be true. It was quite hard to work out which way
round it was. But where are the government on this? This is the soon to be
famous section 19 1b declaration. Now every piece of legislation which goes
before MPs goes to Parliament. It has to have this statement from the sponsoring
minister saying I believe this is compatible with the Human Rights Act so we're
not breaching anyone's rights. It's a model of good government and it's used
around the world. Very rarely in extreme situations the government will say
we're not quite sure but we've really got to do this and this is what the
government's done in this situation. On the front of the bill Suella Braverman
has said that she cannot guarantee it doesn't breach rights and in this letter
she says it doesn't mean that the provisions in the bill are incompatible with
the Convention rights only that there is more than a 50% chance that they may
not be. Now what that really means is that her lawyers in house have said to her
that if this comes down to a fight in the courts it's more likely than not to
fall apart under that sustained challenge. It doesn't mean it won't get through
Parliament, it doesn't mean it can't survive but it shows how risky it is and
that's going to come under sustained attack once this is actually on the floor
of the House and also in the House of Lords where there are just no end of
opponents already declaring themselves. Dominic thanks for that. Dominic
Cashion. This is not just a British issue, people in real need turning up at the
border, could be they're fleeing political persecution, may just be a desire to
escape destitution from a poor country. But assuming there's a cap on the
numbers that Western countries feel they can help or handle, some way of
controlling the traffic seems to be necessary and there is in the West a general
feeling that the trend is up, that travel and knowledge becomes more freely
available as it does so more people will try to migrate and we thought it might
be useful to hear what is happening elsewhere in countries with contrasting
approaches and let's start with Germany and I spoke to Thomas Barrow a reporter
in Berlin. Germany is receiving huge numbers of migrants, huge numbers of asylum
seekers. Germany has received them with welcome arms especially if they are
skilled refugees. Germany has a desperate need for skilled workers so in fact
the government has put in place reforms to attract more skilled workers yet at
the same time the other side of the coin if you will is German authorities
trying to increase the number of deportations especially when it comes to failed
asylum seekers or when it comes to people who have committed to crimes and have
to go to their countries, back to their countries of origin. Okay and is Germany
successfully deporting any of those people because one of the issues here has
been people come, they apply, they fail and then they stay as though they had
succeeded in their application. Is Germany actually finding it actually can put
people on planes and send them somewhere? Germany is finding it very difficult
to do so. There have been proposals in place to maybe have agreements with some
of the countries of origin, try and find ways in which they could work with some
of those countries of origin but different statistics have revealed that
actually Germany is having a lot of trouble when it comes to carrying out
deportations. There was a report actually very recently which stated that two
out of three deportations were very difficult for Germany to carry out. That's
something that is not necessarily new. It was already in the past a main issue
of the previous government under Angela Merkel and it is something that the
current leadership, the current government under Olaf Schultz is also trying to
improve. In other words, how to make sure that those whose asylum applications
have been rejected but are still in the country can actually go back to their
countries of origin in a more efficient way. That's Thomas Sparrow in Berlin.
Germany by the way taking a lot of Ukrainian refugees on top of all the issues
that Thomas was talking about there. Now another fascinating case study where
this debate is very alive is the United States. Joe Biden came in promising a
more compassionate approach than that exhibited by Donald Trump but there are
now reports he's pivoting towards a harder line. Eileen Sullivan writes about
homeland security for the New York Times. During the 2020 presidential campaign
and in the early days of the Biden administration, candidate Biden promised a
more humane approach to immigration than what President Trump had delivered.
Specifically, he said that he wanted to restore access to asylum. And where's it
evolving? The Biden administration is facing, you know, what a lot of other
countries are facing with this global migration movement. And in, you know, the
summer of 2021 and since then, the number of people coming to the country's
southern border has really gone up. So in the recent months, so late last year,
early this year, they've rolled out some policies that are much more deterrence
focused than we had seen previously. What about people come in, they make an
application to stay, some of those applications are turned down. Is the United
States kicking people out? Is it saying, OK, you're being deported because you
failed, we're not allowing you to stay? Well, right now, the United States is
still operating under this pandemic authority where it can expel anyone who
crosses the border illegally. So some of the enforcement measures that they
rolled out last year and this year was an expansion of the public health
authority. And they are now expelling people from certain countries to Mexico
who were not previously getting expelled. So, hang on, the administration is
using pandemic authority to take what might be seen as a harsher line on those
trying to get into the United States than would be possible under normal law.
Right. This has been going on since day one of the Biden administration and
something that a lot of immigration advocates were surprised to see that the
Biden administration kept in place. But with so many people coming, this policy
allows border officials to expel people quickly without taking into
consideration asylum. Eileen Sullivan from The New York Times on what's going on
in the US and that pandemic law does expire later this year, but they do seem to
be trying to put something else in place to keep some ability of control there.
And now let's go to Australia. Now you might know of Alexander Downer. He was
Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, has written because he's based in the
UK about the policy here as well. He was the country's high commissioner to the
UK. We realised we had to break the business model of the people smugglers, the
people who were organising the small boats to bring people unlawfully into
Australia. So how do we break their model? Well, by them not being able to
deliver these people, in this case of Australia, from Indonesia. So we
essentially had to find somewhere else to send them, albeit for processing. And
we made an arrangement, I personally did it, made an arrangement with Nauru,
which is a small Pacific Island country. It's actually very small. It only has a
population of about 13,000, and we made an arrangement with them to set up
processing camps there. And this basically killed off the trade. I wouldn't say
no boat has ever arrived since, but this basically killed off the trade and it
stopped the people smugglers sending people on these hazardous, incredibly
dangerous journeys. And I mean, you managed to send people to Nauru, but what
happened from there? Are those people still there in camps, or have you managed
to find a more settled and permanent arrangement for them? I don't think there's
anyone there now, other than those who decided to stay in Nauru. One or two of
them married the locals or set up businesses in Nauru. What they didn't do, and
what we didn't do, was send them, if they were found to be refugees, back to
their country of origin, because by definition they were being persecuted there.
But we made arrangements over the years with other countries, and it was really
important to make the point that if they tried to come through a dangerous
journey like that, paying a people smuggler, they would never be able to settle
in Australia under any circumstances. And I make one other point, which is that
we nevertheless do have a refugee resettlement programme. So Australia resettles
around 20,000 refugees every year, so we're happy to resettle refugees, but
we're not going to allow people to make really dangerous journeys like that.
Alexander Downer with the Australian Experience. And worth saying that another
piece of the policy announced today is that a safe route will be provided in
when the boats are under control, according to the Home Secretary, and
Parliament will set a number each year that can come in, a cap if you like, on
safe and legal entry. So that's three postcards, if you like, experiences around
the world. Hope you found that informative, and we will be picking this up again
later in the programme. We'll be hearing from Stephen Kinnock, who will be
talking for Labour on what they would do. But it's coming up to twenty past five
now. Let's have a look at some other headlines. Here's Tina. The UN says it
expects the costs of the damage from last month's devastating earthquakes to
exceed $100 billion in Turkey alone. An 11-year-old boy has died after a fire
destroyed a flat in Barking in East London early this morning. Police say the
blaze doesn't appear to be suspicious. The government has extended a deadline
until the end of July for people to voluntarily plug gaps in their national
insurance record in order to boost their state pension. Thanks Tina. Thomas
Cashman has gone on trial in Manchester, accused of murdering nine-year-old
Olivia Pratt-Corbell in Liverpool last August. He denies he was the gunman.
Court heard today how Olivia shouted to her mother that she was scared moments
before she was shot in the chest. The BBC's North of England reporter Rowan
Bridge is at Manchester Crown Court. And Rowan, first we should remind ourselves
this was a case that shocked the country back in August last year. Yes, it
really was. As you say, it was August last year when Olivia Pratt-Corbell was
fatally shot in her home by a gunman. And opening the case today against Thomas
Cashman, a David McLachlan case, he told the court that she was the victim of
the result of an attempt by Mr Cashman to kill his intended target, Joseph Nee,
and how in the run-up to the shooting, it's alleged Mr Cashman had stalked Mr
Nee, going past the property where he thought he would be 10 times in the run-up
to the shooting. On the evening of the shooting itself, the court was told
Thomas Cashman approached Joseph Nee and fired three times, hitting him in the
midriff. Joseph Nee stumbled and Thomas Cashman is alleged to have stood over
him, but his gun then jammed and Joseph Nee was able to get away. Cheryl Corbell
heard those gunshots and opened the front door to see what was happening. And
Joseph Nee saw that door was open and ran towards Olivia Pratt-Corbell's house.
Well, look, take us through what happened then, because the court has been told,
given an account of events today. Yeah, I mean, I think this is perhaps the bit
that people will most remember about the case. So Cheryl Corbell was screaming
and trying to shut a door as Joseph Nee was banging on it, desperate to get in,
with Thomas Cashman allegedly pursuing him. Now, the prosecution say the gunman,
who they say was Thomas Cashman, then fired a second gun with one of those
bullets, piercing Cheryl Corbell's front door, going through the door, through
Cheryl Corbell's wrist, and fatally injuring a daughter who was behind her. And
the court heard how Olivia Pratt-Corbell had been in bed moments before and had
come running downstairs saying, mum, I'm scared, just before she was hit. Joseph
Nee ended up slumped in the doorway of the house before being taken to hospital
by friends. Now, at this point, armed police turned up minutes after the
shooting, and Olivia was rushed to hospital by those officers, where she later
died. Thomas Cashman was arrested later and told police, you've got an innocent
man. He denies murder, attempted murder, wounding and two firearms charges.
Rowan, thanks for that. Rowan Bridge there at Manchester Crown Court. Brace
yourself for the coldest night of the year so far tonight, and get ready for
snow, or more snow and ice as well through this week. As the cold comes out, the
coal comes out, as National Grid power up some of the lesser use electricity
stations to keep everything going. How is the cold affecting people? Well,
Andrea Meanwell is out on her farm in Tebay and told us how she's handling the
cold. It was minus five when I got up this morning. It was really cold. We had
to make sure that all of the animals had enough hay. Thankfully, the water
hadn't actually frozen up, which was great. We're expecting snow, a lot of snow,
I think, on Thursday and Friday. That's going to make a lot of work for us,
making sure that all of the animals are fed and not looking forward to it, to be
honest. Well, it has been cold. Aidan McGiven is a meteorologist at the Met
Office. Aidan, just give us a picture of this week, because we've heard tonight
might be the coldest night of the year so far, but snow may be coming at its
worst later. Yes. So, over the last couple of days, we've seen Arctic air spread
south across the whole of the UK, and as well as the Arctic air, we've seen snow
showers. Those snow showers have primarily been affecting northern Scotland
during the last couple of days, so we've seen 13 centimetres at Altenahr in
Sutherland, and we've also seen 12 centimetres at Aberdeen Dice Airport. It's in
Sutherland where we're likely to see some very low temperatures, especially
where we've got that snow cover as low as minus 15 tonight. Further south, it
won't be as cold as that, but still the cold air is there, and it comes up
against very mild air just to the south of the UK. Now, along that boundary
between the very cold and very mild air, we've got a weather front, and it's a
weather front that has some precipitation, but the nature of that precipitation
will vary a lot over the next 36 hours as it just continuously wriggles across
the southern part of England and South Wales. So there'll be a messy mixture
tonight into Wednesday as well as Thursday morning of rain, sleet and snow. I
think a couple of centimetres of slushy snow is possible in the south by the
start of tomorrow, but the main cause for concern is rush hour on Wednesday, so
rush hour this time tomorrow, when there's the risk of some disruption from snow
building up across some southern parts of England into South Wales, affecting
the likes of the M4, the M5 for example, as much as 5 to 10 centimetres in
places. Right. Aidan, how interesting is this as a meteorological experience? I
mean, is this just a normal winter cold spell? It's not too unusual. We saw a
similar cold snap at the start of March 2021, but you'd have to go back to March
2018 to see snowfall like we're expecting this week. I have to point out that
across northern parts of the UK, even more impactful snow is likely on Thursday
and Friday. That's a key cause for concern as well. Yeah. I mean, it feels like
we're getting milder winters, but with more cold snaps. Is that just my
imagination? Sort of bites of cold and then very mild temperatures and then
another bite of cold. Maybe it's just this winter, I don't know, but is that the
pattern we're seeing? That's certainly been the case this winter. It's not been
the case during many recent winters. We have generally seen milder winters more
often than colder winters, but of course, UK weather is highly changeable. It
all depends on which way the winds are blowing. And this week, the winds are
coming from the north, and even with global warming, northerly winds in March
are very cold. Right. Aidan, thanks for that. Aidan McGiven from the Met Office
there. If you were trying to get a Eurovision ticket today, they were on sale.
We'd love to hear from you. You can send us a voice note with your name, how
long you're in the queue for, and what you plan to do if you weren't lucky and
whether you didn't get one. And we have this WhatsApp number now at Radio 4,
which we're going to be using. It might show up as Radio 4 WhatsApp. That's
fine. You can leave a voicemail on there. And then if you do, we can play it.
The number is 03700 03700 100 444 03700 100 444 with your Eurovision
experiences. We'll be coming to that later in the programme. France, though,
talking of continental Europe, has been through a day of strike action and
protest today. It's over a proposal from President Macron to raise the pension
age from 62 to a whole 64. This is the sixth and biggest day of strikes this
year in France, disrupting travel for anyone here going to France today. One of
the main unions is threatening ongoing strikes rather than just sporadic days of
action. This is some of what we heard from French people today. I think it would
be good if we can have the choice. If they put the law, people don't have the
choice. They have to work longer, even if they're tired, even if they've been
working since they're 18, 18 years old. If they want to work longer, they can
choose. For me, it's just the beginning. If they put the law, we will come back
in the streets. I think the government is very lucky and the people are very
calm. But I think we could be angrier. Well, Lara Marlow is France correspondent
for the Irish Times. Lara, where is public opinion on this plan to raise the
pension age? It's still low by our standards, but where is public opinion in
France on this? Public opinion is very clearly with the strikers. There are
eight trade unions which so far, and this is very unusual, have been totally
united in the strikes and the demonstrations. And there's five youth
organisations. There was a poll done between the 3rd and the 6th of March, so
completed yesterday, showed that 72% of French people support the opponents of
the government on this. And it's been consistent all along. 59% of the people
who were questioned said that they are for rolling strikes, even in transport.
Rolling strikes. So it just goes on and on until the issue is sorted. Exactly.
So that's very strong support. And there are going to be more transport strikes
tomorrow, although it will be less severe than it was today. What was today?
What happened today, in effect? Well, basically the unions kept their promise to
bring the country to a stop. I mean, nothing meaningful happened. No rubbish was
collected. Very few trains and metros and buses and so on were running. The
Communist trade union, the CGT, says there were 700,000 demonstrators in Paris,
which if true, they tend to exaggerate figures, but if that's true, it's
definitely the largest demonstration so far of the six since the 19th of
January. And we'll know within an hour or two. At the moment, the demonstration,
the Paris demonstration, is ending at the Place d'Italie, which has been
absolutely shrouded in tear gas. The images are very dramatic. It's like being
in very deep fog and a lot of the people are leaving the square. There's a big
banner on the town hall of the 13th arrondissement, which is there, which says
no to the reform. And earlier in the afternoon, some black box, who are an
anarchist group, attacked very violently an SUV that was being driven by a
doctor near the Port Royal. And they took street signs, which they'd torn out of
the ground, and they were wearing black hoods over their heads and they were
beating, breaking the windows with the street signs and just smashing up this
vehicle. And the doctor got out holding up a banner that said, Médecins Sans
Frontières, Doctors Without Borders. He wasn't hurt, amazingly enough, but the
car was totaled. So emotions running, well, emotions running very high. Emotions
and rhetoric as well. What's extraordinary is of course Macron is not the first
president to try and sort of inch away at the French pension system. Is he going
to budge? He can't tolerate this for very long, presumably. He's going to be
quite a loser for him if he sticks to it. I think he'll stick it out because the
vote is scheduled to take place this month. It's being debated in the Senate as
we speak. In fact, today they were going to get to Article 7, which will raise
the pension age from 60 to, or the retirement age from 62 to 64. When the Senate
finishes on March 12th, there will be a joint commission by the House and the
Senate who will put it, you know, draw up the text and then it will be voted
this month and it will take effect in September. Now one issue coming, I hear
over and over again from the demonstrators is when the law passes, because they
more or less admit it will pass, do they give up then? Is it too late at that
point to carry on the fight? I think frankly it will be. The inflation is a
great ally of the government because people are really hurting. Food prices have
gone up 15% in one year and people just can't afford to strike because they lose
their salaries when they strike. So that's really working against the
demonstrators. Now the anger is still there and it will come out later in due
course in some way, possibly in the next presidential election, but Macron won't
care because he won't be a candidate. He's not standing. Lara, thanks for that
account. Lara Marlow, France correspondent for the Irish Times. As Rishi Sunak
announces plans to ban migrants from re-entering the UK if they cross the
Channel in small boats, Far Long 4 investigates what's happening to
unaccompanied children when they arrive on British soil. More than 400 teenage
asylum seekers who were staying in emergency hotel accommodation have
disappeared since arriving here. 200 are still missing, raising concerns that
some of them have been targeted by gangs and are being forced into crime. So
what's being done to find them? That's Far Long 4 with me, Livvy Haydock,
tonight at eight. And the time now is 27 minutes to six. We're getting plenty of
Eurovision notes, voice notes coming in. Thank you for that. But you're
listening to PM and we'll have a summary of the news now from Tina Ritchie. The
Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has set out details of the government's new
legislation to crack down on asylum seekers crossing the Channel. She said
migrants arriving in small boats would be detained, deported and banned from
ever claiming asylum in the UK. Ms Braverman said the patience of the British
people had run out. But in a letter to MPs, she said there was a greater than 50
per cent chance the legislation did not comply with the UK's international legal
obligations. The Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the asylum system
was broken and that the Conservative government had broken it. Amnesty
International said it was shocking to see ministers attempt to disqualify
people's asylum claims en masse, regardless of the strength of their case. A man
has gone on trial accused of the murder of Olivia Pratt-Corbell, the nine-year-
old girl shot dead in her home in Liverpool last August. Manchester Crown Court
was told that Thomas Cashman had chased his intended victim, Joseph Knee, into
Olivia's home in what the prosecution described as a ruthless pursuit. The jury
heard that Olivia screamed, mum I'm scared, moments before she was hit in the
chest by a bullet. Thomas Cashman denies murder and attempted murder. The United
Nations says it estimates that the cost of the damage caused by the earthquake
in Turkey last month will exceed $100 billion, that's three times higher than
initial forecasts. The quake, which also devastated parts of Syria, killed at
least 52,000 people. Liverpool supporters who were caught up in the chaotic
scenes at last year's Champions League final in Paris are to receive refunds
from European football's governing body, UEFA. The club's fans were initially
blamed for the disorder outside the stadium, which saw large crowds locked
behind metal fences and some clashes with police. An independent report later
criticised UEFA for what it called failures which almost led to disaster. And
the Deputy Chair of the Conservative Party, Lee Anderson, is to host a show on
GB News. He's the latest Tory MP to be hired by the channel, joining Jacob Rees-
Mogg, Esther McVey and Philip Davis. Thanks Tina. Let's return to the
government's approach set out today to deter people arriving in the UK by small
boat across the channel. What do the British public think on this issue? Tom
Lubbock is a pollster from JL Partners. They specialise in the Conservative
vote, Tom, after working for the Theresa May government in 10 Downing Street. So
Tom, is this an issue of importance to the public? Does it come up, if you like,
if you don't prompt people to have a view on it? Evening Evan, yes it really
does. It's been a top three issue for the public since about October last year
when we really saw it break through in the press. And for Conservative voters
it's a top two issue. It flirts with the NHS and health for that second spot but
really is a top two issue at the moment. That is pretty interesting, isn't it?
So I mean if you were giving a purely kind of political advice, strategy advice
to a Conservative government you'd say you need to be seen to be doing something
about this? Oh yeah, there's absolutely no doubt that the Home Office and the
Home Secretary have identified the public's priorities on this. I mean whilst
the public do have complicated views about immigration and there is a kind of
tapestry of views there on what might colloquially be called illegal immigration
and particularly these small boats. The issue is kind of sui generis. It's
unlike the others in that people just want it to stop. People want it to stop
and that is a priority that the Home Office have identified. Very interesting
question is whether this government is actually going to stop it. Whether this
bill for example will make any difference in time to stop it before a general
election. And I mean I've seen people saying well the best thing for them is
that it gets opposed for the next year so we don't see whether it stops. Because
if it doesn't work that would be the worst thing for this government to sort of
promise and not deliver. I think the prize is really big though. If you look at
other examples of where the government have delivered on the public's priorities
perhaps during the pandemic, the vaccine rollout, the furlough scheme, you see
that governments get rewarded for delivering on big priorities like this. They
have to deliver but that's the prize and it is very big. Tom that's extremely
helpful. Tom Lubbock there on the polling really, the public opinion of all of
this. I think we can talk now to Stephen Kinnock who is the shadow minister for
immigration. Stephen, your colleague Yvette Cooper was scathing about the
government's performance in the Commons today. How the government has failed to
deal with criminal gangs, failed to deport people whose application has been
turned down, failed to process asylum applications in a timely way and has
failed people like the Afghan interpreters who might have expected they could
come to the UK having helped the UK in the war there but didn't manage to get
out during the evacuation. Yvette Cooper is scathing really at government's
incompetence in handling this issue. But I still wasn't sure at the end of her
response whether you actually think the principle of deterring illegal migration
is right or not. Well every word that Yvette said today was absolutely right.
The government's performance has been an abject failure right across the board.
We all agree that the small boats crossings have to be stopped. They are a very
bad thing. People are putting their lives at risk and people smugglers are
earning millions of pounds out of this trade in human misery. So it has to stop.
But the way that the government is going about it, it will fail. It is yet
another piece of legislation after we have the Nationality and Borders Act,
hundreds of pages of densely worded legislation just last year. So Labour has a
plan and I'd be very happy to set that up for you. I just want to get to the
bottom of the principle if I could because there's a line in the Suella
Braverman letter to Tory MPs today and I just want to know whether you agree
with this line or disagree with it. She says the only way to stop the boats and
deter illegal migration is to make clear that if you arrive here illegally
you're not going to be able to stay here. And we heard from Alexander Downer who
more or less said that's what we did in Australia. It stopped the boats. If you
tell people you're not staying then they don't bother to come and they don't pay
the criminal gangs and you can have an orderly safe route in. Now do you agree
with that principle or not? The only way to stop the small boats is to have a
returns deal with the European Union. So you've got to put yourself in the
mindset of somebody that wants to come over on the channel is prepared to pay a
people smuggler £5,000, £10,000, £15,000 and to risk their lives coming across.
The only way that they will not do that is if they know that the moment they
arrive in the UK they will be sent back to continental Europe. We need a deal
with the European Union that puts that clearly in place but which of course
enables those people to apply for asylum in the United Kingdom when they're in
continental Europe. So it's about upstream processing. That's the only way to
remove the possibility of people doing that. Would the government disagree with
you on that though Stephen because they believe in returns. You've criticised
them for not making returns and there's an issue about how do you reach a deal
with the European Union to take people back to Britain to return them. But it
sounds like you're agreeing with the principle that you make clear that if you
arrive here illegally you're just going to be sent back so there's no point in
doing it that way. Well legislation without implementation isn't worth the paper
it's written on and in fact it's worse than nuisance. It just makes the
situation worse as Yvette set out today. So what we are saying is don't put the
cart before the horse. Do the quiet diplomacy, the negotiation with the European
Union. Get that returns deal in place. That's the way to have a deterrent
effect. The only way really to stop the crossings. Now there's other things you
can do in terms of resourcing our police and borders properly in terms of having
safe and legal routes. It's pragmatic hard yards, nitty gritty of government
rather than chasing headlines and throwing red meat to the Tory backbenchers.
You've got to give the continental European countries something in return for
saying you're going to take our people back. What is the kind of number that
Britain feels it should be taking? This is going to arise anyway because the
government's proposal is we need a safe route in, we'll argue about the number
each year and we'll take that number in. What is the kind of number that we
should take in and what would you be like offering to say France in terms of
we'll take X amount so that you can take the others back? Well Evan you'll
forgive me for saying this but nobody goes into a negotiation by putting all
their cards on the table and face up. What we do know is that the Labour Party
has not spent the last six years trashing our relationship with our European
partners and allies. So Keir Starmer as Prime Minister will be very well placed
to go in and have trust based negotiations in good faith with the Calais group
primarily and of course the relationship with France is vital in that to get a
workable returns deal. We know that the Conservatives haven't done that because
they don't have that trust. They are not able to go in and have that
negotiation. Now it's welcome that they've said that they're going to have safe
and legal routes but what's utterly bizarre is they're saying they're not going
to put those in place until the small boats crossings have stopped. The safe and
legal routes should be a precondition for the process, the solution to the small
boats. So again they're putting the cart before the horse and that's why this
legislation is not going to work because they haven't put the conditions in
place. They haven't rolled the pitch to actually make it workable. And you're
not going to give me a number are you on what you think is a British share of
this global issue? Do you accept there's a hundred million that would be given a
right to be here if they could get here but you're not going to give a number on
what proportion of that if you like we should be taking? I think the hundred
million is a dangerous number. It's outrageous that that's being bandied around
by the Home Secretary because it implies that a hundred million want to come to
the UK which is clearly not the case. We have to take our fair share as part of
the quid pro quo, the give and take that you need to make a deal with the
European Union. The European Union operates on the basis of compromise and
negotiation. So that is clear. I'm not going to give you a number Evan because
you don't go into a negotiation by putting your cards face up on the table.
Stephen thank you for that. Stephen Kinnock there, Shadow Minister for
Immigration. Now while we've been on air in fact, the Prime Minister has been
promoting the government's proposals on controlling arrivals of people on small
boats. He's giving a press conference in Downing Street. Here's a small snippet
of what he's been saying. My policy is very simple. It is this country and your
government who should decide who comes here and not criminal gangs. Now the
first step is understanding the nature and scale of what we are dealing with.
The number of people entering the UK illegally in small boats has more than
quadrupled in just the last two years. Those illegally crossing the channel are
not directly fleeing a war-torn country or persecution or an imminent threat to
life. They have travelled through safe European countries. They are paying
people smugglers huge sums to make this dangerous and sometimes tragic journey.
Now the reason that criminal gangs continue to bring small boats over here is
because they know that our system can be exploited. That once here, illegal
migrants can make a multitude of asylum, modern slavery and spurious human
rights claims to frustrate their removal. And the risk remains that those
individuals just disappear into the black economy. Now that is the reality we
must deal with. And that's the Prime Minister speaking just as we are on air.
Are we going to have another clip of him? No, I don't think we are, are we? No.
It's now a quarter to six and we'll have a look at some other headlines. Here's
Tina. Ukraine has launched an investigation to find the Russian soldiers who
appeared to murder an unarmed Ukrainian prisoner of war in unverified footage
posted online. The man is seen smoking a cigarette in a trench before he's shot
dead. A man and a woman have been charged with murdering a one-year-old boy in
the village of Herne Hill in Kent in November 2020. The National Cancer Director
for England has warned that a spike in demand means the NHS looks set to miss a
key cancer treatment target laid out in the Covid recovery plan. Thank you,
Tina. Now the man who is head of the civil service, the Secretary of the Cabinet
and absolutely central player in Downing Street, the fixer who has to keep
government on the road and within the rules is Simon Case. He's had a bad week.
The leaked Matt Hancock texts have shown him talking very casually about serious
matters. He referred to Boris Johnson as nationally distrusted. He derided
something as pure conservative ideology in the texts. None of it was intended
for public consumption and that must be borne in mind. But nevertheless, the
Financial Times has reported that Mr Case is thinking about whether he should
stay or go from his job. If it was just the texts, there probably wouldn't be
any question over his role. But there have been other issues as well, not least
his role in the ill-disciplined Partygate days at Number 10. Well, Jill Rutter,
former senior civil servant who has experience in Number 10 and now worked for
the UK in a changing Europe think tank is with me. First of all, Jill, the role
head of the civil service, it's back behind the scenes, isn't it? But it's
incredibly important. It is very important. So he's the top civil servant of the
country. You could argue he's the principal official policy adviser to the Prime
Minister in his role as Cabinet Secretary. His job is to make government work
behind the scenes, but his other job is to give leadership to all those 400,000
plus civil servants. So it's a very big job. Right. Simon Case came in, he
wasn't the kind of natural sort of man who had worked his way up through the
civil service. He'd been at Buckingham Palace. He was a strange choice in a way.
He was a strange choice. He was an unexpected choice, I think, in some ways.
Usually it's blindingly obvious who's going to be the next Cabinet Secretary.
They've probably been permanent secretary of a big department. They've had a
very key role in Number 10. When two Cabinet Secretaries ago, Lord Hayward,
Jeremy Hayward was appointed. It was so obvious that Jeremy Hayward was going to
be Cabinet Secretary at some point. Likewise with his predecessor, Gus
O'Donnell, permanent secretary at the Treasury. Simon Case had come back. He'd
been pulled back from the palace by Boris Johnson to try and sort out and get
Government's Act together on Covid. He'd been working for Prince William at the
palace and was promoted without having run a big department, incredibly young in
his early 40s. That's still incredibly young in civil service terms without
having done a really senior job in a big government department. So you could say
in that sense, he was a surprise candidate and one who arguably lacked natural
authority over his colleagues. Why are there questions over him, Jill? In your
view, what is the thing that has made him most vulnerable in this position? I
think there's a number of things that's happened. I mean, the circumstance of
his promotion already put a question mark over him. Dominic Cummings, you'll
remember, memorably told the Health and Social Care and Science and Technology
Committees that Cummings had secured Simon Case's appointment to try and get
Boris Johnson under control after Cummings' influence lapsed. I think he made a
big misjudgment in ever agreeing that the civil service should investigate
Partygate. It was clearly going to put the civil service in a very difficult
position vis-a-vis the prime minister. And we've seen that play out. We then saw
Simon Case himself having to recuse himself because he'd been at some parties. I
think his response to Partygate was deeply unconvincing. He's put in a number of
rather unconvincing performances at the Public Administration Constitutional
Affairs Committee about the tensions of trying to manage Boris Johnson, whether
it's over wallpaper, the Richard Sharp appointment. The trouble about Simon Case
is quite a long list of instances, the cumulative effect. None on their own
would be considered a scandal quite, but it's the cumulative effect. I think
it's cumulative effect which questioned his judgment, admittedly working in very
difficult circumstances with the pandemic and with the prime minister, as Case
himself said, like to test the boundaries of what was acceptable. And I think
with that sort of government, there's not really a sense that Simon Case is
patrolling those boundaries very effectively. He looks as though he's probably
knocking the ball over for six far too often in a rather odd cricket metaphor.
Jill, thank you for that. Simon Case, all you need to know about the chief civil
servant. Havana syndrome is one of the most bizarre phenomena to emerge in the
world of diplomacy this decade. It started in 2016 at the US Embassy in Havana.
Number of staff succumbed to some strange symptoms. It's since spread to
hundreds of other US personnel elsewhere in the world. And last week, a group of
US intelligence agencies released a review of the available evidence and said it
consistently points against the involvement of US adversaries, dampening the
suggestion that it's a microwave gun from the Russians. However, it is now
reported the US Defence Department is still looking into it. Shashank Joshi is
the defence editor at The Economist and told me where this phenomenon began.
This was such a big deal that it caused complete disruption to the US's
diplomatic rapprochement with Cuba at the time. They closed down lots of the
embassy and eventually these anomalous health incidents, as the Americans began
to call them, multiplied over 1,500 across 90 countries, affecting spies,
military personnel, State Department officials, all kinds of people. And there
has been a sort of big whodunit in the US government. Right, last week, a group
of intelligence agencies in the US say, we've looked at the evidence, we can't
find a smoking gun here or a microwave gun, as people have speculated. We just
can't find it. That's right. And they looked very hard. So, for example, they
said if it was Russia, Russian spies trying to cause harm to US spies, you know,
in the past they have done things like that. They've harassed intelligence
officers from adversarial countries. Then, you know, can we correlate this with
the movements of Russian intelligence officers? Can we see evidence of
electromagnetic activity that might be consistent with some kind of high powered
microwave energy weapon being used? And I think the answer they found is there's
nothing. We just couldn't find anything. And indeed, even the very mechanism
that would be at play is in some doubt. One of the arguments I think this panel
found was to say, look, if it was a microwave weapon of some kind, which was one
of the theories, where is the heat that you'd expect in the victims? Where's the
sense of a racing pulse you'd expect? Neither of these things is consistent. So
they're very keen not to say that these are fake symptoms. They're
acknowledging, you know, you felt these things because it's such a sensitive
issue now in the US. But they're saying there is just absolutely no evidence
this is a state adversary. Having said that, we have to remember the US
intelligence community, as they're called, is comprised of 17, 18 different
intelligence agencies. And so you'll always find one or two that will dissent
from that conclusion. But overall, this is a sign that they just have not found
any evidence of skulduggery by the Russians or Chinese or anyone else. Yet
Department of Defense in the US, and yeah, there's no such thing as the US
government. There are lots of different agencies who might take their own view.
Department of Defense in the US still seems to be wanting to investigate this
further and see how these kinds of symptoms might be generated. And I think
there's a lot of things going on here. One of them is different parts of the US
system can, you know, do this stuff for ages. You know, I'm not drawing an exact
comparison, but let's remember the Defense Intelligence Agency was doing work on
telepathic remote sensing for espionage into the 1990s. So you can get bits of
the US government that do quite out there stuff for a long time, even after it
shut down elsewhere. I think it's also very political. The people who are
afflicted by this are some very prominent CIA officers, diplomats who have been
fighting to have their condition recognized. And they found a lot of allies in
the US Congress. So in 2021, Congress passed an act that basically, you know,
supported victims of the syndrome with aid, with money, with medical treatment.
And so when the White House or the Pentagon or another executive branch agency
wants to do something, often Congress can make them do the opposite. So thank
Joshi there from The Economist. Hello Greg James here and I'm back with a brand
new series of Rewinder. Can you believe it is back again? We have access to the
enormous BBC archive once again to unearth some hidden gems. We're going to save
go back and get my pig. This week, find out what salad Kate Winslet cooked on
Ready Steady Cook. Bit of an iceberg lettuce. Why were people complaining about
oregalo? Because we obviously had this problem of spoons bending in my wife's
hand. And how could you win this prize? Good bouncing 16 pound hams. No, no,
really. That's Rewinder with me, Greg James, this Saturday from 10.30 on Radio 4
and BBC Sounds. Now did you try to get a ticket for Eurovision today? They went
on sale at noon and were snapped up soon after. You've let us know about your
own experiences. It seems a lot of people were left disappointed. Hi Evan, it's
Elisa here. My husband, Glenn, and I both queued and both of us had problems
with the Ticketmaster site crashing constantly. So we both ended up
disappointed. But not to worry, I'm sure it'll be a great excuse just to watch
from home with some friends and cheer on the UK and have a great night as usual.
Eurovision's just the best entertainment. This is Josh in Oxfordshire. I queued
for one hour and a half. The website didn't crash for me, but after an hour and
a half, I got to number one in the queue after having 2,000 people ahead of me
and there were no more tickets for Eurovision remaining. Oh, this is Liz Denton
from Beverley here. I got really distraught. Super fun downstairs. We did
everything we could. We set up a... I'm exhausted. We set up a WhatsApp group. I
had to run across York to find a Wi-Fi spot. Every time any of us got to the
point of buying tickets, it just crashed. Oh, several experiences there. There
should be some big event for everyone who couldn't get a ticket. I have a
distraught superfan, Eurovision superfan in the studio with me, Paddy O'Connell.
What was your experience, Paddy? I met my Waterloo. My hopes went boom, bang,
a-bang. It was a fiasco. Is this on? Is this on? Right. So firstly, the system
worked, though, did it? I mean, it obviously did crash for many people, but a
lot of people did get tickets. I mean, it allocated all the tickets, presumably.
Yes, there were 6,000 tickets for each of nine shows. Can you believe it?
There's nine of these things, none of them going to me. You didn't get one?
Didn't get one. Some people got one in their shopping basket, and then their
shopping basket magically emptied. OK, so it didn't really quite work. But yes,
many people, many thousands of people did get tickets. We think of Eurovision as
one thing on a Saturday night in early May. The thing is that a lot of Europe
actually consume it over the week, don't they, with the semifinals and stuff.
It's never really been a big part of the... Well, for you superfans, it perhaps
has been. But for most of us, the semifinals have not really been a very big
deal. Yes, because we go straight through to the final. We're one of the big
countries that pay more money than anyone else, and we get a guaranteed place.
So a Saturday night TV show, even when we've sent rubbish from the UK, which we
have for years, the show's been a ratings winner, thanks to Terry Wogan and
Graham Norton. It's been the Eurovision commentary song contest for a long time.
Are you going to find some other way to wank on your way in? I mean, because you
get beyond the staff or something. No, no, the thing is, everyone knows, never
go and see a TV show being made. It's rubbish. You get treated like a prop. You
have to gurn at the camera, some awful warm-up person. The exception is
Eurovision, you get next to a lovely family from Helsinki, two gay men from
France, and a woman carrying an inflatable banana in front. So it's very good
fun. It's a herbivorous fun event. And it goes on forever. Just watch it from a
pub in Liverpool. Many will be doing that. Paddy, thanks for that. Now, we need
to get some weather. We had a little bit of it earlier, actually, didn't we? But
let's get Darren Bett in his forecast. Darren. Yes, it's dry at the moment
across southern parts of England and the far south of Wales. But we will see a
mixture of rain, sleet and snow returning here later on in the night. It brings
the risk of some icy conditions and perhaps a centimetre or two of snow in
places. Temperatures in southern parts of England and south Wales will be near
freezing. Further north, it's going to be much colder. There'll be a widespread
sharp frost with clear skies in most areas. A few snow showers will continue to
run into the north of Northern Ireland and perhaps into the northeast of
England. But most of the snow will again be in the north of Scotland. As we head
into tomorrow, though, we should see fewer showers across northern parts of the
UK and more sunshine. It's still going to be cold at three or four degrees. The
rain, sleet and snow across southern parts of England and south Wales will tend
to move away. But it's only going to return again later in the afternoon in the
south west and south Wales. And that mixture of rain, sleet and snow will push
into southeastern areas tomorrow evening. There could be five to ten centimetres
of snow. Oh, thank you, Darren. That's it. Nicola Brough was studio director.
Mark Faulkner was our editor.