TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Brilliant though, three seconds. It is time for the news with Ann Smith. BBC
News at ten o'clock. The deputy mayor of the besieged Ukrainian city of Bakhmut
has said there's fighting on the streets, but Russia has not yet taken control.
British military intelligence says Russian forces have made further advances
into the city, putting it under increasingly severe pressure. The former deputy
supreme commander of NATO in Europe, General Sir Richard Sherriff, says that
even if Russia takes the town, the cost to them will be huge. But he told the
Today programme here on Radio 4 that Ukrainian forces could also be weakened. I
think the question is whether the Ukrainians in doing so have had to dig deep
into their reserves and the extent to which therefore they will be constrained
from following up or launching a successful counter-offensive. Leaked messages
reveal that the former health secretary, Matt Hancock, spent hours discussing
how he could save his career after The Sun published an image showing him
kissing his aide while social distancing restrictions were in place. The Daily
Telegraph has printed WhatsApp conversations from June 2021, in which Mr Hancock
discussed with his advisers whether he'd broken his own Covid rules. The French
coastguard says a ferry being towed to Calais after a fire broke out on board
has docked at the port. 183 passengers and crew were on board the Isle of
Innisfree when the incident happened yesterday afternoon. Police in Australia
say they've made what's thought to be the country's biggest ever drugs bust. In
a joint operation, American agents seized two and a half tonnes of cocaine off
the south coast of America in November and replaced it with fake packages that
they could track. Police intercepted the gang as they tried to retrieve the
cargo near Perth. And the Hollywood actor Tom Sizemore has died aged 61. He'd
been in a coma since collapsing at his home in Los Angeles two weeks ago from a
brain aneurysm. He was best known for his role as Tom Hank's loyal sergeant in
the Oscar-winning film Saving Private Ryan. BBC News. Alan Smith, thank you.
Welcome back to Saturday Live with me, Nikki Bady and Sean Keaveney. With us
this morning, Prue Leith, restaurateur, chef, caterer, television presenter,
journalist, cookery writer. I'm watching her on the screen going, ah, and
novelist and add to that list of accomplishments. She can now say one woman
shower. And also with us, Jenny Radcliffe. She's a social engineer. She's been
telling us about being a professional burglar. Still to come, the gardening
guru, teacher and author, Sarah Raven. We have the inheritance tracks of actor
Lily James and sitting opposite me, Queen of Boundaries, the life coach and
writer, Michelle Elman. Yeah, I imagine, Prue, that you're probably quite good
with boundaries, with being boundaried in your life. Is that a fair assumption
to make? Yeah, I have never given it a thought. I don't know what boundaries
are. Are you good at saying no? Are you good at saying no, Prue? I'm hopeless at
saying no. Ah, well, that's what we do. Yeah, you're right, actually, because
you were saying before, you always say yes to everything. Well, yeah, and as a
result, I've done a lot of lovely things. Yeah, it's a really tricky balance,
isn't it? Yeah. For me, it's more, it's that kind of the guilt that you feel if
you don't do something that you know somebody else wants you to do, but you
don't really feel like it. Well, that's the part you have to get rid of. So it's
about finding that balance between yes or no, but also I think when you know how
to use your no, your yes has more power. So my family joke all the time that now
when I turn up to an event, you know, I actually want to be there because I'll
have no qualms about saying no. But before then, they used to take me for
granted. They used to assume I would turn up and now they don't. That's good. We
used to call my mate Leon, who's a great drummer, Dr. No, because he used to
just say no all the time. He was really good at it. You'd approve of that then,
Michelle, wouldn't you? Yeah, absolutely. My boyfriend's the person who says no
to most of you. It's annoying being on the receiving end, but you're like, no,
respect his boundaries. Being an accommodator cannot be a good thing sometimes
then. We've been asking you this morning for your stories about escaping from
somewhere you've been locked into or breaking into somewhere. Tilly has messaged
to say, my 87-year-old dad was locked into his bedroom by burglars in the middle
of the night. When he got up for a pee, he realised he couldn't get out. So
using an old scarf, climbed six foot out of his window, relieved himself behind
a bush, then trotted a quarter of a mile down the road to the neighbours who
called the police. The burglars were duly caught red-handed. What a legend.
Exactly. What a legend. Tilly, tell your dad he's been approved. That's
remarkable. I'm just checking, I'm testing the water here. We might have a call
from Caroline in Oxfordshire. Are you there, Caroline? I am. Hello, thanks for
joining us. So what's your locked in or locked out story? Oh, basically a few
Christmases ago, my daughters were coming home for Christmas. I always leave
everything until the last minute and decide I really should make an effort and
put the Christmas tree up. So I went into the attic to find the tree. When I
came to get down, I put my foot on top of the ladder and not the ladder over. So
consequently, I was stuck in the loft for about an hour before the girls came
home. Rachel and Louise finally arrived. I shouted up to them that I was stuck
in the attic, which they thought was absolutely hilarious. They promptly opened
a bottle of wine, sat on the carpet beneath the loft and wouldn't let me out. So
that was, yeah. I love that. It's almost becoming like an episode of Some
Mothers Do Have Them, isn't it really? Yeah. That's it. Thank you very much,
Caroline. That's a lovely memory, especially for your daughters. If you'd like
to get in touch with us this morning, you can email SaturdayLive at bbc.co.uk.
If you're texting, it's 84844. And if you tweet us, please use the hashtag BBC
Saturday Live. Lily James is one of the most in-demand British actresses in the
world. She began her career on stage playing the leading role of Taylor in
Vernon Godlittle. Then she was Desdemona in Daniel Evans's Othello. You may know
her from her three seasons as Lady Rose in Downton Abbey or from her breakout
film as Disney icon Cinderella. She also led the cast of Mamma Mia! Here We Go
Again alongside Meryl Streep. What keeps her so interesting as an actor, though,
is that she always does smaller, edgy films and projects. She starred in the
heist movie with a twist, Baby Driver, the surprise hit Netflix film The Dig,
and she was most recently seen, utterly transformed in fact, as Pamela Anderson
in the series Pam and Tommy. We asked Lily James to share her inheritance tracks
with us. So the track I've inherited is Eric Bibb, The Cape. I love this song.
It starts as this young kid who thinks he can fly. And I love how Eric Bibb
tells stories through his songs. And I love the message of like, you know, it's
gonna be do or die. Let's just go for it. And always trust your cape. This
particular song, The Cape, it really makes me think of being a kid and going
driving with my dad and he would always like tap his fingers on the steering
wheel. And the same with my mom and we would play it and we would sing along in
the car. And it's a CD and a record that we have that we would always play,
like, and have it on in the background at, you know, birthdays and Christmases.
I grew up in an incredibly musical household. My dad played the bass guitar and
my mom and him both had an awesome collection of records, some of which I've
inherited. And actually my dad made these, like, mixtapes for my mom of all his
favorite music, just gotta be the most romantic, beautiful thing you can do for
someone. Well, he wasn't scared of nothing, boy, as he was pretty sure he could
fly. My dad played in a band called Two Way, which was a total vibe, so 80s, and
he had a record. Spread your arms and hold your breath, and always trust your
cape. I went to school called Arts Ed and Dreaming in Hertfordshire in the
countryside and I did a lot of singing there. I used to think that was something
that I wanted to do, but I quickly found that perhaps it wasn't the sort of,
gonna be my focus, but I would love to do more singing. I sang a lot in Mamma
Mia and that was the coolest. I recorded with Benny and Bjorn from ABBA, so they
were on the other side of the glass and I was singing and it was a total vibe,
like, really one of the coolest things I've ever done. I went to Sweden and did
it in their studio there, in Benny's studio, and I've grown up loving ABBA,
again, from my dad and my mum. All these years the people said he's acting like
a kid. He did not know he could not fly, so he did. I think my first cassette
was Gina G. She did the Eurovision Song Contest, and then I had All Saints. I
loved the Spice Girls. I mean, the Spice Girls define my youth, and I recently
saw Jerry Halliwell at the BAFTAs and lost my shit. He's still jumping off the
garage, will be till he's dead. When I listen to this song now, it makes me feel
happy. It makes me feel super nostalgic. It makes me think of my dad. And, you
know, I think that music is so powerful because it really transports you, so I
go back to a really happy time in my life. I sadly lost my dad when I was 18,
but music is a big connector, and I feel very close to him when I listen to the
songs that we listen to together and the songs we shared. He's one of those who
knows that life is just a leap of faith. We played an Eric Bibb song at his
funeral, and I always think that I'll have an Eric Bibb song at all the big
moments in my life, when and if they come. The track I'd like to pass on, this
is incredibly difficult, okay? But I went with Green Papaya by Leanne Le Havis.
The lyrics are so beautiful. The first lines are so amazing. It's, my face turns
to gold, hoping to find my way home. This place I don't know, no yellow brick
road to follow. My face turns to gold, hoping to find my way home. I think her
voice is just angelic, and she has so much soul and heart and emotion in her
music....to follow. Music always reflects the time of life that you're in. This,
to me, is super soulful. There's a lot of pain and heart to it, and there's
something kind of sensual. I listened to this a lot when I was filming The
Pursuit of Love. I was in the countryside, and I was living in this little
cottage on my own, and I would just have her on the whole time. It soothes my
soul every time I play this. But there's also a darkness and a kind of
exploration to the music and your heart that felt sort of like a grab onto that.
My partner in crime, hoping you'll love me till we die. I always loved acting as
a kid. My grandmother was an actress through my life, and my dad, I knew he did
it. It's legendary. My dad was an actor when he was a kid. He was really wild
and cool and rock and roll. But I didn't grow up in an acting family. I just
knew that my grandma had done it, and she was super glamorous to me. But I
didn't know what it meant to really do it as a career, and definitely not
movies. I was theater. Take me out of the blue. My grandmother, Helen Horton,
beautiful voice, those old kind of transatlantic American English voices that I
just love, that, you know, Catherine Hepburn and all the greats had at that
time. My grandmother was the voice of their mothership, An Alien, and so that is
also legendary in my family. This place I don't know, no yellow brick road to
follow. My grandmother passed away just before I started drama school, which was
such a blow, obviously, just because I wanted her to be a part of my becoming an
actor. And then I lost my dad in the first year, so I kind of, yeah, that was
really sad just because both of them were such big influences for me and what I
did. Take me home, let's make a real love, real love. Leanna Havis I want to
pass on if I would pass it on to any of the younger generation. I feel like she
speaks to women in a really beautiful way, but everyone, I pass it to my kids.
She kind of makes me want to dance, and it's a beautiful album just to have on
loud in your house, and do whatever you're doing, it enhances the moment. So,
yeah, I hope that it connects in that way for them too. Take me out of the blue.
Ah, Leanna Havis, the inheritance tracks of actor Lily James, who's currently on
screens in our cinemas in the cross-cultural rom-com What's Love Got to Do With
It, directed by Shekhar Kapoor. I like the look at that. It's based slightly on
the producer and writer's life, Jemima Khan. Oh, yeah, OK. Yes. So Prue Leith, I
was so rude not to introduce you as Dame Prue Leith, but Prue earlier in the
programme, Prue said that her motto, because you have to have a motto when you
become a Dame, is nothing in moderation. Did you have to think hard about that,
Prue? Well, I actually wanted to have JFDI, which means just effing do it. What
stopped you? Well, what do you think? Great. Everyone thought the effing wasn't
good. I didn't want just do it because that's Nike. Yes. Yes. They sell trainers
on it. So I am. So then I thought, well, nothing in moderation. I love that. I
love them both. So we were thinking about this, Michelle, if you had to have a
motto when you become a Dame. Yes. I like it when I when. But I don't know. I
was thinking my general ethos for life. I mean, it could be Scarred Not Scared,
but my general ethos for life is like, I'll figure it out later. Like I'm quite
a wing it person. And I just I say yes to things. And I'm like, I'll figure it.
And my TED talk, I was like, I'll figure it out later. I said yes. Six months
later, I was like, oh, I actually have to figure it out now. So figure it out
later. OK, Sarah, what about you? I think something like we've all got to grow
something or we've all got to grow. We've all got to grow. I don't know. Yeah.
Because it could be taken both ways. Yes, exactly. Many meanings. OK, Jenny,
what about you? Let's grow. Let's grow. It would be good. Let's grow. That's
much better proof. Yes. There we go. Succinct. Yeah. Come on, Jenny. I think
it'd probably just be I only rob you if you pay me. I think I think that
probably would be it. There's many other things. But that's the line I think
that I'd have under my day. I noticed you said to everyone else when you're
sorry, it was implicit when you are. But we'll see if you already were. Yeah, I
will only ever. Well, you could be a pantomime Dame, Sean. I've been asked, you
know, have you? Yeah. But then it was the covid. So I couldn't do it. So if
anybody's thinking this guy would be great, I would be. I would do it.
Absolutely. But, you know, if I was to come up with a motto, I think it would be
I'm just really sorry. That's not a motto. I say that a lot. I say that an awful
lot. If you if you're at home, if you need it, if you need a bit of a lift or a
Philip or a boon, some inspiration, some gumption or encouragement to make a
life move, maybe look no further than our next guest. She was one of a pair of
terrible twins written off as academic flops. Yet she battled on to work as a
doctor before trading that life in for one as a gardener, an author who casts
her seeds far and wide as a mail order seed queen. Welcome to Saturday Live,
Sarah Raven. Thank you very much. Thanks so much for coming in. Let's grow. We
all think that's quite resonant as far as mottos go. But you're an obvious
runaway success now, but it wasn't an overnight success, was it? It didn't seem
obvious at the beginning of your sort of educational career that you might make
a success of yourself, did it? No, I wasn't good at being not thrown out of
school, I have to say. So, yeah, I'm a twin. And I think people find two quite
naughty people more of a handful than one. Not surprisingly. So we were always
the sort of scapegoats whenever anything went wrong. And we went to a rather
kind of strict school and we didn't really abide by the rules anyway. And also,
we weren't we didn't work very hard and weren't very clever. So we both failed
the 11 plus and so didn't go to the school that our parents wanted us to go to.
And lots of our neighbours and friends were clever. Children were going to. And
yeah, well, anyway, it went from bad to worse, really. So is that, you know,
first of all, that's interesting, isn't it, as a kid? And we've all known how
they got kids in our lives. I know kids like this who, you know, just because
you're a bit cheeky, you end up getting tired with that brush all the time, I
suppose. But do you think with today's knowledge, you might have been considered
like neurodiverse in some way? Yes. That was some part of it. Yes. Yeah,
definitely. I think there's probably a touch of ADHD in both of us, I would say.
I'm not sure, but we're not very good at stopping. And we both talk very, very
quickly. Perhaps I'm going to try and slow down now. But my twin talks twice as
fast as I do. And that takes some doing. Yeah, just teachers didn't like us or
they really liked us and settled on us and helped us a bit. The odd one. So I
didn't really go to school after I was sort of just 16. Gosh. And well, I sort
of then did and did my A-levels kind of more on my own. Yeah. Well, it's
interesting that I mean, I'm a diagnosed adult ADD. I take medication for it,
but I don't have the H, you see, I don't have the hyperactivity. Is that you
would describe that as being a big part of your personality, would you say? I
think. Oh, gosh, I don't know, because one isn't diagnosed as one. I mean, and
but but I'm very bad at saying no. And I work seven days a week, ten hours a
day. You know, I'm I'm I'm sort of, yeah, I'm obsessive with what when you like
something. Yeah. Find something. And you because you were in bands and stuff as
well, weren't you? You were you were in you were didn't you play an instrument?
You were in bands at some. No, we were both totally on musical. But because we
were naughty, we wanted to be in a band and we were in an all girls school. And
so, yeah, Jane was going to be the drummer. I was going to be the guitarist and
another friend was going to be the singer. But we had we'd never had a guitar
lesson or anything. I mean, we just decided that's what we wanted to do. Anyway,
we were caught coming back into school having having gone off and missed this
lesson. And so that was the first time that that I was asked to leave. And then
my my sister also. But there were many times of when we were asked to leave. Was
that suspension then as opposed to being expelled? Yeah, we weren't allowed to
stick around, though, to do our A-levels. Yeah. Oh, wow. Yeah, they kind of just
sort of showed you the door in a polite way, didn't they? Yeah. So we don't
really need this school. It's quite it's quite dispiriting that isn't it? It is.
But then I've got two degrees now. So, you know, I made up for it. I mean, what
is it you're right to say you had older parents as well. Yeah. Well, my dad was
much older. He was 50 when I was born and I had a very outdoorsy sort of
childhood. So I was very into nature with my dad, who was a botanist. And so
from the age of when I could kind of be a little bit independent, I suppose from
three or four, I was with my dad botanizing around the British Isles and then
and then Europe, really. And so just all my weekends were full of flowers, but a
nature. And that's sort of why I was a medic for some time. But I returned to
nature when I had children and that's the thing that I find calming and so
grounding, obviously, and happy. Yeah, I love that phrase. My weekends were full
of flowers. I think that's beautiful. Were you how far did you get in terms of
being a medic? What was your qualification? So I actually started training for
medicine when I was 24 because of this slightly checkered. And so I qualified
when I was 30 and I already was pregnant with my first child. So I then took
three years to finish. So my what's called junior house officer year. So your
first house officer year, the first year of being a qualified doctor. And then I
and then I had my second child. So and was intending to go back after 18 months,
but I never went back. Because Jenny was going to ask you 101 questions about
gardening and then thought, oh, it's going to be like being a doctor. Everybody
asked doctor, have a look at this rash. What does that? What does this mean? Do
you have a question, Jenny? Well, no specific question about gardening. No, not
really. Only like and as I say, I just I felt that I have friends who are
doctors and they get asked all the time. I've got this ache or what do you think
about this? And then I thought the same thing to happen about gardens. Like, why
isn't this plant growing or like, why is the only thing that grows in my garden?
Lavender and rosemary, you know, and I know the answer is soil. That's a fair
point. That's why I didn't want to ask her. Soil and sun. Actually, you need sun
for those two as well. But that's a good point, really, because people at home
might blithe have considered this a soft piece about gardens and farms and jolly
nice stuff. But this is a bit cutting edge this because they were talking about
mail order seeds on the Jeremy Vine show yesterday. So it's clearly a red hot
topic. Yeah, because it's this is you do have a big business selling seeds. I
mean, just to talk touch on that a little bit, you know, apparently we are one
of the most unbiodiverse and sort of nature poor countries in the world. The UK
that is apparently true. Yeah, we've done much more to damage biodiversity here.
Unfortunately, yeah, we have not. I mean, states in America that similar or even
worse. But yeah, so it is really important that we all use even our window boxes
or pots on our doorsteps to grow things. And we must stop sort of concreting
over our little bits of soil and use them to grow things. Plastic. What do you
think about plastic grass? Plastic grass. I mean, that's a terrifying dystopia,
really, isn't it? It is. Funnily enough, I did a program for the for the BBC a
while back and we did a survey of different families and what they would like
their lawn to look like. And I'm really sad to say that really high percent, I
think something like 60 percent of people with young families wanted estuary
turf, not a lawn, because they just couldn't face having to look after it. But
also a lawn with daisies and dandelions is a really brilliant thing for the
pollinators. So an untidy lawn is even better than a tidy lawn. You're going to
love my lawn. You really are. Why is it untidy? It's unbelievably untidy. Prue,
how does your garden grow? But not everyone, of course, has a lawn. No, it's
quite a big garden and it has a lot of lawn and a lot of untidy lawn and
wildflower bits. I'm hopeless at the wildflower thing, Sarah. You know, we're
always told scrape everything off. Yes. You know, make it as barren as possible.
Put the wildflower seeds on it. Cut it down. Keep it. I've done all that and I
still don't have any. I don't have enough wildflower. You're on really rich
soil, aren't you, Prue? I seem to remember. Yeah. Yeah. Clays do it really hard.
I've got a balcony. Well, this is what I was going to say, because not
everybody's got lawns. But can we still proffer things to the pollinator gods,
even if we've not got a big space? Yeah. I mean, 100%. And with everything, all
the salads being in the news at the moment and not being able to get your
tomatoes and salad and stuff, grow things like salad rocket. And the flowers of
that is fantastic for the pollinators and they're good to eat. So sprinkle a
packet of seeds into your window box. I don't have a window box. Shall I get
one? Yeah, definitely. You've got to have a window box. I don't have a window.
What am I going to do? Well, you're a bit stuck then, I'm afraid. Do you know
what? This is making me think that next time I go on a job, I should take a
packet of seeds and if I find like a little flower pot or something, I should
just stealth plant it. It's like a flowery, sprinkling it as you go. And just
like, I'm just thinking that's what I should do. I love the gorilla gardener.
Yeah. Is there any hope for the people who go on those websites and click hard
to kill and then still kill them? Yeah, there's loads of things. For some,
lavender and rosemary are really good starting point. I need to start at that
point. Very easy to maintain. Because apparently money plants are hard to kill
and I did kill mine. Did you? As a house plant? Yeah. They are quite difficult
to kill. That is quite an achievement. Yeah. I should put it on my CV. But
rocket, that's the key. Yeah. Okay. That's very good. I do, I virtually live on
rocket. So that's probably my dad. It's his birthday today. I think that's on
Prue's computer. I think my dad's ringing Prue to say, don't forget to mention
it's my dad's birthday. So I will not forget to do that. And just finally,
Sarah, you've obviously, you're a greatly published author and you've got the
seed business. You know, what is the thing that makes you most happy when it
comes to work? What is it the thing that makes you thrive the most? Walking out
in the evening when I get home tonight and picking my own supper every single
day of the year. I mean, obviously I'm not at home every day of the year, but
yeah, and it's really easy and things like rocket, mitsuna, the mustard, so easy
to grow, cut and come again, lettuces, herbs, parsley. I'll definitely pick
something for our... That sounds absolutely delightful, doesn't it? Sorry, Prue,
you were saying? I just wondered if I could chip in here. You must, you must.
No, I just that I get all my tulips from Sarah Raven. And we plant tulips in
huge great agricultural troughs, which I also use to grow vegetables and salads
and rockets. So it goes first of all, raven tulips, then salads, then veg. Well,
I never. An absolute joy. So I think your favorite memory should be walking out
in your garden, Sarah, and just seeing that jewel-like mixture of colors under
your trees. It's amazing. Yeah, absolutely brilliant. Thank you very much
indeed, Prue, but thank you so much, Sarah Raven, for chatting to us and sort of
painting those lovely horticultural pictures in our mind. And what are you
inspired to plant then, Sean? Just to... I am going straight for rocket. Right,
arugula. I eat so much rocket, it's unbelievable. Is arugula the same thing as
rocket? It is, right. Just a different name. Well, on that note, that's almost
it for today's Saturday Live. Thank you for your ears. Thank you to all our
guests, Prue Leith, Sarah Raven, Jenny Radcliffe and Michelle Ellman. We're
going to leave you with a little bit of Laura and Voola on Green Garden. We're
back next week with Lang Lang. Maybe he'll play that piano over there. Until
then, from all of us, have a wonderful weekend. I'll go wherever you go,
wherever you take me. I'll go. I'll go wherever you go, wherever you take me.
I'll go. I'll go wherever you go, wherever you take me. I'll go. Green Garden by
Laura and Voola, ending this morning's Saturday Live, presented by Nicky Beatty
and Sean Keaveney. The producer was Corinna Jones and the studio engineers were
Donald MacDonald and Andrew Garrett. More foodie tips next this morning here on
Radio 4. Jay Rayner and his panel of culinary experts are raring to answer your
questions in the season finale of The Kitchen Cabinet. That's coming up in just
a moment after a quick look ahead to Wednesday morning. The Patch on BBC Radio
4. One producer. What was amazing to me as an outsider was how normal all this
was. One random generated postcode. So I've got to press that. Press that button
and a story unfolding there you wouldn't otherwise know about. What do you sell
then? Everything and anything. Unheard stories from across the UK. What do you
do after being a prison officer? The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds starts next
Wednesday morning at 9. And in that opening episode of the new series, the
postcode generator will be taking us to the village of Feltwell in Norfolk for a
story that leads on to the Pentagon and then outer space. Intriguing stuff.
Well, back here on Earth, it's time now to join Jay Rayner. Hello and welcome to
our final episode of this season's Kitchen Cabinet. Today, we're in Manchester,
a city famous for its industry, music and of course, football. Dishing out the
halftime oranges and the pep talks are cooks and writers Rachel McCormack, Nisha
Katona, Somaya Osmani and often seen dribbling in corners, local boy chef Rob
Owen-Brown. Ladies and gentlemen, your panel. Now, walking through the streets
of Manchester, you may notice a number of bee symbols hanging from old
warehouses, walls and shops. This winged insect is a proud emblem denoting the
Mancunians' hard work ethic and the city as a hive of activity. I've been doing
my research and I found that the worker bee gathers just 0.8 grams of honey in
their entire life. And whilst I'm sure bees don't sit and ponder this fact with
any level of self-consciousness, it's not a lot in human metrics. So what I want
to know from you, panel, is what have you worked very hard on to very little
end? Rob Owen-Brown. I suppose one that really sort of springs to mind is the
hotel probably described as fairly badly run. Kitchen had been notified about a
wedding for 300 people. I'd never been in charge of running a wedding or doing
the prep or the set up or any of that. Starter, get all that prepped. Main
course, get all that prepped. Dessert, get all that prepped, ready for the bride
and groom sitting down at one o'clock, only to be told by reception that the
date was a week out. Oh, my God. You prepped for a wedding for 300 people a week
ahead of time. OK, well, as futility goes, that's brilliant. Rachel McCormack.
Well, I was in Aragon in Spain before Christmas and I was doing various work
things and someone decided that what they really needed me to do with them was
go truffle hunting. So I ended up in this hotel in this province called Darroca
with like four adults in a car. And one, the guy who was driving us, who was a
truffle hunter, he had been a bomb disposal expert with a dog. But when they had
the ceasefire in Spain with ETA, he had no longer need to be the bomb disposal
expert. But the dog was going crazy because it had nothing to do. And someone
said, my uncle is a retired goat herder and he was obsessed with, he knew all
these people in this mountain who would go truffle hunting. Why don't you train
your dog how to be a truffle hunter? We drove an hour from the hotel to some
mountain that I'm not allowed to tell you where it is, but to be honest, it's in
Aragon. We got our legs shredded by all the thorn bushes and then there was
rosemary bushes. Rachel, did you find any truffles? No, this is the point. We
went two hours up this mountain in the dark and we did not find one truffle.
Brilliant payoff. Samaya? Yeah, well, for a while I ran a social enterprise
cookery school in Glasgow and I took it upon myself to teach Glaswegian old men
how to cook a curry. And by the end of like many hours of teaching them how to
do it meticulously, they said, pal, a chicken tikka masala comes out of a jar.
So yeah, that was a bit wasted. Wasted work. Nisha Katona? Very proudly, I'm
building my 21st restaurant. I was a barrister for 20 years and I just wanted my
Indian family to be proud of this fact. But in fact, they are so ashamed of the
indomitable end of my barrister career that they still ring up and say, how many
hotel have you got now? To kind of gild it, to make it feel as though it's
acceptable. So yeah, I live under the pall of that. And if Nisha's family would
like to prove that they are actually very proud of her, they can email us at
tkc, at bbc.co.uk and we'll pass on those emails. Right, after that litany of
futility, let's see if we can be as productive as a worker be by answering our
first question from John Biddulph from SAIL in Manchester. Hello, panel. Do you
approve of or use stock cubes? Well, let's have a heated debate. Nisha, Katona.
Oh, absolutely. They're the ultimate culinary enabler, I think. I absolutely
love them. And not just in dishes where you require that liquid and that umami,
but they're fantastic crumbed up in things like salad dressings, especially
Japanese salad dressings. They're a really brilliant thing to have in your
armoury. So I absolutely rave about them. I'll tell you why that comes from sort
of the background, you know, where we have meat on the bone. So there are no
spare bones in Indian cooking to boil up to make stock. They're precious things,
bones. So stock cubes are a really big thing in the Indian kitchen. Rachel. I
use them quite a lot to make soup. It's just one of those, you just add, to make
sure things aren't too boring, you can just add different type of spices.
Otherwise you feel like you're eating the same thing again and again and again.
That's the issue really with stock cubes is they taste the same. And all you
have to do is just add things to them and you won't notice the difference. I
think what happens is so many times we have professional chefs who don't want to
say that because they don't use stock cubes in their kitchen, which I can
understand, but cooking at home, absolutely all the time. Well, let's go to a
professional chef, Robert Owen Brown. Look, they've got to play something. I
suppose that, you know, into a stew, into soup, into something that's going to
cook for a long time, they're great. The only problem you might have with one is
if you mix up a stock, sort of stock cube, hot water, dissolve that thing, you
will never get that liquid to reduce down. It hasn't got a gelatin sort of
content, so you couldn't reduce it down to make a sauce. If you're going to put
fat into there, you know, reduce the stock down, add double cream and things,
fine. But don't expect you to get beautiful sort of glass type sauce. That's the
point. They don't have gelatin in them. They don't. Sumaya. Yeah, I mean, I
wouldn't live without them. And one of the things that we did when we were kids
was because, you know, we got sick of eating boiled rice all the time, we would
actually just heat up butter, put some cumin seeds in it, add it to the rice and
cook it with a stock, like, you know, made up into a liquid and just let it all
absorb in and cook the rice, absorb, and it has a lovely meaty flavour without
the need for meat and without actually going through all the things of cutting
ginger, garlic, onions. Everything's just yum. Well, I think we should complete
this completely uncontroversial set of answers by throwing it to the audience.
There's about 200 of you here at Manchester Grammar School in Manchester. The
clue was in the name. LAUGHTER If you never use a stock cube, shout no after
three. One, two, three. No. And let's finish this. And if you use stock cubes,
shout stock cube after three. One, two, three. Stock cube. OK, well, I think
that's pretty much completed that one for you, John. And the other three people,
I bet you feel really good about yourselves. LAUGHTER You're listening to The
Kitchen Cabinet on BBC Radio 4. We've donned our macks and brollies and are
coming to you from a city that knows the dam well. Moving in off the Atlantic
Ocean, the moisture made Manchester's climate a fertile environment for the
development of resilient cotton and led to the city's affectionate 19th-century
nickname, Cottonopolis. One dish closely linked to this important part of
Lancashire's history is that of the rag pudding. Here to tell us more about this
pudding is maker Paul Jackson from Jackson's Rag Puddings. Hello, Paul. Hello.
The name is a little deceiving, isn't it? It is. It's not a great name, is it, a
rag pudding? The name of a rag pudding in Lancashire, in particular Rochdale and
Oldham, essentially came from the cotton mills when they would be making shirts
and the back of the shirts were down to the back of the knee. They had a very
long tail on them, so the lady of the house needed a rag. So the chap got a cold
bum during winter, she would chop them off and she would use them for rags, and
she would also use them for wrapping a suet beef pudding in. And that's a rag
pudding. How did Jackson's Rag Puddings start? It started in the early to
mid-'80s. Our family had a kink-meat tripe shop and my dad was looking for
something different to sell. So my grandma's recipe of a rag pudding, my mum
made a dozen. They sold on the day, she made another dozen, they sold 50, 100,
and then on Saturday afternoon, when I was about 13, 14, we would start to make
hundreds. Eventually the high street failed and we got a unit and that's where
we were. How many do you make now? 528,000 last year. That's quite a lot. It is,
yes. You've got some in front of you, which, Rob, I know you've already been
trying. You grew up eating rag pudding, didn't you? Especially Jackson's, I'll
be honest with you. I'm a Radcliffe Berry lad, so Berry Market was full of
these, you know, if you got there early enough. But my mother made rag pudding,
my grandmother made rag pudding. They're made sweet and savoury ones, to be
honest with you. I like mine with a little bit of kidney in, but these are
absolutely superb. Nisha, I think this is a first for you, isn't it? I was born
in Lancashire and I'd never heard of it. I'm a South West Lanx girl, you see,
and that's crazy, cos that's delicious, that pastry is heavenly. Rachel, what do
you think would make a great accompaniment to this? More? LAUGHTER Seriously,
apart from more, chips and roast potatoes don't work. You don't want a crunch,
but you want mashed potatoes, you want your sort of steamed vegetables, you
don't really want to complicate things. Samaya, you also live in Glasgow, land
of the pie. Oh, yeah. Is this familiar for you? Yeah, it has that sort of
familiar comfort of flavour, but I can really feel that suet, and I don't think
I've felt that up on the top of my palate, like, for a really long time, and I
really like that, there's something quite comforting about that. And Paul, what
are the key techniques in the process for making one of these? Essentially, the
difference between a cloth pudding and a rag pudding is the muslin traditionally
would have been tied and dropped in a porcelain pot and steamed, whereas the rag
pudding is actually wrapped like a Christmas parcel, and then we put them
tightly packed to each other on a perforated tray, cos they're tightly wrapped,
and that takes a lot of... many, many years to stop the seepage coming through,
but that's the principles to them. And you mentioned steaming. Let's take a
question on that from Helen Hosker from Wilmslow in Cheshire. Thank you, panel.
I have a lovely underused steam oven in my new kitchen. I occasionally use it
for vegetables and fish. Please could the panel give me some inspiration to use
it more? Right. Well, I'm just a bit jealous now. Is it a solely dedicated steam
oven? It is. Oh, Helen. Oh. Wilmslow in Cheshire, you say? Well, let's cut
straight across to Nisha Katonia, who's recently... I mean, like to claim she
lives in the world, but has moved just over the border into Cheshire. I like to
say that. Do you have steam oven envy? I do have steam... That's incredible. Do
you know, things in banana leaves are fantastic in a steam oven and they're
quite easy to get hold of. You can't get hold of them, you know, tinfoil works
as well, but Bengalis love... And that's where I'm from. They love to steam
things like fish, chicken, prawns. And the secrets to a really good Bengali
steaming are really simple. English mustard, lemon juice, a bit of coriander and
a bit of green chilli if you want to go for that little bit of heat. Sumaya,
what would you put through Helen's steam oven? I would love to, you know, cook
some rice in there because rice comes up beautifully, especially if you flavour
it with things like pandan leaves, which have this delicate flavour that you use
a lot in Malaysian cooking, which is a gorgeous flavour. And when you steam rice
in a steam oven, more flavours from the pandan leaf would infuse into the rice.
I'd also make dumplings, noodles in there. That'd be really quick and easy and
super delicious. Rachel? Ask your fishmonger if you can get hold of a monkfish
liver and then wrap that up in a very light cheesecloth and cook that in the
steam oven. And then when you take it out, if you let it go cold and you slice
it and it's kind of like fish foie gras, it is lovely. It's really, really nice.
And we don't use monkfish liver enough in the UK and in other countries. It's
incredibly expensive. So that's probably to go with the quite expensive steam
oven. LAUGHTER There are some ideas for you, Helen. Panel, Anisha was talking
about wrapping in banana leaves and Paul's been talking about wrapping in rags,
obviously, so I'm interested in other dishes that need wrapping. Anisha? Well, I
grew up with a lot of paneer being wrapped. So, daughter of a Hindu priest, we
didn't very often have meat or weren't very often allowed meat. And so paneer,
which is Indian cheese, it's kind of the basic level of cheese, which is just
milk curdled with a bit of lemon juice, and you hang it in those muslin sacks.
So I remember growing up and there would always be these muslin sacks hanging on
every single sink in the house. In the shower cubicle, you'd go on and there'd
be this huge kind of penulus udder of dripping cheese. And those are my
memories, you know, this kind of muslin-wrapped cheese. Now, we've been talking
about wrapping and we're talking about steaming. Paul, you mentioned the use of
suet in your rag pudding. That's a vital ingredient, isn't it? It is, yeah. It
allows us, essentially, to stretch that pastry so we can wrap it. Rob, for those
who don't know, what exactly is suet? Suet is from the inside of the animal,
usually beef and lamb, and it's the sort of hard fat that wraps itself around
the kidneys and the sort of fillet end at the bottom, you know, right inside the
belly of the carcass. It's massively cheap. All you want to do with it, get a
nice lump off your butcher. You want to render that fat down. Don't cook it too
hard, don't cook it too fast. Just bring the temperature, let the fat melt. Once
it's all melted, you're going to end up with some little bits of sinew and tiny
little bits of meat. Just fire it through a sieve, and you can put some salt on
those little nibbly bits. Fire it through a nice sieve, let it cool down, get it
into a container in the freezer, and then as you need it, pull it out and just
grate it, and you've got wonderful fresh suet. And cardiologists all over the
country... LAUGHTER..are wincing at the radio. Sumaya, it's an important part of
certain dishes in northern Pakistan and Afghanistan, isn't it? Yeah, absolutely.
They cook a lot with the suet. We call it charbi, and the bits of the meat are
actually sometimes put on tikkas, and so you have a piece of meat and a piece of
charbi, and it melts while it cooks, so it actually makes... It softens the
meat, it adds flavour to it, but what they also say is a lot of the balti
cooking up in northern Pakistan is done with charbi, which is suet, and why it's
done is because it's very cold up there, and it says it keeps you warm, it
actually gives you energy, and during the winter, where they don't have a lot of
natural heat... Well, they have natural log fires, but they don't have central
heating, this keeps your body warm. So we've talked about the Indian
subcontinent. Rachel, other recipes that are good with suet? Anything that
really you want to make pastry with. If you look at old Scottish and old English
recipes from the 20s and 30s, and their puddings and their pastries, they've
almost always got suet in them, because it makes for a much lighter and flakier
pastry. Like, if you've had an Eccles cake with margarine and you've had an
Eccles cake with suet, the difference is tremendous. One of the things that they
make, for example, in Argentina, because they've got a lot of cattle there, so
Argentinians are obsessed with beef, and they make empanadas, which are
basically small pies, and a lot of the time, they don't put butter in them, they
don't put vegetable shortening in them, they put in suet. And I think, although
your cardiologist might not be pleased, I think if you make it a special
occasion and you eat beef, then you should have an Eccles cake with suet in it
and never have one with vegetable shortening or margarine. OK, well, it's good
you've laid down the law there. Paul, it would be a slightly remiss of us not to
mention that rag pudding, although obviously the panel thinks it's delicious,
it's not the most attractive pudding, is it? No, it's not the most
Instagrammable or photogenic product in the world. Panel, I wonder if there are
any dishes that look unappetising but our panel finds delicious. Rob? There's
loads, isn't there? But one or two that spring to mind. I mean, an oyster. If
you've never eaten an oyster, I love them, but if you've never eaten an oyster
and you pop the top off an oyster, that looks like something that's fallen out
of a child's nose. It's really bad quality. It is not a pretty-looking thing, is
it? Rachel? If you've ever made a scrambled egg but you've got, like, all kinds
of vegetables in the sauce first and then you add the egg and stir it round, it
really does look like dog sick. LAUGHTER But it tastes absolutely amazing. One
of the lovely things about radio is the way you can paint visual images through
words. Thank you, Rachel. That teaches us you don't judge a book by its cover or
a dish by how good it looks on social media. And a big round of applause for
Paul Jackson from Jackson's Rag Pudding. APPLAUSE Let's take our next question.
From Ruth Perkins from Ancoats. Which smell do you long for when you open the
lid or unwrap your chosen dish? I personally couldn't live without basil or
dill. Right, so we're getting a bit Proustian here. His was taste, but this is
smells. Rachel? I really still, nowadays, when I open a bottle of old-fashioned
oaked Rioja, because nowadays Spanish wine has really changed and it's really
modern and a lot of it tastes a lot better, but there's a thing about an old-
fashioned oaked Rioja which just reminds me of being 19 and being in Spain and
eating, thinking I was an adult for the first time and I was at a table with a
tablecloth and I thought, this is the life. And so now when I have a tiny wee
bit of that smell, I think, yep, that was the life and it was a bit of a
disappointment in the end. LAUGHTER I think we've just had Rachel McCormack's
superhero origins. LAUGHTER Nisha Katerna? I'd have to say the smell of coffee
and Murakami describes it as the smell that separates night from day, deep,
gruff coffees that get straight into the endorphins and raise your blood
pressure by about ten times. That's the kind of coffee I want. Fantastic.
Sumaya? Well, I love the smell of fresh garam masala and, you know, all my pans,
even this empty pan here, if you just put your nose in there, it'll smell of
that and it reminds me of home, it takes me right back... I'm going with roast
lamb. You know, put a joint of lamb in the oven and then disappear out for a
couple of hours and then come back into the house. You can almost smell it
halfway down the street, can't you? You know, come back into the house and it's
just one of those wonderful, meaty, fatty... Yeah, it's just great, isn't it?
And it's full of promise and, you know, mint sauce is coming, and gravy and all
of those things. Ruth, thank you for taking our panel to their happy place. Oh,
my pleasure. BELL RINGS Class is dismissed. Remember to sign up to the disco.
Rob Owen-Brown, please stay behind. I want a word with you. Everyone else, form
an orderly queue to the lunch canteen, please. Chop, chop, no dilly-dallying.
What awaited you in the school lunch canteen? The steaming vegetable medley,
crinkle-cut carrots, a mountain of mash, or maybe the memorable fluorescent pink
custard? Panel, I am interested in your memories of the school food canteen.
Rob, what was it? It's funny that you mention pink custard. We had green, minty-
flavoured custard. It wasn't even custard, it was just thickened up milk with
some sugar in it and green food colouring and mint essence. Rachel? The thing
that we used to have, that everybody hated, was this sort of egg... I think it
was supposed to be a soufflé, it had maybe been a soufflé in somebody's
imagination once, but it was kind of like an egg and onion thing, and it just
wobbled in the nastiest way, and it just looked absolutely horrendous and tasted
even worse. And the worst thing was, they always used to say with mashed potato
that they'd used an ice-cream scoop for. Did anybody... I mean, was it just my
school, or did everybody do that? And you're sitting there going, why have I got
mashed potato that looks like it should be vanilla ice cream, and it's not? I
mean, that's a cruel thing to do to an eight-year-old. Samaya, was this part of
your experience growing up? No, we would come home by 1.15 and have a nice lunch
at home. Oh! Yeah. But I did have a year in England, and I was horrified by what
I had to eat. Nisha? Yeah, I wasn't allowed to eat beef, of course, daughter of
a Hindu priest, and so I was sent to school with a packed lunch of samosas and
onion bhajis, which I would spend the whole lunchtime peddling them for beef
sausages and those lumps of kind of grain cow cadaver in gravy, which were
amazing. You do not know you're born. Yeah. Well, our gracious hosts tonight,
Manchester Grammar School, have verified that one of the dishes they were
serving their students in the 70s and 80s was the Manchester tart. Ooh, I don't
know whether that's approving or flashback. Yeah. Certainly it was a school
canteen favourite. Rob, as a local boy, you grew up with the Manchester tart.
Explain what it is. LAUGHTER Right, um... Oddly enough, considering I'm
interested, it's a shortcrust pastry base, thin layer of jam, custard that'll
set, and then desiccated coconut and a really crap glass of your cherry. Yeah.
Um... Some heathens put banana in it. LAUGHTER Nisha, what do you think people
thought of it? Cos you were also from this part of town. Yeah, and it was a big
primary school dessert and people hated it. Honestly, most people hated it. And
it's a desiccated coconut for children. That is the ultimate insult to injury.
So, you know, people shrivel when you mention the Manchester tart, generally.
Shout yes if you liked the Manchester tart when you were a kid. One, two, three?
Yes! Well, that's interesting. Actually, I should go the other way. And no if
you hated it. One, two, three? No! Oh. The no's have it, Jay. Do they? I think
it's a split debate here. Rob, you're not the biggest fan of desiccated coconut,
are you? If you're not reaching for that, all the hundreds and thousands, what
would you be topping the Manchester tart with? Or indeed, any other pudding?
Well, you see, I'm not one for messing about with a recipe, but if you were
going to improve a Manchester tart, you'd leave the banana out, and then you
would definitely pipe a lovely little soft meringue on the top and then
blowtorch it so you get a beautiful golden topping, nice gooey, and then you get
down into the sort of cold custard and things. All right, other toppings,
Sumayya? I would make a lovely compote of dried Hunza apricots, rehydrate them,
cook them in sugar, puree them, make them really soft and then pour them on top.
Ooh. I am going to go back, though, to desiccated coconut for dishes that
benefit from it. Is there anything you think, Sumayya? Yeah, there's a lot of
dishes that we cook, savoury dishes that we cook with coconut, and there's a
Hyderabadi dish that we make a lot of, especially the communities in Pakistan,
called Bhagarik Bangan, which is really gorgeous, tiny aubergines that are
filled with a mixture of peanuts and unsweetened desiccated coconut and
tamarind, and then it's cooked in a lovely savoury sauce, so they're gorgeous
and gooey and delicious. Rob, if you're not using them to top a tart, there is a
good place for them, isn't there? Yeah, I mean, they're great in a coconut
macaroon, aren't they? Who doesn't love a coconut macaroon fresh out of the
oven? Beautiful. Desiccated coconut can act like concrete, you know, in a cake
mix. It gives a real bit of stability to cake mixes, so half polenta, half
desiccated coconut in a real sort of Italian polenta cake. Really good. That
does sound good. Nisha? Desiccated coconut's the way that we bring a kind of
heft to curry sauces because, remember, they're all gluten-free, we don't
thicken with flour, so if you're making a korma and you want to bring that
luxurious kind of depth of flavour and texture, that's when you add a bit of
desiccated coconut. So, so simple. Turmeric, chilli, garam masala, three spices,
chicken, yoghurt and then a bit of water to loosen it down and desiccated
coconut. It's fantastic. You've got the sweetness and the nuttiness and all of
that exotic richness. Now, we have pretty much, in certain ways, dissed the
Manchester tart, but custard is an important thing, so I wonder how to make a
great custard. Rachel, what's the key as far as you're concerned? I think one of
the first things you need to make sure you do is throw out your cornflour. Don't
use cornflour in thickening a custard, it doesn't work. And, I mean, just the
flavour is dreadful. You need to really use really good eggs and you need to use
really good egg yolk and you need to have a lot of patience and you need to stir
for a very long time. OK, Rob, give us, you know, the basics for making good
custard. I always go half milk, half double cream, because, you know, I'm a
chubby kid. And if you can get more fat in, that means more flavour. I would
always, if possible, use duck eggs because the colour and the richness that you
get from a duck egg is mega. Really good vanilla if you can afford it and icing
sugar because it dissolves really quick. Custard sugar works fine, but icing
sugar will go in a lot faster. Cook it nice and gentle until it starts to leave
the sides of the pan and just keep cooking it until you get a coating, something
that will run off the back of your spatula or run off the back of your spoon.
Rachel, there is one other custard tart, which it has to be said is probably
more popular these days than the Manchester tart, isn't there? I would reckon
it's probably easier to get a pastiche de nata in Manchester than it is to get a
Manchester tart. They have taken over. There are these wee custard tarts from
Lisbon that suddenly in the past ten years are absolutely everywhere. You can
get them in Brazil all the time, you can get them everywhere in the UK, you can
get them in my local bakery in a suburb of Glasgow. They have a special Lisbon
bakery in Glasgow that only sells them. And, bizarrely, you can't get them at
all in northern Portugal. All right, I'm going to test this with this audience
here in Manchester. Let's give you a spread of a year. Charlotte, Manchester, if
you've eaten a Manchester tart in the past year. One, two, three. Manchester.
Oh, Rob joining in, but there's about five of you. Charlotte, nata, if you've
eaten a pastel de nata in the past year. One, two, three. Nata. Well, that's it.
Portugal, 500. Manchester, three. What other custard tart dishes are you a fan
of, Rob? A classic head custard with a load of nutmeg on the top. Absolutely
beautiful. Nisha. I love the way the Thai cuisine treats custards, where they
use pandan sort of instead of vanilla, so you're getting that lovely flavour,
and also lemongrass. It just makes it so much more fragrant and aromatic, really
nice twists on the custard. That sounds very, very good. We have time for one
more question from Andy Bell from Bury. Hello, panel. I'm a great believer in
rules should be broken. What golden rule of cooking do you always break or often
break, and why? Right, golden rule breaking. Rachel. Well, the Italians always
have a rule for absolutely everything when it comes to cooking, and one of their
golden rules is not to double carb. So every single time I have a macaroni pie
with chips and I triple carb, I just want to tell the Italians to get stuffed.
Nisha Kapona. Well, I would chew my bones and use stock cubes wherever you can.
Samaya. I would say break every rule about recipes. I really believe in cooking
with your intuition, so I think that I just don't follow recipes. You have
written them in the past. Yeah. I have to. I have to make a living. Rob Owen
Brown. I'm a bit of a bugger for messing with things when they've gone in a pan.
You know when you put something in and you want it to seal, so, you know, I'm a
bit of a nuisance. I've got to walk away. I've got a nice hot sauce pan with a
little bit of oil or butter in there and I'm trying to brown two chicken breasts
up. I'm a bit of a nuisance for wanting to give it a bit of a shake, for wanting
to just have a little bit of a peek. Yeah, I can't help myself. And opening the
oven when you know you shouldn't. Just a fraction. That's all we've got time for
today in Manchester and for this series of the Kitchen Cabinet, but do not fear,
we'll be back in April, travelling to all corners of the country, although,
excitingly, we'll also be recording a special episode, allowing anybody,
anywhere, to ask us the question they need answers to, so please do send them to
tkc at bbc.co.uk. But for now, it's goodbye from me, Jay Rayner, Nigel
McCormack, Samaya Usmani, Nisha Katonia and our audience here in Manchester.
APPLAUSE The Kitchen Cabinet was produced by Bethany Hawkin, the assistant
producer was Dulcy Wadcock. It is a Something Else production for BBC Radio 4.
Next this morning to Westminster, where the former Brexit Secretary David Davis
and the former shadow Brexit Minister Jenny Chapman will be sharing their views
on the Windsor Framework. The Week in Westminster, after the news. Welcome to
the Spark. I feel like the monkeys are juggling chainsaws. Small acts of
interrupting those thoughts could be life-saving. The Spark.