TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Bess loves Porgy on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds beginning on Saturday afternoon at
3. BBC News at 2 o'clock. The Home Secretary has unveiled plans for new laws to
crack down on people crossing the Channel in small boats, warning the government
would betray British voters if it failed to deal with waves of illegal
immigrants. Under the legislation, migrants would be prevented from claiming
asylum or returning to the UK in future. The Shadow Home Secretary, Yvette
Cooper, told MPs that the government's plan was a con that risked making the
situation worse. This is deeply damaging chaos and there is no point in
ministers trying to blame anyone else for it. They have been in power for 13
years. The asylum system is broken and they broke it. The trial of a man accused
of murdering Olivia Pratt-Corbell in Liverpool has heard that he was in ruthless
pursuit of another man when he shot the nine-year-old in her home. Prosecutors
allege that Thomas Cashman lay in wait for Joseph Knee in August last year. He
denies all the charges he faces. Ukraine's armed forces say they have identified
an unarmed Ukrainian prisoner of war who is seen in video footage being gunned
down by Russian forces. President Zelensky has vowed that Kiev will find the
murderers. Hundreds of thousands of people are holding rallies across France on
a sixth day of strikes against pension reforms. They are unhappy at government
plans to raise the retirement age from 62 to 64. The five mass walkouts held
previously have failed to convince ministers to reverse the plans. New research
has found that missing persons cases involving black and Asian people are less
likely to be resolved by police. The charity Missing People based its findings
on freedom of information requests to police forces and local authorities across
the UK. The organisers of this year's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool have
announced that tickets for all nine shows have sold out less than two hours
after going on sale. Tickets for the grand final were all gone within 36
minutes. Fans faced technical issues when the website selling the tickets
crashed shortly before midday. BBC News. Now on BBC Radio 4, Lily spots an
opportunity in the archers. Hi Ben. Oh, hey Lil. Looks like you're on a mission
for Graham. How did you guess? Flower, Sultanas. She asked me to pick up some
stuff on my way home from work. How about you? Oh, I just needed an excuse to
get out for a bit. Freddie's driving me mad. Well, he is your brother. He's been
in a foul mood all weekend. Why? Chelsea won't join his team of tour guides. I'm
not surprised. She's happy at working in the orangery for actual money. So now
Freddie's trying to think of new ways to recruit volunteers. Right. Oh, he's all
he can talk about. Or rather moan about. Honestly Ben, he never switches off.
Which means I can't either. Yeah. I'm always acting as his sounding board.
Actually, make that a punch bag. Well, maybe I can help. Oh yes? Seeing as
Freddie's lived in the stables before, do you think you'd want to move back in?
And live with Josh? Yeah, I've decided to stay at Brookfield. So it would give
Freddie a break from Lower Loxley, a bit of space, get him out of your hair. So
what do you reckon? Sounds like a great idea. Well, why don't you let Freddie
know that there's a room available? And if he's interested, he should have a
chat with Josh. Okay. It's the right decision, Kate. Really? Absolutely. You've
put so much into spiritual home, it would have been such a waste for you to walk
away from it now. I tell you, Adam, I came very close. Well, thank goodness Dad
took some sense into you. And your plan to give it another five years sounds
sensible. Only, I've been thinking, Dad might just want me occupied. What do you
mean? What if he's worried that if I sell spiritual home, I'll start interfering
at home farm? I'm sure that's not his motivation, Kate. No, no. I think Brian's
praise and encouragement was just him being honest with you. Really? Yeah, he's
certainly not mincing his words at the moment. After all, he's been pretty
honest with me. What do you mean about Mum's clothes? Yeah, he just told me how
he felt. Right. I think he did the same with you, Kate. Yeah, only less
painfully. And I'm feeling better about things now. Yeah? Well, I'll admit it
was a bit of a shock, him having a clear out so quickly. For me too. I mean,
he's probably still trying to process the funeral, but you know what Dad's like.
Just wants things fixed and quickly. Do you think that's what this is about? Who
knows? He's clearly not thinking straight. Or thinking too straight. Maybe
that's the problem. He just wants to tidy everything away and move on from it
all. Dad. Hey. At least Mum's stuff is here now and we can choose anything we
want to keep. Yes. Well, I suppose we'd better start going through these boxes.
Wait, wait. Not just yet. I thought that's why you asked us over. It is, but
there's something in particular I want to show you first. Oh? This box. Look.
Toys. And baby clothes by the looks of it. Do you recognise anything? Wait. Oh,
that looks like Whitney, one of my old dolls. I think that's my christening
gown. All the bits and pieces Mum kept from our childhood. Oh, gosh, that's so
sweet. Yeah. It's a bit of a jumble though. Which is why I thought we could go
through it together. Claim what's ours. That's a lovely idea, Adam. Are you
looking for me? Unless you're still working. Nope, I'm done. I'm glad to be
home. Oh, bad day. Just this last client. Going on about the electric charging
station. Oh, really? Brandishing one of Jim Lloyd's leaflets. It mentions
Brookfield, so this guy... Well, he was enjoying having a go. For what it's
worth, I don't have a problem with it. Yeah, I think it's a really good idea.
Well, let's hope you think my idea is a good one too. Sorry? It's about the
spare room, Josh. Oh, yeah. Is Freddie up for it then? Forget Freddie. I want to
move in. I've got beer or... beer. I guess it'll have to be beer then. Excellent
choice. Look, if you've got it in your head that I'll cramp your style or
something... I didn't say that, Livvy. But I can tell you're not sure. It's just
a bit of a surprise, that's all. Here. Thanks. What's worrying you? I'm just
weighing things up. Come on. I'd be a great housemate. You reckon? This is nice,
isn't it? You and I sharing a beer at the end of the day. Sure. I know Freddie
thinks I can be a bit of a square, but since splitting up with Russ, I'm not
taking life so seriously. I never had a proper student experience, did I? So I
think now is the time to do a house share. This isn't really student living,
though. Well, no... Auntie Shula wants the house looking after, Lily. That
doesn't stop us having parties, though. Or organising game nights and stuff like
that. I work 12 hour days. I don't have time for games nights. All the
inclination. I won't let Auntie Shula down. And I'm good for the rent. I can pay
up front. OK. I've got the money, after all. Kitchen sales didn't pay too badly
when you hit your targets, which I always did. OK. Well, when would you want to
move in? I don't know. End of the week, maybe? Whatever suits you. Wow. You're
not lying when you say you want to change. Is that a yes, then? Why not? Oh,
this is going to be so much fun, Josh. So, listen, if you're moving in, then I
guess you should know I'm planning on renting out the third bedroom as well.
Great. Yes, the more the merrier. My original plan was to ask Freddie, so I
reckon I should give him first refusal. Freddie? No, Josh. I thought... We can't
both live here. I need to get the rooms rented out as soon as. And if Freddie
finds out I've offered one to you and not to him... No, please, Josh. This is
meant to be a fresh start for me. I love my brother, but we need some space from
each other. If we move in here together, we'd only spend our time bickering.
Good point. So let's consider other options, please? All right, but I don't want
this dragging on. I promise I'll find us someone before Freddie even knows
there's a room available. Now, I definitely had one, Adam. You cut the hair on
yours. Why would you remember that? Because you pretty much scalped her. It
sounds like the sort of thing you do, Kate. And you drew her makeup on with
permanent marker. Well, you obviously remember my toys far better than I do. Are
you really that desperate for a makeup and styling head? Yes, it's part of my
childhood, Alice. Debbie's childhood. Well, who's to say it's not the same one?
It might have been Debbie's before it was Kate's. It's not! Well, I always ended
up with hand-me-downs. Oh, here we go. What? I'm trying to stick up for you. You
didn't get hand-me-downs. I did. I ended up with all your old cast-offs. That's
how it was for Rory and me. We had excellent taste in toys. You should have been
grateful. Look, I'm taking the styling head, OK? What else is in there? Fine.
What's this? Someone's milk teeth. Oh, they're definitely mine. You'll have
claimed everything in this box by the time we're done. Don't tell me you
recognise your milk teeth. No, it's just I think Mum would have kept mine,
that's all. Oh, yours in particular? I made such a big deal about leaving them
out for the Tooth Fairy. Yeah, me too. Yeah, we all did. That's what children
do. Anyway, I'm not going to object. You're welcome to them. Yeah, they're
gross. You can have them. They're not gross. I kept all my own kids' teeth. Oh,
you're still hoping for a pay-up from the Tooth Fairy, are you? Come on, you
two. There's a lot more to get through. Right, what's next? OK, digging down
this time. What have you got? A Prefect badge. That's mine! That's it then. You
know you didn't have to collect your stuff so quickly. Well, most of it I'd
already taken to Brookfield. I just thought I'd come and get the last few
things. There was no rush, Ben. There is if Lily's moving in. Anyway, I wanted
to tell you something. Oh? You know this Facebook group opposing the electric
charging station? I've been reading the comments and... Oh, don't do that. I
can't help it. Seriously, Ben, promise me you won't go down that rabbit hole.
You've got to look after yourself and that means blocking out all this rubbish,
especially anything on social media. You know what people round here are like.
One minute they're complaining about it, the next they'll be queuing up to use
it. Take no notice. But what if they start saying stuff about Brookfield? We've
been over this. Eventually they'll move on. Would it make you feel better if I
agreed to join the group? Keep an eye on it in case... whatever. Would you? Of
course. Just so long as you steer clear, okay? Okay. Right. You got everything?
Yep, I think so. We had some fun times here, didn't we? Yeah. But now you've got
Lily and a third room to fill. Don't mention it to Freddy, will you? How come?
Lily made me promise. She doesn't want him moving in with us. I see. She's
determined to make this a fresh start. What, by moving a couple of miles down
the road? Lily's got plans. Oh, yeah? Regular film nights. And get this. If I go
clubbing, she'd like an invitation. And she wants us to designate one day a week
when we share a takeaway. Typical Lily. Only she could be so prescriptive about
fun. When did you say she's moving in? Sunday. Well, then you'd better enjoy
your last week of freedom. Can you clear a space for the pizzas? Ooh, they look
yummy. Is that the vegan one? I'm just stating a fact, Adam. You lucked out
marrying Ian. His pizzas are the best. Why did your teddy have such a stupid
name? Snugglebug is not a stupid name. Yes, it is. And actually, his name is
Baloo. Listen to yourself squabbling over a moth-eaten soft toy. I don't think
you're any better. Me? You've been just as petty, Adam. Yes, trying to claim
that truck for Xander. When in fact, it's Rory's. No, no, no. You see, the thing
you don't realise is that it has a dent in the rear side passenger door. See?
Try and trot on it. It is 100% mine. Oh, how convenient for you to have such a
perfect photographic memory. Just like Kate and her ridiculous milk teeth. Oh,
you're never going to drop that, are you? OK, OK. I'm putting a stop to this
now. Well, you started it. I did not. Yes, you did. This might be stuff from our
childhoods, but we don't have to regress to being four years old. I think it's a
bit late for that now. The fact is, we can't agree on anything. Not everything.
Pretty much. See? We can't even agree on that. I've managed to claim one thing.
A potato print painting. And that's only because I happened to write my name on
it, age five. Anything else we've argued about? And we haven't even been through
everything. Really? What's left? Homemade Christmas decorations. A pair of
Wellington boots. Well, they look like mine. A few books and a... Oh. What is
it? Oh, for goodness sake. What? Mum's handwritten list of what belongs to which
of us. Oh, you're kidding. Seriously. Toys, keepsakes, clothing, all itemised. I
might have guessed. Mum always was an expert at resolving arguments. It seems
she's still got the knack. Well done, Mum. Well, we'd better go through the list
then. Let's do that. And Mum's word is final. Oh, of course. Absolutely. Oh,
there's only one problem. Oh? What's that? When we've finished. Yeah? Who's
going to keep Mum's list? And this evening, Lily has something to tell Elizabeth
and Helen has the bit between her teeth. It's all about big tech, data
manipulation and the undermining of democracy in just a moment. The thriller
Galapagos is after this. Radio 4's Feedback is the programme that reflects what
you, the listeners, have to say. I would like to add my voice. Why have you
changed a perfectly good format? Sharing your comments, questions and critiques.
It just sounds really patronising. For me, it was wonderful to hear something
with such passion and heart on the radio. And we hold the BBC to account on your
behalf, the radio audience. Then it is in public interest for us to report on
this kind of thing. Join me, Andrea Catherwood, for Feedback, starting this
Friday afternoon at 4.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Salmons. We're searching for spring
on Radio 4 in half an hour with an original spring story. That's at 2.45. But
first Galapagos by Andrew Day and Simon Scardafield. Bryony has opened the
Pandora's Box that is Galapagos, an exciting new development in AI technology in
order to impress her new boss Sydney. But can she control what happens next?
Bryony, it's time you outgrew them. There was something about Sydney and what
she was saying. Of course I know now what it was, but back then, things seemed
to be working by magic. I had no plan. I just rolled the dice and launched this
Galapagos thing. I didn't know that as I arrived back at the Fish Eagle mine, I
basically tied this guy called Boniface Karakoga to a huge rocket, or that the
rope was wrapped around my ankle. Galapagos by Simon Scardafield and Andrew Day.
Part two. Omar, this is early for you. I haven't slept. It was wrong what you've
done. Omar, not now. We've been on the road two hours and we're just getting to
the point. I've left him like six messages. It has to come from me. I'll make
sure he doesn't blame you. No, you can't. He's not logical. I had no choice.
Sydney already knew about Galapagos and she'll trust me more if... See? See?
It's about you getting in with this woman and leaving us behind. You created
Galapagos. Max owns it. You're baked into the whole arrangement. So there is an
arrangement. Oh, don't be paranoid. Oh, wow. Oh, wow. You actually are
gaslighting me. I need to get off this call. Talking to you is not good for me.
Stop here. Titus, what? It's gotten worse. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. The mine
is open. We have new protesters protesting against the protesters. Karakoga, he
is in jail. What? How did you do? Just tell me exactly what's happened. A crowd
came to the mine and attacked the protesters. Another mob tracked Karakoga down
in Ulawayo City and started beating him. So the police took him to protect him.
And the workers are back? Yes. These new protesters are protecting them,
demanding their work. All these people since yesterday? I know. Amazing. Excuse
me, can I ask you... Yes, hello? Can you tell me why are you protesting today?
No more economic cleansing in Ulawayo. Economic cleansing? Boniface Karakoga is
a government-sponsored agitator. The Shona government does not want economic
prosperity in this part of Zimbabwe. Why? We are Ndebele. This mine means good
jobs for Ndebele people. Shona people create rumours to close it down. They are
the ones who are corrupt. Thank you. I understand. How did you do this? Whoa,
whoa, whoa. I need to talk to my colleagues. This number is not accepting calls
from your device. Oh, Omar. Max, thanks for making the time. I know you're super
busy. Not busy, Briony. That's precisely the... To be not busy, so thanks for
your seven missed calls. It's big news. Are you sitting down? Lying, with my
face through a hole. So get on with it. Lower, please. That's a spot. The mine
is open. That's the big news. Woman does job. Not quite. I'm not into delay,
gratification, shit, or get off the pot. Galapagos did it. What? It was a magic
wand, Max. You don't know about Galapagos. Galapagos is... Get off. What are you
talking about? Sydney said she wanted it. Sydney? He... Nobody knows about
Galapagos. She's a she and she knew. Impossible. I don't know how she knew. I've
got a pretty shrewd idea. You couldn't manage this pisspot little contract. Max.
So you twisted your ex-boyfriend slash boyfriend. I don't know if you kids are
off or on or how you're dicking the poor bastard around. You got it out of him
and he gave you the password. It's all worked out. You just need to... You
thought I wouldn't fire you, sue you, put naked pictures of you all over the
internet? What pictures? I'll find some. I'll get a team of techies in the
Philippines to hack iCloud. Hi, checking out. And a taxi to the airport, please.
I'll need a credit card. Oh, you already have one, Mayfair Interventions. I'm
sorry. I have just received instructions to accept no more transactions on that
card. Marvellous. Gaynor, hiya. Hi. At last. I'm so sorry. I haven't had a
moment. It's been literally bonkers here, but guess what? I can come home
because da, da, da. I've been fired for getting my job done, brilliantly, but
wrongly. So now I'm ransacking my hotel room for something to barter with a taxi
driver. Is that something you'd have any expertise in as a social worker? Ah,
perfect. Whiskey. How's work? How's the campaign? How's you? Gaynor? Sorry.
Yeah, just trying to work out how to pick up from there. Oh, OK. Might as well
just plunge in. I've got cancer. Gaynor, no. Stage four. I don't know what to
say to you and... Gaynor, don't move. I'm coming home. It's OK. It's just a
thing. I need to tell everybody and I'm working through my contacts. No, no, no.
I'm coming. Don't worry. There isn't really that much you can do, even when you
get back to London. I'm coming to Ptolemaic from the airport. Taxi! Taxi! Hi,
yes, hello. Airport, please. Listen, I don't have any Zimbabwean money. I've got
ten English pounds. Aye, that may be fake. You drink whiskey. I'll give you this
whole bottle if you take me to the airport. Madame! Madame! That whiskey you
have to take! OK, go. Madame, did you take the whiskey? Just drive. Please.
Madame! Madame! Madame! Thank you. Sorry. Do you think... Do you think she'll
get into trouble? I don't know. Will you... Will you please do me a favour?
These earrings. They're worth more than the whiskey. Will you take them to her?
I feel bad. Oh, I... I will take the earrings. Give her back the whiskey. Yeah,
whatever works. Oh, this phone. Yes? Rhyme, hi. It's Sam Baxendale. Wow. Hi.
God, last time we spoke would have been what? 2023? You were off to some
internship at the FT or something. Yep, did that. How are you? Thriving. How did
you get this number? I'm a nosy journalist, Bryony, and I've got a few questions
about your work with Fish Eagle. Oh, does anybody give a monkey's about what
goes on in a Zimbabwean mining company? I just got a call from my contact in
Bulawayo. Lawyers representing some protester called Boniface Karakoga got
locked up. Sounds like Mayfair Interventions found some strings for Fish Eagle
to pull. No, actually, there was a grassroots backlash. Also, I don't work for
MI anymore. Have a great day. Or not. Wow. Gina, me again. No Wi-Fi at the
airport and my phone's low on juice, but... Sorry, can I just go through?
Airport tax, ten US dollars. So, yeah, don't worry if there's a long wait or
silence. Look, I know it's been weird between us for, I don't know, ever,
basically, but yeah, I can't wait to see you. Here, ten pounds. US only.
British. This is more. It's like eleven. You can change it at the bank over
there. That closed bank with the shutters down. Excuse me. Maybe I can help. Oh,
yes, please. Present from Africa. Biltong? What's Biltong? It's like jerky.
What's jerky? I don't really know. You know, I don't need you to buy any old
crap at some airport. It's just something we capitalist mortals do. We exchange
gifts. You and Mike eat it. I'm eating organic. Yeah, no, of course. Great that
you're tackling it on all fronts. You know, meds, therapy, complementary,
everything, and mindset. It's not all in the mind, but you know... This is all
in the head. Brain tumour. I'm here for you, OK? Whenever. Whatever. You'll have
your work cut out looking for a new job. No, not for now. Screw work. Look, my
work phone. It is toast. Literally. Oh, no, actually, that's not very good for a
toaster. It's going in the bin. There. You still working? Well, I can. It helps.
Helping other people. I always did. OK, tell me the plan. I'm not going to get
better, Bry. Don't think that. It's official. The plan is about managing, not
curing. I'll do some research. I'm really good at asking the right questions.
The answer is that if I had half a million quid, I could go to the States for
some new radiotherapy thing. They would buy me another six months, they say. Are
you going to get that? No. When did you find out? End of last week. Have you
told Ewan? I run courses on how to have difficult conversations with young
people, but I can't do this one. Make some tea. That would be useful. Tea.
Herbal. Which flavour? Whatever. Show me the paperwork from the hospital. I can
ring the consultant. You have to badger them. It'll help me understand so I
don't have to keep asking you annoying questions. I can get redundancy,
severance or whatever out of MI so I can stay and help out. With what? Shopping.
Do some cleaning. I can cook. You literally can't. I can cut a pizza into the
right number of segments. Taxis. Child care. Ewan's 15. Whatever it's called. I
want to spend more time with him, not less. A treat then or a holiday. Stop now.
What? What am I doing wrong? I don't want you to make it better. I don't need
that. You need that to feel useful. This isn't something you can fix and if you
act like it is, I need you to not be around me. Just send it to voicemail. I
just don't want to tell Ewan. I know I have to, but the moment I do, that's the
end of normal life for him. Briony. It's alright. Where's he even going to live
when I'm gone? Ignore it. No, it'll be... It'll be something Ewan's ordered.
Briony? Yeah? It's for you. It can't be. A woman in a Stetson? Sounded like
Sydney. Sydney, great to see you, but... Get your things. I can't do that. Then
we'll buy you new things. Come on, get in the car. I have family stuff that...
The Boloio mine is open. You made that happen overnight. I'm not with Mayfair
Interventions anymore. I'm fixing that. Over Max's dead body. Look, I would love
to talk if you have time when... I don't have time. Get in the car. You'll want
to take that. Not now. It's Max. What? Hello? Briony. Max. Look, redundancy is
an HR ballache, especially when the person you're trying to sack is a talented
high achiever you yelled at when you had low blood sugar because... Anyway, so
yesterday never happened. We're good. There's a meeting I need you to be at.
It's tomorrow in London. You need me? Don't make me my own puke, Briony. Just be
there, yeah? You're essential. I'll message you with details. Max. What? Can you
tell Omar to call me? How did you know that was Max? That has to do with why you
need to get in the car. I don't know what to do. Yes, you do. Lucky you didn't
unpack. I wasn't expecting anything like this. I was. I wouldn't go but Sydney
says... It's fine. I'll call, like a lot, okay? Love you. Leader of the
coalition government, Caroline Lucas, insisted today that a video appearing to
show her at a dinner party eating chicken and complaining about the performance
of her electric car is in fact a deep fake. She refused to say who she thought
was behind the prank, putting it down... Idiots. I'm sure you have some
questions. Yeah. What's happening? Mayfair Interventions is being bought out for
a lot of money. Who by? The technical answer is complicated. Various legal
entities. The non-technical answer is me. That's why you could tell Max to
reinstate me? Yes. So what? You'll be my boss? Max's boss? By 10am tomorrow,
yes. Weird. Max was ready to sell the whole thing to you. He wasn't. Then he
doesn't know I'm me. He doesn't know that his small fry Zimbabwe client is also
behind the takeover of his company. He must have seen you, heard you. We tweaked
my face and voice on the virtual calls. Is that easy to do? For us, yes. Anyone
important? Um, Omar. Omar's important? Yeah, but... Don't worry. Ignore me.
Omar! We smashed it. Galapagos performed outstandingly. It identified volatile
groups, targeted them effectively, produced highly credible copy for social
media. Nice to hear from you. What? I wasn't sure I would. Why? Well, last time
I was... Yeah. What gaslighting you apparently. Oh, that. I was afraid Max would
be angry. Yeah, he was. But now he's forgiven you. So what? You can too? What?
How are you, brainy? You beat me to it. I'm fine. I'm in a big BMW. Lexus.
Lexus, with Sydney now on our way back to London. She's told you about the
takeover? Yep. So you can't really talk, can you? That's right. Okay. So look,
while I was sorting some tech stuff, I came across some very interesting
documents. Cool. Only 15% of MI belongs to Max. It's actually owned by some
venture capitalists, these guys in Switzerland. That sounds nice. There's a
document called an asset summary. It details everything MI has that's worth
anything. Real estate, tech kit, intellectual property. Like, for example...
Galapagos, right? But get this. Max has drawn up two versions. The one the Swiss
owners are seeing doesn't mention Galapagos at all. They don't know it exists.
They'll be selling their company way below value. Ah, that's a shame. And Max
gets a massive bonus for seeing the deal through. It's basically Max and
Shapeshift conspiring to secure Galapagos without paying for it. Okay, well,
thanks for that. Let's have a drink next week. That's the sensitive stuff done.
I'll give you the blow-by-blow of how Galapagos played out. I'm sure you will.
I'm on the socials now. It's hard to track because our work is being obscured by
all this traffic around the protester guy. Photos of him with a mashed up nose.
Who? The fellow you mentioned. Boniface Caragoga. What's happened? Looks like
he's in protective custody. Right. Is that, um... You know... No. What? Us. I
mean... Did we... No. No. The Galapagos effect has the life cycle of a firefly,
not a giant tortoise. Peaks at 24 hours or so, and social media activity halves
every three, four hours after that. All this now is just people doing what they
do. Crazy stuff. Glad to hear it, Omar. Speak soon. Let's do that drink. Sure.
Bye. Good, isn't he? Bloody good. To have figured out how we're underpaying for
Galapagos. You heard all that? You were on the car's Wi-Fi. From tomorrow,
assume that I read every message and listen to every call. Okay. Valuable
information. Information is the only valuable thing. The value of anything else
can be changed by changing the information about it. Briony, look at me. You're
good too. So we want you. All of you. That's all it is. Okay? Uh-huh. You
worried about Caracoga? Yeah. Don't be. It's a local thing, not Galapagos. I
feel responsible. Omar says you're not. He'd know. Yeah. Yeah, I guess he would.
So look, tomorrow, Max will see you before the meeting. Ignore his bullshit. And
then I'll join. He knows me as Shelley. And we'll get down to business. So as
you can see, Shapeshift caved into everything I asked for. You drove a hard
bargain. You turned out to be excellent leverage. Me? They were so keen for you
to be on board, I managed to sneak in clauses I never thought they'd agree to.
The day Omar introduced you to me was a very lucky one for you. The way things
are going. Shelley, hi. Great to meet you in person at last. Welcome to Mayfair
Interventions. And here's Briony. You're right, she's an absolute dynamo.
Pleased to meet you, Briony. Right, let's get started. Okay. Those documents
will be signed by everyone though, right? Everyone. And here's the agenda.
Right. It would have been good to get sight of this. Things move fast. Briony,
as Chief Operating Officer with oversight of HR issues, do you want to get the
ball rolling by firing Max? What? Briony? What? Briony? You're firing Max? No,
you are. What is this? You point at him and say you're fired. It's not as simple
as... Just like on TV. This won't work. The contract we all signed is right in
front of you. And if you read it, you'll see there's nothing to stop Briony
firing you right now. She won't. Unless you disagree, Briony. Sorry, Max.
Briony? You're fired. I am Mayfair Interventions. You can't... Max, you now have
to leave the building. Security will come and escort you. Fine. Fine. I'll go
home and start spending my six and a half million dollars. You won't get that.
It's in the contract. Oh, you're going to kick yourself. There's nothing about
redundancy in there. You might want to have a word with your lawyers. You kept
them so busy with all those pointless clauses you snuck in. Ah, I see the
security guy hovering outside. You'll... You'll see what I'll do. Feel good?
Feels fine. What are you doing? Just making sure we can be private. I've got a
few questions. Don't ask why I booted Max and kept you. If it turns out we do
actually need a sexist bully with a 1980s mindset, I'm sure we can find another
one. That was a surprise. I can fire you too if the pace of change doesn't suit
you. No, no, no. It's brilliant. How did you find out about Galapagos? When you
came to my hotel in Bulawayo, I hooked onto your calls and got the name. But
we've had our eye on Omar for years. Mayfair Interventions. Have you changed the
code? Yes. I want my laptop. This Mayfair Interventions laptop? My computer with
all my... With all your inappropriate material? Don't worry, no one needs to
know about any of that unless you instigate some sort of legal battle. Christ,
and then you knew I would go to my sister's house? We had a woman next to you at
the airport. And she slipped a tracking device into your bag? Of course she did.
Aren't you worried about, I don't know, laws? Every law has a grey area. Often
that's where all the money gets made. But there's no grey area here. I told you,
I hear your calls. I know your movements. Why should I? Because we're tripling
your salary. Also, tell me what you think of this. Isn't it dreamy? This
Lamborghini is high octane heaven. That's amazing, but the real Britta Thunberg
never said those words, right? She doesn't have to. With our text to speech
algorithms, we can make her say whatever we want. Wow. How long did that take?
This one was a day's work. But it's six months old. We could do this in a couple
of hours now. Bad news for Greta. Or good news. She could use the same software
to create infinite messages from herself instantly. But they wouldn't be like,
from her real self? They'd be from her online self. That is the real self now.
Your physical self is now just your real world avatar. I don't get that. When
people voted for President Musk, they didn't see him physically at rallies. He
didn't do any. And now it wouldn't matter if he's physically in the White House
or even still alive, as long as somebody has video of him smiling, waving and
talking. Somebody like you. Us. Say it. Us. We have the best deepfake software
on earth, Bryony. All we've been missing is something to tell us which deepfakes
to make. That's what Galapagos can do. We can, for the first time ever, put two
and two together and make whatever we want it to make. So if you're queasy about
me knowing where you are and who you're talking to, you can join Max outside. Or
you can be a part of something extraordinary. Hi, can I be of assistance to
yourself today at all? What paperwork do I need to get a new sim? Fantastic! Can
I ask if you already have a handset? Because you have a great offer- Just tell
me about the paperwork. Hello? Bryony, it's Sam. I blocked your number. This is
a burner. What have you got to say about the tragic news from Bulawayo? When
will Fish Eagle be making a statement about- I don't work for Mayfair
Interventions anymore. Stop calling me. I'm here for you, Bryony, any time you
want to- So, here's a list of documents we- Forget that. I need a burner. Okay.
Sorry. Dana? Hey, hey, can I just- I just need you to listen. I know, and I'm
here for you, and I will call you back as soon as- I mean right now. What?
Listen to this. What's going on? That's Ewan, locked in his bedroom. He opened a
letter from the hospital. He knows about the cancer. He's furious, I never told
him. I need someone else to talk to him. I'll get on a train tonight, I'm
coming. That's £24.95 then. Thank you, and I can use this right now, right? All
set. Titus? Bryony? Has anything happened? Ah, you mean with Kargoka? Yes, very
unfortunate. The police released him and a mob took him. Where is he now? He's
dead. No! There was a rumour on WhatsApp, people saying that he was stealing
children. A mob killed him. People were saying he was stealing the melee
children to become slaves for Shona people. Oh my God, but that wasn't what we
did. We didn't create that rumour. Where did it come from? This kind of crazy
thing has happened before. Some madness in human nature sometimes. Welcome to
the 1148 service to Swansea. Calling at Redding, Swindon, Bristol Parkway,
Newport, Cardiff Central, Regend, Torbett Parkway, Neath, Swansea. I need you
off that train, Bryony. Well, my sister needs me on it. Shapeshift needs all of
you, remember? It's just my bodily avatar that's going to Wales, whatever else
there is of me. You've got it, you're all over it. Bryony, what you have to do
now, and this is important, is take a leap into your own future. The future
belongs to you if you're ready to claim it. What am I, a little dot on your
screen? See it moving? Train's started, I can't get off now. Talking to Sydney
like that, I felt like a diver, tearing off my mask and holding my breath. I was
still holding my breath at Redding, I nearly got off and ran back to her, but
the truth was, my future didn't need leaping into. It was already rushing
towards me, train or no train. I was hurtling away from Gaynor, away from that
poor man, that poor man. Away from the real world. And myself. In Galapagos,
Bryony was played by Hannah Daniel and Sydney was played by Bryony. And I was
playing Bryony. In Galapagos, Bryony was played by Hannah Daniel and Sydney by
Ashley Haddad. Gaynor by Sarah Gregory, Omar Danny Ashok, Titus John Fumagena
and Max Ewan Bailey. Aneni Ntombizodwa N'Glovu and Sam by Claire Cage. The
series was written by Simon Scardiffield and Andrew Day. Sound design by Nigel
Lewis. It was directed by Philippa Swallow for BBC Audio Drama Wales. Galapagos
continues at the same time tomorrow and you can catch up on the series so far on
BBC Sounds. On BBC iPlayer. Wild Isles with David Attenborough starts on Sunday
night on BBC iPlayer. And here on Radio 4 on Thursday afternoon a chance to join
Claire Balding as she explores the wild and stormy west coast of mainland
Orkney. That's this week's Ramblings at three o'clock on Thursday afternoon. Now
on Radio 4 we continue with our new series of Spring Stories. This is Field
Notes by Malaika Kigodi. When I was a kid, every spring, our garden would
suddenly teem with daffodils. It seemed to happen overnight, the earth
disappearing under a sea of yellow. I'm back at the house and this year is no
exception. The changing season creeping in, papery buds of daffodils just
beginning to unfurl across the lawns of the estate. No one ever pictures this
when they hear of these places. They imagine grey high-rises and dilapidation.
But when I think of my childhood here, I think of flowers and how time felt as
boundless as the fields outside my window. Isn't it strange how much smaller a
place seems after you've left it? In memory, these kitchen cabinets tower above
me and the garden stretches out and down for miles. But now, clearing up the
dusty clutter of decades, our home feels suddenly smaller each week, turning
from reality to a sketch to something that fits in my pocket. Once I'm done, it
will be sold to developers to build more flats for more families. More stories
are primed to bloom here that have nothing to do with us. But first, I have to
find the book he asked me for, the black book, the only thing he seems certain
of anymore. My father settled into the care home quicker than expected. Father,
that feels like such a formal word. But when your parent becomes a case file,
that's how everyone refers to them. Your father, Mr Charles Wasilwa. I suppose
it's because saying dad feels too soft and personal. The padding of the D like a
baby babble. Dad, dad, dad, dad, dad, dad. You can never accuse dad of being
soft. A sharp man with square shoulders and intensity that never waned. Even
when he slept, his brow remained furrowed. People in town always seemed scared
of him, this towering black man moving unknowably through the Kent countryside.
Even my brother Jay found him difficult. Jay, the soft, emotional opposite to
dad's stiff stoicism. I remember sometimes dad would stay in bed for days, door
ajar and lights off. The crack of that door felt like a dog-eared page to me, a
story I'd return to one day, a part of him I wasn't ready to see. When my mum
found me loitering outside listening, she'd say, mind your dad's cell, he's had
a tough round of it. Our parents were old when they had us. Sometimes, at night,
I'd pad across the landing to peek down at them in the kitchen together. Their
silent routines looked like dancing. After mum died, dad stayed in the house for
a few more years. I'd come by and always found him in the same spot, at the
bottom of the garden. Hands in pockets, head tilted upwards and eyes closed.
It's how I remember him best, stood there. I'd sometimes watch him from my
window when I was a kid. He looked so soft in those moments, it felt almost
embarrassing to watch. It was the same spot that, years later, the neighbours
said they'd seen him at strange times of day and night, standing sometimes for
hours, a dark ghost that scared their children. It was around then that I
realised my dad had somehow, suddenly, become an old man. I realise I've been
talking about dad in past tense. He's still here, just about. His eyes are now
searchingly wide, the irises ringed with watery blue. Jay didn't help much to
move him to the care home, but I can understand why. That sharpness between them
never really died. He never got the opportunity to see dad as anything other
than a shadowy extension of himself. But dad and I, we had our walks. We share a
birthday, the 25th of March. Every year, we'd go on a long walk together. As a
kid, I just assumed he didn't work on your birthday. Of course, I now realise he
must have booked it off in advance, every single year. He'd lift me over the
gate at the bottom of the garden, and we'd walk into the green-blue hum of
spring countryside. I remind him of these walks when I go and visit. The bristle
and spike of barley fields. Aching arches of feet. Finding forbidden pathways
into fields through gaps in hedges. I'm never sure how much he really remembers.
If he contributes at all, the words curl in on themselves like smoke. Each visit
lately ends the same way. Make sure you bring the book next time you come, Sal.
When I ask him which book he means, he just nods his head, looks out the window,
and I lose him again. It's almost time to go. One last sweep of the old house.
One last look out of the window in the kitchen. The shape of this view is the
one thing that hasn't changed in all these years. It feels right for these
daffodils to be seen by fresh eyes. That more kids will stretch their legs in
our fields. Be lifted over fences to wade through the landscape. Now real life
is returning. I hope people don't forget how it feels to be part of everything.
At the top of the stairs there's a flap of carpet that curls upwards and away
from the wooden floorboards. It's been stapled back many times, then kicked and
scuffed until it comes away again. Underneath, the words Jay and Salama are
scratched into the wood. He wrote them with a tiny penknife when he was ten.
See, Sal, this means that even after we're gone, everyone will know we were
here. Our secret little legacy. I sit cross-legged on the floor, finger tracing
our names that will soon be gone. I slip my hand further under the carpet, feel
the dust and dirt wedge under my fingernails. Then I feel the soft edge of card,
the sharp ribbing of paper. I scrape, claw, feel the eventual give as it slides
and crackles towards me. The black book. I often walk the circular route. After
swinging over the gate, you turn and walk along the stream until the water turns
to thick mud. Then a leap over it takes you up into a series of wide open fields
that go on for miles. I still don't know how Dad knew how to make sense of this
muddle of meadows. How to curve in which fields to end up in the right place
every time, the peak of a hill that opened the landscape out. Made you feel like
part of the sky. I was nine when we heard the cry. The air pierced. We ran in
its direction, Dad bounding far ahead. A woman, her hair strawberry blonde, top
blue, arms wide and waving, stood by a brown cow. The cow was immense. In my
memory, the biggest cow in the world, trembling and pushing and heaving. The
spindly legs of a calf hanging out of her like wet string. She's struggling.
She's strong. But we need to pull now, help her. The woman's shrill voice
harmonising with the low bray of the cow who buckled and swayed. My dad suddenly
seemed so small. His sleeves rolled up like a little boy as his hands gripped
the legs. No one has ever pulled as hard as my dad pulled that day. The air
around us huffed and wheezed in struggle, strong, pull, help. The sky was
struggle. The friction of shoes on grass was strong. The fields around us were
pull. The oblivious clouds were help. Slippery strength and natural resistance,
the sinew and weight of new life in my father's hands. Everything happened so
quickly that the memory feels like the footage of a shaky camcorder. The calf
out in a rush of red, ropes of afterbirth as Dad fell backwards, his hands raw
and face wide open as he lay on the floor. The mother's wide, hot tongue on the
gentle heap of life that lay hot and steaming in front of us. Seconds later, Dad
held his hands in the stream, letting the water between his trembling fingers,
eyes glazing over as he absently lifted a smooth brown stone from the water and
placed it in his pocket. For the rest of the walk, the rhythm of our footsteps
sounded like lyrics in my head. Struggle, strong, pull, help. Struggle, strong,
pull, help. I looked up at my dad's face to see if he had changed. He still
wasn't back to full height, still something boyish about him despite the firm,
long jaw and furrowed brow. His eyes, I realised, were full. Tears pooling and
spilling in the curve between his cheeks and nose. It was the first time I'd
seen my dad cry. Still, the only time I've seen him cry. I slipped my hand into
his, which he held tight as we kept walking our familiar route. On the way back
round, we saw the calf, tiny but already standing on impossible legs. The
masking tape is yellow and hard, barely holding the stone in place. I open the
page and it almost slips out of the book, but I hold it with my thumb and read
my dad's words from that very night. A tender pencil sketch of the calf, its
large, adoring eyes. Next to it, a sketch of me. The words, Sal is nine today.
He goes on in abrupt, short sentences to describe the day. The smell of the sky,
the texture of leaves and the sound of our footsteps on the grass. I never knew
he drew so well or so gently. I turn the page and with each one see his words
and stories. Sketches of Jay in the striped jumper he wore in his teens until it
was more holes than stitch. Mum's jokes written down in shorthand. Kate said
this today, very funny, her face so delicately drawn next to crushed flowers.
And every few pages documents a birthday walk, an old memory with new detail.
The soft snapshots of us together through time from five to twenty four, when I
moved out and he slowed down. Finally, in an older, hesitant hand, robins, foxes
and an abundance of Jays. A flash of blue feathers. The evening is drawn in as
I've been reading the black book. I return to the first page where he sketched
our garden from above. An X marking the spot where I'd always see him standing
from my bedroom window. I open the door and go outside. Walking down to the
bottom of the garden, the full-faced daffodils bump softly against my shins as
my eyes adjust to the pale blue evening. I stand where he stood so many times
before and I look out at the fields. I look out to where the orange aura of day
disappears into the horizon. To the view he saw every evening for his many years
here. And then I close my eyes to become him. I tilt my head towards the sky
like him and listen for what he always heard. The rattle and heave of wood
pigeon. Twinkle of dunnock. Squabble and screech of warbler of song thrush
decked in this canopy of sound. Thinking of my dad. The thick-set, heavy-hearted
tower of a man who people cross the road to avoid. The man with calloused hands
and steady gait, with furrowed brow and intimidating presence. The man who
walked to the bottom of his garden every night to close his eyes and listen to
the birds. Field Notes was written by Malaika Kigodi and produced in Bristol by
Becky Ripley. Next this afternoon, when is it okay to break the golden rules of
cooking? Jay Rayner and his panel will be giving their verdict in the kitchen
cabinet just after the news. Is that it? Keep listening to find out.