TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Got Apple Strudel or Black Forest Gatto. They're both shop bought I'm afraid,
but they come highly recommended. Oh that Black Forest Gatto takes me back. I'm
so stuffed but they do look good. Excellent. Anyway where were we? Ah, no you
were saying about the architect you got working at Green Gables Roy. Yeah
Andrea, yeah she's been really good. I was saying the design for the new part of
the building is really modern but somehow it complements the old part. Well it
looks like Ardull's done his homework. It's a clever use of Grey Gables,
Oliver's made a good call. Well it's obvious he had to. We could all see how
much business was struggling. Only me. Oh Alice. Hiya. Hiya. You've just missed
dinner. Oh then he came to check in. I've eaten with Aunt Lillian. Well there's
lots left if you want some. Oh no, honestly. Everything okay? It was delicious.
It must have been the hostess with the mostess. Dad! You've still got your apron
on. Oh yes, I've noticed. And neither of you have touched the pudding. Come on
help yourselves. What are they meant to eat them with? What? Or on for that
matter. The pudding's no good without plates and forks. Right of course. You're
just about to get stuck in with the fingers it looks so yummy. Don't worry. I'll
get them. I'm so sorry about this. Actually we need a knife too or one of those
cake slices. Just through here. I'll get it. I might just nip to the loo. Excuse
me. Oh, it's a lovely meal Brian. And dessert. It's okay Kirsty. You don't have
to do that. What? I'm afraid if Jenny could see me right now she'd be mortified.
Oh that's not true. Yes, she was a perfectionist. She liked everything to be
just so. And without her I can't even serve pudding. Oh, Jennifer liked
everything to be just so because that was her thing. Not yours. If you could do
all for yourself she'd have had no one to spoil the way she did. She did indeed.
I suppose you think that's terribly old fashioned and awful. A woman looking
after a man the way she did me. I mean I'd give anything to have someone like
Jennifer waiting for me when I get in from work. Instead of Roy standing in the
kitchen making his infamous spag ball. Well it's a good job you take it in
turns. I don't know. You haven't tasted my pasta bake. It's been lovely having
you two over Kirsty. It's been a pleasure being here. And remember, Jennifer
chose the life she had because she loved you. I miss her terribly. I know. And I
think if your Jenny could see you now she'd be really proud of you, Brian. Here
you go. One scrambled eggs on sourdough toast. Thank you. I must say it looks
very inviting. More coffee? Thank you but I'd try and limit myself to one a day.
Tea would be much appreciated though. Decaf? Please. These eggs? Yeah, fresh
from my brother's egg business here on the farm. Ah. And the sourdough? Baked by
my gran in the kitchen where Bess has not set foot since last night. I'm sure
she has somewhere else to stay dry when it's raining. Yes, yeah. Don't worry
about her. She's been safe and dry all night. Good. Well after what turned out
to be quite a surprising evening. This is a welcome breakfast indeed. Good. I'll
leave you to enjoy it. Oh, Mr Archer? Ben, please. Ben, please could you call me
a taxi for about half an hour from now to take me to Bautista High Street? Oh.
Is there a problem? No, no, not at all. Consider it done. Tony, I've been
summoned by Mum. Do you know what it's about? Sorry, I don't. Tony. She's upset
about you wanting to travel in a separate car from us. She'd like us all to go
to the funeral together. Oh, for pity's sake. It's one short car journey. It's
not the end of the world. When you're a parent going to bury your child, it can
seem like it lasts forever. But if you insist, Pat and I will go in one car and
we can just tell Mum the kids want to travel with you and her. Is that Dad's
carriage clock? Yes. It's working. Yes. It looks so new, different. It hasn't
worked in years. Just needed a bit of attention and polish, that's all. And I've
reattached the handle that was laid on top as well. You've worked wonders. I was
trying to give it to you when you were last over, but you left in such a rush.
Well, I had a lot on my mind. Don't we all? Actually, I had a favour, to our
last. I found this old projector and box full of slides. I can't seem to get it
working. Well, did you find that old thing? I've often wondered where that went.
It was in the attic, but I'm afraid it might be beyond repair. I'll have a look
at it when I've got the time. Right, well, I'll go and speak to Mum. If we can
get it working, maybe we can see if there are any images of Jenny we'd like for
the funeral, or that the children might want of her. Well, if you put it like
that, I'll have a look at it now. OK. Well, back in a mo'. Right, so the taxi
should be here soon. Is there anything else you need from us? Yes. Firstly,
these notes are private, so please don't try and peek over my shoulder. Sorry?
Also, could you bring my bags down for me? I have an inflamed knee, and I'd
rather save myself the discomfort. Oh, Linda, I had no idea. Do you want me to
have a look? Enos is the one with the inflamed knee. Ah, yes, of course.
Absolutely, sorry. Oh, and Hansel the taxi, would you? I decided to ask a friend
to pick me up. Cancel it? Please. But it'll be here any minute. You know,
drivers can get a little gnarkey if they get cancelled last minute. Not my
problem, I'm afraid, Ben. You can bring the bags in here, if you like. Fine.
It's fixed already. The projector was just jamming. From age, I think dust got
inside the moving parts. It should be fine now. Well, can we test it? Here?
Yeah, in the workshop, yeah, just... Well, you know, just us. I can put a sheet
up on the wall. Great. And what about this great big dust sheet? I know. That's
for the train set. It's thick, Tony, but only be using it for an hour or so. Let
me go put it back. Well, there's some old curtain linings over in one of those
boxes. Where? Oh, never mind. I'll get it. Yeah, I'm surprised Pat doesn't make
you tidy your workshop up, Tony. It's a real jumbling. I know exactly where
everything is, thank you very much. Found it. See? Now, if we just get this up
on the wall here... Hmm, we can hook the curtain rings onto the rail. Yes. Er,
let me get the step ladder. Now, if you hang on to the curtain, I'll... I'll do
it. No, no, let me. Tony, I have not decrepit. I didn't say you were. It's
barely three steps. I'm not climbing up Mount Everest. For heaven's sake, I'm
trying to be... Sexist? No. Ageist? No. Good. So, stand aside. Fine. Now, if I
could just... Grow a couple more inches. You are not helping. I'm just a little
too... Short? No, I just need... A bigger ladder? Ah-ha! Well, you should have
let me do it then. Don't lean any further. Just move the ladder. I'm almost...
Oh! Oh! Elia! Are you all right? I think I've squished your boxes. Oh, come on.
Up you get. There's only old sheets and blankets. It was a good landing spot,
actually. Thank goodness it wasn't your toolbox. Or my train set. Oh, you and
your little train set. Will you ever listen to me? Oh, fine. You hang the
curtain. Good. And you can sort out the slides. Deal? Good girl, Bess. Good
girl. Bess, no. I'm so sorry, Inis. She's not supposed to be in here. Don't
worry, Ben. I am pleased to report Inis has left the building and you are now in
the company of your friend and compadre, Linda Snell. Right. So, no more
allergies? No, no more silly allergies. Isn't that right, girl? So how did we
do? Well, then, Robert will be here to pick me up soon and we've got a lot to
get through. Ah, right. First and foremost, how do you think it went? Er, I
think the room went down well and the breakfast. Agreed. Now, I must say, I was
a little unsure about the shared bathroom situation and, of course, the pole-
dark incident last night. Honestly, Linda, Dad doesn't normally wash or change
in the kitchen. Mm. Even during carving, he was just trying to keep the bathroom
nice for you. Mm. Poor David. I understand his predicament. But finding a half-
naked man in threadbare long johns, washing at the kitchen sink, is not a sight
one is ever prepared for. Yeah, no, I understand. Neither should one be. No, no.
I must say, you showed much patience in the presence of Inis. It wasn't a walk
in the park, that's for sure. By design, Ben. By design. The best test is a
trial by fire. Once you've dealt with the worst-case scenario, everything else
should prove a walk in the park. And in this business, the worst-case scenario
is a fussy customer with lots of particularities they expect you to address on
the hoof. But we addressed them, didn't we? Oh, yes. Very well indeed. Perhaps
too well. Really? Can you do too well? I believe you can. For instance, Inis
being allergic to soap ingredients is definitely her lookout. Of course, if a
customer is polite and well-mannered and you wish to go the extra mile for them,
you can. But that cannot be the expectation of every Tom, Dick and Harry. So
what should I have done? Pointed me in the direction of the village shop with
opening hours and bus or taxi details. Got it. But your attentiveness, your
politeness and accommodation of Inis's needs means she is much more likely to
pass your details on to friends and family. Your USP isn't the finery of country
living and views of the undulating hillsides. It's more the action-packed uber-
reality of farming life. I believe that there are plenty of potential guests out
there who would be interested in such a place. So, remember it in all your
promotional work. I will. Thanks, Linda. This has been a real education. I
believe that with a few tweaks here and there, you will be a very recommendable
host of a very recommendable B&B. Yeah? Definitely. You're going to make a
success of this. I can feel it in my bones. I can't believe some of the outfits
Mum made us wear to church. There are way too many ruffles on that shirt. Jenny
and I were always in the same clothes in different colours like twins. Oh, no!
Oh, you without your two front teeth. How long did they take to come in? Too
long. What beach was that? It's definitely Wales. Aberystwyth, probably. Dad's
favourite. Oh, look at you in the rock pool. Looking for crabs, as usual? Jenny
and I were always in the sea, but you were one for the water when you were
little. I swam. Well, yeah, I know, but you always preferred to look in the rock
pools by yourself rather than swimming with us. What, a two's company? Oh,
nonsense. We didn't make you feel like that, did we? Oh, come on, Lillian. It's
not a big deal. I was a bit of a loner as a child, that's all. You two were all
right because you were both girls and you shared a room for ages. Oh, yes, both.
Oh, look. Jenny's tenth birthday. Look at the pout on you. What on earth was I
so grumpy about? I had no idea. And there she is, trying to make me smile.
Succeeding. Yeah, she always did. She was the only one. Whenever you were in a
front, Jennifer was the only one who could snap you out of it. Sorry, Tony, I
just need to message Justin, tell him where I am. I'll only be a minute.
Lillian. I'm sorry, darling. I'll be back in a minute. You haven't even got your
coat on, did you? No, no, please. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Are you OK? No. No,
actually, I'm really not. Me neither. I keep going over it, them trying to
resuscitate her and nothing happening. Don't. Don't do that to yourself. She'd
want to be remembered as we knew her, not like that. I know, but I just can't
get it out of my head. I'm really sorry you had to deal with that alone,
Lillian. I know, I know. And I know why you're angry. I understand. Really, I
do. But if you could have been there, heard how adamant she was that you didn't
need to know, that she didn't want to burden you with it until she had to, if
she'd known it was going to happen while you were away together, we just never
expected it would be so soon. I still can't believe she's gone. If there was
anyone who could bang our heads together when we were fighting, it was her. She
was always the glue. She kept us together, always. So now it's up to us,
Lillian. If you'll forgive me, we can be the glue that keeps us all together,
for Jennifer's sake. Oh, Tony, there's nothing to forgive. I've been such a
fool. Oh, come here. You've not been a fool. You just miss your big sister. I
love you, Tony. I love you, Lillian. I always will. 80 favourite tracks on
desert island discs in just a moment. And we've more exhibitions in the Museum
of Curiosity at midday. For us though, if you're a fan of Kate Bush, well,
you're in for a treat. Now on BBC Radio 4, time for desert island discs with
Lauren Laverne. My castaway this week is the artist Sonia Boyce. She was just 25
when the Tate made her one of the youngest artists and the first black woman to
enter its permanent collection. Last year she represented Britain at the world's
oldest international art show, the Venice Biennale. She took home the coveted
Golden Lion Award, the first British artist to win the top prize in 30 years and
the first woman of colour to represent the UK. She was born in London to parents
who arrived as part of the Windrush generation and as a child she drew
incessantly. Her art teacher spotted her talent and suggested she give life
drawing a try. She used performance, film, installations and sound in her work
but says her true medium is people. She's a collaborator and has taken the
stories of domestic violence survivors to the Serpentine Gallery, the voices of
black female singers to the Venice Biennale and the memories of a local
community to a mural running for two kilometres alongside the new Elizabeth line
in London. She says whenever a door is opened I ask myself if I am in this place
what is possible, what will enable something to change so that others can
benefit from me being here too? Sonia Boyce welcome to Desert Island Discs.
Thank you. So talk to me Sonia about the excitement of collaboration. It's
something that's engaged you for many years. What do you love about it? You know
there's this idea that as an artist you work on your own but I always get very
inspired by how other people take to a situation what they do. They always do
something really unexpected and they've come along on the journey not knowing
necessarily what that journey might be. I'm thinking I am so grateful for them
just thinking yeah this might be interesting. That must be quite a wave to ride
though as an artist because you have to be very brave to allow things to unfold
in unexpected ways. I'm always anxious in projects that I do and also the people
that I work with because I don't really, you know, I kind of made a decision not
to direct people. I mean there have been many times when I thought I've brought
all these people together I'm not sure anything's going to happen. People are
going to just sit here for ages just looking really worriedly at each other to
not have a plan just to know that we're all going to be in the space and
something's going to happen and then seeing where it goes. And usually it just
goes off in such spectacular ways that I'm kind of now addicted you could say to
the non-plan plan. The non-plan plan. I love it. So Sonia let's get cracking
with your first disc then. What have you got for us? So I always feel slightly
embarrassed about this. I must have been about six, seven, eight, possibly even
nine. And I saved up my pocket money to buy this record. And I was so chuffed
with myself that this was my record because of course we had records in the
house and but they either my brother's sister's parents' music but I actually
had my own record. So this first record is Meet Me on the Corner by Lindisfarne.
And I still love it even though I say I'm a bit embarrassed because it being a
folk stroke hippie kind of song but it does it makes me happy still. I'm asking
you back and fix around the room for your dreams are all I believe. Meet me on
the corner when the lights are coming on and I'll be there. I promise I'll be
there. Down the empty streets will disappear into the dawn if you have dreams
enough to share. Lay down your bundles of rags and reminders and spread your
words on the ground. Well I've got time if you're feeling right. I'm just
hanging around. Lindisfarne and Meet Me on the Corner. Son, your boys, you were
born in London. Your father Donald came from British Guyana and your mother Edna
came from Barbados to study nursing. So tell me about your dad first. He was one
of the Windrush generation. How did he adjust to life in London? His first job
was as a projectionist in cinema in Camden. He'd actually been a tailor before
he arrived in the UK and I think it was just the first job that he got when he
arrived. And after doing the job as a projectionist he went back into tailoring.
And my mum before she was a nurse she was a dressmaker. And all of our family
were always making things because there was loads of bags of cloth in the house.
I always think that my mum, if she'd been born at another time, more my
generation, I think she might have become a fashion designer because she was
always making clothes for us. I often thought that they were very weird in terms
of materials. Because there were kind of offcuts from what she'd do, a lot of
piece work at home. So there was always these very weird kinds of bits of fabric
that she would say, oh yeah, I think I'll make you a dress out of that. So it'd
be like an offcut or things that she'd put together that sort of weren't meant
to go together but she'd find a way to make it work. And I remember lots of very
scratchy dresses. So your parents separated when you were very little. What was
your relationship with your dad like? I didn't see my dad again until I was in
my teens, about 15, 16. He lived in London, lived in Highgate, had a very lively
life in Highgate. So I used to go and see him with my sisters. Lively in what
way? Well he would talk about having celebrity filled parties where the bath
would be full of champagne with ice. And were these tall tales or true stories?
No, no, because he was very involved with the Labour Party. So there'd be MPs
and all sorts of celebrities who'd be at his bashes, whatever they were. He was
quite gregarious as a great charmer. I could see how he kind of was charming to
my mum but they're very different personalities in terms of she was very much
about getting things done and doing things in the right way. I can imagine why
it would have been irritating for your mother to hear about that as well. She
was left to look after you guys. Yeah, she was no longer enamoured with him. My
parents split up just as my mum got pregnant with the last child. So there were
five of us that she was keeping going. But she was very determined to make sure
that we got a good education. She was always convinced that whatever was out
there in the world we should go and get. Disk number two, what are we going to
hear next? So we're going to hear that there's a track that reminds me very much
of my eldest sister, Marietta, who subsequently died. And we always used to all
pile into her house and she's got five children and there was always music
playing. And this particular track reminds me of the 70s and being in their
house and there being lots of food and lots of noise and lots of people in and
out of the house. A track by John Holt could help me make it through the night.
Common lay down by my side. Tilt the girl the morning light. All I'm taking is
your time. Help me make it through the night. I don't care who's right or wrong.
I don't try to understand. Let the pepper change tomorrow. Lord tonight I need a
friend. Yesterday's day in God. And tomorrow is out to sight. And it's sad to be
alone. Help me make it through the night. John Holt and help me make it through
the night. Sonia Boyce, when your parents separated, your mother moved the
family to a tenement block in East London. You lived very near to the renowned
Whitechapel Art Gallery. Did you ever go inside? Part of me wonders whether I
first went to the Whitechapel Art Gallery because of a school trip. I was in the
Whitechapel Art Gallery, but often on my own. I'd been there before, I'd just
walk in. I'd just walk into the gallery. I really liked the scale of the
building, the light that was in there. I don't remember any specific paintings
or drawings or objects. I would just walk in there. And what about when you were
at home? I know that you loved drawing and would use any available surface. Much
to my mum's real frustration. When I was at school I was always drawing in the
margins, when I was at home any surface I was just always drawing. And I wasn't
even particularly conscious of the fact that I was drawing, it's just something
that I always did. I mean it's doodling really, faces, names, you know if there
were patterns I would draw little patterns. This idea of motif and particularly
wallpaper has recurred in your work throughout the decades. That presumably then
goes back to your childhood. Tell me a little bit about the story behind all of
these patterns and papers that you were surrounded by. I had this thing where I
particularly I'd kind of wake up in the middle of the night and I was always
convinced that the wallpaper was moving. That I could see things in the
wallpaper. And I do think that wallpaper or repeat pattern has a kind of
otherworldly quality about it now. But as a child I was just always a bit scared
of the wallpaper and by the time I was doing my degree and using those images I
started to kind of get to love more than fear what a repeat pattern can do. Time
to go to the music Sonia, it's your third choice today. What are we going to
hear and why have you chosen it? This is a particular, I was really into reggae
and lovers rock and this particular track by Louisa Mark, Court You in a Lie,
for me absolutely captures that 70s moment with me and my friends and how we all
used to go to parties or clubs, youth clubs or town hall clubs and we all sing
along to these songs and dance to these songs. I suppose it's another way in
which I'm thinking about how I've congregated with people around music. So Sonia
Boyce, when you got a bit older, one of your teachers spotted your artistic
potential. She really took you under her wing. Tell me what happened. Mrs
Franklin, who was my art teacher, wore lots of purple. She was very much part of
that kind of bohemian, what I imagined to be bohemian to be about and she saw
something in the drawing that I was always doing and said, okay, you need to go
to art school. I'd never heard of art school before. I was 15 at the time and
most, most young people don't go to art school until they're about 18 and she
wrote my mum a letter. What did your mum make of that? I think she was a little
concerned because she didn't really know what it meant, but she said, okay, if
your teachers said that you should do this, you should go. So she had that kind
of sense of respect for a professional opinion. Yeah, almost the teacher's voice
was the law for her and it was like this world opened up because I had no idea
about art school before then. What were you expecting and what was your first
day like? My first day, it was hilarious. So I'm coming from school and at
school you knock on the teacher's door and they say come in and you can go into
the classroom. So I get to East Ham College and I'm told where the life drawing
class is and I knock on the door and I stand and I'm waiting for someone to say
you can come in and people are coming in and going out of the room but nobody
said you could come in. So you were just standing there for ages. I stood there
at least for half an hour and this person who'd come in and gone out a few
times, talked to me and said, you know, you can just go in. And I kind of walked
into this room and then this room full of about, I don't know, 20, 30 people
seated with these easels and there's this man standing there with no clothing.
And I'm like, what is going on? I didn't know where to look. And then Arthur,
who is the life drawing tutor said, oh, just set yourself up. And I was like,
what is going on? Why is this man got no clothes on? Because I had no idea what
happened in art school and my mum had no idea. I mean, it's the reason why I
needed to have her to sign permission for me to go because of life drawing.
Letty, your fourth music choice today, what have you gone for, Sonia? When I was
young, about 10, 11, I was obsessed with the Old Grey Whistle Test. I was just
actually, I was obsessed with two programs, Old Grey Whistle Test and the Open
University programs. They always happened later night, midweek. And I learned a
lot about kind of new wave bands that were emerging and a particular band,
Talking Heads and this tracks, High Go Killer, I first saw on Old Grey Whistle
Test. I can't seem to face up to the facts. I'm tense and nervous and I can't
relax. I can't sleep because my bed's on fire. Don't touch me, I'm a real live
wire. Psycho killer, casket C. Run, run, run, run, run, run away. Psycho killer,
casket C. Run, run, run, run, run, run away. You start a conversation, you can't
even finish it. You're talking a lot, but you're not saying anything. When I
have nothing to say, my lips are sealed. Say something once, why say it again?
Psycho killer, casket C. Run, run, run, run, run, run away. Talking Heads and
Psycho Killer. So Sonia, in 1980 you started a degree, Fine Art was your course
at Stourbridge College of Art. Did you find your creative feat there? When I was
on Found Nation, I was very interested in feminist art practice. Feminist art
practice often spoke very much about social issues. And I was coming in all guns
blazing wanting to talk about social issues. And with other female students, we
formed a feminist student group. We were very concerned about the fact that
there were no female tutors on the course, but 50% of student body was female.
Particularly those of us that were part of that group would often, any time we
spoke, would be kind of the raised eyebrows and almost the yawns, oh God, here
they go again, kind of. But actually, we were trying to fight for something
better. It must have got quite serious because is it true they wanted to expel
you? Yeah, by the end of my first year into my second year, they wanted to expel
me. And so basically, I was throughout my second year, I was on continuous
assessment. And I was terrified to tell my mum. And so I just didn't tell her.
And just kind of, she would have, because she would have told you to do what you
were told to do what I was told. Did you at any point think, I'm just going to
do what they want me to do? No, I did. I was doing what they wanted me to do. I
was doing these very formal abstract drawings and learning in the process,
learning a lot about paper and materials. To a certain extent, I had been
browbeat, you could say, into getting through the course. Everything changed for
you though, Sonia, in 1981. So you saw a poster for an exhibition at the
Wolverhampton Art Gallery and it featured work by a group of young black
artists. What impacted the art avenue when you went to see it? It was very raw.
It was very DIY. It was very energised. I could tell that the artists were young
because of the nature of what the subject matter, it was all about subject
matter. And this became the black art group. I think they were all in their
teens, right? They were in their teens. And what was the subject matter? You
mentioned the subject matter. I remember a series of drawings and a series of
collages that were about the Soth laws because young people were really feeling
that experience. There was something to be said and it couldn't be suppressed
anymore. And for me, it was like, I literally woke up. The ground shook for me.
That's your thunderbolt. So what did it do for your sense about your own art? I
went back to this art school and I just ripped up so much of the work that I've
done and thought, right, this is it. I'm going for it. If they fail me, they
fail me. I don't care. I'm just going to do it. Sonia, I think we'd better hear
your next track before we find out in the next chapter in your story. Number
five. What is it? This track by Dennis Brown, Wolf and Lippards is part of that
moment in reggae where there's a sense of consciousness raising about being in
the UK, but also being from the Caribbean and that question of a colonial past
that had brought us to the UK. For me, it's very much about that social moment,
this track. To match in farmers. To match in farmers. To match still they rise.
Time to separate the sheep from the wolves. We're at the crossroads and this is
the time of the sea shod. To match in farmers. To match still they rise. To
match in farmers. To match still they rise. Dennis Brown, Wolf and Lippards.
Sonia Boyce, you graduated in 1983 and you started making art your own way. Your
work took on subjects like colonialism, feminism and organised religion. What
did your mum think of it? She'd say, couldn't you do something nice? Couldn't
you just paint some flowers or to a portrait? When I first graduated, I moved
back home and moved back to London and she let me use one of the rooms in our
house as a studio. One day I came home and she had the neighbours in the studio
talking through it. It was quite contradictory. I was furious. People were not
allowed to come into the studio and she was saying, well, you know, they just
wanted you to know and people started asking whether I could do their portrait.
And I said, well, actually, that's not quite what I do. So it was kind of mixed
on one level, her being very proud but also her, I think, feeling really scared.
She was worried about me being disruptive. In 1985, one of your drawings
featured in an exhibition called The Thin Black Line. Now, you called the piece,
Mr Close Friend of the Family pays a visit whilst everyone else is out. And it
shows a man reaching out to touch a young girl. We can't see his face, just the
open neck of his shirt and his crucifix peeking through. That young girl is you.
What's the story behind that image? Well, I was remembering this incident that
had happened at home where a man who was a close friend of the family had come
round to the house and nobody else was in the house. I'd let him in and he tried
to rape me. I would have been 12, 13, something like that. And I never spoke
about it. Had you thought about it a lot since? Was it something that came back
to you when you started making that work? I think it just came back to me. And I
didn't really talk to anybody about what I was going to make for the show. I
just kind of turned up with this thing rolled up in a tube and put it up and
then ran home because I just kind of felt, I just need to say this at this
moment. Did anybody know in your life what happened? What you've been through?
No. And I was very aware when I was constructing the image that the female
figure who's looking out is looking out directly to the audience to acknowledge
her presence. Did it help? Yes, it did. I mean, I think that's part of the whole
thing about making art is that somehow you're able to process things. And so,
yeah, it did. It did help. Let's go to the music, Sonia. It's your sixth choice.
What are we going to hear next? I wanted to choose something that was about me
and my partner, David. This particular track reminds me particularly of us
having a holiday break in Amsterdam. And we'd gone to a record shop and we both
went for this record by Gil Scott Herron, a track called Is That Jazz? David is
convinced that he bought the album. I'm convinced that I bought the album. It's
never going to be resolved because we both feel that we own that album. But
really, I bought it. Well, you've got it on your island. So there you go. Sorry,
David. One for the music and things that he said. There was a word back with ten
of those heads from Kansas right up to the press. Lester Yarnin. The feeling,
the feeling, the queen of the sea that keeps going on in my head. What it has
will surely last but is that jazz? My love, I had a style for the mazes and
raisins, spirits from deep in your soul. Trains took a vein, laughter and pain,
adventures of my curse. And Steve and Bob talk of freedom in jobs that they're
on in the vegetable ways. Playing and singing as long as it's bringing a message
in all that it says. Children's eyes would get that jazz. Gil Scott Herron and
Is That Jazz? So, Sonia Boyce, as I said at the beginning of the programme, your
career has included many, many firsts. You were the first black woman to have a
piece of work collected by the Tate in 1987. You were just in your mid-twenties
at the time. The first black woman to represent Britain at the Venice Biennale.
How, I wonder, do those firsts sit with you? I love that people recognise me and
recognise the things that I'm doing. But when I'm told, oh, you're the first, I
kind of think, oh, they weren't expecting me or anybody like me. That's part of
my frustration is, you know, so when I was in the run-up to doing Venice and the
British Pavilion, that's all that got said, is the first black British female
artist to represent Britain. But nobody knows what I do. If you just say that,
it doesn't matter what I do. Literally, you're just looking at me and not the
work that I make. In 2018, you hit the headline, Sonia, some of the staff you
were working with on a project in the Manchester Art Gallery chose to
temporarily remove J.W. Waterhouse's painting, Hyles and the Nymphs, from the
wall where it was hanging. Now, the decision to take it away came out of a wider
conversation about who decides what work will be shown. Why was this painting in
particular singled out to come down? What the staff who, public-facing staff,
kept saying was, well, actually, there's a kind of culture that is developing
around this painting where young teenage girls come and take selfies. And then
there's a kind of cruising culture that happens where a lot of middle-aged men
gather also around those girls who are taking photographs of themselves. And as
the conversations developed, and, you know, there were members of staff, as we
said, there were mainly male members of staff who thought, oh, this is not
actually that serious. You know, I think maybe you're exaggerating a little bit.
Until the very last session when we were all sat there, there was about 30 of us
by this point, this man came around and he had an iPhone where he was filming
all of the paintings and sculptures where they were naked or semi-naked women
and making these very guttural sounds of like, oh, that's really gorgeous. And
obviously he was recording something. And then he stops at this painting, I
listen to Nymphs, and he's still making these guttural sounds. And another
member of the general public, another man, comes up to him and says, you do know
that they're meant to be prepubescent girls. And he goes, oh, that's even
better. At which point everybody who was sat there, we were all sat there in the
same gallery space, said that painting has got to come down. So that's why that
painting came down as part of a performance where there were lots of other
things that happened. Exactly. And then in the performance, it comes down for a
week and then it was replaced by post-it notes. Where people could talk about
representation. Where people could kind of have their say and they could put
their voice, as it were, on the gallery wall. So the removal of the painting
caused a fair amount of outrage, hullabaloo. On social media, some sections of
the press. Were you surprised by the response? Because it was massive. It was
massive. It was global. I was getting messages from all over the world. There
were death threats to the staff. Did you get death threats? No, but I got a lot
of quite horrible emails getting hounded by certain people for well over a year.
The police got involved at one point. How did you deal with that? I was really
scared by it. For members of staff to receive death threats because of an action
which didn't hurt anybody. A painting came off of the wall and then it went back
up and people were asked to respond. That doesn't, in my books, doesn't warrant
a death threat. Let's have some more music, Sonia. Your seventh choice today.
What's it going to be? It's a song for my girls. I've got two daughters. This is
a track by Corinne Bailey-Ray. Put your records on. And I love this track and
the girls love this track. And what I love about it is the kind of message of
just step into your own beauty that is just joyful. Sometimes we got it wrong,
but it's all right. And more things seem to change. And what does it say to you?
Don't you hesitate. Go put your records on. Tell me your favorite song. You go
ahead, let your head down. Start firing faded jeans. Start hoping to get your
dreams. Just go ahead, let your head down. You're going to find yourself
somewhere, somehow. Blue as the sky, sunburned and lonely. You're 17 and above
while the road's high. Just relax, just relax. Don't you let those other boys
fool you. But I love that I foreheaded. Maybe sometimes we feel afraid, but it's
all right. And more you stay the same. Corinne Bailey-Ray and put your records
on. Sonia Boyce, you've been working steadily for 40 years, but your success at
the Venice Biennale put you in the international spotlight. Your winning entry
was called Feeling Her Way and features improvised performances by five black
female musicians. What did this recognition mean to you? I was genuinely
confused about what emerged in terms of Venice. Being arts in the first place to
do the pavilion and then being awarded the Golden Lion. And I remember on the
stage thinking, I don't know what's going on right now. You were quite emotional
too. I was very emotional. It goes back to this thing about being the first
whatever. On the steps of the British Pavilion and seeing hundreds of people
queuing to come to see the show, it broke me. I just kind of thought, I'm really
feeling the weight of history right now. And really saying, please don't mess up
Sonia. Please don't mess up. Because I didn't, you know, I knew that I loved
what I was doing, but I had no idea how the work was going to be judged. But
just suddenly thinking, oh, I think this is a big deal. Your mother at the
beginning of your career was anxious about you kind of making trouble, making
yourself heard, maybe causing trouble. Did she keep any of your pieces? So this
must have been in the 80s. She asked me to do a picture for her. And I thought,
oh, that's lovely. And then she handed me a postcard of a Paul Gauguin and she
wanted me to do a copy of it, which I did. And so when my mum, she had dementia
in later years and ended up having to go into a nursing home. And the thing that
she wanted to come with her was that picture. It was quite an emotional thing.
It's like this was her painting. I think hopefully she'd have gone back. Paul
Gauguin by that point. But yeah, it's curious. I think she had come round in
some ways, not just because of that particular work, but because of the fact
that she realised that other people took it seriously what I was doing. I really
feel that she was quite proud. You're very sociable, Sonia. I mean, a lot of
your work, obviously, as we've discussed, involves collaborating with other
people. But I'm afraid I'm going to send you to the solitude of the desert
islands. How do you think you'll be on your own? I'm quite good on my own. I
think it was because there's always a lot of family in the house and lots of
people in the house when I was growing up that I would go to the quiet room and
lock myself and be reading or playing records, whatever. And I can do long
stretches on my own because I spend a considerable amount of time daydreaming.
Well, we'd love to hear one more track from you before we send you to your
islands on your voice. What's your final choice going to be? It's Joan Armour
Trading, Love and Affection. I love the opening line to this song. This idea
that you're looking at somebody and they're looking at you and I could be
persuaded. It does actually remind me of the relationship between me and David,
that kind of interplay between will you, won't you, shall we, shan't we, which
we still do. Even 30 years on. Even 30 years on, we're still that kind of little
game. But also when she says, make love with affection, seeing someone that you
want and that you're kind somehow. I love that. But with a lover, I could hold
my head back, but with a lover, I could really laugh. Thank you. You took me
dancing across the floor, cheek to cheek. But with a lover, I could really move,
really move. I could really dance, really dance, really dance, really dance. I
could really move, really move, really move, really move. Now if I can feel the
sun in my eyes, in the rain on my face, why can't I feel love? Will it love,
will it love, will it love, will it love, will it love, will it love? Joan Homer
trading the love and affection. So, Sonia Boyce, the time has come. I'm going to
send you away to the island. I'm giving you the Bible, the complete works of
Shakespeare, and you can take one other book. What are you going to choose? I
think it might be Charlie and the Chocolate Factory. I won it as a prize at
junior school. So it was the very first book I owned that I didn't have to take
back to the library. I could read it whenever I wanted to. And of course,
Charlie being ever hopeful, and the moment when he thought he was going to give
up, he hit gold. It's yours. You can also have a luxury item. What will that be?
I am partial to champagne. So, if there could be some champagne there. Oh,
absolutely. I mean, that would ease the fact that there's nobody else. I mean,
it's never the wrong thing to take. I mean, I'd miss everybody, but... Sure, but
only up to your point. You know. You've got to do what you've got to do. And
finally, which one track of the eight that you've shared with us today, would
you say, from The Waves? Is That Jazz by Gil Scott-Haron. This history upon
which he draws from, his poetry with that history. Also, the connection between
me and David, and yes, I do own it, David. It's mine. But the song itself, it's
a love story to all that's gone past. Sonia Boyce, thank you very much for
letting us hear your desert island discs. Thank you, that was amazing. Desert
Island Disc was created by Roy Plumlee. The producer was Paul McGinley. Lauren
Laverne's castaway next week is the writer, actor and comedian Robert Webb. And
a reminder, you can listen to many more editions of the programme on BBC Sounds.
Sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. Lent
Talks on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Begins this Wednesday evening at 8.