TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Dr. Tarek's also from the physicist and excitingly runaway Carlo Revelli, but
first the news with Vigey Alice. BBC News at 10 o'clock. Farmers have said
they've been warning for a year that food shortages were possible. Some
supermarkets are limiting sales of items such as tomatoes, cucumbers and
peppers. There's been bad weather in Spain and Morocco and British growers have
said they can't afford to heat their greenhouses. Speaking on the Today
programme, Helen Browning, the chief executive of the Soil Association who is
also a farmer, said producers had been hit with unprecedented pressures. I think
the issues that are affecting the horticultural sector are really deep and
severe and it's not just about this weather problem in other countries and the
energy problems here now, but we've had a number of shocks that have hit the
industry over the last few years. And there's just not confidence that actually
they're going to get the return they need if they do start to invest and grow
more of what we need. Talks between the UK and the EU on post Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland are continuing this weekend with signs that an
agreement is close. A Downing Street source has described negotiations as
positive and the Foreign Secretary James Cleverley has pulled out of a long
planned trip to the Middle East at the beginning of next week. Health officials
in the UK have begun drawing up contingency plans for the possibility of bird
flu causing a pandemic among humans. An 11-year-old girl in Cambodia has died
from the H5N1 strain of the virus and the World Health Organization has said the
global situation is worrying. Voting is underway in Nigeria's most competitive
election since the end of military rule near a quarter of a century ago. Nearly
90 million people are eligible to vote and there are long queues at some polling
stations. Three candidates are seen as front runners to succeed President
Muhammadu Buhari. A Blizzard warning is in places for parts of Los Angeles for
the first time in more than 30 years. Coastal areas of California are also under
flood warnings because of the winter storm. BBC News. Vijay Alice, thank you.
Welcome back to Saturday Live with me Nicky Beatty and the Reverend Richard
Coles. With us this morning, best-selling author, screenwriter and doggo file
Jojo Moyes, musician, podcaster and gong bath advocate Erin Horn, the performer
and playwright Henry Naylor and still to come. Novelist Ava Glass whose previous
career involved her working with spies and the inheritance tracks of the world's
most inspirational physics teacher, Carlo Ravelli. We've been asking you this
morning for the stories behind the thing that you own and love that nobody else
likes. Ava's has actually accompanied their message with the most frightening
photograph and says, I have a ventriloquist doll, Jimmy. Apparently in Edwardian
times he sported a man-sized tweed suit but now only his head lives on. I got
him from my grandparents house when I was a child. His eyes swivel. He can cry
and also smoke a cigarette. Everyone thinks he's creepy but I think he's sweet.
Jojo look at your face. What's happening? Henry's face is doing what my face is
doing. Oh are you creeped out? Yeah. I can't even look at that picture. Can I
just interject here? Yes interject all you like. This comes from Lucy and
Cornwall. I've always loved creepy things especially ventriloquist dummies. The
fact that people find them so creepy just makes me love them all the more. I
asked my husband if he'd buy me one for my birthday but he said no. Much to my
delight a few years later a friend whose father was a well-known children's
entertainer of the 60s and 70s came across his dummy when clearing out his
house. She said there's only one person I could think of who would like this and
she gave it to me. He still works and sits on a little chair in the living room
in his top hat and tails and is named Lord Tiny Toffington. My husband and adult
children all hate him. He does look quite alarmingly like my dad which is
somewhat disconcerting. Henry. I'll tell you what. You know the comedian Nina
Conti. Yeah. She loves her. She's so good. But she did a documentary a few years
ago about there is a museum in the States where ventriloquist puppets go to die.
Yes. So when ventriloquist dies. That film is amazing. It's wonderful isn't it?
Yeah. And it's the most creepy thing. There's a room of about four or five
hundred dollars and they all go to the door. Wow you get kidnapped by the
mujahideen and you think a ventriloquist dummy is creepy. I would rather go to
the mujahideen. Janet Berry says what makes people recoil for me is my great
great aunt Evelyn's plait of hair. Oh. In the late 1920s early 1930s. To me it
is a link to the past and a fascinating part of my beloved auntie. The beautiful
auburn colour is still evident. To others it's a manky tangle creepy mess. It
has no aesthetic merit and no practical merit. It is guaranteed to be the first
in the skip once I'm gone. That's beautifully put though. Here's one unsigned.
The thing I love but everyone else dislikes. My current husband. Oh wow. No back
stories folks. That's your next novel show to hear. Now whenever I read the name
of the theoretical physicist Carlo Rovelli I think of one of my favourite
Renaissance painters Carlo Rovelli a very distant figure but perhaps not
somewhere in the quantum world where the former plies his trade arguing for an
interpretation of quantum mechanics in which the world is not a collection of
things but a fabric woven by relations. May sound esoteric but it's been
amazingly popular. He sold a tonne of books being described as the world's most
inspirational physics teacher and counts among his fans Neil Gaiman, Billy Cole,
David Hockney and Morgan Freeman. He ran away from home folks as a teenager to
join a commune in Tuscany to live in accordance with the doctrines of Plato. So
undifficult to knock on his door and ask for inheritance tracks. So the track I
inherited is Nothing Shines Unless It Burns by a great cult Italian rock band
called Belladonna and the reason this has been an incredible gift for me is that
my voice is in this song without me knowing about that. In fact I don't know how
to sing. The group record the song without me knowing and without telling me and
they didn't dare ask me until the day in which I a physicist Italian working in
France moved to Canada and became friend with a philosopher but this philosopher
likes rock music he plays rock music and because of that he got to know Luanna
of the Belladonna band and so Luanna a musician asked the philosopher who asked
the physicist whether perhaps I would agree to accept that this music goes out
and I said yes and here is this music out with my voice and a great gift for me.
Not really singing, talking. It was exactly in the house of Wayne the
philosopher one evening in which he said listen to that music without telling me
what it is. So I hear this beautiful strange magic music and I'm very captured
by it until I hear my voice in it. When I heard it I didn't understand what was
going on. I thought he was teasing me or playing a game on me or something like
that but when he actually explained me that this great rock band had used my
voice I felt marvelously because somehow without being capable of singing I was
a dream of my youth was realized. Sex and drugs and rock and rolls that was my
generation and I spent time traveling around and listening to music and the rest
and I would have loved like many friends to me a musician but I definitely did
not have the skills. I tried I had my little band when I was in high school with
my friends and the other two were pretty good. I was a disaster. I became
attracted by science and by physics only when I thought that the revolution that
was the dream of my youth failed and physics was full of revolutions. Einstein
views were revolutionary quantum mechanics was revolutionary. So it was a
revolutionary aspect of physics that for me was a second choice. The world
didn't want to be revolutionized. It's more than just my voice in it. The song
is about time. In a sense it captured one aspect of my own book about time about
the physics of time but also about the emotion of time. I love this title
because nothing shines unless it burns. I would love to put this as a title of
my own life. We try to shine but to shine we burn. The track I want to pass on
is Fratrice by Arvo Part. Arvo Part is a giant of contemporary classical music
who writes very intense, rarified, I would say, extraordinary beautiful music.
And this particular track, Fratrice, I love it because once again I think it is
about time. Arvo Part is the only musician I would say that is capable of
stopping time and moving us in a dimension where time is not there. Fratrice
means brothers in Latin and I think that today in this historical moments in
which we humans are going once against the other one and how we have to win them
over and how we have strong and overcome. Spiritual music like this one with the
title Brother is something we should meditate and remember that we are brothers
on this earth and we should share it and try to listen to the others rather than
find the others. I would not say that music directly spires my work. When I do
physics is more equations and previous equations in physics and try to work them
out. However, I think that all our experience collars and motivates what we do
and some theoretical abstract research like theoretical physics, the entire
world view that one has inherited including the music and the philosophy comes
in and makes a package which is our thinking from which ideas are born. I do
listen to music when I work sometime. I used to work lying on a sofa with my
feet up and a notebook in my hands or a computer if I'm writing something and
some music in the background and sometimes I just put away what I'm doing and I
just listen to music period especially if there is something like our part.
Music is always part of my life one way or the other. I think we humans are
largely musical. We need music. We are like birds, right? We need songs around.
I would pass this song to everybody, to all my brothers and sisters around the
planet. You know, British, Italians, Russian, Chinese and trying to remind
everybody that we're brothers and if we stop fighting it's better for everybody.
Wow. Those inheritance tracks from Carlo Revelli. I want to go and live in a
commune with him according to his doctrines, not maybe Plato's but anyway. His
new book is Anaximander and the Nature of Science. Who was Anaximander? He was a
pre-socrates? Pre-Socratic. Don't look at me. I don't know. I thought you knew
everything. I'd pretend to know everything. Okay. We have been asking you this
morning for your stories about something that you own or you bought that you
absolutely love that nobody else does. Mary Saunders, what a lovely name. My
husband loves the elephant dung he collected in Samburu, Kenya in 1960. It lives
under a Victorian glass dome in the corner of our sitting room. Nobody else
loves it. I've been in Kenya this week. I didn't bring back elephant dung. He
was pre-socratic. He was pre-socratic, so I was right. Well, you know, you asked
me, I think I was right technically. He's from elephant dung to Socrates. This
is how we roll on a Saturday morning. Exactly. The last time bestselling crime
and young adult fiction author CJ Doherty was on Saturday Live. We were
enthralled by her own life stories because they rival the adventures and
challenges that she creates for her characters. For a period of time, she worked
at the home office as a communications consultant focusing on counter terrorism.
She experienced being vetted for the highest level of government security
clearance, and that's when she became fascinated by the art of spying. Her
latest novel, which she's written under the nom de plume, Ava Glass, which is
why we've been calling you Ava Glass throughout the show, is a breakneck race
against the Glock thriller with a female British spy at its centre, and it's
already been optioned for TV. So shall I call you Ava or shall I call you CJ?
Come, Ava. So you began your career in the States as a crime reporter. Then you
came to London to work for a publishing house. How did you end up at the home
office? I always say my career's been less planned out and more like a series of
car crashes that I just somehow reel from to the next. And so I worked for a
publishing house for five years in London. And when that job sort of ended,
because the company literally ran out of money, I felt like I was at a
crossroads. You know, I was 33 and I was thinking, is this really what I, what
do I want to do? The rest of my life is now. And I had no idea. And at that
point, a friend called me and said, I mean, completely out of the blue, I hadn't
talked to her in years. And she said, I've taken a job working for the home
office and I'm looking for someone who can write about counterterrorism and not
get scared. And I thought of you. And suddenly that felt like fate. That felt
right, because she was right. I knew I wouldn't get scared. And also it felt
like a door opening that I should walk through. What did you know about the home
office at that point? Absolutely nothing. I had no background in government. I
mean, I never, when I was a journalist, I was based in the US. I mean, I knew
basics of any citizen about the various offices. And I knew that the home office
had given me my visa and I knew that they oversaw the police. So I knew that
much. In your book, they refer to MI6 as six. Is that true? Yeah, but we did or
box. It has nicknames. Oh, tell us everything. Box, nobody who actually works in
government or certainly in security refers to six as six, except those of us who
are outside of spying. Spies call it box. They always have. What else do spies
do? What else do they say? Tell us everything. So in order to get your job
there, you were, as I said, vetted, but you were vetted by spies. How did you
figure that out? Well, to get a security clearance, everybody has to be security
clearance to work in the home office or any big government office. They're doing
the stuff I was doing. You just give them everything. I mean, everything, your
addresses for the last five years, your bank accounts, your credit cards. Ava.
In an era of social media, I mean, some of us have to read all your tweets and
all your Facebook. Yeah, they look through everything. They know everything. Can
they hack your WhatsApp? Oh, I'm sure they know. Actually, no, no, I don't think
they can. It's encrypted. I don't think they can. Oh, is it? I thought that
might not be end to end encrypted. I thought Telegram and Signal were anywhere.
Somebody will write in and tell us. Exactly. Back to your vetting process. So
filled out all the paperwork. Six weeks went by and I got my pass and there was
no explanation. I don't know what they did or how it worked. I just know I got
my pass and I was told you start on this day. Huzzah. And so I'm in. I've got
this job I really want to do. I get in and I'm not doing the job like I'm being
shuffled onto alcohol standards and police rules that I know nothing about. I've
not met a single counterterrorism person and I keep asking like, do you want me
to actually do the work you know that you've hired me for? And they say, well,
we're waiting for you to be briefed. The person's not in. And it was during that
time that I met a young woman in the kitchen at the home office while I was
making a cup of tea and she was completely normal. About 28. You wouldn't have
looked at her twice. She was new. It was her first day and she was asking where
something was and I knew now and I told her and we got to chatting and then
after that, you know, we kind of kept running into each other. We'd go for
coffee. Maybe I'd run into her in the canteen and we'd have lunch and she was
extremely interested in my background and just lots of questions. And I just I
am so I thought myself so sophisticated, but I bought this hook line and sinker.
I told her everything she wanted to know about my family, my history. Oh, yes,
my brother was in the military. Yes, he was and oh, just for four years and oh,
no, he doesn't do that anymore and etc. And then she disappeared her phone
number, her email address, everything. And after that, I met my first like I was
I met the spies. I started working and I realized she was the first she had to
be the first spy. So she was testing you all along. Yeah. You didn't know she
was a spy. How did you know the other people were spies? Well, that's the weird
thing about that world. The fact of being a spy is it self-estate secret. So
nobody will tell you. Right. So you have to kind of figure it out. And it is
also if you ask too many questions, you never know who you work with is so
nobody asks. I would only ask people I knew positively were not and then we then
we could speculate. Do you think Bob is? I think Bob is one of the giveaway. And
if you say to someone, where do you work and they blankly say the Foreign
Office? Yeah. But they don't say anymore the Foreign Office. Yeah, exactly.
That's a dead one. That's a dead giveaway. Do you have what it takes to be an
excellent spy? Oh, God, no, look, look what I'm doing right now. Because you've
written this amazing female spy character Emma for your latest book. So you must
understand quite a lot to have written like that. Yeah, it was for me because I
was communication. So they didn't I think in the end, they did trust me. But at
first they didn't. So they wouldn't let me completely inside. But they did. They
did crack a window so I could see what they do because they refused to do what I
wanted them to do. I wanted them to communicate. I was there to communicate for
them to the public about the amazing things they were doing at that time to make
us safer. And they weren't having it. They just weren't having it. But they
wanted me to understand why not. So they would show me things. They take me on
training things training missions. They would let me see them their work and
explain to me without explaining to me, you see why we can't tell people about
this. That was always the undercurrent. Tell me about training in Wales. That
was wild. So the government is constantly training for the worst things that
could ever happen. They're constantly prepping. I mean, you don't want something
to blow up. And that's the first time they've dealt with a fire. You know what I
mean? Like it is they they do these huge training missions where they take
hundreds, even thousands of people from various offices. So MI5, military,
police, ambulance, everybody goes somewhere in the middle of the countryside.
Wales. They'll build something and blow it up. And that will be the beginning.
And so then they have to respond to it in real time as if it is real life.
Everything is they call it a game. It is a game. It is the game. But it is
incredibly serious. Everything is filmed. Everything is watched. Top ministers
are there. There are there's a gold command headquarters that I could go into
from time to time. It has 20. It looks there's more there's more screens in it
than there are here. And they're watching all these different aspects
simultaneously. And the people watching them are quite, quite high level. And
everybody's tested their press conferences. And it all feels incredibly real and
very intense. So I do do well. I was the BBC. Oh, really? Yes. Because you you
had to be like a reporter. Yes. So I would write articles about how they were
handling this, how many people died in the explosion. How much research did you
do about a BBC journalist then? Absolutely. No, I think I could I could wing it.
Oh, yes. Ava, can I ask, does your brain work differently as a result of this
job? Are you always looking for the thing behind the thing now? Because that
experience of meeting that woman that would throw me fundamentally that idea
that I've made friends with someone who didn't really exist. Yeah, it was it.
It's such a deception. I actually dedicated my book to her because I have spent
the last sort of 10 years trying to figure out how someone so young could be so
so she was so deceptive, so confident, absolutely betrayed nothing that would
have and I used to be a journalist. I thought I could see through people. I saw
nothing. She could work in customer service, couldn't she? In in the book,
London's famous Ring of Steel has been hacked by the Russian government. And
Emma's job is to bring the adult son of Russian dissidents into protective
custody. What sort of research did you do to make that as real as possible?
Yeah, I mean, the main thing was, where can you go and not be caught on camera?
And researching that was is kind of fascinating because the answer is almost
nowhere. It's a few parks, there are parks, canals, some canals, but not all
canals. It's so limited that I realized early on that my spy would know from the
start that it was impossible. And so she would not tell him, but she knows
they're going to get caught in her idea. Her job is to have a plan in place for
how they survive when they're caught. So, yeah. Ava Glass, thank you so much.
Ava's novel is The Chase. We've been asking for your lists of things that you
love and are important to you, but which strike fear and disgust into the hearts
and minds of decent people everywhere. We can talk to Mark Michaels on the
phone. Good morning, Mark. Good morning. What's yours? Age 10, I had my appendix
removed and now 65. It is in a jar beside my bed. Oh no. My wife wants me to
dispose of it, but I think it would be the thin end of the wedge. And what would
be next? So your appendix in 55 years residing in its jar, has it held up? It
has, absolutely. It's in the same condition at which it left me. Oh dear. I
mean, oh well, great. And that's on your bedside bookshelf. It is indeed.
Perhaps you've thought of moving it to a shed or something, but... Well, what
would follow it? Oh, I see what you mean exactly. You must hang on to those
parts of yourself with zeal, lest somebody else starts chucking bits of you
away. Absolutely. I get it. Mark, this is useful advice. Thank you so much.
Thank you for your call, Mark. I bet you lots of people around the country are
going to start messaging about... Well, we were doing milk teas, weren't we?
Yes, we were, because... Is it okay if I ask you this on air? Sure. You've done
something beautiful with your child's milk tea. There's air in hormones. Oh
yeah, I made a little rattle with them. I put them all in this little metal
container and I've got this tiny little rattle. I mean, I think that's
beautiful, but only a musician would probably think of that. Or maybe other
cultures do that. My mother threw my milk teas away. That was a bit mean. Well,
hang on, Jo. As long as they were out at the time. But I was thinking you were a
sentiment. We were talking, weren't we, about bits of people. I mean, appendix
is perhaps an unusual memento to keep of somebody. But why next to the bed? Why
next to the bed? Why would you have to look at it? It's still freaking bad.
Franco slept with St. Theresa of Avila's withered hand on his bedside. Oh, good
lord. Yeah, but he was Franco, wasn't he? Yeah. He ended up... Well, okay, it's
a bit of an imaginative leap to put ourselves in the jack boots of the
generalistimo. But you know, people do keep... Hang on to think. I'm going to
bring in something that JoJo might appreciate a little more than bodily part.
Christine Macmillan says, mine's an ancient golden syrup tin covered with 1970s
dark brown wallpaper with an orange paisley design. It was one of a pair that my
mother decorated to match my bedroom's feature wall and it stayed with me.
Absolutely irreplaceable, irreplaceable, but so loved, sadly only by me. Do you
remember when people did that with tins? Yeah. Yeah. I've got more human stuff.
I'm trying to end on a really lovely note. I just wanted this one. Alright. This
is from Mike in Benenden. He says, I've collected all my nail clippings for the
last 20 years. Most people find this very creepy, especially my children, but
they're strangely comforting to me and rattle nicely. No, no, no. Come on. Hey,
Errol. Yes, Henry, have the last word here. Wasn't it one of those Darwin Awards
things when somebody died because they stored all their nail clippings from
their entire life above their bed under sort of one of those little thumbtiles
and collapsed and they... Yeah, they... Well, listen, Mike from Benenden, do
take great care with your stored nail clippings. Turn them into percussion
instruments by all means, but don't get lost in a drift of your own keratinous
remit. Would they smell their nail clippings? Oh, no. Sorry. Enjoy your
breakfast, everyone. We're talking about appendixes that Wendy says that her
treasure was a large pickled snake bought in a junk shop in Guernsey in 1975
pounds. Parents are both horrified as their mother hated snakes. The snake
followed to England where I attended art college and eventually to her present
house. It lived on the floor in the downstairs toilet with other curiosities
until one day I came home, smelt formaldehyde and the bottle with a crack in it
was discovered. My husband, who'd been cleaning the floor, denied breaking it,
but I was heartbroken. I thought you were going to say, and then we found the
snakes lithering around because it was actually cryogenically suspended. You
can't do that. That's just nonsense. I don't know. Do I advance my duty? People
used to say that you could break oak up in a stone and there'd be a frog or a
snake would leap out of it. But it's not possible? It's mythology. Well, I know.
I love it. Carlo Revell is Quantum World. It's happening every Tuesday. He can
answer that first. Well, that is almost it for today's Saturday Live. Thank you
for your ears and a huge thank you to all our guests, Jojo Moyes, Henry Naylor,
Aaron Horn and Ava Glass. Jojo, you've chosen the track that we are going to end
with. What are you giving us? It's Life on Mars by David Barrow. It's The Sound
of My Childhood and I think everybody loves this song. Thank you. We're back
next week. Until then, from all of us, have a very good weekend. Oh man, reading
up the wrong guy. Oh man, wondering if he'll ever know. I've done the best
selling show. This is Life on Mars. Saturday Live was presented by Nicky Beatty
and Richard Coles. The producer was Claire Bartlett and The Sound Engineers were
Duncan Hannant and Emma Hart. We're opening the kitchen cabinet next here on
Radio 4 and this morning the Port of Grimsby and its historic ice factories
inspire the panel to discuss the merits of frozen foods. We'll join them in just
a moment. Discover the very best in arts and culture with Front Row. I love when
the theatre becomes absolutely silent and they're like, what's happening? With
live discussions, news and reviews. It was extraordinary. I got very moved. And
interviews with the people creating and changing the world of arts around us. I
pay a lot of attention to lessons in the human condition that never cease to
inspire me. Join Tom Sutcliffe and me, Smira Ahmed, for Front Row. Some of the
lines that I write I personally do actually really love. Live every Monday to
Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15 with thousands of episodes now on BBC
Sounds. In the next hour, the BBC's political correspondent Ben Wright will be
reviewing the political week gone by, discussing the current state of the race
to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as leader of the SNP, a potential deal with the EU
over post Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland and he'll be looking
ahead to next month's budget in the week in Westminster after the news at 11.
Now on Radio 4, here's Jay Rayner. Hello and welcome to the kitchen cabinet.
This week we're on the Humber Riviera, Jim's V Docks to be precise at one time
said to have been home to the largest fishing fleet in the world. Despite the
decline of the fishing industry, the port remains one of the busiest in Europe.
There's even a sign declaring it Europe's food town as you drive in past its
iconic red brick dock tower and the multitude of food processing factories
turning out fish fingers, crispy pancakes, frozen peas and everything else in
between. For our part, we've cast our net far and wide to bring some of the
finest food experts to shore. They are chef Robert Brown, food writers Melissa
Thompson and Phyllis Freeborn and a barnacle encrusted Dr Annie Gray. Ladies and
gentlemen, your kitchen cabinet panel. Now this week's show is our 250th. That
frankly sounds sarcastic. Still it's a major milestone. So panel, I want to know
about your own personal food milestones, please Melissa Thompson. Oh, probably,
like my dad is a serious critic of mine. You know, everyone else, well, this is
lovely Melissa and he'll be like this. It's horrible. And my grandma, his mum
made the best curry chicken and I made it for my parents. And when my dad said
he was like, you've nailed this, that's probably the best milestone I can think
of. I can see that. Thank you. Thank you. Robert Brown. I got sent on a foreign
exchange as an 11 year old boy to France. I'd always been rummaging around in
the water as a kid and catching things and never quite knowing what to do with
them when I've got them. Going to France taught me that everything they did, if
it was walking the dog, they were picking mushrooms. If they were catching fish,
it was for lunch. If you went to the beach, it was to get oysters off the rocks
and catch more fish. That was my food thing because I finally put two and two
together and realised it wasn't that weird. I was just going to be a chef. Let's
go to our next minor milestone with our first question of this 250th episode
from Paul Braven from Grimsby. A one pot solution to what to do with leftover
chicken is usually curry for me. Can the panel suggest an alternative? Right.
I'm going to very briefly come to you, Dr. Annie Gray. Leftovers. What are
leftovers? A 20th century, late 20th century concept, which has no real meaning.
Leftovers. They are precooked food. They're just ingredients that are really
convenient because you've already done a lot of the work. Right. So you, Paul,
have got a big fridge full of chicken and you need something to do with it. I'm
just going to go down the line. Fliss. So I like to, with leftover chicken, I
like to fry off an onion, as you do with most things. Add in the chicken, add in
a couple of fillets of anchovies and then pour in some tomatoes. Let that simmer
for about 20 minutes and have that as a pasta sauce. Really, really simple.
Okay. So we've got pasta sauce. Melissa. If I'm feeling virtuous in a salad, if
I'm not, then I would probably mix it with some gravy, thicken the gravy, get it
into a container, flatten it, refrigerate it until it's set solid, cut it into
cubes or whatever, brick on it, fry it, a bit of mayonnaise. I think part of the
laughter is the admiring glances from Rob O' and I like you. You're looking
practically aroused, actually. Rob. I don't want that lady shed. It's got to be
a pie if it's a leftover chicken, isn't it? But if you don't want to go to a
faff of making a pie, shred that meat that you've got left. You can buy a packet
of bean sprouts, can't you? A couple of chilli flakes in there, mix those
together, get a bit of sriracha sauce on it and just leave it for a minute or
two. That sriracha will wilt those bean sprouts down. Shit, spring roll pastry.
Make a little sausage roll out of it, deep fry them. So if in doubt, deep fry
it. Excellent stuff. Let's take our next question from Anne Schlechter from
Laus. Hello. My question is, have you ever got someone to eat something they
said they would never ever eat? Right, well, there's an interesting challenge.
Melissa, have you ever got someone to eat something they said they would never
ever eat? Yeah, I have. I might get in trouble for this, but what the hell? So
my partner is a hematologist and also works with blood. So for her, I think bone
marrow is obviously important in the creation of blood, not something you eat.
And the thought of eating bone marrow, I love bone marrow. Ever since I was a
kid, we used to fight over it, my brother and I, and thought of eating bone
marrow. If I talk about it, she's like, can you stop talking about it? It's
making me feel sick, but I have snuck it into burgers, into burger patties. If
she's listening to this, will this be the first time she's realised this?
Possibly. Possibly. I love you. We made her tell you. Rob? Yeah, I mean, there's
a couple of things, but I suppose the one that mainly sticks in my mind is
tripe. And everyone pulls a face about tripe, you know, nobody likes tripe until
they eat tripe cooked properly. You have tripe up here, don't you? Yeah, not
come that far north, have I? No, right. Yeah, cut tripe, honeycomb tripe, it's
got to be cut into really thin strips and you're going to hate me for this. Roll
it in flour, roll it in egg, and then some breadcrumb with some English mustard
powder in it and deep fry it. And I have served that at so many functions to
lovely people in cocktail dresses and dinner jackets with little English mustard
dip and they've all thought it was calamari. And it's not. You're listening to
the kitchen cabinet, which today comes from Grimsby, just down the road from us
here on the docks, is a famous local landmark, the ice factory. There are a
small handful of these still in existence around the UK, but Grimsby's is
arguably the most well preserved and the only one with the ice making machinery
still in place. With us to tell us more is Emma Lingard from Associated British
Ports, who owned the docks where the ice factory sits. Emma, thanks for joining
us. So what was the function of the ice factory and why was it so important to
the town? So the ice factory was built to produce artificial ice and it opened
in 1901. And the reason for its existence was because we had a growing fishing
fleet. Now with the railway and the finding of new rich fishing grounds on the
Dogger Bank, it lured a lot of fishermen from the south and of course going out
fishing, they needed preservation. And basically in winter, what they would do
is they cut the ice from the rivers and the lakes and the ponds rather, stored
them in the ice houses. Or at the point in the 1880s when the fishing fleet had
grown that much, they were actually bringing ice in on ships from Norway. But
that still didn't meet the demands. So how transformative was this ice house for
the fishing industry? It was huge because when it was built and opened, it was
producing 300 tons of ice a day. It was about 93,000 tons a year. And 10 years
later, they had to build an extension, add more tanks. So then they were
operating at 500 tons a day. But what it meant was that the fish that was coming
in, because the method that they used on the sailing smacks, they'd go out in
what was like a fleet system. So the sailing smacks would go out catch, a
mothership would bring the catch back to the dock and the fish would be kept
live in wooden tanks submerged in the dock and then obviously got it and cleaned
when needed. But they needed the ice to prolong its life, especially when it's
going on further journeys. When did it finish working? It ceased working as an
ice factory in 1990 and that was mainly due to the demise of the fishing fleets.
They no longer needed a building which in its heyday was producing about 1100
tons of ice by the time it finished. Now before I let you go, I'm told there are
exciting plans for the development of the ice factory. Can you tell us anything
about that? Unfortunately, Jane, my lips are sealed on that one, but all I have
to say is watch this space and the future looks bright. Alright, fair enough,
you heard it here. Emma, thank you for your time. Annie, we now take frozen food
for granted, but when did general frozen food, as we know it in our home
freezers, first come into existence? Well, you've got two factors really. You've
got the development of the freezing process to give us frozen food and then
you've got freezers really going into the domestic context. In terms of frozen
food, people were experimenting with the idea of freezing food to preserve it
really from the 1840s onwards. There are patents looking at that. Most of that
used ice and salt, which obviously we were well used to using to freeze ice
cream, but it didn't really freeze the food very well. It kept it kind of what I
would call slightly off frozen, so not brilliant for things like fish and meat
in terms of modern food hygiene. We started importing frozen meat in particular
from Australia and from South America as well in the 1880s, 1890s, and that
would come in just frozen and then it would be sold by butcher shops, chain
butcher shops started opening deliberately to sell this unfrozen meat, because
by then it defrosted, to the public as fresh meat. Not passing it off as fresh,
but just this was meat and it was much cheaper than meat that had been produced
in this country and slaughtered on the hoof. So it was a really important thing
for the diet of the working classes, but that was sort of as far as it got for a
long, long time. Vegetables ended up being frozen in the 1920s, 1930s, a lot of
that developed by Clarence Birdsye, who was a real pioneer. But most homes
didn't have freezers. They might have ice boxes filled with ice and salt, but
they'd only keep things kind of cold. And when you think about it, electricity,
which is really what powers the modern freezer, was not in most homes until the
50s and 60s. So modern freezers were invented in the 1930s, but most people
didn't have them. It's something like 3% of people had freezers at the beginning
of the 1960s. Now it's about 95%. The big growth time was the late 60s, early
70s. And if you think back, those of you that can remember the 70s, all those
adverts for things like really cool frozen foods to save the stereotypical
harried housewife or the really bad dad who can't cook, all of that advertising
was really, really successful in persuading people. They not only wanted to buy
freezers, usually chest freezers, but also then buy the foods to go inside them
as well. Fliss, any sense of nostalgia for frozen foods? No, I'm too young to
have any sense of nostalgia. Oh my God. All right. So no nostalgia, but how do
you use the freezer? I use my freezer for absolutely everything. I wouldn't live
without my freezer. I always have bags of frozen veg in there. So that's frozen
peas, frozen green beans and frozen spinach. They're like absolute staples
alongside. I tend to have frozen berries. I'll have like frozen banana and
frozen mango on occasion if I want to make a smoothie. But most of all, I use my
freezer for ingredients because I am a fully unpaid up member of the zero food
waste brigade. So I'll have stuff like parmesan rinds. I keep all of those put
in stocks and stews. I keep all of my citrus peelings if I'm only using the
juice. I grate them in from frozen into dishes. I keep everything that I need to
make stock and stews. So that's animal bones, onion skins and veg scraps. They
all have their drawer where they sit. And of course I have ice lollies on hand
at all times. Vital use of the freezer. Let's take a question on frozen foods
from Heather Pickwell from Grimsby. This is my question. I always have half a
bag of frozen peas loitering in the bottom of my freezer. Any ideas on how to
use up frozen peas in a tasty way, veg or non veg? Right, frozen peas. Annie,
actually certain foods are actually better frozen, aren't they? Yeah, and peas
are one of them. I've grown peas. Many of you may have grown peas. They're
terrible. Every single one has a maggot. And they're dry and horrible and they
take forever to grow. And then you cook them and they say they're only going to
take five minutes and 20 minutes later you're still boiling them. And just know
I wouldn't bother with fresh peas ever. It's all about the frozen peas. So
frozen peas are a useful thing to have. We need ideas. Fliss, what can you do
with frozen peas? I can do everything with frozen peas, if you try hard enough.
My favourite thing to do with frozen peas, if I do want to use them up and get
them out of the way, I'll make a pea pesto. So I'll blanch them really, really
lightly and then I put them in a blender with a bunch of parmesans, some pasta
water and some basil and possibly some pine nuts, mostly often walnuts because
they're a little bit cheaper. And that all goes in and goes round spaghetti and
it is delicious. Melissa? I make fried rice often and usually I have left, the
starting point is the leftover rice and I will look in the fridge and I'll look
in the freezer for any vegetables that I've got that can go in there. And peas
are something I use a lot and I just think they're lovely, nice little pops of
sweetness. Rob, I do remember interviewing you, right, the first time we met and
it said on your menu, I think it was a Barnsley chop with little peas. And when
I said, why are they called little peas, they said because we're in England,
they're not petit poi, they're little peas. They're not petit poi, they're still
not. Okay. I think it's just a marketing ploy to charge a little bit more on a
menu. You know what, I love frozen peas. I think they're one of those few things
that you can take out on a freezer and, you know, finest restaurants in the
world use frozen peas. I don't care what they tell you. Soaps, the simplest way
of getting rid of them. I am intrigued just why you've got half a bag. What did
you do with the first half of the bag? It went into a risotto. We'd do the same
with the next bag. No, that's right. But I wanted ideas from you. I wanted good
ideas. Soup, yeah. Get a shallot or an onion, a little bit of carrot, a little
bit celery. You know, those awesome sorts of little vegetables you've got. And
then sweat that off really quick. Get some chicken stock in there. Get a bag of
peas in at the very, very end because you don't want to lose any colour. Put a
stick blender on it. Done. Thank you. And I'll give you a few ideas for that
other half a bag. Yeah, absolutely does. Thank you. And a big thank you to Emma
Lindgaard from Associated British Ports for joining us on the stage today.
You're listening to The Kitchen Cabinet, which this week comes to you from
Grimsby. We've heard all about freezing as a technique for preserving food, but
it's not the only one that Grimsby is famous for. Smoking has long been another
method which not only helps keep the fish longer, but in parts a fantastic
flavour too. Annie, why was smoked fish so important historically? Mainly
because for half of the year, back before the Reformation, we had to eat fish
because that was what you did if you were Catholic. So we had what were called
fast days, which was quite a lot of the wheat plus any form of saint's day, plus
the whole of advent, the whole of Lent. And on those days you could eat no
animal products. So obviously that meant we ate a lot of fish. If you were rich,
much of that was fresh fish because you would have your own moat probably
surrounding your own castle. So not a problem. If you were somewhat poorer, then
you would eat preserved fish, which tended to mean either air dried or salted or
smoked. And a lot of the time the way those fish were described was relatively
sort of fluid. So for example, smoked haddock in a lot of books is referred to
as dried haddock. And you get dried coming in a lot. It's just a generic word
for preserved fish. Even after the Reformation, we kept eating a lot of fish. I
mean, I don't know how many of you eat fish on Fridays, but that's the kind of
hangover from that pre-Reformation period. And again, the rich would often eat
fresh fish and the poor would eat dried fish. And some of it was terrible. I
mean, some of the dried stock fish you would get would require soaking for four
or five days and beating with a hammer in order to eat it. And then of course,
once you get to the 19th century, that idea of smoking to preserve and drying to
preserve fish goes slightly out the window because you get the railway network
coming in and then everyone can access, if not afford, fresh fish. But fish
remains really, really important because the rich want to put it on their table
as part of their, well, nine course tasting menus, which is effectively what a
rich person's dinner was. And the poor need that fish for protein because it's
so very, very difficult to afford meat. So fish is really important, both for
rich people to show off and poor just to access the calories and the protein
they need in everyday life. Now with us is Rob Moore, head smoker from Alfred
Enderby on Grinsby Docks, who have been smoking fish using the traditional
Grinsby method for over 100 years now. Rob, welcome. Good to see you. Hello.
Before Grinsby smoked fish was awarded protected geographical indication status
back in 2009, which means that only fish prepared and smoked in Grinsby using
the traditional method can be labeled traditional Grinsby smoked fish. What does
this mean exactly and why the resulting fish is so different to the stuff we
might find in most supermarkets? Well, firstly, most of the fish prepared and
smoked is done in a mechanical kiln, which is mass produced. So that's the stuff
in the supermarket? In the supermarkets, yeah, mass produced and it just doesn't
have the flavor traditional smoked halik has, Grinsby traditional smoked halik.
So Alfred Enderby will have big brick chimneys instead of electronical kilns and
they are laden with tar, as is 100 years old, our smokehouse has been in
operation and it's full of tar. That tar will give the fish tannins, the sawdust
slowly smolders overnight, 16 hours will smoke it for, whereas a mechanical kiln
could be two, three hours mass produced in and out and it just doesn't have the
same flavor. What wood do you use? It's a secret, but it does come from trees.
Okay. I'm delighted to hear it. Phyllis, you've got some of the smoked haddock
in front of you. Start passing that down to the panel. Tell us more about the
process. Where does it start? Well, the key to any good ingredient is the start
process. So we'll be, Grinsby fish market we'll go to in the morning. We will
pick out, single out the best fish we can buy. Usually does cost more, but we'll
get the best ingredients we can. We'll bring it back. Everything's hand filleted
in the smokehouse. It's then brined, which is the start of the curing process
because the salt will draw the moisture out of the fish. We'll then hang it on
metal racks for two to three hours before loading it into the smokehouses. And
then that's where the magic happens. Coming in the morning and it's done for us.
All everything's done in there. And that's cold smoking. Cold smoke. So the fish
is high up. There's no heat. And cause it's high up as well as it not being near
any heat. The smoke isn't so thick as it would be near the bottom. So it's, it's
delicate and it produces a brilliant flavor. Rob, just to be clear, you don't
dye the haddock that you sell. No, we don't dye it at all. No. And Patrick the
owner always says, don't eat yellow haddock, do not eat yellow snow. So he does
say that. He does say that. There is a reason for that is first of all, it
brings absolutely nothing to the party. So there's no flavor into it. It's just
a dye. And the reason people used to dye it is people used to try and hide old
fish to smoke. So it sort of made it look bright again, made it look fresh
again. But the quality of our for it to be that good. We don't want to dye it.
We want people to see how fresh it is, how good it is. And we're not hiding
anything. Annie, how have we smoked haddock historically? Well, I mean, a lot of
it was associated with poverty because preserved fish was for a long time. And
then in the 19th century, we really got into it largely as a breakfast dish. I
mean, I suppose today still smoked haddock's got kind of breakfast association.
So there's lots of breakfast dishes and things like sort of kedgeries and things
like that. And then also, by the end of the 19th century, it was really, really
popular as what we're known as savories. So those were the sort of end of meal
things that would really punch above their weight in terms of their intense
umami. That's the sort of savory flavor that you get from things like parmesan
and tomato. So you get recipes for things like tartlets and croutes. So bread
crust with a tiny bit of smoked haddock in various sources might be a light
curry sauce, might be a bit of smoked haddock with a mushroom on top or a
pickled walnut. All things really make your mouth absolutely water. So things
like that that were highly flavored really. And then you get a few kind of weird
dishes like there's a iced fish curry souffle thing in one book from the 1880s,
which I wouldn't necessarily recommend we try. Okay, let's not do that. Rob,
Owen Brown, is cooking smoked haddock something you enjoy doing? How could you
not want to? You know, I mean, it's just got that beautiful gelatinous, you
can't taste it, I'm sorry, but the sort of gelatinous texture between the two
flakes. All of that trim off the edge, wonderful in a little sort of quiche or
something like that or folded through an omelette. But the main loin piece, I
love to just get a frying pan, pre-boil some new potatoes, yeah, not many, pan
fry that little loin of smoked haddock, get a little bit of color on it, lots
and lots of butter, drop my new potatoes in there and bash them up into that
smoked haddocky buttery sort of flavor. Get some pepper on there, always got to
be a little bit careful with salt on smoked fish, I think when you're cooking,
because you can sometimes just tip it over the edge, throw a handful of spinach
in there, get that nice onto a plate, nice little poached egg on the top,
that'll do it, won't it? I think it will. And a big round of applause for Rob
Moore from Apple Envy. Let's take a question sort of associated with this
subject from Gary Gray from Grimsby. Hello panel, you've heard how we've got
some really great fish products here in Grimsby, what would you say are the
essential elements of a really good fish pie? So I have to start by asking, does
smoked haddock have to be in a fish pie? Yeah. Rob says yes. Absolutely 100% but
not a lot, and just the trimming bits, I wouldn't dream of putting a nice loin
in, you put too much in, you'll kill everything else. Now as this is radio I
will have to tell you that the other three panelists all shook their heads. So
we're talking about really good fish pie, Phyllis, what are you putting yours? I
love a really good fish pie, in all honesty I'll put whatever fish I can find in
the supermarket in it, because I love the stuff. But the trick for fish pie for
me is really not to cook a fish very much at all if you can help it before it
goes in the oven with the roux and the mashed potatoes on top, because there is
nothing worse than getting a fish pie, opening it up and having a chalky bit of
fish that can't stand that. So if you're going to cook it, either poach it in
the milk really, really lightly so you get the milk flavoured with fish and then
you make the roux out of that, or really don't cook the fish at all before it
goes in and put it in the dish raw. Vigorous nodding from Melissa. Yeah, agreed.
And for me a fish pie is a really good vehicle for whatever fish you have. I do
like to have something smoked in there, whether it's a bit of smoked salmon or a
bit of smoked trout. And also I like to pop in some peas into my fish pie. So
yeah, that's another option. Annie Grey. Well, I quite like to put cheese on top
of my fish pie, because there's nothing that doesn't go with cheese. Obviously I
would prefer to put pastry on my pie because it's a pie and puff is really good
with fish because texture is everything. But if you must go down the mashed
potato route, the only way to cook fish pie, I agree with the peas. And I also
agree with that not cooking the fish too much is to put loads of cheese on top,
put it under the grill so you get crisp from the cheese to compliment the kind
of mushiness of the mash. And then you get your kind of glorious texture from
the not too well cooked fish. And I quite like a few prawns in mind to give a
bit of boing. All right, I'm going to go back to Rob, who must have made many of
these. Give us a quick version of fish pie. Really lightly poached fish in milk
if you can with a little bit of bay leaf and nutmeg in there. Drain your fish
off. Turn that cooking liquor into a thick white sauce. Fish in the dish. No
peas are going anywhere near this because what happens to the peas while
everything's cooking and you're getting all that mashed potato on the top, all
glorious and golden and crunchy and bit gnarly around the edges, all them little
peas are losing colour and starting to look like a camouflage. No, it's de-
josting roll. Frozen peas. You've got your fish. White sauce over the top. Make
sure you've got lots of salt and pepper in there. Good, good layer of really
lovely, unctuous mashed potato on the top. Get that into a really hot oven. Get
it all golden and brown. Get it out. And cheese. But no peas and no cheese. A
bit of cheese and butter. All right, we have to quickly go back to Gary. So now
we have a heated debate. Where do you stand on peas in a fish pie? I have to
agree that I would want my peas on the side. I would want the peas though. But
on the side. In fact, let's throw this open to the audience. If you think peas
should go in a fish pie, shout peas after three. One, two, three. Peas. And if
you think they should not shout no. One, two, three. No. Rob and Gary both, I
think you have one there and the rest of the pie have lost. Cheese on a fish
pie? Yeah, yeah. A bit of cheese. Definitely though, the crusty top with the
voluptuous underneath. Why do we even bother to get the panel to answer when
cleaning? There you go, Gary. I hope that helps. We have time for one more
question from Caroline John from Clethorpes. Hello panel. I'd like to know what
is the worst meal you've cooked yourself? Right, the worst meal you've cooked
for yourself, Fliss. Only one meal I've ever made has gone in the bin and it was
when I added too much flour to mashed potato to make a frittata and it just went
really gloopy in the pan and I thought, no, I can't eat that. That's the worst
thing I've ever cooked myself. Rob, I once roasted a rabbit with all of the
offal in a plastic bag. Isn't it great you just got a round of applause for
winning at bads, I know. Annie. A really awful 17th century pear and chicken pie
and I used my entire pear crop and it's a biennial tree and it was horrific.
Horrific. And on that tragic note, that's all we've got time for today. We'll be
back next week as though when we'll be in Manchester eating steam puddings. It's
a tough life but we do it all for you. As ever, we'd love you to get in touch.
You can email us your stories, tips and photographs from both tribes and as the
panel was just discussing disasters to TKC at bbc.co.uk. But for now, it's
goodbye from me, Jay Raynor, Melissa Thompson, Dr. Annie Gray, Rob Owen Brown,
Fliss Freeborn and our audience here in Groesby. The kitchen cabinet was
produced by Dominic Tierman, the assistant producer was Dulce Wodcock and it's a
something else production for Radio 4. For a hundred years, the BBC has been
making groundbreaking radio drama. In this evening here on Radio 4, the poet and
writer Michael Simmons Roberts explores even further. Continuing our celebration
of the centenary of BBC radio drama. The Huntsman now purposefully directed his
footsteps. Analyzing the most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical. It's this room. You just took your wallet. You can go
to different places and tell the stories from different points of view. Dramatic
beats with me, Michael Simmons Roberts. Everything in British storytelling on
television owes so much to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sound.