TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-17H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Oh, it's all around you. The Gold Watch on BBC iPlayer. BBC News at four
o'clock. Lancashire's police and crime commissioner has announced an independent
review of the investigation into the disappearance of Nicola Bully. Andrew
Snowden has commissioned the College of Policing to look into the case,
including the release by officers of personal information about Miss Bully. The
45-year-old's body was pulled from the river wire on Sunday. Mr Snowden said the
case was completely unprecedented, considering the amount of online and media
interest. This review is being held because there are questions quite rightly
that members of the public and across different political spectrums want to have
answered around the search, around the investigation, and around the release of
the information. Lancashire police said it welcomed the review. Tesco and Aldi
have become the latest supermarkets to introduce limits on the sale of certain
fruit and vegetables because of shortages. Asda and Morrison's have already
imposed restrictions after extreme weather affected harvests abroad. Ambulance
and other health staff are to stage a fresh strike over pay. Unison said its
members would walk out across England on March the 8th and accuse the government
of failing to hold proper talks with health unions. The health secretary is
having paid talks with the Royal College of Nursing. Shamima Begum has lost her
legal challenge to the decision to revoke her British citizenship. The court
dismissed her appeal but said there was a credible case that she was a victim of
human trafficking. Ms Begum was 15 years old when she travelled to Syria to join
the Islamic State Group. The ruling means the 23-year-old remains barred from
returning to the UK. At least two people have been killed and more than 50 are
trapped underground after a coal mine collapsed in northern China. President Xi
Jinping has ordered a search and rescue mission to the mine in Inner Mongolia.
And a large mystery metal sphere has washed up on a shore in Japan. The
authorities don't know what it is but police have investigated and they don't
think it's explosive. The hollow object has been called the Godzilla Egg by
curious and confused locals. BBC News. Now on BBC Radio 4, Mathias Saeed steps
into the concert hall to explore the passion and the pain of music. Karine
Morris is on stage. She's playing to a concert hall in Bordeaux. Tonight, it's
Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo theme and she's the solo cellist, the star.
About three-quarters of the way through the concert, I just became aware that I
was not going to have the stamina to finish. Karine isn't just tired from a busy
performance schedule. Her right shoulder, the arm she uses to bow her cello, is
failing her. She pushes on through the notoriously difficult final variation.
Dread, just utter panic. I can't even remember how I got to the end of the
concert, but I did. The crowd suspects nothing. A pause fills the air. And then
I staggered off stage and that was the moment that I knew I can't lie to myself
anymore. There really is something wrong and I have to go and face it, whatever
it is. I'm Mathias Saeed and this is Sideways, my show about the ideas that
shape our lives with stories of seeing the world differently. Today I want to
explore the powerful connection that forms between our bodies and the
instruments of our professions and passions and how losing that connection may
feel like we've lost a part of ourselves. I started playing piano because my
mother hated my singing. I was walking around the house singing, clearly not
gifted at singing. And so she put me in piano lessons and it really stuck. This
is Artina McCain. I'm glad that I'm a terrible singer so I ended up playing
piano. From her teenage years, Artina knew she was onto something with the
piano. She was selected for the Juilliard Experience where she spent time with
professors at the prestigious New York Performing Arts School. She was entering
competitions and she developed a taste for the thrill of adoring crowds. People
are telling you, you're really talented at this or that and you're like, yeah, I
feel really great on this stage. I want to stay here. I want the attention. I
think you have to have maybe a tiny bit of an ego to go on stage and be
crucified for every concert. So I had that energy of just wanting to be on
stage, wanting to be in front of people. In her early twenties, Artina is
studying at a conservatory. Everything is falling into place. The dream she
holds of being a concert pianist is looking really promising. I always felt like
I was completely on target to be a concert pianist, which is crazy because being
a concert pianist is what people tell you not to do. They tell you to take a
safe path. And I think that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to do a concert
piano. I'm going to tell you not to do. They tell you to take a safe path.
Clarity of Mind about the direction she wanted her musical career to take was a
feature of Corinne Morris' teenage years too. One of my first defining moments
was a concert that I went to and I was around eight at the Royal Albert Hall.
And I just remember those deep sounds coming from the cello section and just
caught my imagination. And I suddenly said to my parents, I must learn the
cello. That's just the instrument I've got to do. So believe it or not, by the
age of 11, I knew that that was the instrument that I wanted to play
professionally. Corinne's abilities are clear from a young age. By just 16, she
has a diploma with honours from the Royal College of Music in London. She's
requested personally by one of the world's greatest cellists, Mr Slav
Rostropovich, to take part in his festival in Evian in France. And over the
years, a deep bond has formed between Corinne and her instrument. I actually
don't feel like I'm holding my cello, but rather embracing it. We are connected,
the cello and I, as one, as a unit. I feel how the cello is on any particular
day, as you might with a friend, having a good day, having a bad day. I can feel
that with my cello could be the weather that's influencing the wood and
therefore the response of the instrument under my hands. And of course, it can
be down to things such as strings. And it's also my own mood and feelings of
that day. I viscerally relate to the idea that certain objects can be taken into
our own emotional and physical world. As a professional sportsman, I had the
same table tennis bat for almost 20 years and frankly, it wasn't a bat. It was
part of me. Mine was called a Gruber Pro FL, and I can still feel its ghost in
my palm. Once, a tiny piece chipped off at the top and I took it to a carpenter
to add some resin to the gap. I almost couldn't bear to watch. I flinched when
he started to sand it down. It was like watching an operation without
anesthetic. Thankfully, while I got it back, it was the same trusty, subtle,
wonderful, pliable piece of wood and it fitted my hand, as it always did, like a
second skin. When we take a tool, something unhuman, inanimate and connect with
it on a deep, almost spiritual level, it can allow us to perform to our highest
potential. To play involuntary music, you need to have an embodied interaction
with music. And that means that actually your body can play its natural role
when you interact with music. This is Professor Luk Ness. He's a music education
specialist and a philosopher at the University of Luxembourg. To explain this
idea of involuntary music, Luk calls on the ghost of that legendary cellist,
Mstislav Rostropovich. Dmitry Shostakovich composed the fiendishly difficult
cello concerto No. 1, specifically for Rostropovich to perform in 1959. He says
at some point, I play music involuntarily. The cello is my tool no more. And
that is exactly what expresses this idea of becoming merged with the instrument.
You don't have to deal with the instrument. You play music. That's actually at
the point where your instrument becomes like a natural extension. He says you
don't have to think about what to do with your arm to take a glass and drink.
But Luk's also been considering this relationship philosophically to understand
how musicians might reach that natural extension of themselves where the
instrument disappears and they just play. It can be achieved by finding a very
important mental state, one that will be familiar to any sports people
listening. It's called flow. In sports, it's often called being in the zone.
You're really into it. You feel challenged on the one hand, but on the other
hand, you also feel up to the challenge. You just can do it. We feel in control
and vitally we feel emotionally invested. If you don't feel like playing the
clarinet, if the clarinet doesn't mean anything to you at that level, it will
also interfere. So when all these levels are okay, you will be able to immerse
deeply in what you are doing and you will be able to experience flow. Flow
sounds quite hard to achieve. A lot of practice and repetition to lose yourself
in the performance, to merge with the activity, whether it's playing an
instrument or table tennis. But in the end, flow is worth it. When one achieves
a state of flow, it becomes a part of who we are. But when the flow stops, it's
brutal. I was playing the Tchaikovsky-Rococo variations, which is a fairly
difficult piece. I realised that I was losing control of my right arm and it was
becoming increasingly heavy. And from then on, I tried to conserve energy, tried
to get myself cued mentally. I'm going to do this, I'm going to go through this,
and true grit is just inconceivable to stop in the middle of a performance and
say, I'm sorry, I can't. I had masked that pain through the grit. I will make
it. But then, as soon as I was out of the performance, that's when the pain
really kicked in massively. Karine has a debilitating shoulder injury. It had
come on slowly, but with a gruelling practice and performance schedule, the
tendon in her right shoulder was hugely inflamed. This performance was the
breaking point. A doctor suggested that she should have surgery. He's basically
telling me, if I go back to the cello, in three, four years' time, I'll wind up
in the same place. Karine refuses the surgery. I think I went straight into
quite a deep depression as I refused the hope of something, even if it wasn't
100% guaranteed. And yet I didn't have another strategy to replace it. I was
just trying to give myself time to find the right way forward. I cancelled all
my work. I basically closed in on myself. I think if one can imagine trying to
hold a cup or a mug or something small, and that seems like such an easy task,
but even those types of tasks, when you have that type of stiffness in your
hands, can be quite monumental. Pianist Artina McCain was in her 20s. She had
been studying and playing hard at a conservatory for her masters of music. She
was on track for the concert pianist career she'd always dreamed of. But she'd
started experiencing pain and loss of mobility in her hands. That's something
that's really probably scary for anyone, but particularly when you use your
hands as your career and your life goals and focus, it's particularly
devastating. Each time she experienced another bout, she'd rest a day or two,
hoping to recover quickly. She felt she just had to keep on playing. Everybody
wants to compete and be the best, and you could definitely experience this no
pain, no gain, or I believe those things. But I also realized that when a person
is in a spiral of pain, it's actually not possible to progress. Artina realizes
she has to take a break from her performing career right when it's taking off.
Her only source of income is teaching, and she couldn't talk about what she was
going through. It's very hush-hush. You know, you don't want to tell people
you're injured. One, because they might not call you for engagements because
they figure, oh, she won't be able to do them. They think, for lack of a better
word, that maybe I'll catch it. What is wrong with the way you think about
posture or your technique? Artina takes time trying different methods she thinks
might help. She decides to pursue a doctorate, but again, she faces major pain
trying to complete the performance side of her PhD. She rests some more, and she
starts to feel like she can play in a more low-stakes setting, her church. After
playing for one week, I had actually lost the complete ability to open my hand,
my right hand. I could no longer reach an octave. I couldn't drive. I was in
excruciating pain at this point all of the time. There was never a break, and I
really thought, oh, wow, this is the end. It's difficult to describe when your
vocation, the thing from which you derive meaning, is suddenly ripped away. It
isn't just about losing the thing that brought you joy, but like losing a part
of yourself. I've met injured sports people who say that while they were out
with injury, they didn't know who they were. It's a profound loss when your
goals are cut short, when a career no longer serves you, when the thing you love
so much is damaging your health. Luc Ness was a talented clarinetist. I think it
was 2002. I think my first son was just born, and I had a very severe accident
with my car. And at that moment, I could no longer play the clarinet. Everything
stops, playing in the orchestra, playing chamber music. Just that it stops
because you can't play anymore. What am I going to do? Luc decided to take
another path into philosophy, and it was his accident that sparked his interest
in the relationship between musician and instrument. When you have such an
accident, you're confronted in such a big way with your body and your
instrument. And your body is actually saying, no, you can't play any longer.
Now, Luc's research aims to bring more freedom into music teaching. To celebrate
and encourage the role of movement is a way of finding greater expression. And
20 years since his accident, Luc isn't a classical concert player, but he is a
teacher, and he is able to play his clarinet again. And when he does, he's free.
So I play with six friends. I play in this Balkan-Klezmer ensemble, and I move
around, I go among the public, I dance with them while I'm playing. It feels
great. It is possible to redefine yourself and maybe discover a new kind of
relationship with your former passion. Luc found his alternative path, and
eventually it brought him back to music in a fresh way. But that isn't the
choice everyone would want to make. It's the summer before Artina is due back in
school for the second year of her doctorate program. She can't play, she doesn't
have an alternative income, and she's in a state of constant pain. She's back in
the same church where just a couple of months earlier she'd lost all hand
movement. She thought her career was over. I think I was just sitting there
looking depressed. You know, somebody noticed my down demeanor and said, hey,
you want to talk about it? No, I don't want to talk about it. And one of my
friends said, no, you know, Artina, you should just tell them what's going on.
And so I told this woman who happened to be an amateur pianist and kind of
secretly thinking, what can an amateur pianist tell me? But it's interesting,
God works in funny ways. And she told me about a new modality that was in
Austin, Texas, and it's actually one of the best practices in the world called
the Continuum Method. And it uses a hand technique to turn on your nerve and to
exact your muscles. It sounded crazy to me, but at this point I'm like, hey, I
don't have any other hope, I'm going to give this a try. After two sessions of
this muscle activation technique, Artina has the full range of motion in her
hand again, which she says is mind boggling given where she'd been. I had lost
other mobility in my body. I had suffered from two car accidents. I wasn't able
to turn my head to the left. I was like an old lady at 27. And so he was able to
reactivate the nerve endings in my feet. After her injury, cello player Corinne
Morris was also searching for a way to move past her pain without surgery. She
spent nine months working with a specialist in what's called Active Release
Techniques to break down scar tissue in her shoulder and heal the area. She was
able to do a lot of work and she was able to do a lot of work. To break down
scar tissue in her shoulder and heal the area, Corinne could finally begin to
practice again. And I remember that first day when I took a bow and drew the bow
across the string. I basically did one minute and that was me done for the day
because it was so tired. It was not hurting but so tired. But slowly, slowly,
minute by minute, Corinne begins to come back to playing. I needed again to
build very slowly into this and also mentally to trust in myself and trust in my
right shoulder that it was sufficiently healed for me to be able to do this. It
was hard for me to even believe my dream can come back. Six months into my
treatment, I gave my first doctoral recital and you can't believe what that felt
like. It was so incredible. I actually performed a work by Margaret Bonds called
Troubled Water. It felt like a rebirth. It felt like I had been born again. I
had been given a new life, a new opportunity to start over. The piece's meaning
really is symbolic of my story. Troubled Water is actually a Negro spiritual
that's based on the biblical story of God troubling the water for healing. The
expression that I was able to get after being healed, you can only imagine the
joy that one has that exudes not only from just the performance aspect but from
your soul. Artina McCain is a celebrated concert pianist and is now a scholar
showcasing the work of underrepresented composers and associate professor of
piano at Memphis University. She runs the Musicians' Wellness Forum to help her
fellow players find information and create openness. Today, Artina doesn't have
the same relationship with the piano that she did in her twenties, but that's
more than okay. Most of my experiences of practicing over that period of time
from being a teenager to an early 20-something feels negative and painful. And
yet I still want this relationship with the piano and it's like they took away
the fear I had of the piano and restored it with something that's pure love. It
doesn't feel like a vocation or just this is my career, but it actually feels
like an opportunity to connect with humanity and the human soul. The reality of
what it means to have to rebuild after a break is not simple. Corinne Morris
came back after five years away. She recorded a new album, Macedonian Sessions,
recorded with the Macedonian Radio Orchestra. Her second, Chrysalis, was
recorded with the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. Corinne was back. She was giving
promotional interviews, getting great reviews, and she was on stage to delight
audiences. I suddenly started to have fairly severe lower back spasms, and that
was like my body saying to me, you're going to have to stop because there's no
way you can play when you have a locked lower back. You can hardly walk. It
turned out as a full-blown burnout, of which I recovered after a few months.
With the second setback, Corinne took a new approach to her care. She started to
look at the underlying causes of her shoulder issues. It was obviously due to
muscle imbalances and lack of recovery time and strength training and many other
aspects of life. From then on, I started to approach my life in a far more
holistic manner for myself, and this has now become also the object of my next
project, which is to build a course for the next generations. So they find out
about the realities of managing one's energy, one's time, building in proper
recovery time before it is an injury and doing preventative measures. And
through this holistic approach to her recovery, Corinne is now able to embrace
her cello in a new way, one that allows her to connect more deeply. The memory
of physically playing on the instrument is fully there, and yet when you do it
in real time after a period away, it feels like that's not exactly how I
remembered it. You've moved on as a person and physically, mentally,
spiritually, and you reconnect with this instrument that you know so well, and
yet it feels foreign at the same time until you find your new way. You settle
into your new relationship. You are one with the instrument again. Why are we
creating those notes, and how do we connect with the composer's emotions and his
thoughts that he's poured into the music? And that flow state just allows you to
fly off with that. Flow is one of the most evocative of experiences, a sense of
oneness with your skill, your surroundings, and the tools of your trade. To lose
access to this experience through injury or anything else is traumatic. It's
understandable that so many people in this position seek a pathway back, but
this isn't typically the instant return to form that makes for a neat and
satisfying storyline. More often, it's a jagged path full of compromises, but
this too can lead to its own kind of reinvention. I think there's a lot to
celebrate here about passion, about purpose, about the strangely intimate
relationships we can forge with inanimate objects, and also, of course, about
the nature of reinvention. Obstacles don't need to be the end. They can denote
new beginnings. And true flow may be found when our passions serve our physical
and emotional needs. Thanks to the producer and series editor, Catherine
Godfrey. The executive producer is Max O'Brien. Sideways is produced by novel
for BBC Radio 4. Next week on Sideways, how a small bag of salad opened up a
world of culinary pleasure. And if you can't wait until then, you can find the
entire Sideways back catalogue of episodes on BBC Sounds right now. The
storyteller and satirist David Sederas returns to Radio 4. I thought I'd support
the movement the way I had become accustomed to by donating money and then
telling people I'd donated twice as much. The author shares his incisive humour
and social critiques of modern life and himself. The moment I got my first
vaccine, I started thinking of the coronavirus the way I think of scurvy.
Something from a long ago time, something that mainly pirates get. A new series
of Meet David Sederas starts tomorrow evening at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.
Now on BBC Radio 4, here's Katie Razzle with The Media Show. Today, what does
the tragic story of Nicola Bully tell us about the media? Yesterday, the
broadcast regulator Ofcom wrote to ITV and Sky News after the Bully family
issued damning criticism of them. This afternoon, the police and crime
commissioner for Lancashire launched an independent review, but will look at the
police's investigation as well as their interaction with the media. I'll be
talking to a journalist who's been covering the case and getting the perspective
of a former police chief constable. We're also taking a look at the conflict in
Ukraine one year on and asking how it's changed journalism. I'm joined by
journalists in the studio and also in Ukraine amongst them. The BBC's Oleg
Heron. Hello Oleg, where are you? Tell us where you are right now. Hi Katie,
we're in the east in a small town called Drusch Kivka and that's about half an
hour from the city of Bapmut, which people will have been hearing about in the
headlines in recent weeks and months. It's the centre of a fierce battle now
between the Ukrainians and the Russians. Well, very welcome. Thank you so much
for sparing us the time on The Media Show. And also with me is Rohit Kachri from
ITV News, John Sweeney and Katarina Melofieva. And more from you all in a moment
because I want to take a look first at the reporting around Nicola Bulli's
disappearance. Let me just play you a clip of Andrew Snowden, police and crime
commissioner for Lancashire, who was speaking this afternoon. It has got very
personal, it's got very vitriol and it has felt sometimes that certain elements
of the media have been determined to expose whatever information they can and
undermine the police investigation. And I think Ofcom do need to look at that.
And there will be reflections for policing around how they have handled elements
of the investigation. But I think there should be some reflection from the media
around has their focus always been in all elements of the media on finding
Nicola or creating stories that will simply create that click through to their
websites. Well, that was Andrew Snowden, Lancashire's police and crime
commissioner. And I want to bring in the Guardians north of England
correspondent Josh Halliday and Andy Trotter, a former police chief constable.