TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I can't believe that you're still trying to do your best while shedding tears.
Right, Sensei? Yes, I am. We want you to work harder. Yes, we want to be a force
for others. We're alive, so we want to be a force for others. If you're in pain
or have sad feelings, or if you need help, please send us an email. Maybe you
can take a step forward to the new future. It's web at keizuhamai.com. Today, we
got some advice from Ms. Hiiramari. It's Thursday, the 23rd. Please come to our
studio at 6.30 p.m. Thank you again, Sensei. Thank you very much. I'm hungry. I
want to eat with you, but I don't have much time. I want to eat quickly. Then
I'll think of something to eat on my day off. Oh, you mean Iyasume Omusubi? Yes.
There are three stores near Waikiki. Great! How many stores are there in total?
There are about six stores in Waikiki, Aramoana, and Kahara. Oh, are the menus
the same? Yes, they are. I recommend Spam Musubi and Mentaiko. If you go to
Beach Oak, there's Oden. Oh, Omusubi and Oden are so good for stomachs. I'm
hungry. Then let's go on a day off today. This is Scott Bakula. Some people
believe that in the future, all kids will have access to world-class medical
care at no charge. Well, at Shriners Hospitals, the future is now. Shriners
Hospitals provides some of the world's best orthopedic and burn medical care
totally without charge. And they combine it with progressive research and
innovative teaching programs. There's a Shriners Hospital helping kids from this
area. For more information, call 1-800-237-5055. Shriners, giving help and hope
to kids for over 80 years. The 2023 Sakura Festival Calendar. The Sakura
Festival is held this year at the Hawaii Japanese Society. There are 15
contestants for the 71st Sakura Festival. They are learning Japanese culture and
Japanese tradition to become the Japanese women representing Hawaii. K-2 Radio
broadcasts the Sakura Festival Calendar, which introduces the contestants who
are active. Broadcasts live from 5 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays from February
20 to March 16. And reruns from March 13 to Thursdays from Monday at 9 a.m. And
Fridays from 9.30 a.m. This program is brought to you by Platinum Sponsor
Jenkins Eye Care. Gold Sponsor, Dentist Richard Tamaru. Ballet of the Temples.
Silver Sponsor, H&H Wellness. Glasses of Parimiki. Hawaii Life Consulting,
TSUDAKUMI. Uehara Yoshimitsu First Honolulu Reality. Yamamoto Dorae Pari. These
are the sponsors. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact us. We
are Dream Construction, which will transform your dreams into reality. We will
do our best to make your dreams come true, from refurbishing your kitchen, bath,
floors, interior, and even renovating. You can find us anywhere, including our
offline store. Please call 808-372-3319 or call us at License number BC-32084.
Now it's time for Dream Construction. If you are concerned about your home, such
as renovating, water supply, and kitchen, we are here to help. Last time, we had
the President of Dream Construction, Hiroshi Okamoto, and his wife, Miki, with
us. Today, we would like to hear from the customers of Dream Construction. Let's
hear from Mrs. C. Mrs. C., thank you for coming. Thank you for having me. First
of all, I would like to ask you why you chose Dream Construction. We had a water
leak, and we needed to repair it urgently. We had a few people who knew the
person who repaired it, so we asked them to introduce Mr. Okamoto. The water
leak was a big problem, but it was fixed. We saw the construction of the person
who brought us here. We trusted him, and he was very fast. He was very diligent
and worked hard. He told us to do this and that, and he asked us to fix the
water leak today. He told us that he had a workshop in Derryhamn, and he was
going to fix it. He told us that it was going to rain on the weekend, so he was
going to fix it on the workshop. He told us that it would be clean on Monday,
and he would come back. We trusted him very much and asked him to fix it the
next day. We only met recently, but the house was getting cleaner and cleaner.
My wife asked me to change the floor of the kitchen. I was old, so I had to move
the tableware. I was lazy, so I used tape to fix the door. I told my wife that
it was too heavy, and I had to remove the whole thing. I told her that it was
too heavy for me at this age, and she gave me the whole thing. I took a picture
of it because I was young. I told her that I would put it in the kitchen. It was
amazing. I was very happy to see the couple of Mr. Hiroshi and Ms. Miki. I was
very happy to see Mr. Hiroshi and Ms. Miki. I'm looking forward to seeing them
together. I'm very grateful. I'm very grateful for Mr. Okamoto's smartness and
experience. And I'm very grateful for Ms. Miki's dedication. She is a Japanese
woman. She is very considerate. Mr. Okamoto and the employees are all very good.
I love watching them. I love watching them. I want them to do a good job. I'm
looking forward to seeing them. I'm looking forward to seeing them. What kind of
construction did you do? I've been working on this and that since mid-January.
First, you repaired the water leak. And I also repaired the barn. I made a
Japanese-style barn. I also repaired the refrigerator. I bought a big
refrigerator in the kitchen. But I was confused. I didn't have what I wanted in
Hawaii. So I bought a small one in Toza. I bought a small one in Daikokuan. I
was sorry, but it was broken. I bought a big one and I had to repair it. I live
in a house in the sea. It's a paradise for termites. It's a paradise. It's very
dry. That's why it's easy to live in. It's good because it's not rainy. But it's
a paradise for termites. It's a big damage. So I bought a new refrigerator. I
asked the owner to repair the kitchen. I repaired it very well. I made a
Japanese-style barn. Termites ate it. But I wanted to keep it. So I asked the
owner to repair it. I asked the owner to repair it. I put a paper on it. I put a
paper on it. I thought it was clean before I repaired it. I thought it was clean
before I repaired it. But I was in a hurry. I was looking for a long-term job.
But I was looking for a long-term job. So I bought a big refrigerator. I
repaired the kitchen floor. I've been working on it since January. I've been
working on it since January. I'm not a repeater. You're a repeater. I'm a
repeater. I'm a repeater. I'm very grateful for your trust. I'm very grateful
for your trust. I want to recommend you to everyone. I want to recommend you to
everyone. I was impressed by your smile. I want to show you the smile of Mrs. C.
I want to show you the smile of Mrs. C. I'm happy to hear that. I'm 80 years old
this year. I've been dreaming of having fun since I was a kid. I've been
dreaming of having fun since I was a kid. I've been dreaming of having fun since
I was a kid. I've been in good mood and this family is getting in good mood.
Ôka-Motsu-san told me how to live a better room in the old evening. Ôka-Motsu-
san told me how to live a better room in the old evening. I thought it would be
better to live in a house with a lot of space. I was surprised when I visited
the house before. I thought it was a good idea. I thought I could live a more
beautiful and spacious life if I lived a little longer. I see. Ms. Namise Sushi,
I wish you a better and happier life. It's because of Dream Construction. Yes,
it's because of Dream Construction. They are realizing the dream of life. Let's
keep on dreaming. I'm looking forward to it. Thank you very much for today, Ms.
Sushi. Thank you. We heard from Ms. Sushi. She is having fun with Mr. Okamoto,
the president of Dream Construction. Next, we have Ms. Ueda. She is a real
estate agent. She is a professional. Let's listen to her story. Thank you for
coming today, Ms. Ueda. Thank you for having me. Ms. Ueda, you are a real estate
agent. Why did you choose Dream Construction? I am a real estate agent. I help
people who live in the out of town area to repair and renovate their houses. I
have four real estate apartments in Kakao area. I have to estimate the cost of
each house. I happen to get the best price from Dream Construction. They also
help me with my needs. I have been asking for Dream Construction for a long
time. How long have you been asking for it? It's been almost 10 years. You are a
real estate agent. I ask for it whenever I have a chance. Especially when it
comes to high-rise buildings, I have to ask for a contractor's license. I can
trust Dream Construction. I feel like you are working with Dream Construction.
Thank you. You have been working with Dream Construction for over 10 years. Do
you have any memorable stories? In December of 2012, I had to change the
flooring of my rental house. I asked Mr. Okamoto to estimate the cost. He said
it was a rental house, so I had to ask for a contractor's license. I have to
make sure that the flooring is waterproof and durable. I have ordered a lot of
things, but they all met my expectations. You are a professional. You know what
kind of material you need for a rental house. You have to meet the requirements
of Dream Construction. That's amazing. How do you feel about working with Mr.
Okamoto? I feel at ease because I have worked with him in many cases. You have
been working with Dream Construction for over 10 years. Yes. I think many people
are listening to this program. Can you give a message to them? If you have a
problem with your responsibility, you will have to pay a lot of money. So, I
think you should ask a contractor to work with you in any field. I am very
grateful to Mr. Okamoto for his service. I will continue to ask him for help.
You are a professional who works in real estate. I think you are the one who is
recommended by Mr. Ueda. I agree. Thank you for your valuable advice. We have
heard Mr. Ueda's story. We have one more person. Please listen to Ms. Mie. Thank
you for coming today. Thank you. Thank you for coming to the studio. You chose
Dream Construction. Why did you choose Dream Construction? I was looking for a
Japanese contractor who could speak Japanese. I met Mr. Ogura and he was the one
who brought me to Dream Construction. How did you feel when you first met Mr.
Ogura? I could understand Japanese. I could say something to him. I could
understand his conversation. I could say my opinion. I was glad to meet him. I
think it is the safest way to understand Japanese. I am an amateur and he is a
professional. I was glad to hear his explanation. I was worried that he would
use Japanese. I was worried that he would use Japanese. I am glad that I chose
Dream Construction. What was the order like? My brother's house is 50 years old.
He is in Japan and he wants to renovate his house. But he asked someone to do
it. But he asked someone to do it. He said that the window frame was damaged by
the rain and the wind. So he asked his brother to change the window frame. But
there were 21 windows in the house. It was a big construction. There were 21
windows in one house? There were many windows in one or two houses. The small
window was for the bathroom. There were 21 windows in one house. It was a big
construction. There was a steel frame for security. He removed it and fixed the
broken window frame. He put a new window in the house. He painted the old window
frame. He painted the old window frame. He worked very carefully. I also worked
on the window frame. I changed the color of the paint. I adjusted the color of
the paint. I adjusted the color of the paint. I will paint the window frame. You
will paint the window frame. Did you like your work? Yes. I want to be able to
communicate in Japanese. I am an amateur. I have many suggestions. I want to be
able to communicate in Japanese. I want to be able to communicate in Japanese. I
see. I will ask you a question. How did you feel about working on the Dream
Construction project? I started working early in the morning. I was glad to work
with him. I was glad to work with him. You have decided what you want to do
next. Yes. Are you satisfied? Yes. I will continue to work on the project if my
friends have a place to fix. I am looking for people who can speak Japanese. I
am looking for people who can speak Japanese. Are you listening? Yes. I
recommend Dream Construction. I heard you talking to Mie. Thank you very much.
Thank you. I heard you talking to Mie. I met Miki, who supports Dream
Construction. Miki, I heard you are satisfied with Dream Construction. I am very
happy. Mie, you said you wanted to work on the next project. I am very happy. I
heard you have a plan. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you
are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I
heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are
busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard
you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy.
I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. I heard you are busy. The wind
carries the dust of the sea. It gets entangled in the laundry. The white moon in
the sky before noon was somehow beautiful and I was fascinated. There are some
things that don't work, but if you look up, it's small. The blue sky is a pint
and the clouds are quietly swaying. If you can share the joy of waiting for the
flower to bloom, that's happiness. If you close your eyes and smile gently next
to me, you will be behind my eyelids. How strong have you become? I want to be
strong for you. How strong have you become? I want to be strong for you.
人は誰もただ一人 旅に出て Hito wa dare mo tada hitori tabi ni dete 人は誰もふるさとを ふりかえる Hito wa
dare mo furusato wo furikaeru ちょっぴりさみしくて ふりかえっても Choppiri samishikute furikaette
mo そこにはただ風が ふいているだけ Soko ni wa tada kaze ga fuiteiru dake 人は誰も人生に つまづいて Hito wa
dare mo jinsei ni tsumazuite 人は誰も夢破れ ふりかえる Hito wa dare mo yume yabure furikaeru
プラタナスの影は舞う 冬の道で Pratanasu no kage wa mau fuyu no michi de プラタナスの散る音に ふりかえる
Pratanasu no chiru oto ni furikaeru 帰っておいでよと ふりかえても Kaette oide yo to furikaete
mo そこにはただ風が ふいているだけ Soko ni wa tada kaze ga fuiteiru dake 人は誰も恋をした 切なさに Hito wa
dare mo koi wo shita setsunasa ni 人は誰も耐えきれず ふりかえる 何かを求めて ふりかえても Nani ka wo
motomete furikaete mo そこにはただ風が ふいているだけ Soko ni wa tada kaze ga fuiteiru dake
ふりかえらずただひとり 一歩ずつ Furikaerazu tada hitori ippo zutsu ふりかえらず泣かないで 歩くんだ 歩くんだ
うつりゆく時の流れのままに Utsuri yuku toki no nagare no mama ni ただ身を任せているだけなら Tada mi wo
makasete iru dake nara 高い丘の上に登って 風に吹かれていたい Takai oka no ue ni nobotte kaze ni
fukarete itai 失うことを恐れることなく Ushinau koto wo osoreru koto naku 輝いてた日々を今は忘れて
Kagayaiteta hibi wo ima wa wasurete 高く高く信じるままに 秋の空のように Takaku takaku shinjiru
mama ni aki no sora no you ni 誇りある道を歩いてくどんな時も やがていつか一人だけになってしまうとしても
心から先へはもう進めないと Kokokara saki e wa mou susumenai to 挫けそうになる時はいつでも Kujikesou ni
naru toki wa itsudemo 君のことを思い出して 歩き始めるもう一度 Kimi no koto wo omoidashite aruki
hajimeru mou ichido そして僕は君のために何ができるかと考える Soshite boku wa kimi no tame ni nani ga
dekiru ka to kangaeru そして僕は強くなるより優しくなりたいと思う Soshite boku wa tsuyoku naru yori
yasashiku naritai to omou あの風のように柔らかく生きる君が Ano kaze no you ni yawarakaku ikiru
kimi ga 初めて会った時から Hajimete atta toki kara 誰よりも好きだった Dare yori mo suki datta
君のことを思い出して 歩き始めるもう一度 Kimi no koto wo omoidashite aruki hajimeru mou ichido
誰よりも好きだった Dare yori mo suki datta そこから逃げれば夢はないだろう Soko kara nigereba yume wa nai
darou 振り返るのは最後だけでいい Furikaeru no wa saigo dake de ii その時初めて Sono toki hajimete
全てを語ればいいから Subete wo katareba ii kara ここにある道を歩いてく Koko ni aru michi wo aruite ku
どんな時も Donna toki mo やがていつか Yagate itsuka 一人だけになってしまうとしても Hitori dake ni natte
shimau to shite mo あの風のように Ano kaze no you ni 柔らかく生きる君が Yawaraka ku ikiru kimi
ga 初めて会った時から Hajimete atta toki kara 誰よりも Dare yori mo 君のこと Kimi no koto
誰より好きだった 作詞・作曲・編曲 松本 優 歌詞・作曲・編曲 松本 優  作詞・作曲・編曲 松本 優 Namiki michi Mujeki ni
hashagenai Kaerimichi Itsumo to wa chigau kisetsu wo Futari kanjinagara Komorebi
no naka Mukiatta toki Hikari no minare wo kitta Sayonara no hanatsukuki ga
Sorezore no kata wo someru ne Samishisa ni naru mae ni anata Mou ichido mitsume
sasete Haru no gate issho ni aruite ne Omoide tadoru you ni Nayami goto
uchiakete mo Suki na kimochi wa umaku ienakatta Kono koto wo umaru Tomodachi no
line Koerarenakute Chokkiri kuyashii keredo Sayonara no hanadokei ga Sorezore no
michi wo kizamu ne Hanarete mo yume nara zutto Mirai e to tsudzuite iru Haru no
gate akushu wo kawasou ne Ashita mo au mitai ne Sayonara no hanatsukuki ga
Sorezore no kata wo someru ne