TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
Another round of violence and death between Israelis and Palestinians in the
West Bank. This time though, it came after talks between officials from both
sides on how to calm the clashes. Huge protests in Mexico over government plans
to slash funding for the body which organises the country's elections. Children
among dozens killed in Italy's deadliest shipwreck in years. This type of
tragedy should have been avoided, not lived how we're having to live it today
and how we will live it again in the future. Could there be a Brexit
breakthrough as Britain's Rishi Sunak prepares to welcome the head of the
European Commission to talks about the status of Northern Ireland? And in
English football, Manchester United win the League Cup with a 2-0 victory over
Newcastle. I think the mood in the club is good in this moment and we have to
keep that positive vibe and then even more has to come. This is Alex Ritson with
the newsroom. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. Israeli settlers in the
occupied West Bank have set fire to Palestinian houses, shops and vehicles,
killing one Palestinian man. It comes after two Israelis were earlier shot dead
in the same place. Yolande Nell has more details. In the course of the day,
there was this attack in Hawara close to Nablus where two Israeli brothers from
a nearby settlement were shot at close range. The Israeli military says it's
hunting for a Palestinian gunman but there's also been continuing violence there
over the past few hours as Jewish settlers set fire to Palestinian properties,
some with families inside who had to be evacuated. There was one Palestinian man
who was killed after he was shot. Palestinian health officials say that was
after settlers and soldiers entered into his village and that is really keeping
tensions very high. Tens of thousands of people have taken part in protests
across Mexico. They're unhappy at government plans to slash funding for the
National Electoral Institute. With more, Will Grant. Tens of thousands of
demonstrators turned out in the capital Mexico City and descended on the main
plaza chanting their opposition to the measure. Smaller events were held in
other cities around the country under the slogan, Don't Touch My Vote. Critics
of the reform are worried that the bill approved by the Senate last week would
undermine one of the few trusted public institutions in the country and place it
under presidential influence. Many fear a return to a period in which the
biggest and most powerful party wielded undue control over the electoral body.
Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say that a Russian military plane has been
damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They've attributed the attack
to what they call anti-government partisans. Here's Charles Haviland. Drones are
said to have caused two or three blasts at the airbase near Minsk, damaging a
Russian A-50 military surveillance plane, its avionics and radar and taking it
out of action. Bipol, a grouping of former law enforcers now opposed to the
autocratic government of Alexander Lukashenko, says it was responsible and that
its operatives are now safely out of the country. It's not possible to confirm
the Belarusian opposition's account of what happened, but this reported attack's
also been highlighted by Belarusian journalists. Many Belarusians oppose their
government's support for Moscow's invasion of Ukraine. Local reports say there's
now been a crackdown on civilians near the airfield. The first results have been
announced from Nigeria's Titus election since the end of military rule in 1999.
The governing party candidate, Bolotinibu, won in one of the party's
strongholds, the southwestern Ekiti state. The election went more smoothly than
previous polls. This is the world news from the BBC. Chile will on Monday deploy
troops to patrol its borders with Peru and Bolivia in an attempt to control the
entry of undocumented migrants. The mayor of Colchane, on the border with
Bolivia, said he was seeing 400 unauthorised crossings a day. An Australian firm
has bought the defunct battery-making company Britishvolt, which collapsed last
month with the loss of 200 jobs. Britishvolt had plans to build a $4.8 billion
battery plant in northern England. Its downfall was blamed on a lack of battery
experience and unproven technology. From Monday, the law in England and Wales
will raise the age at which a person can get married from 16 to 18. The change
is intended to protect vulnerable children from being forced to marry. The new
rules will make it a crime punishable by up to seven years in jail for an adult
to facilitate the marriage. Rajdeep Sandhu has more details. The Marriage and
Civil Partnership Act makes it an offence to enable a child to marry or enter
into a civil partnership under the age of 18 in any circumstances, removing the
need to prove the child was forced or coerced into it, and also ending parental
consent for 16 and 17-year-olds. The change also applies to religious or
cultural marriage ceremonies that aren't legally recognised. Campaigners hope
the threat of jail time, if the law is broken, will act as a deterrent. The
authorities in the Brazilian state of Sao Paulo say the death toll from the
floods and landslides that ravaged the south-east of the country last week has
risen to 64, and that 18 of the fatalities were children. Most of those killed
lived in and around the coastal town of São Sebastião, where more than a month's
worth of rain fell in 24 hours. BBC News. This is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom.
Amid already rising tensions between Israel and the Palestinians, Sunday saw one
of the worst outbreaks of violence in the occupied West Bank this year. After
two Israelis were shot dead in the village of Huara, just south of Nablus,
Israeli settlers set fire to Palestinian properties. A Palestinian man was
killed. The unrest came a few hours after a rare meeting in Jordan between
Israeli and Palestinian authority officials to try to restore calm. There was
some progress, including an Israeli commitment to stop discussing new settlement
building for four months. But later, the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu tweeted there would be no freeze on settlements. Some Palestinian
factions have also expressed criticism. So where does that leave the
negotiations? That's a question I put to our correspondent Yolande Nell, who's
in Jerusalem. It's very difficult to say because you have the Palestinian
Authority, which controls only parts of the West Bank, which sent its officials
along, both political and security officials. And of course, there is this big
division because it's the Palestinian group Hamas, which governs Gaza. And then
within the Israeli government, you do have these these different streams, even
within the coalition. And it underlines how this could cause trouble for the
Prime Minister, for Benjamin Netanyahu. He's leading one of the most right wing
governments in Israeli history. And as much as he has committed to making these
announcements, particularly on settlements, these are key issues for some of his
ministers. The Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich came out, he actually has
responsibilities over Jewish settlements in the West Bank. And he was basically
saying he would not abide by an agreement. He said, I have no idea what they
spoke about in Jordan. He wrote that on Twitter. But he said, one thing I do
know, there'll be no freeze on the building and development and settlements, not
even for one day. Nonetheless, it is quite a statement to make this joint
commitment to make immediate steps to end a surge in violence. What happens
next? Is it more meetings or will there be concrete action? There is a plan for
another meeting to take place in Sharm el-Sheikh in March. We had
acknowledgement from the US National Security Advisor as much as he he praised
the meeting as a starting point. He said, implementation will be critical. We
assume that lots more has been decided, a lot of detail perhaps, behind the
scenes at this unusual summit that's not being put out there in the public
domain at this stage. It wouldn't be helpful for either side if that was to be
the case. But I mean, just a reminder of how things really have not got calmer
at this stage. The Israeli military says tonight that it is hunting for a
Palestinian gunman who killed two Israeli brothers who came from a settlement
near Nablus. They were killed, shot dead in a car near Nablus. Settlers in that
area have been starting fires, they've attacked Palestinians. We're hearing from
the Palestinian Red Crescent that more than 300 people have been injured in this
violence and one Palestinian man has been killed and he was shot. All of this
still looks very dangerous. And as the international community knows very well,
we are heading now into a very sensitive period when the Islamic holy month of
Ramadan starts. That's at the end of March. This year, it's going to overlap
again with the Jewish Passover holiday. And that looks set to raise tensions
here in Jerusalem. I mean, generally, there are tensions during Ramadan around
the Al-Aqsa Mosque in the occupied old city of Jerusalem. This is a bitterly
contested holy site for Jews. It is Temple Mount. So the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound
or Haram Sharif is the third holiest site in Islam. It's also the holiest place
for Jews. And you can guarantee that more Jewish visitors will want to go there.
And that will cause problems during Ramadan. Yolande Nell in Jerusalem. Up to
half a million people have taken to the streets in Mexico. They're protesting
against reforms backed by President López Obrador that they say are an attack on
democracy. Let's talk to our correspondent in Mexico City, Will Grant. Will,
tell us about these protests. Well, they were very large. There's some debate,
as you can always imagine, between the two numbers put out. The city officials
who are aligned with President López Obrador are suggesting that somewhere in
the region of 90,000 people, but the organizers saying it could have been as
many as 500,000. I imagine the truth is somewhere in the middle of all of that.
But certainly, they shut down the center of Mexico City, turned out wearing pink
and white in support of the electoral body, which is facing kind of root and
branch reform from President López Obrador's party. It's already been passed by
the Senate, and it's now expected to come into force on Monday. And that change
involves slashing its budget, closing scores of local offices. And those
protesters were turning out under the slogan, leave my vote alone and don't
touch the vote. They truly suspect that there'll be sort of presidential
influence on the voting process. Yeah, that's the fear that the president is
ultimately trying to exert control over future elections. What does he say about
that? Well, he has simply dismissed that idea. He believes and argues fervently
that, you know, the entire body is biased, that it's made up by vested interest
over the years, aligned to the traditional parties, and that it's, you know, in
need of genuine reform from top to bottom. Now, those who don't believe him
point to the fact that he's had a long standing argument with the INE, as it's
called, the electoral authority, dating back to 2006, when he narrowly lost the
election, the presidential election, by a question of, you know, thousands, tens
of thousands of votes at most, and has always sort of had a problem with them
since then. The truth of the matter is that no matter how many people took to
the streets, not just in Mexico City, but across the country, this is now going
to enter into force. These changes will take place. Mr. López Obrador has all
but signed it, and it will certainly be appearing on the books later this week.
So where does this go? To be honest, I think it gets to the heart of the debate
over Mr. López Obrador's presidency. Those who see what he's doing as somehow in
support of the Mexican electorate, bolstering it, giving it greater
opportunities, sort of slashing budgets of oversized, overinflated, over-
influential apparatus of the state that sort of, as I say, according to him, has
vested interest behind it. And those who simply don't see that as the case and
see Mr. López Obrador is sort of involved in creeping authoritarianism from the
presidential office, the presidential palace. Those two sides really are growing
further and further apart as time passes. Will, thank you. Will Grant in Mexico
City. A search and rescue operation is continuing after a boat carrying people
trying to reach Europe sank off southern Italy on Sunday. Nearly 60 people are
known to have drowned, including a number of children. Those who did survive
came ashore on the Calabrian coast and are being helped by Red Cross workers.
John Donison reports. Another tragedy in the Mediterranean. The migrant boat
broke up in rough seas just off the Calabrian coast. Rescue workers struggled in
the conditions to recover bodies from the water. It's thought around 150 people
were on board. Dozens, including a baby, are known to have drowned. The regional
governor visited the scene. Calabria is a region that welcomes people. Last year
we welcomed 18,000 migrants, but we can't be abandoned by the rest of Europe.
This type of tragedy should have been avoided, not lived how we're having to
live it today and how we will live it again in the future. And reacting to
today's loss of life, the head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen,
said altogether EU countries must redouble their efforts to tackle the migration
crisis in the central Mediterranean. Around 80 people were brought ashore alive,
among them migrants from Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Despite the dangers,
Italy is one of the main landing points for people trying to reach Europe in
small boats. Almost 12,000 migrants have already arrived by sea in Italy this
year. In 2022, more than 105,000 successfully made the crossing, with over 1,300
dead or missing. Although high, those numbers are way down on the 2016 peak,
when there were over 180,000 arrivals by sea. The government blames people
traffickers and has pledged to stop the boats. At the Vatican, Pope Francis is
in the process of preparing a memorial for the victims of the crisis. At the
Vatican, Pope Francis expressed his sorrow for the latest loss of lives, which
he said included many children. He said he was praying for the dead, the missing
and those who survived. And those survivors, like hundreds of thousands before
them, face an uncertain future. Under the white sheets behind them, those who
didn't make it. John Donison. Britain's decision to leave the European Union
created what has been an impossible conundrum for the British province of
Northern Ireland. That's because it shares an island, and therefore a long land
border, with the Republic of Ireland, which is still in the European Union. Any
attempt to put in place border checks would be enormously controversial, and
previously were a factor in years of inter-communal violence. The Northern
Ireland Protocol, which was part of the Brexit deal, effectively put a border in
the sea between Britain and Northern Ireland. But it's run into difficulties.
Now there's hope of a solution, as the British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak meets
the head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, later on Monday. Rob
Watson told me more. So the Northern Ireland Protocol was arranged as a way of
trying to prevent there being a hard border between Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland, which could be a focus of attacks for paramilitaries. And
so essentially what it said is, let's treat Northern Ireland, if it was still
part of the European Union, at least its single market, in terms of the trading
of goods, to avoid any checks. And essentially what the protocol did, therefore,
was to say, right, let's have Northern Ireland sort of stay inside the European
Union's single market for goods. In other words, for Northern Ireland to be
treated somewhat differently to the rest of the UK. And we think what this deal
does is to just sort of soften the edges of that way in which Northern Ireland
is different to the rest of the UK, and to make trade easier, at least when it's
just trade from Great Britain into Northern Ireland. And if it goes well for the
British government and the European Union, you would see an improvement in
relations between the EU and the UK. You would see Rishi Sunak, the Prime
Minister, no doubt try to claim that he's sort of a good friend of the Prime
Minister, no doubt try to claim that he sort of cleared up the mess left by
Boris Johnson when it comes to Northern Ireland. And the hope would be on
Northern Ireland that it sees a return of power sharing between those parties
that essentially would rather have a united Ireland, and those that want to see
continued union, that's mainly the Democratic Unionist Party, which up until
now, has refused to share power because of its opposition to the protocol, to
post-Brexit arrangements, which it has felt has made Northern Ireland less
British. So from what you're saying, an awful lot of the problems which Brexit
has left behind for the UK and to a lesser extent for the European Union could
be sorted out in this meeting between Rishi Sunak and Ursula von der Leyen on
Monday. But I did hear what normally is a massive danger word at the very start
of what you said, and that was the word if. If. So I guess you've got the on the
one hand, the classic on the one hand, on the other, on the one hand if things
go well for Rishi Sunak, I think he would hope that this would begin to see
putting Brexit as an issue to bed in UK politics, not completely. Now it is a
big if, because on the other hand, I mean it is possible that hardliners within
the governing Conservative Party and in the Democratic Unionist Party, which
wants continued union between Northern Ireland and the UK, will say, you know
what, Northern Ireland is still being treated differently to the rest of the UK.
It remains in the European Union's single market for goods. It is being treated
differently. We won't have it. In which case, you could potentially see a return
in British politics to the kind of absolute chaos we saw over many years in the
post-Brexit period. I mean, if it turns out that the hardliners within the
governing Conservatives think, you know what, we don't like this deal very much,
but maybe it's not making us very popular with the British electorate to keep
banging on about Brexit and looking divided, then I think that could be a huge
boost to his leadership. But actually, if in the end, the Conservative Party is
so utterly riven by divisions over Brexit and with hardliners digging in, and if
the main Unionist Party in Northern Ireland, the Democratic Unionist Party,
absolutely refuses to accept this deal, then Rishi Sunak's premiership could be
a mortal, mortal danger. Rob Watson. Time for the sports news now. Paul Serres
is with me. And Paul, it's been a while, a long while, but Manchester United
finally have their hands on some silverware. Yes, indeed they do, Alex. They
beat Newcastle 2-0 in the final of the English League Cup at Wembley on Sunday
to win their first trophy since the Europa League under Jose Mourinho back in
2017. They're still in the FA Cup this season. They're into the last 16 of the
Europa League after beating the Spanish league leaders Barcelona last week, and
they're up to third in the English Premier League too. So all in all, an
excellent first season so far under manager Eric Ten Hag. The United goalkeeper
David De Gea says there's more to come for United fans. Yeah, we have a chance
to go and try to win more trophies this season. I think the mentality of the
team is a winning mentality. So we're in the right direction. So like I say,
let's enjoy the moment and recovery as soon as possible because we have another
fight on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the drought of many decades continues for poor
old Newcastle. But also disappointment for South Africa in their first ever
cricket World Cup final, Paul. Yes, indeed. That's right, Alex. As you say,
South Africa have never been in a World Cup final, men's or women's, T20 or one
day international until this women's T20 competition that finished on Sunday.
Unfortunately for South Africa and their fans, they came up against Australia,
who were the reigning champions, had reached eight of the last nine World Cup
finals and have dominated the sport. Australia won by 19 runs at a packed
Newlands in Cape Town. The Australian all rounder Ashley Gardner says the
tournament has been a huge boost for the women's game. It's growing the game
globally. And that's what we want to do as sports people is show what we're
capable of and showcase the best talent. And I think how many people came out
today, it was sold out. It was a fantastic atmosphere. Even when South Africa
went on top, they were still cheering for their side. And I guess that's the
best thing to say is they're out here supporting us as players and us as people.
And one other significant result from Sunday, Alex France beat Scotland 32-21 in
Rugby Union's Six Nations Championship to bring the Scots' hopes of a Grand Slam
to an end. Paul Serres, thank you. And we stay with the sporting theme. They're
better known in the arena of social media perhaps, but a little while ago, Tommy
Fury and Jake Paul took to the boxing ring for a much hyped bout in Saudi
Arabia. It ended in a split decision victory for Fury. And already there's talk
of a big money rematch. The BBC's boxing reporter Steve Bunce was at ringside.
We're under the stars. We're in a UNESCO ancient site here on the outskirts of
Riyadh. And we've got two men in the ring making an awful lot of money, but with
an awful lot to prove. The fight was nicknamed the Serbian War of Independence.
And it's claimed the search for the truth. Well, perhaps they both found the
truth. What we had, we had blood, we had guts, we had a knockdown, we had points
deducted for illegal blows. We had tears at the end. We had the winner sending a
message to his newborn baby daughter called Bambi. We had the loser saying, I'll
learn more from that fight than I've learned from my previous fights. And then
the two of them declaring they'd have a rematch. What more do you want? And
these are officially proper boxers, but they're better known as YouTube
influencers. Did the right man win? Tommy Fury was the one who at least was from
a boxing family. Yeah, Tommy had a lot, the burden of his name, the Fury name.
He's got cousins and brothers and fathers and uncles, all of whom are thought as
amateurs and all of whom are thought as professionals. And of course, his
brother Tyson Fury is the world heavyweight champion. And Jake Paul, well, he's
also got a name and a reputation. He's one of the biggest YouTube people and
influencer, a reach of something like 220 million, if he puts out just a basic
tweet on social media. So they both had an awful lot of pressure on their hands.
And Tommy is in theory, the more traditional boxer. They were both novices, but
they never stopped trying. It wasn't a masterpiece. It wasn't a fight filled
with stunning ring craft, but it was filled with unbelievable effort. And for
that, they need to be commended. Sure, they're probably going to make about 10
million dollars each, but they still need to be commended. Some might say,
though, that the real winner was, well, Saudi Arabia, sports washing its human
rights record. Yeah, but we've been down the sports washing route before, and we
have a simple situation here. If you actually look at sports washing, this is
not sports washing. This is how big sport works. This is why they have the F1.
This is why we've had all of the massive World Heavyweight Championship fights
here, the important WWE events here, the F1. It's straightforward. It's money.
Is it sports washing? You know what? I'm here to report, not to support. It's
that simple. Steve Bunce. Now, is Korean reality TV about to become another
entertainment K success story? A Netflix survival show, Physical 100, a storm to
the top of the charts. Our Seoul correspondent, Jean MacKenzie, has this report.
This is one of the most defining moments of Physical 100. Female wrestler Jang
is spurring on her team as it struggles to drag a one and a half ton ship
through sand and upper ramp. On paper, they're the weakest team, but
miraculously, they complete the task. Think of this as the real life Squid Game,
except nobody dies. It's become Netflix's most popular non-English program
around the world, making it the first reality TV show ever to grab this top
spot. Three, two, one. The show has been such a surprising success that they
have cobbled together an event for fans at the last minute along the river here
in Seoul, and 50 of the contestants have turned up. Pulling that ship was the
hardest thing I've ever done, says Jang. Her fellow contestant, Joe, praises
her. It was only possible because of you, he says. I know that one thing people
really did love about the show is how nice you all are to each other. Yes,
people cheered each other on and comforted each other. I think our foreign fans
found these moments beautiful, says Jang. It's the Korean way, says Joe. All
afternoon, the contestants entertain their fans, removing their shirts to flex
their sizeable biceps. Why do you like the show so much? Oh, because there's a
lot of hot people. Yeah, me too. Everybody knows Korea. It's really cool. I love
it. The industry here is now watching the success of Physical 100 with
excitement. Last week, Amazon Prime brought its first Korean reality TV show,
Jinny's Kitchen. Want to come to our restaurant? It features a group of
celebrities attempting to run a street food restaurant in Mexico. It's been made
by one of Korea's biggest entertainment companies, CJ. Sebastian Kim is their
sales director. We have around 200 producers. These 200 producers are like
scratching their head to make a better show every day. This opens a great
opportunity for them. If these kind of shows can travel outside Korea, that
means the more funding coming in from that show, that gives them more freedom to
produce a bigger show, a better show. If K-pop and K-dramas show the polished
side of Korea, K-reality offers fans the chance to see the unvarnished side.
What sits at the heart of the culture that they've grown to love so much.
Remember, you heard it here first. K-reality TV is the concept to watch in the
months ahead. You've been listening to The Newsroom from the BBC World Service.
This is the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying
Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun
and frivolity to disadvantaged children. Children in refugee camps, in
orphanages and care homes. These kids probably have gone through some of the
worst traumas and they don't have access to counsellors or therapists. Ash and
the Seagulls aren't therapists, they're clowns. So they do what they do best to
help. Escapism and fun. Give them something to wake up excited about. Give them
something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise, what is the point? When the
Greek government allowed children in refugee camps to go to school, the kids
who'd been working with the Seagulls did far better than the other kids. If they
can believe themselves to be limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into
the next challenge of their life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying
Seagulls. Child's Play. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Up next on the BBC World
Service, the climate question with Greya Jackson. Record-breaking temperatures
in the Alps has led to a bad start to the ski season. Picture grass green slopes
with not a flake in sight. I don't think in my 35 years of travelling to the
Alps I'd seen anything quite like that. This will likely become more common
thanks to climate change. So we ask, can skiing survive? Answers after the
latest BBC News. BBC News with Neil Nunes. Israeli settlers in the occupied West
Bank have torched Palestinian buildings, killing one Palestinian man. The
rampage followed the shooting dead of two Israelis in a village near Nablus.
Residents allege that Israeli soldiers helped the settlers carry out the revenge
attack. Organisers of protests in Mexico against reform of the electoral agency
say half a million people have taken to the streets across the country. They say
plans to slash the institute's funding are an attack on democracy. Exiled
Belarusian opposition figures say a Russian military plane has been damaged in a
sabotage attack inside the country. They say anti-government partisans carried
out the attack. The investment bank founded by a Chinese billionaire who was
reported missing 10 days ago says it's now aware that Bao Fan is cooperating in
an investigation being carried out by the authorities. Shares in China
Renaissance Bank had plummeted to a record low after it was unable to contact Mr
Bao. Chile will on Monday deploy troops to its borders with Peru and Bolivia in
an attempt to control the entry of undocumented migrants. The operation will
last for 90 days. An Australian firm has bought the defunct battery-making
company Britishvolt which collapsed last month. Britishvolt had plans to build a
4.8 billion dollar battery plant in northern England. England and Wales have
raised the legal age at which a person can marry can get married from 16 to 18.
The change is intended to protect vulnerable children from forced marriage. And
the Oscar-winning film producer Walter Mirisch has died at the age of 101. He
oversaw the production of classics such as Some Like It Hot, West Side Story and
In the Heat of the Night. That's the latest BBC News. We are the Montauban
family. We come for three weeks each summer and a week each winter. The
Montauban family have been coming to ski in Les Deux Alpes, a resort in the
French mountains, for years. But they've noticed something's amiss. There is
less and less snow thanks to climate change. We've lost 10 meters from the top
of the glacier in 10 years. And that scares them. Of course the seasons have
already changed. Probably there will be no summer skiing and then in a few
years, we don't know how it will be in the spring because the snow on the low
levels will certainly start receding too. Whenever I've headed down to the Alps,
I've come upon a winter wonderland. Wooden chalets adorned with icicles,
perfectly groomed ski slopes to careen down and snow, a lot of snow. But this
year, the season didn't get off to its usual start. Sparse snowfall and weirdly
warm weather, over 20 degrees Celsius in Switzerland, meant that skiers and
boarders were confronted with grassy green slopes, not a flake in sight, and it
forced many low-lying resorts to shut. Thankfully, there's been some snowfall
since, but the skier in me, and many others, are wondering if this is an omen.
Can skiing survive climate change? I'm Greer Jackson and from the BBC World
Service, this is the Climate Question. My name's Anna Richards. I'm a freelance
journalist and I live in Lyon in France. Today though, Anna's travelled around
three hours southeast to Le Dessalb. I kind of hesitate to call myself a skier
because I'm quite a baby skier. I only started last winter, which is my first
winter living near the Alps. So there's a dog right next to me, so you're really
getting the atmosphere here. So I think you better tell us where exactly you are
and why we can hear howling dogs in the background. I'm at the pub, of course.
You know, you take the breath out of the country, but yeah, no, I'm at the pub.
A lot of tables have fire pits on them, actually kind of sunken into the wooden
tables. My hands are pretty cold, so yeah, jealous of the early birds. It's the
school holidays in large parts of France and it's just starting to get dark, but
I can still see the mountains. And how's the snow been? Everyone's desperate for
a bit of snow. I mean, for example, this morning up on the Pice, you know, the
snow was looking okay and then by this afternoon I was starting to see, you
know, brown patches of earth appear, some stones, because also it's busy as
well. It's quite a high altitude resort, so I think it's been a lot more
fortunate than some in that it's been able to open all season because, for
example, I was in Villa de L'Anse in Berco a couple of weeks ago and I went to
get my ski pass and I looked at the map of which Pice were open and I mean, it
was about two thirds were marked red, as in not open. I don't think in my 35
years of traveling to the Alps I'd seen anything quite like that. Really? Yeah,
the Alps had a very severe warming weather event around Christmas and New Year,
which was quite an unusual one. This is Rob Stewart, by the way. I'm a skiing
journalist. I also run a media company in the winter sports industry called Ski
Press. What happened this time around was it snowed in December and the season
actually got off to a pretty good start in the Alps, but then a warm front came
along and it rained for about 36 hours and so a lot of the snow just got wiped
out. A lot of resorts held on to the snow higher up and they also held on to the
snow that they'd made, the artificial snow, so people could still ski but the
lower slopes were brown and normally we'd expect them to be white at that time
of year, so it was pretty severe. I mean, it can warm up during the winter in
the Alps and if it did that say at the end of February or into March when you
would expect things to start getting warmer, if you get a period of rain like
that often it has impact but it doesn't wipe the snow out because there's more
snow. Right, so it's significant that it was right at the beginning of the
season. Yeah, definitely. Fortunately, we had that cold weather coming and it
snowed. I think if that didn't happen we would have had a very, very serious
problem going into the holiday time. Obviously, it's concerning. Of course, we
see the trend. These events are becoming more regular. Let's hear a bit more
about the regularity of these events, shall we? Matthias Vue is a climate
scientist who works as a professor at the University at Albany on the east coast
of the USA. So, what we're seeing with the warmer temperatures, we're
increasingly seeing rain as opposed to snow, especially at lower elevations. So,
overall there is less snow on the ground. In parts, we also see that the snow
season is starting later in the year. Yeah. The lack of snow we've seen in the
Alps this season, have we been able to attribute that directly to climate
change? I think it's difficult to do that for just one specific winter because,
you know, there's a lot of natural variability in the climate system. Right.
What we can say is this. There's 36 fewer days of snow cover than there was 600
years ago. That's according to new research out just in January. The researchers
say the decline is unprecedented. And maybe that's not all that surprising given
that Matthias says the Alps are warming twice as fast as the global average. So,
one thing that we're seeing in the Alps, but also in some other mountain
regions, is what we call elevation dependent warming. And that just refers to
the fact that the higher up you go in the mountains, the stronger the warming
is. And this is related to so-called feedback loops. The most important one
that's quite easy to understand is if you think you're in a mountain region in
the winter, you have snow on the ground, snow and ice, which is very bright. So
it reflects sunlight back to space rather than allowing the sunlight to warm up
the surface. But now with warmer temperatures, the snow and ice is starting to
melt and it's replaced by a much darker surface below it, right? Rocks and
soils. And that darker surface now does not reflect the sunlight back. It
absorbs it, leading to stronger warming, which then again leads to less snow,
more darker surface, more warming. So it's sort of an amplifier of feedback. I
mean, the world is currently around a degree warmer than it was before the pre-
industrial times. Do we know what it is in the Alps? Yeah, it's about two
degrees. So it's double, double. Gosh. Okay. And so what does the future hold if
we continue on this trajectory that we're on where we think we're going to see
nearly three degrees of warming? What will we see in the Alps? Well, what we
fear is that for one, we will lose almost all the glaciers in the Alps for snow
cover. You know, you're still going to have snowfall in the winter, right? But
it'll just be much more spotty and it will be limited to really the highest
elevations. So the lower elevations, the valleys, they'll be mostly green
because it's going to rain rather than snow. If you're a stats person like me,
wrap your head around this. 25% less snow in the Alps by 2050. That's according
to the UN's climate body, the IPCC. And that's regardless of whether we manage
to slash our emissions or not. A certain amount of warming has been baked in by
the past planet warming gases we've pumped out. But it isn't just the Alps that
are suffering. We're seeing similar things in the Rocky Mountains in Colorado
and Utah. And I work mostly in the Andes in Peru and Bolivia, Ecuador. And there
as well, we're seeing massive glacier retreat and much less snow on the ground.
I understand that one of your projects was a glacier called Chacaltaya. What
happened there? Yeah, so Chacaltaya was a small glacier in the Andes of Bolivia.
The peak was at about 5,400 meters above sea level. And it's interesting because
it used to be the world's highest ski resort. And I worked on that glacier with
some colleagues at the beginning of this century. And we wrote a paper already
suggesting, you know, that this glacier essentially is doomed and isn't going to
survive. And sure enough, about a decade later, it had disappeared. It was
featured in one of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports as an
example of the disappearance of low-lying glaciers in the Andes. Is Chacaltaya a
warning to the Alps? I think so. I mean, in the Alps, we're also already seeing
some small glaciers disappear. But I think, you know, glacier disappearance, it
is kind of a cannery in the coal mine, if you will, because it's something we
can see. If you can actually show with glaciers, with repeat photography showing
here was a glacier, now look what it looks like. You can actually visualize the
changes in our environment in a much more powerful way. I think that's a problem
I come across a lot on making this program as well, is, you know, people think a
degree, two degrees, it doesn't sound like very much. And yet the impacts are so
very real for so many people already today, when we've only got around one
degrees of warming. It feels like a really big challenge in the kind of work
that both of us do. Yes, absolutely. And, you know, that's why I'm personally
someone who likes to work with visuals, because I just think it's so much more
powerful than just, you know, showing equations or numbers. On the radio. But we
can talk about it. A bit more challenging. Well, video or audio, but not just
numbers and equations, not just quantitative aspects. Despite Matthias' advice
not to use stats, here is one I can't ignore. In the last 75 years, over 80
alpine resorts have gone bust because of a lack of snow. And with the climate
crisis only hastening, the threat of more closures looms large. That could be a
complete disaster for the local region, or even the country. If you look at
countries like Switzerland or Italy, France, Austria. Yeah, Robert Stewart isn't
kidding. 4% of Austria's GDP comes from the ski industry. There's around 2000
ski resorts in the world. Around 40% of those are in alpine countries. It's a
huge industry. And so people just get worried. You know, they are worried about
the impact to their jobs, to their livelihoods. And that goes for locals in ski
resorts. It goes for tour operators that operate ski holidays. These events are
becoming more regular. So we have to be able to deal with them. We have to be
able to adapt to them. Adapt? How? If it doesn't snow, they can make snow. Make
snow? We saw that in the Winter Olympics last year, when North, East and China,
the mountains there, very, very dry climate. Cold, but dry. And snowmaking
accounted for pretty much 100% of all the ski runs that the Winter Olympic
athletes used for the downhills and slalom races, giant slalom races and
whatever. So they can do that. And of course, it's in the industry's interest to
make sure they keep ski resorts open. There's other things that ski resorts are
doing as well, other than just making snow at the time. They are farming snow
during the end of the season. They are storing that snow through the summer.
Farming snow? You can farm snow? I mean, there are projects out there to prevent
snow from melting through the warmer months of the year. Surely that's a lot of
snow. Yeah, they can't store all the snow. But they can take some of it and they
can use that to lay down a base on the runs. I mean, what tends to happen with
snow is if when it falls onto what in Europe they would call a piste, which is a
ski run, it gets compacted down by machines and skiers and snowboarders as well.
Because it's compacted, that snow takes a lot, lot longer to melt than, say, the
natural snow around the edge of the runs. This strikes me as a somewhat short-
term solution. After all, you can't stop snow melting when it gets very hot. And
you also can't make snow when the temperatures are above one degree Celsius.
That's at the moment. There are attempts by some to make snow in temperatures of
25 degrees. But there's another issue we need to talk about here. Artificial
snow… Clearly uses a lot of water and that water has to be stored and it has to
be collected. Now, ski resorts would say they have plenty of water. It rains
quite a lot, especially in the autumn, and they've become very efficient at
collecting that water in reservoirs. The Alps are huge. They stretch hundreds of
kilometres from France to Slovenia. And as well as a mecca for skiers, it's home
to thousands of plant and animal species. They also store a lot of water in
reservoirs and lakes, as Robert says, but also as snow. So much so they've
earned the nickname the Water Towers of Europe, providing as much as 90% of
lowland Europe's water. As the climate changes, there are important questions to
be asked about balancing water priorities for skiers and their snow, for
animals, for agriculture and many other uses besides. Some also question how
sustainable these snow machines are. If they're powered by fossil fuels, they'll
be releasing planet warming gases into the sky. Yeah, that's true. If that
energy is coming from fossil fuels, then it is contributing to climate change.
So ski resorts are doing everything they can to ensure that the energy that they
use is coming from sustainable sources, from hydroelectric power, from solar
energy. And it's in their interest, it's in ski resorts' interest to do that.
Interest. We couldn't find any data on how the ski industry overall is doing
when it comes to renewables. What can be said is the majority of snow seekers
fly to get there. And this is a significant source of emissions for resorts. And
as we know, flying is a major cause of climate change. There are other ways
resorts are trying to adapt to a warmer world. Some are moving higher up the
hills where it's colder. Others are looking beyond snow sports, beyond winter.
Others like Christophe Aubeur, the mayor of Les Deux Alpes, where our reporter
Anna is. Of course, changes have occurred since I grew up. And everybody that's
been living here could see it. So it's not something new. The change is on how
temperature changes and how it rains sometimes more or sometimes it snows a lot
more. And we need to get prepared for more variety. And you were talking a
little bit a moment ago about getting prepared for more variety. How do you see
the future of Les Deux Alpes? It's more about how we got prepared because there
are so many people coming today for skiing, but as well for hiking or sometimes
for ski touring. And of course, skiing is the basic premise for everybody that's
coming here. And in summer, we are cycling a lot, a lot of biking, like downhill
or cross country or touring as well. I have such fond memories as a kid doing
these sorts of activities, canyoning through glacial gorges, biking downhill at
breakneck speeds and hiking to hamlets through streams and butterfly laden
flower meadows. Just amazing. But honestly, the resorts we stayed in were pretty
empty. It's all how can we get people there in the summer? Can we match the
winter numbers? Generally, people in the summer don't spend quite as much as in
the winter because skiing inherently, you've got to rent equipment. You're on
the mountain all day. So you tend to have a lunch on the mountain rather than
take a picnic in the summer. Things like that. Skiers spend a bit more money
than summer tourists, but the numbers are getting there. While the resorts in
the Alps are doing what they can to adapt to a warmer world, resorts further
north where it's colder are wondering whether there might be an opportunity, an
opportunity to become the next big European ski destination. Are you planning a
ski trip this winter? Let me guess, you are thinking about going to the Alps.
Well, stop right there and don't book anything until you have seen this video
about the best ski resorts in Sweden. It's the best. Best over there. It's
fantastic. It's pretty crazy. You just have to come up here and experience it.
Sweden is one of the nations that could perhaps offer snow and snow security a
bit longer than others. Meet our next guest from Sweden, as you might have
guessed. My name is Linda Lundmark and I am a geographer working at Umeå
University. I work on issues related to climate change and tourism. Hooray, a
fellow geographer. I also study geography, so great to have you on the
programme. So you seem very apt to talk about what's been happening in the Alps
and the fact that some see the decline of snow there as an opportunity to expand
their skiing offer. Can you tell me a bit about Arctic Sweden? I think that if
we just look at winter tourism, I think there are a lot of things that make it
attractive to go to northern Sweden and of course, also including Finland and
Norway. It's going to be cold. We're going to have winters. So that makes it, of
course, a good opportunity. But then also we have something that we
conceptualise as arctification. What we mean by that is that the Arctic has
become exotified. Europe has seen the Arctic and recognised that there are
attractive things to do. And that is, of course, related to northern light and
it's related to snow and it's related to all the kind of experiences that you
might have in a winter landscape. I think of dog sledding, ice fishing, ice
baths, ice hotels, anything icy really. So that is, of course, increasing the
attraction of the Arctic. But the reality is, of course, that we also will have
problems in the near future as well. Uh oh. Well, I guess Sweden isn't immune to
climate change either. Recent research shows that it has increased four times
here than anywhere else. It's four times warmer. Yeah, it increases four times
here than anywhere else. But I think that there are other issues as well.
Looking at, for example, the infrastructure that we have built already in the
Swedish mountains, we don't have the same infrastructure for tourism. For
example, when it comes to hotels, we don't have airports, we don't even have
railroads going into the mountains. So if we consider becoming a substitute for
the Alps, then we would have to build quickly and extensively. And I suppose in
some ways that's kind of problematic because building all that infrastructure
obviously contributes to the climate crisis. Yeah, I agree completely. Those
areas where we will have more reliable ski conditions will also be those areas
where we don't have a lot of local population, where we don't have built
infrastructure and where we don't have a local population big enough to actually
support a tourism industry. So that would mean that we would have either a fly
in or fly out labour, or it would mean that we would really have to compete with
other industries for the labour force. And in light of trying to become a
sustainable destination, I don't think that would be really a good option. I
mean, it sounds like you're not particularly fond of this idea of Sweden
becoming the alternative to the Alps. I mean, who is pushing that agenda? Is it
the government? Well, I guess there are several, but I think the real push for
making Sweden some sort of substitute is, of course, the idea that it creates
simple jobs quite quickly. It's kind of the old idea that tourism will be a
substitute for lost jobs in other industries. This is a very real issue that
governments face. As we move to a green future, how do we ensure that those
working in the polluting industries, be it at the coal face or building
combustion engines, how do we make sure that those people don't get left behind?
We've made a show about this. It's called What Will Happen to the Fossil Fuel
Workers? Check it out on BBC Sounds. I think the question that I'm coming up
against in this programme is really the issue that people need to ski less and
holiday less. I mean, is that the truth of it? If we want to be serious about
climate change, its impacts and stopping it, reducing it? You know, changing
your habits and doing something differently because of climate, just
voluntarily, it's hard to do. Climate scientist Mattias Vuwe. But at the same
time, I do think there will be some sort of a consolidation because there will
be fewer resorts and they can only really accept so many people. It'll probably
drive prices up. Skiing will become more expensive. And then through that
process, maybe it will reduce the overall number of people that are skiing. I
don't know. But it's hard to do. You know, I ski myself. I love to ski, mostly
cross country. But if somebody had to tell me you shouldn't ski anymore, that
would be very hard for me. I have to admit. Skiing, well, actually, snow sports
are culturally important. It's not just about losing an industry, but a way of
life. And this was something everyone I talked to brought up again and again.
And the same was true for Anna, a reporter in Le Dessalb. Everybody I've spoken
to is aware that climate change is happening and everybody wants to do something
about it. But without kind of giving up the things that they really enjoy or
what their whole livelihood is dependent on. And it's a difficult one. You know,
if you've lived here your whole life and skiing is your whole livelihood and
your favorite thing to do, I think that it would be very difficult to accept
that perhaps it's something that's not going to be around in the future. I began
this show by asking, can skiing survive climate change? In the short term, we
heard how fake snow and snow farming could help. Longer term, it looks as though
snow seekers will be driven to higher altitudes and higher latitudes. The low-
lying resorts, some of which have operated for over 100 years, will very likely
face a painful future. Closure. Kudos to our amazing behind the scenes team.
They were producer Ben Cooper and Maura Morrison, researcher Matt Toulson,
series producer Roz Jones, editor China Collins and mixing by Tom Brignall. This
is the BBC World Service bringing you the story which uncovered a multi-million
dollar fishing scandal. I'm Johannes Dell and I've come to Namibia to find out
how the great hopes invested in its fishing industry have been dashed. It's a
story, too, about how journalists here and in faraway Iceland are working
together, sometimes at personal risk. Fish rot at BBC World Service dot com
slash documentaries. In 30 minutes, pick of the world with Anna Dylbul. What
happens if Ukraine runs out of ammunition? A letter of anger and frustration to
Turkey's leaders after the earthquakes and the young African farmers sharing
their success. The stories that you clicked, commented on and shared this week
in peace.