TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at six o'clock. This is Jane Steele. Good evening. The former health
secretary Matt Hancock has disputed claims that leaked WhatsApp messages show he
rejected expert advice on Covid testing for care homes. One of the ministers
involved in the exchanges said it had been a question of capacity. In a
situation where we had the capacity to test at most a few thousand each day,
tough decisions about prioritisation had to be made. China hits back at the US
over FBI claims about the origins of the pandemic. So here you're talking about
a potential leak from a Chinese government controlled lab that killed millions
of Americans. A mother and father who allowed their disabled daughter to die
through neglect have been jailed for manslaughter. Greece's transport minister
has resigned after a train crash that left at least 36 people dead. A
disciplinary hearing has begun into allegations of racism at Yorkshire County
Cricket Club, but some of those accused have withdrawn from the process.
Government decisions on pandemic issues including Covid testing, care homes and
schools are under renewed scrutiny after the leak of a series of WhatsApp
messages linked to the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock. Among the most
serious allegations from the Daily Telegraph are that Mr Hancock rejected advice
about testing procedures for care homes in England in April 2020. He has
strenuously denied the claim and is said to be considering legal action. The
release of the messages is set against the backdrop of the Covid-19 inquiry,
which the Prime Minister said should be left to get on with its job. Our first
report tonight is from our political correspondent Ian Watson. The ministerial
mantra in the early weeks of the pandemic was that the government was following
the science. So critics have seized on leaked WhatsApp messages from the then
Health Secretary Matt Hancock, which suggests that he changed his mind about
accepting clinical advice to test everyone going into care homes in England. In
one message on April 14th 2020, he appears to be enthusiastic, but later that
day he decided to restrict testing only to those coming from hospitals. His
spokesman has suggested that the leaked messages portray a partial and
misleading picture and that the apparent change of heart was because Mr Hancock
had been told wider testing wasn't deliverable. In the Commons, the Health
Minister Helen Whateley, who had been the Minister for Social Care for much of
the pandemic, blamed a lack of available tests. In a situation where we had the
capacity to test at most a few thousand each day, tough decisions about
prioritisation had to be made, decisions that were taken on the best public
health advice available. Professor Alan McNally helped to set up the Milton
Keynes Lighthouse testing lab, the first of three large sites which processed
Covid tests. He told the World at One that when ministers decided to restrict
testing to those leaving hospitals for care homes, they should have been aware
that much greater availability was just a matter of weeks away. It's true that
on the 14th of April, the testing capacity was limited, so in the Milton Keynes
lab we did a couple of thousand tests that day. But we were very, very much in
the middle of the ramp up that within a couple of weeks would have seen us
deliver, just at Milton Keynes, somewhere in the region of 30 to 40 thousand
tests per day. It wasn't until June 2020 that every care home resident in
England was offered testing. And further leaked messages from August 2020 have
suggested that both the government's chief medical officer for England and the
chief scientific adviser had doubts about the effectiveness of telling more than
two million extremely clinically vulnerable people to shield at home, but that
the guidance had remained in place. The Department for Health has been asked for
a response. The official Covid inquiry is still in its early stages, but the
leaks have once again raised questions of how and how quickly the government
tried to mitigate the impact of a global pandemic. In the middle of April 2020,
around 20,000 Covid tests were carried out each day in the UK. Our social
affairs editor Alison Holt has been looking back at what was happening in care
homes at the time. During the week when Matt Hancock sent his messages about
testing, warnings about the impact of Covid on care home residents were reaching
a crescendo. Council bosses told the government reliable testing was needed and
concluded that generally social care appeared an afterthought. Two of the UK's
largest care home providers spoke out about the number of deaths they were
seeing. In fact, that was the week when Covid deaths amongst care home residents
hit their peak in England and Wales. Testing everyone might have been the best
plan, but official figures show the capacity to do that was very limited.
Experts later concluded the two main ways Covid got into care homes was from
patients discharged from hospital and through staff moving between homes. In
mid-April, staff were struggling to get tests. Also, few people were moving into
care homes from the community, so it appears testing was targeted. For many
families, it may be hard to square Mr Hancock's leaked messages with the claim
made a month later that he had thrown a protective ring around care homes.
Probably, only the public inquiry, armed with all the facts, will be able to
judge the decisions made. The Telegraph has this evening released more messages
about the thinking behind pandemic decisions affecting schools and children.
Here's our education editor, Bramwen Jefferies. This latest selection of leaked
exchanges gives an insight into decisions around the precautions put in place as
schools in England reopened fully in September 2020. The school year starts
earlier in Scotland, where the First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, had already made
masks compulsory for secondary pupils in corridors and other crowded areas. This
was in line with the advice from the World Health Organisation, but in England,
ministers initially said it would not be introduced. The Telegraph says leaked
messages suggest the Chief Medical Officer, Chris Whitty, had no strong feeling
either way, and Boris Johnson questioned whether a U-turn was really needed. But
the Downing Street Director of Communications, Lee Cain, is reported to have
asked whether it was worth fighting, as Scotland had taken the step. Simon Case,
then leading civil service Covid efforts, is said to have warned that nervous
parents will freak out if Scotland's example wasn't followed. There were also
disagreements over the rule of six, which set the maximum number who could
gather during Christmas 2020. Helen Wakeley, the Social Care Minister, said in a
message it would make such a difference to families if children were not
included. Matt Hancock replied that number 10 didn't want to shift an inch. The
messages were given to the journalist Isabel Oakeshott as part of her work with
Mr Hancock on his book, Pandemic Diaries. Our media editor Katie Razzell
considers why she's decided to release them. Isabel Oakeshott is well-versed in
scoops and controversy. At the Sunday Times, she broke the story that saw the
former Liberal Democrat Cabinet Minister Chris Hewn jailed in 2013 for lying
about a speeding ticket. Hewn's ex-wife, Vicky Price, who'd spoken to Isabel
Oakeshott and made the story public, also went to jail. At the Mail on Sunday in
2019, Oakeshott's reporting of remarks made by Britain's then US Ambassador Sir
Kim Darroch about President Trump brought about the diplomat's resignation. And
her unauthorised biography of David Cameron, which she wrote with the
Conservative donor Lord Ashcroft, included an unsubstantiated allegation about a
sex act on a dead pig's head. Her latest revelations, what the Telegraph has
called its lockdown files, were defended on the World at One as being in the
public interest by the paper's associate editor, Camilla Tomine. It's perfectly
legitimate to question how the decisions were made, to ask whether the normal
protocols went dangerously out of the window as people made public health policy
that affected the lives and liberties of the entire country. It's perfectly
right to apply a degree of journalistic scrutiny to that. Ms Oakeshott herself
wrote in the paper that she felt compelled to release the WhatsApp messages
because the public inquiry would take years to conclude. But there are questions
around what Matt Hancock and his supporters see as a gross betrayal. Ms
Oakeshott hasn't denied claims that she signed a non-disclosure agreement, a
promise to keep information confidential as part of her pandemic diaries
contract. Lawyers believe she does have a defence, if publication is in the
public interest, that could allow her to break any such agreement. I understand
she wasn't paid to work on the book. Isabel Oakeshott is a lockdown critic and
Brexiteer, whose partner Richard Tice heads Reform UK, which evolved from the
Brexit Party. One big question this throws up is why did Matt Hancock choose her
as a collaborator on his book? The Chinese government has criticised the FBI
after the American Intelligence Agency said a laboratory leak in Wuhan was the
most likely source of Covid-19. Beijing says there is no credibility to the
Bureau's first public comments on the origins of the pandemic. Here's our North
America correspondent John Sudworth. Suspicions have long swirled around Wuhan's
laboratories. Now, three years after the start of the pandemic, they've been
raised again with the comments from the director of the FBI, Christopher Wray.
The FBI has for quite some time now assessed that the origins of the pandemic
are most likely a potential lab incident in Wuhan. So here you're talking about
a potential leak from a Chinese government controlled lab that killed millions
of Americans. From the start, many scientists believed that Covid had passed
naturally from animals to humans in a Wuhan market. But with Wuhan's
laboratories known to have been collecting and experimenting on coronaviruses,
there's an alternative possibility that a researcher became accidentally
infected with a virus he or she was working on. The World Health Organization
team that travelled to Wuhan in 2021 called the lab leak theory extremely
unlikely. But there were concerns about China's political management of the
inquiry, something acknowledged by one member of that team, virologist Marion
Koopmans. It's difficult to know where the science ends and where the politics
starts. This was not a neutral, let's just have an open scientific debate. No,
that's clear. Despite the FBI's public comments, the US intelligence agencies
remain divided. And without new hard evidence, some scientists fear that one of
the biggest questions of our time, where did Covid come from, may never be
convincingly answered. The parents of a disabled teenager from Powys who died
after becoming morbidly obese have been jailed for gross negligence
manslaughter. Kayleigh Titford, who was 16, was found in filthy conditions at
the family home in Newtown by emergency services in October 2020. Our Wales
correspondent Hal Griffith followed the sentencing hearing at Swansea Crown
Court, the first in Wales to be televised. Kayleigh Titford lived with a spinal
condition and used a wheelchair, but for most of her childhood, she'd remained
active and independent, playing basketball and attending a mainstream school.
When the first national lockdown in March 2020 meant she had to stay at home,
she became entirely reliant on her parents for care. Their response was to leave
her immobile in bed for over six months, lying in squalid conditions and living
off takeaway food. Her body became so obese, inflamed and infected in the end,
it couldn't cope. On the night of her death, her father, Alan Titford, ignored
her screams, sending her a text message telling her to stop. As he sentenced
Titford and his partner, Sarah Lloyd-Jones, Judge Justice Griffith said they
were both fully and equally culpable for their daughter's death. This was a
horrifying case, a case of sustained neglect, leading to the death of a
completely dependent, bedridden, vulnerable, disabled child at the hands of her
own parents. Questions have been raised over whether the local authorities could
and should have done more to protect Kayleigh, but the judge made clear offers
of help had been ignored. Alan Titford was jailed for seven and a half years.
Sarah Lloyd-Jones will serve a six year sentence. Three days of national
mourning have begun in Greece after two trains collided head on, killing at
least 36 people. More than 70 others were taken to hospital after the crash near
the city of Larissa. The Greek transport minister has resigned and police say
they have arrested a station master. From Greece, here's our Europe
correspondent, Nick Beek. It is a horrific sight. Emergency workers picking
through the remnants of one carriage all but destroyed, another totally gutted
by fire. The train had been carrying hundreds of people, mostly students, who'd
been celebrating a Greek Orthodox holiday. One survivor described the moments
after his intercity service crashed into a freight train head on. We heard a big
bang. It was a nightmarish ten seconds. We were turning over in the carriage
until we fell on our sides and until the commotion stopped. Then there was
panic. The fire was immediate. As we were turning over, we were being burned.
Fire was right and left. Identification of victims has been hard. The fire was
intense. This is Greece's worst railway crash and it shouldn't have happened. A
59-year-old signal master working in the city of Larissa, 15 miles away, has
been charged with manslaughter by negligence. He has blamed a possible technical
failure. Visiting the carnage, Greece's Prime Minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis,
promised to find out what had gone so catastrophically wrong. But who to blame
is not a straightforward question. There have been repeated concerns over the
lack of signals in Greece, with many drivers reported to receive instructions
over mobile phone calls. This evening the transport minister resigned, saying
his efforts to improve a railway that was, he claimed, not fit for the current
century hadn't been enough to prevent such an accident. You're listening to the
6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4, the main news so far. The former Health Secretary
Matt Hancock has disputed claims that leaked WhatsApp messages show he ignored
expert advice on Covid testing for care homes. China has rejected a claim by the
FBI that the pandemic originated in a government-controlled laboratory in Wuhan.
Still to come, a makeover for a special chair to be used just once by King
Charles III, and… Flamingos have individual and consistent personality types,
and these particular personality types influence the friendships they form. How
to become besties with a big pink bird. The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has
announced plans to set up an independent public advocate to support survivors
and the families of those killed in major disasters. He told the Commons the new
body, made of a panel of experts, would advise victims where to access help,
speak on their behalf and assist them during subsequent inquiries and inquests.
The announcement is part of the government's response to a report written six
years ago by the former Bishop of Liverpool, James Jones, about the experiences
of the families of Hillsborough victims. Here's our Home Affairs correspondent
Tom Symons. The families of 97 Hillsborough victims have fought for 34 years for
answers and justice. Those who survived or were bereaved by the Grenfell Tower
fire are still waiting after five years. In both cases, victims have complained
of the challenges they faced, obtaining everything from health and financial
help to information about their involvement in public inquiries and inquests.
The Justice Secretary Dominic Raab has decided against a single independent
public advocate in favour of a permanent panel of experts. Social workers,
doctors, ex-civil servants, emergency responders, community leaders and media
advisers. They'll step in to help families of the bereaved and those with life-
changing injuries. James Jones, the former Bishop of Liverpool, who chaired an
independent panel on the Hillsborough disaster, said the government's
announcement was a start. There needs to be much more detail about what the
advocate will do, but I'm now urging the government to respond in full to the 25
recommendations that were there in the report that I was asked to write on
learning from the Hillsborough families' experiences so that these things should
never happen again. One of them is that families should be given clear
information about what investigations and inquiries will take place and help to
take part. But Labour said the government's proposals today fell short. The
advocates' panel didn't have the power to obtain information on behalf of
victims and it would be for the government to decide how the panel should react
to specific disasters. Dominic Raab said there might be differences of opinion
between victims. The proposal will need new legislation, which is still to come.
Metropolitan and Sussex police forces, which are both searching for a missing
baby in Brighton, have said that they must consider that the infant has come to
serious harm. The parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, had been missing
for 53 days before finally being found and arrested on Monday. They're being
held on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. At a news conference,
Detective Superintendent Lewis Bathford from the Met gave this update. An
application for the extension of their detention for a further 36 hours has been
sought from Brighton Magistrates' Court. The police searches of the baby
continue and we must consider that the baby has come to serious harm. This is a
hugely difficult and painstaking search operation, covering a vast area of some
90 square miles. We're using every resource we have at our disposal to find the
baby. Nigeria's opposition Labour Party says it will mount a legal challenge
against the results of the presidential election, which was won by Bola Tinubu
of the governing APC. The polls have been mired in controversy, with allegations
of intimidation and vote-buying. Mr Tinubu said it was a credible election. Our
correspondent Manny Jones reports from Lagos. On the day Nigeria woke up to a
new president, Lagos' bustling streets are unusually quiet. Many are still
worried there could be a violent reaction to the result. It hasn't helped that
Peter Obi, whose youth-led campaign upset Nigeria's two-party system, says he'll
be challenging the results in court. The opposition has called the election a
sham, a sentiment that's been echoed in the southeastern state of Anambra, Mr
Obi's stronghold. Chukwuemeka is a tuk-tuk driver in Akwa, the state's capital.
Let them just cancel it because this one is like they have put corruption on it.
They don't want to tell us the truth. If they want to bring the original result,
let them cancel it. We don't want it. Bola Tinubu has called for unity after
what's been a very divisive election. But he'll have to work hard if he wants to
win over young urban Nigerians who support Mr Obi. They thought this election
would be their chance to choose a different kind of leader, but they've been
left disappointed by the result. Many worry that Mr Tinubu, who's faced
questions about the source of his enormous wealth, doesn't care about the issues
affecting them, including youth unemployment and corruption. Housing campaigners
have criticised a Supreme Court ruling on so-called ghost landlords, after
judges agreed that a landlord is the person a tenant signs their contract with
and not the property's owner. Critics say the ruling will be a blueprint to
allow landlords to avoid taking responsibility for their rentals. Jim Connolly
has more details. If tenants find the properties they're living in fail to meet
certain standards, they're entitled to claim their rent back. But this ruling
has serious implications for people looking to do that. Housing campaigners say
it gives a blueprint for landlords to avoid taking responsibility, because it
allows companies with very few liabilities to sign deals with tenants and then
fold if there are issues. The National Residential Landlords Association says it
gives much-needed clarity for those worried they could be held responsible if
secondary companies trick them into letting out their homes in poor condition.
The court said in its ruling there are a range of other sanctions available to
combat rogue landlords, including fines and banning orders. The five judges also
said that ultimately it was a matter for Parliament to decide whether these were
sufficient. So now all eyes will be on legislation currently passing through the
system and designed to protect renters, which is currently making its way
through Parliament. The Governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, has said
it may be necessary to further increase interest rates. Speaking at an event in
London, Mr Bailey said no decision had yet been taken. He added that the economy
was behaving as expected, although inflation was slightly lower than predicted.
In the city, the 100 share index ended the day up 39 points at 7,915. On Wall
Street a short time ago, the Dow Jones was up 51 points at 32,707. On the
currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20. Against the euro, sterling is
at 1.128. That makes a euro worth 88.8 pence. A hearing into allegations of
racism at Yorkshire Cricket Club has been told that the former England bowler,
Tim Bresnan, used a racial slur towards his team-mate Azim Rafiq's sister.
Bresnan, who has declined to take part in the process, denies the claims. The
England and Wales Cricket Board has been setting out cases against a number of
former players. Our sports editor Dan Rowan was at the hearing. Two years ago,
Yorkshire Cricket Club was plunged into crisis after it was revealed that the
county had taken no disciplinary action against any of the people involved in
the racial harassment of the spin bowler Azim Rafiq. A catalogue of disrepute
charges followed. Today, the England and Wales Cricket Board claimed Yorkshire
accepted that it failed to address systemic use of racist and or discriminatory
language over a prolonged period and in relation to multiple employees and or
players of the club. Outlining its case against the former England bowler
Matthew Hoggard, the ECB said he'd admitted using racially offensive phrases but
he denied any discriminatory intent. Another ex-England star, Tim Bresnan, was
said to have used a racial slur against Rafiq's sister in 2014. Bresnan, who
also declined to take part in the process, denies the allegation. Five of those
charged have withdrawn from the proceedings, citing concerns over fairness,
leaving the former England captain Michael Vaughan as the only defendant set to
appear. He's accused of making a racist comment to Rafiq and three other Asian
players during a Yorkshire match in 2009. Vaughan, who has repeatedly denied the
claims, stepped back from his broadcasting work at the BBC last year after he
was charged. England's men's cricketers have beaten Bangladesh by three wickets
in the first of three one-day internationals. David Millan scored an unbeaten
century in Mirpur to help the Taurus overhaul Bangladesh's 209 all-out, with
eight balls to spare. Painstaking preservation work is being carried out on the
medieval throne the King will sit on as he's crowned at his coronation in May.
Conservation experts say they're trying to clean the chair and stabilise layers
of flaking gilding. Our Royal Correspondent Nicholas Whitchell reports. It was
constructed more than 700 years ago by a craftsman called Master Walter, the
painter of Durham, on the orders of King Edward I. It was built to hold the
Stone of Scone, the ancient slab of sandstone on which Scottish kings used to be
crowned. The stone had been seized by King Edward, who brought it to Westminster
Abbey. The finished chair enclosed the stone and it became the coronation chair,
and it's been used at the coronation of every monarch since then. Henry VIII,
Elizabeth I, Victoria, all have sat on this ancient chair for their crowning. It
was last used, of course, at the coronation of the late Queen Elizabeth II in
1953. The chair bears the marks of the centuries. There's graffiti from the
1800s when visitors were able to carve their initials into it. Its original gilt
finish and vivid painted decorations have gone, but structurally it's sound. The
Abbey Conservator who's cleaning it is Christa Blesley. It's decorated with
punchwork, which is small tiny dots that we use to create images. So there's
birds, there's figures of saints and kings, and because so little survives of
English art from that time, it really is an exquisite example of the quality of
craftsmanship. At some point, the Stone of Scone, which was returned to Scotland
in 1996, will be brought from Edinburgh and placed underneath the chair's seat.
And then the coronation chair will take its place in front of the Abbey's high
altar for the coronation service. A service which, though it will be tailored in
some respects to reflect modern Britain, will nonetheless honour the centuries
of tradition represented by the chair, which will be its centrepiece. A maroon
sailor who survived for almost a month at sea by living off Heinz tomato ketchup
is set to receive a gift from the company. Elvis Francois was tracked down by
Heinz after a social media manhunt. Now they want to give him a gift that's far
more to his taste. Aruna Iyengar reports. The marketing possibilities were just
too lip-smacking when Heinz found out about Elvis Francois. He'd been repairing
a yacht when it went adrift with no engine or sail, leaving him stranded at sea
for 24 days with nothing but ketchup and spices to eat. After he was rescued by
the Colombian Navy last month, he said the sauce was full of vitamins and more
palatable than seaweed. Heinz then launched a social media campaign to locate Mr
Francois using the hashtag find the ketchup boat guy before a media outlet in
the Caribbean island of Dominica tracked him down to his home village of Anse de
May. Heinz now plans to buy him a new boat. A teenager who has camped out in a
tent for the past three years to raise money for charity is calling time on his
challenge. Max Woosey has spent more than a thousand nights under canvas and
even took his tent to Downing Street, collecting more than £700,000 for North
Devon Hospice in the process. He plans to hold a festival next month, complete
with axe throwing and a party bus, to mark the end of his outdoor sleeps. Max
says it's been quite the ride. Sadly it has come to an end. I'm 13 years old now
so it's been a brilliant adventure for me and I love the sports, I'll still be
outside but I think sadly it has come to an end at some point and what better
way to go out with a massive festival. Researchers have found that it's not only
birds of a feather that flock together but birds of a personality type too. A
study of captive flamingos at Slimbridge Wetland Centre in Gloucestershire
revealed that the group formed cliques of like-minded individuals. Sally Johnson
has this report. You probably already know that the collective noun for a group
of flamingos is, appropriately enough, a flamboyance. But new research has found
that within these garish flocks there are interesting friendship dynamics at
play. Flamingos might all look the same but they are particular about who they
spend their time with. Dr Paul Rose from the University of Exeter is one of the
scientists who studied two captive flamboyances in Gloucestershire. Flamingos
have individual and consistent personality types and these particular
personality types influence the friendships they form within the flocks that
they live in. This probably gives them advantages when it comes to nesting and
breeding and finding a mate and accessing resources. The researchers also
believe that flamingos carve out different roles within their society based on
their personalities and offer support to other members of their group, including
in flamingo fights and squabbles, to ensure the birds they hang out with remain
very much in the pink. The headlines again. Allies of the former health
secretary Matt Hancock say he's considering legal action after the Daily
Telegraph alleged that in the middle of April in 2020 he rejected expert advice
to give Covid tests to everyone going into care homes in England. He denies the
claim and says at the time the country didn't have the capacity to carry out
testing on that scale. This evening the Telegraph has published a new allegation
that in September of 2020 secondary school children in England were required to
wear masks to avoid a row with Scotland, which had already introduced the
measure. China has dismissed a statement by the head of the FBI that the
pandemic was probably triggered by a leak from a laboratory in the city of
Wuhan. Swansea Crown Court has jailed the parents of a disabled teenage girl who
became morbidly obese and died in conditions described as unfit for an animal.
Police searching for a missing baby near Brighton say the fear of the child has
come to serious harm. They're expected to give a further update in the coming
minutes. Greece's transport minister has resigned after at least 38 people were
killed in a collision between a passenger train and one carrying freight. BBC
News. And the news was read by Jane Steel. Comedy in a moment. The Devil and the
Deep Blue Sea beckons in conversations from a long marriage. And then later,
playwright Gary Owen is on front row this evening, talking about his new play
Romeo and Julie, the story of young lovers in Cardiff, plus the Barry Milroy's
choir perform live in the studio. That's at a quarter past seven here on BBC
Radio 4. There are over one and a half million postcodes in the UK. The Patch on
BBC Radio 4. We randomly pick one out. So which one do I press? Clear the random
postcodes? And uncover a story there you probably wouldn't have heard about.
They can't get the staff to put them here, let alone a new prison with 700 more
staff. He said we know exactly what's up there. We're looking for something that
shouldn't be up there. The Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. When the police lock
these people up, who looks after them? Well, it's prison officers and it's all
done unseen. Starts next Wednesday morning at nine. Back to this evening on
Radio 4 and it's over to a couple all at sea. Conversations from a long
marriage. By Jan Etherington. Starring Joanna Lumley. And Roger Allen. Episode
3, The Devil and the Deep Blue Sea. So I just dug out this T-shirt. Uh-huh. I
got it in New Orleans, remember? Mm. Laissez les bons temps rouler. Let the good
times roll. And we sure did, didn't we, darling? I've got some lovely T-shirts
I've collected from our travels. I should wear them more often, shouldn't I?
Yeah. This is quite old. It's late 70s. Rather a snug fit, but I can still get
into it. Jolly good. I never normally choose red, but I think it looks quite
good on me. Don't you? Drawn to melancholy, you need closure. Eight letters.
Eleven across. Any ideas? Shut down. Ah, yes. Thank you, darling. See me. Feel
me. Touch me. Feel me. Oh, there you are. I'm surprised you noticed I'd left.
Here's the post. Don't put it on the seedlings. Need any help with the potting
on? I'm fine, thanks. Need any more help with the crosswords? All right. I'm
sorry. I was just trying to distract myself. From me, obviously. And you
succeeded. From thinking about money. Or lack of it. All the outgoings. It's
getting scary. Everything's going up. I'm sorry I lost the editing job. It's not
your fault. You'll get other commissions. I hope. Are you really worried? Let's
just say we can forget about having any kind of holiday this year. That bad?
We're going through our savings. This house is a money pit. Do you wish we'd
downsized after all? Not yet, but... Are you thinking we shouldn't have got the
dog? Almost daily. He doesn't mean it, Amy. Sorry, Ames. I'm joking. You're safe
with us. Just try and eat less. Look, everybody's in the same boat. Sure, but
that doesn't help at all, does it? I'm doing what I can. You said we needed to
cut back. That's why I've been rummaging through my old clothes. And I've
discovered a whole new look. It's not new. It's retro. I'm calling it
spontaneous purchases after long lunches circa 1975, instantly regretted and
languishing in the back of my wardrobe since Pink Floyd were number one.
Cumbersome but evocative. Aren't you going to open the post? No point. It'll
just be more demands and statements. That one's for you. It doesn't look like a
bill. It's got a crest on it. His Majesty's prison, perhaps? I'm pretty sure
that would be a brown envelope. HMRC, then. I think I missed the deadline for
the tax demand. They have window envelopes, don't they? Then it'll be from some
chancer offering to handle a portfolio of assets that I haven't got. My hands
are all covered in wet compost. I love it when you talk dirty. Just open it.
Well? Give me a chance. It's from an agent. Secret? No, a talent agent.
Someone's heard you sing in the care home choir? Not a million miles out.
Someone heard me talk about Fleet Street in that radio documentary I took part
in last year. Really? Yeah. It says, Very impressed, not just by your
storytelling skills, but your ability to present information so entertainingly.
And also you have an excellent speaking voice, which would project well in a
large auditorium. Would you consider joining our roster of speakers for the many
cruise ship companies we represent? Below are the details of a lovely cruise
urgently needing a lecturer. Please call me, signed by Dinah, all at sea talent.
She wants you to do talks on cruise ships. I get that impression. You're not
going to, are you? Why not? It's a holiday. Isn't that what we want? Well, not
that sort of holiday. Being herded around like school kids and forced to dine
with Margo and Jerry from Surbiton every night. Cruises are for people who leave
towels and Dan Brown novels to bagsy loungers and get morbidly depressed if
they're not invited to eat at the captain's table. That's what I love about you,
your open-minded tolerance. I would rather spend a day stuck on the central line
in a heat wave. You have never even been on a cruise. And there's a very good
reason for that. I'm an independent traveller. We both are. We always have been.
Free to come and go and jump on a bus or a plane to wherever the mood takes us.
A cruise is my idea of a nightmare. You just don't like being told what to do.
Don't tell me what I like. There it is. Look, it's ten days sailing round the
Med. That's ten days I'll never get back. Everything's free. It'll be like a
prison ship. Including drinks. Well, let me think about it. I brought you a
coffee. Thank you. I'm not sure I've earned it. Why not? I'm just trying to work
out a topic for each talk. Trouble is, I don't think I can tell some of the best
stories. Like what? Well, like the one about Jacko, the vertically challenged
ex-jockey racing correspondent who after a few drinks in the Ascot bar told the
six-foot fashion editor, I want to make love to you. Oh, yes. And she looked
down at him with a withering glance and said, if I ever find out that it
actually happened. But, you know, maybe the wrong tone. What are your topics so
far? Press barons, Northcliffe, Beaverbrook, Murdoch, Maxwell. Fleet Street
characters, Geoffrey Barnard, Keith Waterhouse, etc. Memorable pictures.
Thatcher leaving number ten. Princess Diana alone on the Taj Mahal. Good. That's
very good. Then, fantastic headlines. Freddie Star at my hamster. Martian
kidnapped my son and turned him into an olive. I think that's apocryphal,
darling. And gotcha, the sinking of the Belgrano, the Falklands War. I think you
should do a whole talk on the press coverage of 9-11. There's endless footage,
but you can tell it from a newspaper's point of view. Changing headlines every
hour. Terrifying. Excellent idea. Thank you, darling. And you can go now. What?
Isn't that what you're going to say to me? No. I really value your input. This
is a first for me. It's all very well joining a conversation and chipping in,
like the documentary, but this has got to be structured. And I've got to do a
PowerPoint, get photos together. Want to be my picture researcher? No, thanks.
There are two swimming pools and a spa. Probably full of people who can't even
swim, standing around chatting about house prices. Right, that's it. I don't
want you to come if you're going to be moaning all the time and patronising my
audience. You what? Sally said the cruise sounds wonderful. I'll take her and
you can stay at home with the dog. Impressed? It's absolutely huge. Well, I know
size is important to you. So I'm glad you approved. I didn't say I approved. In
fact, I'm pretty appalled. It's blocking out the sun. There are 14 decks. It'll
be like travelling around in a teetering tar block. Next time we'll choose one
of the smaller ships. Oh, you think there'll be a next time? You promised to
give it a go. Well, I have. And the thought of spending ten days on that fills
me not only with revulsion, but a very strong sense that I'm accelerating
climate change just by stepping aboard that monster. It's an eco-friendly ship.
Oh, with a thousand passengers? They recycle everything. That's impossible. Stop
it. Now slap on a big smile and get up that gangplank. Or what? If you're going
to be hard work, I'm putting you off at the first port. Which is Barcelona.
That'd be nice. I should hate you, but I guess I love you. You got me in between
the devil and the deep blue sea. The sea's certainly moved for me. How about
you? Bloody bay of bisque. I'm shattered. All that rolling around. It seemed to
go on and on, tossing backwards and forwards. Oh, I thought it would never end.
Once, that's summarised most nights for us. You make it sound like we switch off
the lights and turn our backs on each other now. Some people read books in bed
side by side, I've heard. Just saying. Well, we've done that. I've never got
past two pages before you jump on me. I'm still trying to finish Lord of the
Rings, and I started it in 1978. Aren't we lucky that we still want each other.
Darling? Sorry, just got a message from the cruise director. He wants a list of
my talks. First one is scheduled for today at 2pm. When everyone will nod off
after lunch. Thank you for your support. What are you going to do till then?
Stomp around sulking? I'm not sulking. I just can't imagine there's anything I
want to do here. Are you joking? Look, check out the day's events. Killer darts,
carpet bowls, and the puffy eye seminar in the spa for starters. There's a Queen
tribute band on tonight. Well, if it was the real thing, I'd be down the front.
What more could you want? Horse riding? Funny. Come on, make a plan. OK, I'll
have a swim of course. The pool's probably fenced off, the boat's still rocky.
They wouldn't dare close the pool. They might, because they don't know you well
enough to realise that vengeance will be heaped upon them if they stop you from
swimming. Well if the pool's shut, I might as well come back to bed. You'll have
to be a quick one, I've got a meeting in half an hour. Who said anything about
sex? I need some sleep. Thank you so much. My next talk on Fleet Street's Rogues
and Rebels will be on Thursday at 10.30. Well done. Oh, that was marvellous.
They loved it. How do you know? They were spellbound. So, did you like the story
about Murdoch's fist fight in the Ivy? I was inspired. I never mentioned it.
Hilarious. Seriously, I didn't. Right. So why did you ask me what I thought? Are
you trying to trick me? I just know you weren't in the audience. I was there
most of the time. About four of the 45 minutes. Well how do you know I wasn't?
You shouldn't have worn that gold shirt. I saw you floating in as I was summing
up. OK, I'm sorry. I'd forgotten we'd put the clocks forward and I got a bit
caught up. There's so much to do. I've been talking to Carlos. Who's Carlos?
Carlos, the guy who's been talking to you. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm
sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. That's worrying. We could learn it
together. I haven't got time. Six talks to prepare. There are quite a few
husbands and wives in the class. Do all the blokes look bored? It's great to see
couples dancing, don't you think? Darling? No, I don't. Unless it's John
Travolta and Uma Thurman in Pulp Fiction. Well, we could do that. And look
completely stupid like all those newlyweds. Let's just put a stop to it. OK. OK.
OK. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Like all those newlyweds
who try and do the lift from dirty dancing at their wedding and end up falling
on the cake Don't you fancy a twirl? Look, I realize you've spent all our
married life trying to turn me into your dancing partner But to quote the late
philosopher meatloaf, I would do anything for love, but I won't do that Could
you put your legs somewhere else? Where do you suggest? Under my armpits? Oh, I
don't care where they go, but if you don't move I'll have to climb all over you
to get my clothes That used to be part of the fun in the old days Sit over there
out of the way Our times have changed I'm sorry, but this is a titchy cabin
Okay, throw me my shirt and suit and I'll dress on the balcony We're very close
to the coast, people will see you You're worried I'll inflame the local
senoritas No, I'm worried you'll expose something inadvertently on the port side
I didn't know I had a port side Seriously, we should ask for an upgrade
Seriously? That's very funny Why? Because as you know, I am officially crew and
you are my bit on the side, this is a freebie Some people have a special key for
those suites at the top I bet they don't have to climb over each other to get
dressed Ah, but it's not all canapes and cocktails up there The top decks suffer
most when the weather's bad If you pay, you sway is the mantra So I'm not asking
for a suite Lady Mary wouldn't put up with this She has a dressing room and a
maid in Downton Abbey Why don't we take it in turns to get ready? I could watch
you getting dressed I don't want you to See earlier comment on changing times
Oh, sorry Look, obviously darling, that's a lovely idea, but it's formal night
And I'm still trying to find something I've got that fits the bill You've got
enough stuff to choose from, 90% of the wardrobe is yours That's not a wardrobe,
it's an itsy cupboard with not enough coat hangers Can you see anything that
says Weybridge Golf Club Dinner Dance? And why would I want to? Because, listen
to this dress code Formal night gives the ladies a chance to wear an evening
gown A cocktail dress or elegant separates Gentlemen are invited, i.e. chucked
overboard if they don't To wear a smart suit or a dinner jacket Have we time
travelled back to the 1950s? You loved dressing up You, yes, but I don't think
this spaghetti-strapped slip satin number Is quite what the formal frock police
have in mind for the midship's dining room It's certainly what I have in mind
Where's the man could ease a heart like a satin gown? Oh, here he is No,
seriously, I can't wear this tonight I'll get sent back to change Then you'd
better slip into something less comfortable Hurry up, the table's booked for
8.30 Or we could not go out at all Nice idea, but I have to mingle and circulate
You can do that in here with me Two people doth not a mingle make I think we can
prove that it doth When you rock and roll with me No one else I'd rather be No,
nobody here can do it for me How are you doing? I almost prepped talk three
Guess what? I got top marks in the quiz Well done No, it doesn't have a happy
ending I was reading in the panorama lounge and this quiz started And I dotted
down the answers and then at the end she said Hands up if you've got more
than... And my hand was still up when she said 18 And she said, you've won,
what's your team? And I said, it's just me And she said, you have to register as
a team But you'll know next time I thought, that won't be a next time I am not a
team player Glad you're making friends It's hot in here, you should take a break
I need another half hour OK, and then how about we go up on deck And re-enact
the flying scene from Titanic? That didn't end well Oh, it's lovely up there
Let's have a swim together when you're done OK But annoyingly, there are no free
loungers by the pool I've just been up to check Good, I don't want a lounge by
the pool I did try whipping a towel off one and this woman snapped My husband's
coming back, where from? I said, the dead I really hope you didn't say that No,
of course not But everything I've heard about lounger hogs is true When one
couple got up to leave I said, thank you And I started to sit down He dropped a
Richard Osmond on the seat and said Actually, we're just going to lunch And your
blistering riposte was? Nothing I thought I'd better come and find you Before I
said something I regret Easily the most sensible thing you've done for decades
But then his wife said You're with that wonderful speaker, aren't you? We like
him a lot That's nice So I said, but not enough to let me have your lounger
What's this? It's just a note from someone at the last talk Rather flamboyant
handwriting Cathy? Cathy Richardson, I sort of know her In what sort of way?
She's the widow of Ritchie Richardson, picture editor I think you probably met
him at Kevin's leaving do He always wore a bow tie Cathy was a secretary in the
newsroom She was quite a looker A looker? Yeah, you know No, I don't A bit
patty-boyed She got trapped in the lift once with the Everly brothers And they
ended up singing Cathy's clown to her Till the engineer rescued them I don't
believe anything you say about those Fleet Street days You just make it all up
What do you expect? We're journalists Is she here on her own? Yeah, Ritchie died
five years ago, peacefully in his sleep Which was a huge surprise to everyone as
he was a Class A hell-raiser Once found lying on the train tracks at Bromley
Crying, take me to Pratt's Bottom Well, you'd better watch out There's a lot of
elderly widows on board And it seems you're a bit of a granny magnet Cathy
suggested we meet for a drink about six Catch up on old times That sounds
fascinating, but I've got a dance class then That's OK, you're not invited Oh,
fine, see you later Off for another skirmish? I'm going to continue my lounger
hunt, if that's what you mean Don't rock the boat Can't promise For the people
who said sit down Sit down, you're rocking the boat People who said sit down Sit
down, you're rocking the boat And the devil will drag you under By the sharp
lapel of your checkered coat Sit down, sit down, sit down, sit down Sit down,
you're rocking the boat Bye, Cathy, see you at the next talk Bye, nice to meet
you I thought we were meeting at dinner What are you doing here? I'm here
because when I was shown to a table A woman was crawling underneath it saying
Anyone seen a tooth? My husband's lost his denture So I said I'd forgot my
glasses and I came to find you Just as well I did An erotic sculptress? Yes,
quite a surprise She took it up after Richie died And couldn't wait to show you?
She's proud of her work She just wanted me to see her portfolio Oh, yeah, that's
how it starts I think she was glad of the company But she already had company
She brought along her two pouting breasts Stop it Or maybe they weren't hers
They looked a little pneumatic What were the pictures like? Mostly symbolic Of
what? I think you know what I don't She wouldn't let me see them That's because
you were sniggering Obviously, I thought it was an album of photos from the old
days Then she said they were erotic sculptures Didn't you laugh when she told
you? No, because I'm not a schoolboy Were they any good? They were striking Big
willies? Right, we're going to sit on the veranda on our own And you're not
going to speak to anyone Did she offer to sculpt you? And that is a euphemism
She might have done if you hadn't barged in and ruined the moment Oh, thanks,
I'll barge out again, shall I? I'm sure if you whistle she'll come back I'm
joking, darling She's always been a bit flirty But I can handle her Well, that's
what worries me You're quite enjoying it, aren't you? All the attention Hmm,
probably about as much as you're enjoying your salsa class I forgive you Because
I can't forget you You got me in between A devil and a deep blue sea Oh, Sal,
the view from our balcony Now, I know, gorgeous Cadiz We were there all day
Paella, Sangria Well, we would have liked to stay into the evening and wander
around a bit But we're off to Lisbon And our cabin, well, compact is the word
Formal night is more like formal fight Trying to get dressed together Oh, but
you'd love the spa I had my nails shellacked yesterday Tropics coral, all it
goes with the salsa I'm having a really good time with Carlos Oh, he doesn't
mind He doesn't notice No, he's fine Drawing quite a crowd at his talks They all
want to buy him drinks In fact, we're a bit like ships that pass in the night
I'm doing the dance class And he's sampling the cocktail of the day With the
granny groupies One in particular And listen to this She's actually... Oh, hang
on, Sal, there's someone at the door Sorry, forgot my key card Oh, for the
hundredth time I'm just telling Sally about our floating home Look, Sal, I'll
call you from Lisbon Bye, darling, bye Wait, wait No, give it back Hi, Sal Yeah,
yeah, fine Can you put the dog on? Can you put the dog on? And switch to speaker
so she can hear me Amy, it's me Good girl How are you getting on with Aunty Sal?
I hope you're behaving Bet you're missing our walkies and cuddles Sorry, Sal,
he's gone too lally Give me the phone Mummy's getting cross with us I'm not her
mummy Sal, please end the call before I have him committed Oh, she's gone Sad
droopy tale Have you been drinking? No, I'm just high on life You mean the
helium of fan club adulation They're nice people Especially the one with the
book of dirty pictures And the inflatable chest She thinks you're very pleasant
Pleasant? Well, while you've been busy being adored I've just come from my
lesson with Carlos How did it go? Got a bit sweaty We tried the Argentine tango
And he suggested I should wrap myself around him like cling film Good advice
Sounds like the tango Bet you wish I'd taken up shuffleboard I'm just glad
you've found something you really like Maybe we should introduce Carlos to Cathy
And spend more time with each other Nice idea, but I'm doing a question and
answer session later I can think of a few I'd like to ask you But I'm not sure I
want to hear the answers Turning inside out Tell me why Last day of the trip and
I've only just found out There are two laundrettes What? Oh, sorry, I didn't
know you were asleep Just resting my eyes Pretty tiring walking around all day
But lovely Yes, it was, but then Passengers from the ship come up to talk and
some want selfies Oh, poor you You should get some advice from Brad Pitt About
how to avoid the media spotlight Here's a clean pants You nearly didn't get them
back Oh, don't tell me Frantic women fans fighting over them No, I put the
washing on and went to get a coffee And when I came back I sat there listening
to the women talking Forget last night's comedian There's more laughs in the
laundrette And fights over the ironing board And they ruthlessly tip out
everyone's washing when it's finished And then I suddenly thought Weird, the
washing should have finished by now And I realised I didn't recognise the bra
going round Because I was in the other laundrette The one on deck seven Were you
listening? Yes, from the laundrette, funny Last night on board tonight Mm Shall
we eat in that lovely Thai restaurant, just the two of us? Sure, who else is
likely to come? You tell me Oh, except in about half an hour I'm having goodbye
drinks with some passengers How many? What, drinks? Passengers? Oh, I don't
know, a few people who have come up to chat after the talks Old hacks from the
mail, Daily Sketch And even a guy from Melody Maker You know I'm doing my dance
with Carlos tonight? Yeah, you said No, well, not just me, but the rest of the
group as well But they're all in couples It's a sort of end-of-term exhibition
dance I'm really glad you're doing that Are you? Of course, proud of you I
thought I'd wear my satin slip dress and my silver heels Perfect Are you coming
to watch? What time is it? Seven in the ballroom before dinner Erm, I'm pretty
sure I can make that What would stop you? Well, you know what it's like when you
get talking Maybe I'll set an alarm on my watch That would be very wise I'm a
bit nervous, Carlos I sometimes have a mental blank about the steps I'm so glad
I've got you to guide me Hasta pronto Carlos? Where are you going? May I have
the pleasure of this dance? Hilarious Oh, I'm glad you made it Why don't you sit
over there? No chance Let's get into a hole You can't dance Oh, but I can, now,
a bit What do you mean? I've been having lessons from Carlos all week Secret
lessons? Sort of You obviously didn't find out, thanks to him So what was all
that about meeting people? And Cathy? Only met her once with you But it was a
good pretext for my absences Oh, you utter sneak Oh, I've been very upset I
thought you were having a fling Good Let's channel that into the dance, shall
we? Salsa's all about passion and jealousy, Carlos says So you really have been
learning salsa? I hope so I'll find out Even though you hate dancing? I do hate
dancing, but I love you Oh, thank you, darling So, shall we? Ooh, nice hip
action Carlos advised me to release my inner panther By golly, you have Very
stringy OK, let's salsa Not so fast I need to get my feet in the right place
first One, two, three, and five, six, seven, and one, two Woo-hee! You a white-
hot baby But do you have to count out loud? Yes, five, six, seven, and one, two,
three Baby, five, six, seven, and one, two Woo! Like seven inches from a midday
sun Well, I hear you whispering the words Melt everyone But you stay so cold
Conversations from a Long Marriage Was written by Jan Etherington It starred
Joanna Lumley And Roger Allen It was produced and directed by Claire Jones And
was a BBC Studios production This life ain't good enough I feel my world Don't
lift you up I could change my life And you can join Joanna and Roger at the same
time next week when Roger's in a bad mood, but why? There's plenty of wit and
wisdom from David Sedaris in tomorrow night's 6.30 comedy And tonight, Tony and
Lillian have something important to discuss and Helen tries to cheer up Lee
We're off to Ambridge after the news This year, as part of Red Nose Day, you
could win an iconic BBC treasure How about Pat Butch's earrings from EastEnders?
Heavier than you might think? Maybe a House of Games winner's suitcase? Or Craig
Revel Horwood's ten-score paddle from Strictly? Not that he uses it much These
are just some of the BBC items that could be yours as part of Red Nose Day Hey!
Not the microphone! To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief go to
bbc.co.uk forward slash rednoseday where you'll find the terms and conditions
and privacy notice You must be 18 or over to enter The giveaway closes at
11.59pm on Saturday