TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-11H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Watch on BBC iPlayer. This is BBC Radio 4. BBC News at ten o'clock. The former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock has described the leaking of thousands of his
WhatsApp messages from the height of the Covid pandemic as a massive betrayal.
The journalist who revealed the messages confirmed she'd broken a non-disclosure
agreement she signed before helping Mr Hancock write his book. Isabel Oakshott
insisted she'd acted in the public interest. Our chief political correspondent
Nick Hurdley says Mr Hancock disputes this. His argument is that there is no
public interest in this because he handed over these messages to the public
inquiry which is looking into the UK's Covid response. My understanding is those
messages were handed to the inquiry back in the autumn. Now the argument we've
heard from Isabel Oakshott is a different one that actually the public inquiry
was going to take far too long. This stuff might never see the light of day. The
latest messages published by the Daily Telegraph detail how Mr Hancock fought to
overturn a government decision which kept schools open as Covid infections rose
towards the end of 2020. In one message to Mr Hancock the former Education
Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson said teachers really do just hate work. Mr
Williamson has insisted he was talking about some unions not teachers. Police in
Sussex say a post-mortem examination will be carried out on the body of a baby
found during a search for the missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon.
They're being held on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The third and
final report from the public inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017
which killed 22 people will be published this afternoon. The report will focus
on the role of the security services and is expected to establish whether the
attack could have been prevented. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex say they've
been asked to vacate their home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of
Windsor Castle was given to the couple by Queen Elizabeth in 2019. Reports that
Prince Andrew has been offered the home have not been confirmed. BBC News. Now
it's set to turn a lot colder next week but while we might be tempted to turn
the heating up, spare a thought for those in Uzbekistan where despite being one
of the world's largest gas producers people have been unable to cook a meal or
keep warm through a bitter winter. We'll hear their stories in from our own
correspondent just after 11. But now it's time for Woman's Hour with Anita Rani.
Good morning and welcome to Woman's Hour. On the programme today I would like to
hear from you about something unusual you may have inherited in a will. The
reason I'm asking is because later in the programme we'll be hearing the story
of the Great Stork Derby. Let me fill you in. In 1920s Toronto a financier
called Charles Vance Miller died leaving no direct heirs to his fortune which
was over five hundred thousand dollars, the equivalent of about nine million
dollars in today's money. But rather than leave his money to a charity he made
the unusual stipulation in his will that it would go to the woman who in the
following 10 years would bear the most children. Well this sparked what came to
be known as the Great Stork Derby. I know we're going to get into a fascinating
story that we will be hearing about a little bit later and discussing all the
issues around what he did. But this morning I would like to know if you have
ever inherited anything unusual or surprising in a will. Shakespeare left his
wife Anne Hathaway his second best bed. Janis Joplin left two thousand pounds
for her 200 favourite friends to spend on one big party in her honour. The
comedian Jack Benny arranged in his will for his widow Mary to receive a single
red rose every day for the rest of her life. And Dusty Springfield's will
contains specific instructions of how she wanted her cat Nicholas to be looked
after. She wanted him to live in an indoor tree house, have Dusty's old record
serenade him at night and for him to be married to a friend's female cat. So
what have you been left or indeed what are you planning on leaving in your will?
You can get in touch in the usual way the number to text 84844. You can contact
us via email by going to our website or you can send me a WhatsApp voice note or
a message on 03700 100 444. I'm still waiting to inherit the fortune from a
long-lost relative I never knew I had. Also on the programme how are our breasts
affected by sports? If you are someone who does sport regularly you will be very
interested to hear that one. And Jo Cheatham will be here to talk about her
memoir Killjoy the story of how she found herself at the centre of the No More
Page Three campaign. That text number once more for all of you if you'd like to
get in touch with about anything you hear on the programme today. Your thoughts
and opinions are most welcome it's 84844. But first I'm going to start by giving
you a stat. According to the most recent data from the Office of National
Statistics there were 114 domestic homicides in the year ending March 2021. A
similar number to the average over the last five years. Robert Brown battered
his 46 year old wife Joanna to death with a claw hammer in 2010 with their two
children within earshot. In 2011 he was convicted of manslaughter due to
diminished responsibility and was given a 26 year sentence. He could be released
later this year after serving half his sentence. Well now Joanna's mother Diana
Parks is campaigning to prevent his release and is calling on the Justice
Secretary to intervene. You may remember this time last year Diana appeared on
Woman's Hour alongside the then Duchess of Cornwall. It was Diana's story that
inspired the Queen's Consort into raising awareness of domestic abuse. Well I'm
joined now in the studio by Diana and Joanna's best friend Hetty Barclay-Lanton.
Together they set up the Joanna Simpson Foundation which aims to transform the
lives of children impacted by domestic violence. Diana, Hetty welcome to Woman's
Hour. Diana you were at Westminster yesterday to highlight this case. What was
the response? How was that? It was amazing really. Ever since Hetty and I were
invited to Buckingham Palace for the United Nations day for the elimination of
violence against women that we met Carrie Johnson and she just latched on to our
story and in fact we really have her to thank and Hetty for getting to where we
are now with this. I mean it's just accelerated at such a pace it's incredible.
Yeah you've got some support at the highest level and we're going to hear
shortly from the former Justice Secretary Robert Buckland who was there but what
have you been told about him being released later this year? What information do
you know? So Robert Brown is entitled to be released in November 2023. He
doesn't have to apply for parole. He's just out. He doesn't have a medical check
even though he went into prison suffering from adjustment disorder so who knows
what he might be suffering from now but no medical check he'll just come out and
be on license for 13 years. Sorry who is going to monitor him I keep asking for
13 years it's an awful long time. What we do know and which is why we're really
driving this campaign hard is that we know from our discussions with the
probation that he is been assessed as being dangerous. He's a critical public
protection case which means he needs to be very closely monitored for the
protection of the public. Now ordinarily a critical public protection case would
not be released into society but his sentence means he has to be and this is why
we're doing this campaign because we believe not only are we frightened but it
is really critical for the safety of the public that we stop this from
happening. Diana you said last year when you're on Woman's Hour that you were
terrified about his reliefs. Can you explain why? Well we still are. He'll have
been festering in jail for when he comes out 13 years and he will be blaming
everybody but himself for what he did. He's been stripped of everything his
status, his job, his house and most of all his children and he will be fuming
and he's always said and he'd said to my daughter before he killed her that he
hated our family and had done for all the time they'd been married. And what's
about the idea that he might might be released? How does that make you feel?
We're really stressed, we're quite frightened. I mean not just for our family
but for Joe's best friends as well because he'll blame them as well for causing
all the stress that they had. You put a question to Dominic Raab, the Justice
Secretary on Laura Kunzberg's programme and he said he'll be willing to meet
you. What would you like to say to him? Well just in fact on Tuesday I received
a telephone call from his office to say that he would be pleased to meet me next
week which is amazing. So what will you say to him? Well put all the case to him
and pinpoint where it's gone wrong. I think the really, I agree with that and
the really important thing to get across to him is that this is not about us
trying to get justice. We won't ever get justice, Joe will always forever, we
can't say that she was murdered, we have to say that she was killed. This isn't
a justice thing, this is about absolutely the protection of us but critically
the public and so we'll want to reinforce for him why do we believe that Robert
Brown is dangerous and therefore why do we believe from a public protection
perspective he needs to act and he needs to act now. We asked the Justice
Secretary, in fact any minister in the Justice Department, to come on the
programme. Nobody was available but they did send us a statement, I'd like to
read it out. They've said this was an appalling crime and our thoughts remain
with Joanna Simpson's family and friends. The Deputy Prime Minister will do
everything in his power to keep the most dangerous offenders behind bars and has
pledged to give this case his closest personal attention. Hettie, you're a
friend of Joanna's, why do you believe that he shouldn't be released now? So I
believe he shouldn't be released now because all of the pointers point towards
him being dangerous. So there was a history of domestic abuse, everything that
we work with, I'm now the Chair of Refuge and everything that we do at Refuge,
you know we can see the signs. Domestic abuse is never a single event, it's
always a series of events and what happened to Jo was all of those telltale
signs in terms of coercive control, stalking, even stalking down to the last day
that she was alive. So that's a pattern of behaviour that doesn't disappear
overnight, it doesn't disappear when the victim is killed and that's the
assumption often. So that's one thing in terms of the kind of pattern of
domestic abuse but the second thing and to be honest I think it's been quite
horrific working with probation because when we started working with probation
we wanted to express how frightened we were and actually what they've done is
further reinforce that by saying you know what you're right, he is a critical
public protection case. So we want to get across to Dominic Robb how dangerous
this man is, why he's dangerous and therefore why we are asking for what we're
asking for. Well earlier this morning I spoke to the former Justice Secretary
Sir Robert Buckland and asked him how after this awful crime Robert Brown could
be released, how do you see that? And he said that after this awful crime Robert
Brown could be released halfway through his sentence. Here's what he had to say.
The law up until very recently when it was changed by an Act of Parliament that
I put through as Lord Chancellor was that for a sentence that is anything other
than a life sentence or a particular sentence that is extended in terms of its
time in prison, there is an automatic release provision that allows people who
have been sentenced to be released after halfway. Now this man was given a 26
year sentence but the rules then meant that he would be released automatically
after the halfway point which is of course 13 years. That was changed as I said
by the law that I put through. That means that in cases like this now where
there's an automatic release provision they'd have to serve two-thirds of the
sentence that was imposed and that would apply for anybody sentenced for a
violent or sexual offence where they get over four years of imprisonment. And
further to that there is a new provision in the Act that was passed that allows
the Secretary of State to, instead of allowing an automatic release, to refer a
case to the parole board for them to decide whether the criminal should be
released if it is felt and if there's evidence to show that this person poses a
substantial risk of serious harm to the public. So we've got two checks and
balances now, that increased term of imprisonment which would have meant that
Brown wouldn't have been eligible for release until 2027 and then this power to
stop automatic release and to ask the parole board to consider. These are the
changes that you've made when you were in the role but it doesn't apply now to
this specific case does it? And you're the former Justice Secretary but how
likely is it that the current Justice Secretary Dominic Raab is going to
intervene and take a look at this? You know I'm not going to attempt to prejudge
it, I haven't seen documentation. It'll be up to him and his officials to come
to a view but I do think that it's right that the campaign that has been
launched with the incredible support of Joanna's mother Diana, gets the fullest
possible publicity because important though this case is, there are many others
in this position who are deeply concerned, traumatized, anxious, worried about
what might happen when a perpetrator of such an appalling crime is released into
the community. If he is released, how could his case be dealt with within the
community? What happens? Well before release, the agencies will be working, the
police and indeed the probation service and the prison authorities will work
together to draw up a list of conditions that this person will have to live
under even though they're released. So anybody who's released before the end of
their full term of imprisonment is on what we call license and those license
conditions can vary greatly. They can be a very long list of conditions, for
example preventing entry to certain parts of the country that are geographically
delineated, making conditions on contact, a whole range of what I think we'd all
regard as common sense conditions to limit and to restrict and to prevent the
possibility of individuals like this from being in any way in touch with
victims' families and indeed behaving in a way that would be wholly inconsistent
with their release. If those terms are breached, then the perpetrator can be
recalled immediately to prison. There's no court hearing, there's no
adjournment, there's no delay, they can be brought straight back into prison and
the recall provisions are used very, very often where people do this. If you
remember the case of Colin Pitchfork, I think all of us remember that case, the
Leicestershire case where he'd killed two women about 20 or 30 years ago. In the
end, despite my efforts, he was released but within a few weeks he'd breached
his license conditions and he was brought straight back inside. So it does show
that... Why did that happen in that case then? If you said despite your efforts,
so you tried but... Well, the powers that the Secretary of State currently have
are to ask the Parole Board to reconsider their decision to release. At the
moment, the Secretary of State doesn't, and they used to years ago, Home
Secretaries in those days used to have the direct power to intervene to stop
releases. That was changed a while ago and it was felt that the Parole Board
being more independent, looking at the evidence would make a more independent
decision. But there's a mechanism that was available to me to ask them to
reconsider, which I did on that occasion. And I do feel that my concerns were
actually borne out by events because Pitchfork was brought back in because he
breached the conditions. The key thing, I think, for everybody listening is, how
well are those license conditions policed? Well, I think, Casey, and it's a very
good question. Yeah, because, you know, recently we've heard some damning
reports into the probation service, concerns about excessive workload, shortages
of staff. It's exactly what you said. How confident are you, given the problems
with the service that Robert Brown's case is going to be dealt with correctly?
Well, I am more confident than I was. I think that the probation service has
undergone a lot of change recently. And I, again, when I was in charge, brought
forward reforms to the probation service to bring it all back together. And I
also, through the prisons and probation service, recruited an extra thousand
probation officers by the time I'd left office. I think that program carried on.
What would you say to Diana? That the probation service should be absolutely on
top of this case from start to finish. And that we expect the highest standards
from them. The vast majority of domestic homicides, as I'm sure you are aware,
Sir Robert, are carried out by men. There is a government review into domestic
homicides. What's happening with it? When is it going to be published? It's been
conducted by Claire Wade, Casey, a very experienced barrister dealing with this
type of case. Casey was asked to look at the overall framework of sentencing in
domestic homicide, which covers murder and indeed manslaughter. I gave, there's
a particular example, I think, that is difficult for the courts. At the moment,
there are differences in the levels of sentence that are passed between somebody
who might have carried a knife to the scene or a weapon to the scene, which
obviously suggests a high degree of pre-planning, and a person who might arm
themselves at the scene with a knife and then commit the act. Now, it's felt
that in the context of domestic homicide, that doesn't necessarily reflect the
reality of life in an abusive home, where ordinary items in the kitchen become
weapons of offence. A kitchen knife, a blunt instrument that we have lying
around our home and we don't think anything about. But does that mean that
therefore the domestic perpetrator should have a lighter sentence in those
circumstances? And there's a perverse issue as well. What about where, you know,
we've had cases where women who have been controlled, who have lived a life of
abuse, have had to arm themselves in order to protect themselves from a stronger
perpetrator, a stronger man. You know, very often they're put in a worse
position because they might be holding some sort of defensive weapon or some
sort of item in order to protect themselves. And there have been some sentences
that, you know, perhaps have not necessarily reflected the reality of lives and
perceptions for women who are physically less strong. And therefore all these
issues sort of interact in quite a complex way. And that's why Claire Wade,
who's a very experienced criminal barrister, was given the job by me to look at
this particular framework and come up with some proposals for change if
necessary. And that report is ready, I'm told, and therefore it's now incumbent
on the MOJ to publish it and to publish its response. And I very much hope that
if there is to be proposed change that we can get on and do it in Parliament as
quickly as possible. So in the meantime, as we await the report and the changes
to be made, is the justice system currently failing women? I think that in many
cases the justice system is delivering for women. I think one of the challenges
is to get those cases into court, and that's a conversation that we've often had
about investigation, about women feeling failed by the system and therefore
withdrawing their complaints, or actually getting to the system in the first
place. Because we know that, I think it still applies, that for every complaint
of domestic abuse that has been made, there will have been at least 17 previous
incidences which have not been complained about to the police, because the
victim perhaps doesn't see themselves as a victim or just hasn't felt strong
enough or in a position to make that complaint. And I think I think, you know,
uncovering that particular issue is going to be crucial if we are to, frankly,
end the culture of abuse. Because what we're dealing with here is the symptoms,
the consequences, the disastrous aftermath of domestic abuse, coercive control
and then violence resulting in death. We need to do much more to deal with the
causes at root so that fewer and fewer people will resort to this behaviour, and
we make it as unacceptable as, for example, you know, with what we did with
drink driving and all those other issues many years ago. Talking about domestic
abuse, exposing it and saying that it is entirely unacceptable in our society is
the only way that we're going to really tackle what is a vicious and wicked
problem for far too many women and girls, and indeed men as well. That was the
former Justice Secretary, Sir Robert Buckland, who spoke to me earlier this
morning. Hettie, I asked him whether the justice system is failing women. Did it
fail Jo? Absolutely, it failed Jo entirely. So Jo, the verdict was a travesty.
Anybody you speak to, the police, the legal people, the public, obviously Jo's
friends and family, it was an absolute travesty of a verdict because it did not
reflect the reality of what she went through and why and how did that happen. It
was fundamentally, lots of reasons, but at its heart it's a criminal justice
system that allowed Robert Brown to continue to abuse Jo through that criminal
justice system in the court. He effectively portrayed Jo as a terrible woman who
had effectively driven him to do the thing that he did, and that's not just
something that you see in, it wasn't a one-off problem in terms of that trial,
it is something that is still happening every single day up and down the
country, both in domestic homicide trials and indeed in the family courts and in
the criminal system. It is an endemic issue around misogyny through the criminal
justice system that we have to call out and we have to address. And which is why
it's so important for both of you to talk about this, that you've set up this
foundation and I'd like to know what you've been able to achieve, but before I
do I'd quite, I'm quite interested to hear what the impact has been on you and
the rest of the family. Well obviously devastating, it's something that you just
never get over. The grief is always there but you learn to walk alongside it and
my grandchildren are proof of that, they're absolutely brilliant, they really
are. And how about you Hattie, what's about the toll something like this takes
on you? It's heavy, it's very heavy. I suffered from PTSD for about eight years
and four years ago I was diagnosed with breast cancer, which hopefully I'm clear
and there is no doubt whatsoever that that was an autoimmune response driven by
the high levels of stress that came from this. I hoped that after the trial I
could pick things up and carry on but with such a devastating verdict that just
simply wasn't possible. And how are you Diana? Well I had to carry on because I
had two children, nine and ten, who depended on me for everything so I just
cracked on. And what have you been able to achieve by setting up the foundation?
Well I think we're making people aware of where the terrible misgivings of
domestic abuse, how it's not properly monitored, how not properly dealt with at
all and what families go through is just dreadful, dreadful. And as Hattie says,
because in her role as chair of Refuge, she deals with this kind of thing
virtually every day and she sees how dreadful people are affected by this. Yeah
you'd mentioned Hattie that you know the signs are there as the chair of Refuge,
you do indeed hear stories like this and work with women in domestic abuse who
come, who survive domestic abuse or don't. Yeah. You were best friends with Jo,
what signs did you see? So often women themselves who are in very coercive
relationships who are in an abusive relationship don't recognize that they are
in that kind of relationship and it can take a woman an average of five years to
get the help that they need and a lot of those five years is even recognizing
there's a problem. So as Jo's friend, you know, you've got to bear in mind that
this was before the days when people were talking about coercive control.
Domestic abuse wasn't a term that was used, people talked domestic violence. So
quite often Jo and I used to talk about it because I would, that he's never hit
you therefore it's not domestic violence. If I look back now however I can A,
see the patterns and I can B, see the high risk that she was in. So let me
explain that a little bit. Please do, yeah. So throughout her marriage to Robert
Brown the first telltale sign was just after she'd married him and she phoned
Diana. She phoned me and she said, Maura I've made a terrible mistake. Now we
hear this a lot in domestic abuse is that there will be a point at which the
perpetrator suddenly realizes they have control. That will be an event like a
marriage or a pregnancy or those are the two typical events where suddenly
they'll go from being charming to being a completely different person. But by
that time they've got their woman trapped. So that's the first sign. And then
slowly, slowly over a number of years he would coerce her. So he would put her
down constantly. He would, and he would target things that for her were
important. So she was a homemaker and she would do anything to protect and
support the children. So he was always kind of contradicting her and challenging
her on things like that. So if she cooked a lovely meal he would never say she
cooked a lovely meal. He'd have something different. He'd cook something
different for himself. He was targeting the things that meant a lot to her. If
it was about the children it was about going to school. So that pattern
continued. Then he attacked her with a knife and threatened to kill her. Very
typical of these dangerous cases where there's no violence but there's threats
of violence which further creates control. Then they separated. Then three years
of intimidation, stalking her, breaking into her house, cutting the wires of her
CCTV. All of this drip, drip, drip, drip, drip to the point whereby she was a
sitting duck. It must be incredibly difficult. I know you have to do it because
you are out there to highlight this because this is what you are campaigning for
and you have a huge amount of support at a very high level. But it must be
incredibly draining on you personally, Diana. Well sadly I did a programme
earlier on BBC Breakfast in which I did fluff because I just felt quite tired to
be honest because I'm nearly 84 and it's bringing it all back in great big
capital letters now. How are the children doing? They are brilliant. In fact I
asked my grandson if he would mind that I said they never want to be
photographed at all by the press so whenever we go anywhere they have to stay
apart from me because we don't want Robert Brown if he is released to know what
they look like now. And that's one of the tragedies of this is that those
children were nine and ten at the time. They were made to travel in the car with
their dead mother. They are now in their early twenties. Yes they're adults,
fantastic, but they're still massively vulnerable and they should be focusing on
their lives and taking off into the world. But they are focusing on their lives,
they're doing really well. Yes. But obviously there's always this in the
background. And it shouldn't be there. So we need the support of the public to
make sure that they support the campaign hashtag not another Jo and that they
write to their MP to ask their MP to put pressure on Dominic Raab to give this
really due attention. Diana and Heti, thank you very much. Thank you so much for
inviting us. Thank you for speaking to me this morning. Thank you. 84844 is the
number to text if you would like to talk to me about anything you hear on the
programme this morning. Holly in Bristol has been in touch to say family court
judges are typically men and older and coercive relationships and abuse is not
recognised enough. Another message here from someone saying leaving a coercive
relationship isn't always an escape. I left a mentally abusive coercive
relationship when my baby was seven weeks old. My son is now three and the abuse
continued through the family courts as there are no bruises or physical abuse.
It's been very hard to prove this in court. I've been in 15 court hearings in
two years. Keep your stories coming through and if you'd like to share a longer
story then feel free to send us an email via our website. Now, this year's
Women's Hour Power List will be celebrating women in sports. As you know, we're
busily whittling down our long list until the big reveal at the end of this
month. But until then, we'll be bringing you lots of issues from the world of
sport that we think you might like to know about. And today we're talking about
breast health and exercise. For those of you who like to lace up your trainers
and pound the streets or the treadmill to keep fit, here's a question for you.
Can you guess how many times your breasts might be bouncing when you go for a
run? Well, according to my next guest, the answer is up to 10,000 times an hour.
I will let that sink in. Joining me to discuss how best to look after our
breasts when we play sports is Associate Professor Deirdre McGee, a breast
anatomy and biomechanics researcher at Breast Research Australia, University of
Wollongong. She's also a sports physiotherapist and a world leader in the field
of breast injury in sports. So, Deirdre, you are the perfect person to talk to
me about this. We'll come to your thoughts on sports bra and how we can minimise
breast bounce and exercise in just a moment. But let's start with something our
listeners may be less familiar with. That is breast injuries. What are our
breasts made of and how might they be injured when we're playing sport? Well,
the breasts are made of fatty tissue and encased in fibrous tissue. And then we
have our glandular tissue buried within that soft mound. And they're attached to
the chest wall via the muscles around the perimeter of the breast. And so
they're soft. There's only skin covering them. And if you get a blow to your
anterior chest wall, because they're highly vascular, they'll bruise, swell, and
it'll really hurt. They're very well innervated. Are there long term
consequences? In terms of the research we know on sports injuries, we don't have
any long term data because we've only just identified that these injuries are
occurring in sport. But if we look at the research on breast injuries that are
occurring from seatbelt injuries in motor vehicle accidents, women can have long
term consequences to their breasts. They can develop scarring in their breasts,
which can down the track, mimic breast cancer. It looks like breast cancer from
clinical exam and from imaging. And there's also women who have breast implants
who have ruptured their scarring that can affect the growth of the breast in an
adolescent female. And women who are breastfeeding, we know that they can have
damage to the ducts and the glands of their breasts, which could mean that the
treatment means we have to stop them from breastfeeding. So yeah, there can be
long term consequences. So how can a sport related injury breast injury be
treated? We treat it like any soft tissue injury where we follow the basic, what
the acronym we call is POLICE. So we ensure that we protect it, whether we stop
the athlete from playing or we pad the breast to protect it if they choose to
keep playing. And then we work out OL is optimal load. So we work out what we
can do to minimise breast movement, and that would be increasing breast support.
And then we follow ice and compression to treat the swelling and the bruising
and the pain. And the E we use as education, because it's very important that
women understand that we need to monitor that breast to make sure that it
returns to their normal. And in order for them to know that it returns back to
their normal, they need to know what their normal is, because we know that
women's breasts are different. Some women have lumps in their breasts all the
time, and that's that's their normal. So we really need women to be breast
cancer aware and monitor their breasts so they know what their normal is. I'm
interested to know how much of a taboo subject this is within sport, because in
2019, it's a study that was conducted with Breast Research Australia with elite
female athletes. 36% reported experiencing breast injuries. I'm sure you are of
this. A fifth said that the injury negatively affected their performance. But
here's the shocking bit. Over 90% of these women did not report it to a coach or
a medical professional. Why do you think that is? And that's been across the
board, not only from the research that we've conducted, but also there's
research that's been conducted in America by Laura Smith, another
physiotherapist, and she found the same thing in volleyball, in basketball, in
soccer. So women, this is a silent injury. And part of the problem is that it
doesn't fit, breast tissue doesn't fit into injury surveillance. So when we have
injury surveillance systems, we look at a type of injury, a muscle, sprain, a
ligament strain, or we look at a region of the body. And in many sports, these
have been taken from a male sport. So it's a male figure. So the breasts don't
fit in region or nature of injury. Athletes also reported that they were
sensitive to talk about their breasts to a male coach or a male physio. They
were warrior women, they were playing sports they'd loved for years that were
traditionally male sports. They didn't really want to be different to a male.
And also, because of breast tissue being glandular tissue, they didn't think
anyone could help them. They didn't understand that a physio could actually help
treat that pain and help them to recover quicker. And it starts by having
conversations like this as well, doesn't it? What are your thoughts on
protective equipment? Well, the research we did on women found that only a small
percentage used any protective equipment. And most of them complained about
issues of comfort and heat and restrictions of their arms with the breast
protective equipment they were wearing. So there wasn't a high regard for it.
There are some breast, female specific breast protective equipment on the
market, but there's no evidence published anywhere that any of those garments
can actually decrease the force sustained by the breast. Indeed, we don't even
have any data of what the magnitude of the forces are that the breasts
experience during a tackle or when a woman hits the ground with her chest. And
what about the women who might be listening who just enjoy exercising? They
don't play sports at an elite level, but they like going for a run. What are
your thoughts on sports bras? Should we all be wearing them? If you're involved
in a sport that involves running and jumping and forceful arm movements,
regardless of your breast size, then you are much more comfortable and you have
freer movement of your trunk and better posture when your breasts are supported.
Also, we know that women experience nostalgia, breast pain associated with their
hormones, and women experience breast pain associated with breast movement,
particularly women with large breasts and older women. And a highly supportive,
well-fitting sports bra can solve all of those problems. So it's a no-brainer.
All women deserve a high level of breast support if they're involved in those
type of sports. Deidre, we'll take it. Thank you very much. It is a no-brainer.
Thank you so much for speaking to me about that this morning. That's the
Associate Professor Deidre McGee, Breast Anatomy and Biomechanics Research,
Researcher at the Breast Research Australia. Your thoughts on anything 84844.
Isabella Coles has been in touch saying, I'm 14 and a competitive swimmer. I
find I have to always wear a sports crop top while doing dryland training. I
have to wear a tight swimming race suit for my swimming racing, as it can be
uncomfortable. I think injuries should be spoken about more so solutions could
be found. Isabelle, I think that is a very good idea. We will continue to talk
about them here on Women's Hour. Now on to my next story. China is racing to
undo an era of birth limits. A number of new incentives encouraging people to
have children highlight the challenges China faces in trying to boost its
declining population. In local provinces, there are incentives that include 30
days marriage leave and a one-off subsidy of around £1,700 to families having a
third child. Well, there is a story. I mentioned it in the opener. It is called
the Great Stork Derby. Have you heard of it? Well, it's a real event that took
place in Toronto in the 1920s. When the wealthy financier Charles Vance Miller
died, he left no direct heirs. So he decided to leave today's equivalent of
around $9 million to the women who had the most children over the next 10 years.
This sparked what became known as the Great Stork Derby, a so-called contest
that created a media frenzy. It's the inspiration behind Caroline Lear's new
novel, Prize Women, which comes out next month. And Caroline joins me to tell me
all about this. So the so-called Great Stork Derby, tell us a bit about it
because people thought it was a practical joke at first, didn't they?
Absolutely. It was initially thought to be something that was quite farcical.
And I mean, the public at the time viewed it as kind of a practical joke. So
there were lots of stories that ran about women who might be involved and lots
of speculation about their lives. For the first sort of six years of the
competition, there was no real media attention around it. And it was only when
the will was sort of contested by the Attorney General at the time, and he
sought to kind of distribute the money elsewhere, that there was then public
outcry because the story had been picked up by the newspapers. And so you had a
situation where journalists were going around lots of the poorer areas of
Toronto where there were women who were horrifically economically deprived,
particularly because this was during the Great Depression, and knocking on
women's doors and offering to give them a dollar to take their photo and telling
them they were in the running for this money. And lots of the time, these women
didn't really have kind of a voice of their own, and desperately needed the
money, but then found themselves caught up in this maelstrom where every little
detail of their lives was under some sort of public microscope. And I think that
was really what inspired me to want to write Prize Women because... Talk about
the women. Yeah, absolutely. Well, you're in the right space. What do we know
about this women, the women who eventually entered the competition as it were?
How varied were they? So, lots of the women, I'll talk in a second about the
women who ended up being awarded the money. Lots of the women who were caught up
in the competition, as I said, were from poorer areas in Toronto, or had other
kind of social disadvantages that then made them figures of public derision
eventually. So, because a lot of the court battle around the Stork Derby focused
on which women deserve the money or which of their babies should count in
inverted commas, a lot of the women had, you know, various things that
discounted them in the end. One woman had five children from one relationship
and five children from another. And actually, the man in her second relationship
was essentially coercing her into having children and had drawn up a contract
saying that he would kind of share the money with her after she'd had these
children. And that she would be freely admitted in court, that he'd given her a
black eye, that he'd beaten her door down. And this was kind of greeted with
laughter and kind of an almost like a celebration of the idea of this man who'd
kind of got won over on this woman in order to be awarded the money. And this
woman was an Italian-Canadian immigrant and had an awful lot of real vitriol
directed against her because she already had a great number of children. She
ended up, I mean, she had 25 births, only 12 of the children lived. The death
rate for the children who were sort of in this competition or who were born to
these mothers was much higher than elsewhere in the population. So what was the
process of deciding who would get the money eventually? Well, it was essentially
men who decided. It was a court battle where the lawyers were men, the judge was
a man, and he was possibly kind of highly influenced by the kind of public
prurience and scrutiny at the time, where there were lots of people who were
discussing why women deserved the money and why they didn't because of their
behaviours. So because they lived in really poor circumstances, one of the women
who, the characters in my novel are fictionalised, but one of the women, and I
use her story in the novel, lived in a really poor area and her house was
infested with rats, and one of her babies died of rat bites and she had to kind
of recount that along with some of the stillbirths she'd had and discuss why she
still deserved the money. And when she was brought down in court, the story was
reported in the papers as her being kind of hysterical and screaming and there
was so much of the language that was used to describe these women that was so
divisive and inherently misogynistic. And, you know, when there are stories that
come up about financial incentives for women to have children, I just think it's
such a nuanced and difficult discussion to have, because it's not always about
supporting women, and essentially women are the ones who bear the brunt of the
emotional burden around childbirth, as well as the kind of practical concerns.
And I just think it's a difficult discussion. So who eventually got the money?
Who won? It's even strange to use that terminology, isn't it? It really is the
idea of kind of babies counting and women winning this prize. But the four women
who eventually won were white, they were middle class. When the journalists went
to their houses, they reported on the cleanliness of the houses and kind of the
serenity of the surroundings. And so once again, it's this idea of kind of who
is more deserving and mothers and women who are more deserving. And that was
really what I felt when I was writing Prize Women, that it wasn't just a story
about kind of a farcical baby race, that it was a story that had so much
relevance today for women and mothers being put on trial for the role that they
play and the extent to which they conform to expectations, or if they don't, the
kind of vitriol that's heaped upon them for not meeting expectations. And the
book is coming out in a month? It's coming out on the 27th of April. Yes.
Another one of those stories that when you read about it, you're shocked. How do
we not know about this? But and tells us so much about not just how women were
treated in the 1920s, but we can reflect on where we are right now. Caroline,
Leah, thank you so much for speaking to me. The book is called Prize Women. Keep
an eye out for it. Fascinating story. Thank you so much. Thank you. Now on to my
next guest, Jo Cheatham. She spent her childhood in a council house in
Rotherham, writing poems and drawing clothes on page three models. Years later,
she was a long way from home, studying for a PhD, working as a nanny in London
when she read the news of an upcoming protest. Before she could talk herself out
of it, she officially found herself joining the No More Page Three campaign.
Over the three years she protested up and down the country, she made an unlikely
group of friends and she's written a book all about it. It's her memoir called
Killjoy. And she's in the studio to tell me more. Well done. Congratulations on
writing the memoir. I loved how this story is about you becoming part of the
campaign, but it's also your story and it's about class and there's a lot of
humour in this. So we want to talk about your family. So we'll start right at
the beginning. Tell me about being a girl and the gender roles and the
expectations growing up in Rotherham. Well, growing up in Rotherham in the 80s,
it wasn't a great time to be a girl, to be honest. You know, my dad bought the
sun. Everybody's dad bought the sun. I saw Page Three absolutely everywhere from
a very young age. You know, it was in the house, it was at school, it was at the
chip shop. Remember when you buy chips, it would be wrapped in newspaper and
you'd get it there even on your chips. Little surprise. Yeah, I know, right. It
was, you know, it was on the bus. It was the Page Three calendar, was in the
doctor's waiting room. It was behind the counter at the Butcher's. I saw it
absolutely everywhere I went. And, yeah, I just grew up, grew up seeing these
working class young women sort of semi-naked in the paper. And it always just
felt a little bit weird to me. You know, when I was very young, I would draw
clothes on the models because I thought, well, they must be cold. Why? Why are
they naked when everybody else has got clothes on? And yeah, then when I got a
little bit older, you know, and I started to think about why this was in the
paper, it used to make me feel really uncomfortable. And you wanted to leave
Rotherham and go to university. Was that expected of you, though? Absolutely
not. The school careers advisor, when I told him I wanted to go to university,
he pretty much said to me, well, you know, you'll end up getting married and
having kids. So it'll be a waste of money. You know, it's a waste of money for a
girl like you. And that actually just made me really determined to go to
university just to prove him wrong. So, yeah, I mean, nobody in my family had
ever been to university. I didn't know anybody who'd been to university. It just
wasn't expected at all. So how did you get there? Well, it took a really long
time. So I left school. You know, I did a load of different jobs, did my
A-levels. I studied locally so I could live at home while I was at university in
Sheffield. And then I just saved up money. I got a scholarship to study in
London and I moved down here when I was about 29 to do an MA. And it was quite a
culture shock, to be honest. In what way? So my university was really
prestigious and the other students were mainly privately educated. They were
very clever. Is this when you were, is this pre-PhD? Yeah, so I came down to
London to do an MA and then I stayed on to do a PhD. Clever. Oh, thanks. In art
history? Yes, which again is an unusual choice. I didn't know it was sort of a
typical sort of posh degree to do. I had no idea. I just thought I like art and
I like history. What did your family think of you coming to London to study art
history? My dad was excited that I was going to university because, you know,
there was no expectation I would do that and he thought it was a good thing to
do. My mum just said, oh, Joanne, they won't like you. You're going to be too
different. You're not going to like it. You know, do something else. You don't
have to go. And it really was a shock. I felt really out of place. The other
students were so clever. They were very wealthy. They all just seemed so tall
with like really good teeth, you know, and they were named after Shakespearean
characters. And I felt like some kind of Dickensian urchin. Like I felt short
and common and stupid. And a lot of people took the mickey out of my accent as
well. It happened all the time. And there was one bit in the book that really
struck me. You talk about going to a conference where you had to make a speech
and you'd been practicing it by using the ironing board as a make do lectern, as
you do. Very good imagery. And then you ran away. You didn't do the speech. You
buffled it. I put so much work in. I wanted to explore that sort of imposter
syndrome. Even now you're saying they were tall with great teeth. Yeah, they
were. I can picture them. But that imposter syndrome was really deeply embedded
in you. Yeah. I didn't feel like I belonged in that kind of academic environment
at all. And I just walked into the conference and yeah, everybody just seemed so
clever and so articulate. And they were dressed differently. You know, I was
wearing like an old dress from H&M. They were all in skirt suits. The men were
in linen trousers. All the men seemed to be called Julian. And there was a
certain kind of person who was there. And I was not that kind of person. And I
was there, you know, I was ready to speak. And I just felt like I couldn't
breathe. I ran out of there and just ran home. So how did you get involved with
the No More Page Three campaign? You're the young girl drawing clothes on the
page three models and you find yourself in this world where you are alien to
everyone around you. What did finding that campaign do for you? How did you find
it and how did it change? So I read about it in a newspaper when I was in London
in the middle of all of this imposter syndrome, basically. And it just struck a
chord with me. And I just remembered everything about my childhood and
everything about how I'd felt seeing page three growing up. And I actually I
went to a protest, the first protest I've ever been to in my whole life. That
was just after I'd run away from that conference. And my self-esteem was at an
all time low. And I just went to this protest and met Lucy, who'd started the
campaign. And we just really hit it off. And from that point, we stayed in
touch. And then I ended up joining the team. How self-conscious were you at the
protest? Oh, so self-conscious. I hated it more than anything. Why? There was a
press photographer there and she was like shouting instructions, you know, look
angry, walk towards me, looking fierce, holding the sign. And I just forgot how
to walk. You know, when you feel really self-conscious. I can't remember how to
walk. I sort of like trip-trapped towards her like a horse. I didn't know what I
was doing. It was really horrible. I hated it. But you did find your voice.
Eventually, you ended up speaking at the Scottish Parliament. How did that come
about? How did you find your voice to be able to speak out? It's interesting
because I feel like rather than finding a voice, I was trying to recover the one
I'd lost. I feel like when I was a kid, I knew exactly how I felt about
everything. I knew what I wanted and how to ask for it. And then you grow up and
sort of life kind of beats that out of you, particularly if you're a girl,
right? And yeah, I just wanted to get back to that person that I used to be. And
that's what I was trying to do. And your grandma was an inspiration? Yeah, she
was an absolutely amazing person. You know, my granddad died before I was born
and she'd been such a good role model, such an independent woman, always did
whatever she wanted. She was very assertive. So yeah, she was a great role model
for me. So just how embedded did you become in the campaign? How much of your
life did it take over? It took everything for two and a half years. I mean,
there was me and to begin with about six other volunteers. None of us had any
experience of campaigning at all. We didn't have any money. We didn't have a
single idea what we were doing. We were kind of making it up as we went along.
And it had to slot in, you know, in between our busy lives. Some of them would
be taking the kids to school and talking on the phone to a journalist at the
same time. And we were doing lots of jobs and caring for relatives and stuff
like that. It kind of filtered in between every bit of spare time that we had
for that two and a half years. And did that take a toll? Yeah, it was absolutely
exhausting. And we got a lot of trolls as well. There was a lot of abuse online.
I mean, anyone who speaks out about any sort of feminist issue, they get a lot
of trolls online. And we would have so much abuse on a daily basis that it just
became normal. We were used to it. We were totally used to it. I mean, I guess
that's why you called the book Killjoy, right? Yes, because we were all
Killjoys. What kinds of things were you told? What sort of stuff were you
reading being said about you? Oh, I mean, there was the nicer end of the scale,
which is that we're, you know, Puritans and that we're against nudity. And yeah,
that we're Killjoys, that we don't know how to have a laugh and that it's no
fun. But then at the other end of the scale, they were like rape threats, death
threats, really serious, unpleasant, graphic messages. So what keeps you going
then? Is it the solidarity between all of you? Yeah, we had this amazing group.
We all really supported each other. And we laughed about it as well, as much as
we could. I mean, sometimes you couldn't laugh about it. But, you know, laughing
at these kinds of messages, it gave us some kind of power over it, I suppose.
And how important was class within the group and the friendship that you formed?
It was really interesting because most of the people who were on the team were
working class women. And it mattered to us because we'd grown up seeing, you
know, these newspapers every day, we'd all grown up with the sun in our homes.
And because they were always, well, almost always working class young women in
the newspaper, it was kind of sold to us as empowerment. You know, it was like
this was the best you could hope for as a working class woman, to have this kind
of lifestyle and this kind of fame and to have this kind of look. We were
supposed to aspire to that. So you found your crew? Yeah, yeah. But it was, you
got a lot of support from MPs, Claire Short, Caroline Lucas, and from the Girl
Guides. How much did this help the cause? Massively. Really, I think things
turned a corner when the Girl Guides got involved, because they were one of the
first organisations to formally support the campaign. And it just kind of, it
galvanised us and it gave us a purpose as well to have these incredible young
women speaking out about these issues that still really mattered to them. To
have this younger generation involved, it just really spurred us on. And it
built momentum. Yeah, it did. Got to the Welsh Assembly, Scottish Parliament
backed you, and then the Irish Sun stopped page three. How did it feel to have
made that change? It felt amazing. That felt amazing. And at that point, we
really were very optimistic that the Sun in the UK would follow suit and drop
the topless images. It really gave us something to work towards. And we were
really hopeful at that point. And then? And then they did drop page three in
January 2015. But then they brought it back. So they got rid of the images. And
then two days later, they brought it back and said it was all a joke. And how
did that, you must have all taken that quite personally? You know what, we kind
of expected some kind of stunt because it's the Sun. And they'd never really
acknowledged that the campaign exists, you know, and we knew that they might try
some kind of stunt like this. So we weren't massively surprised, but we were
really tired. We were exhausted with all the ups and downs. Tired, but they were
a force. It is a brilliant read. Has it changed your writing about the
experience? Yes. In what way? Because it's reminded me that we've kind of all
got more power than we think we have. And that it can feel overwhelming that
there's so much to do in the world. But if you just try, just try one thing, it
might work and you might have a good time doing it. It is very inspiring. It's
such an inspiring read. And especially because you tell it so well and your
story coming from Rotherham, moving to London amongst all those tall people, but
you held your own. And it is a great read. And it's out now. Yes, it is. Today.
It comes out today. Happy, happy publication day. Oh, thank you, Anita. Jo
Teetham's Killjoy out now. Join me tomorrow for more Woman's Hour. Thank you,
Jo. Thank you. This programme was brought to you by the BBC. After the news,
we'll hear dispatches from our correspondents.