TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Women's World Cup for the first time and we'll hear from one of their players.
This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. At two hours GMT
you're listening to the newsroom from the BBC World Service coming up. The
message is clear, it doesn't matter what Russia tries and how it attempts to
undermine international order, it fails one time after another. The United
Nations General Assembly resoundingly banks a resolution demanding that Russia
immediately withdraws from Ukraine. It's the 24th of February, a year since the
invasion began. I'm Gareth Barlow in London. And I'm James Walterhouse in Kiev
looking at how the past year has shaped Ukraine. In the next half hour, as James
says, we'll explore how a year of war has affected Ukraine, shaped global
security and led ordinary people to do extraordinary things. We'll also explore
what the near future holds for the conflict. Ukraine has to demonstrate its
counter-attacking capability. It must show its Western backers that the huge
amounts of weaponry, training and money are actually making a difference. You're
listening to the BBC. Our UN correspondent in New York, Nenetofik, says the
resolution is largely set to be significant, and it also encompasses meaning and
intelligence problems for the training organization, for confirms that Russia
more than can result in them without further Trying What's important here is for
the average person wondering, you know, where do countries stand on Ukraine?
Well, this gives them that answer. It really just underscores, again, the
overwhelming nature of countries that remain concerned about this war, about the
global effects of this war and the fact that you have Russia, a permanent member
of the Security Council violating one of the most basic principles of
international law. And then you have others who feel that, yes, those principles
are incredibly important, but this resolution won't help advance peace. Poland
has started fortifying its border with the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. The
Polish government says there's been a rise in flights into Kaliningrad from
Turkey and the Middle East. It fears migrants arriving there will be encouraged
by Moscow to cross into the European Union. North Korea has test-fired four
strategic cruise missiles into the sea. The state news agency said the missiles
traveled 2,000 kilometers, adding that the drill demonstrated the conflict
readiness of what it called Pyongyang's nuclear combat force. It's the latest in
a series of provocative weapons tests that have increased tensions on the
peninsula. The former Hollywood film mogul Harvey Weinstein has been sentenced
to 16 more years in prison at a court in Los Angeles for rape and sexual assault
charges dating back to 2013. He's already serving a 23-year sentence following a
separate conviction in New York. After the sentencing, one of Weinstein's
accusers, Caitlin Doolaney, spoke outside the courthouse. These cases are often
tried later after they've happened, and these things don't happen in front of
other people. So to get a conviction here and a strong sentence, so I'm very
proud of all of us who have been speaking about what Harvey Weinstein did and
supporting the women who testified. Hopefully we'll make it harder to get away
with these kinds of crimes. World news from the BBC. A court in Sierra Leone has
ruled that the main opposition candidate for June's presidential election will
have to stand trial over allegations of corruption. Samura Kamara was chosen as
the candidate for the All People's Congress three days ago. He's denied any
wrongdoing and says the case is politically motivated. Boeing has temporarily
suspended deliveries of the 787 Dreamliner again in order to conduct analysis on
a fuselage component. The aerospace giant recommenced deliveries of the jet last
August after they had been halted for more than a year due to previous problems.
Boeing said there was no immediate safety concern. A senior federal investigator
in the United States has called for an end to the politicization of a rail
disaster in Ohio. Jennifer Homendy was announcing the findings of a preliminary
report into the crash, which caused a major chemical spill three weeks ago.
Enough with the politics. I don't understand why this has gotten so political.
This is a community that is suffering. So I don't care about the politics. What
I care about is figuring out how this happened. But I can tell you this much.
This was 100 percent preventable. Every single event that we investigate is
preventable. So our hearts are with you. A rare blizzard warning has been issued
for parts of Southern California from early Friday through to Saturday evening
with millions of residents told to brace for unusually cold weather and snow.
Forecasters are predicting a record snowfall of more than two meters in
mountains to the east of Los Angeles by Saturday. The National Weather Service
says the last time that L.A. was under a blizzard warning was in 1989. BBC World
News. You're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC World Service with me,
Gareth Barlow. It's a grim anniversary. As dawn broke in Ukraine one year ago,
Russia launched its full-scared invasion of the country. Its military attacked
from the north, east and south and so began the biggest conflict in Europe since
the Second World War. The cost has been huge. The UN estimates at least 8,000
Ukrainian civilians have died. Millions are homeless or refugees. Cities have
been flattened. As many as 100,000 Ukrainian troops are dead or wounded. And
Russia's losses are even higher. As many as 200,000 casualties. Twelve months
have passed and with the war showing no signs of ending, the UN General Assembly
in New York has now overwhelmingly passed a resolution calling on Russia to
withdraw its troops from Ukraine, both immediately and unconditionally. Before
the vote, China's UN representative Dai Bing criticized Western military support
for Ukraine and called for peace talks. We support Russia and Ukraine moving
towards each other, resuming direct dialogue as soon as possible, bringing their
legitimate concerns into the negotiation and setting out feasible options,
putting an early end to the crisis and giving peace a chance. For their part,
speaking after the vote, Ukraine's foreign minister, Dmitry Kaleba, said Russia
could not ignore the result. We are satisfied with the outcome and the message
is clear. It doesn't matter what Russia tries and how it attempts to undermine
international order and the coalition in support of Ukraine's territorial
integrity, it fails one time after another. Well, let's cross to our North
American correspondent Peter Bowes, who joins us live. Peter, what does this
vote show us about where the world stands on this conflict, on this war, one
year on? It shows us that the world is in about the same place as it was a year
ago with overwhelming opposition to Russia's invasion and the ongoing war in
Ukraine. The resolution reaffirmed support from 141 countries for Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and it rejected any Russian claims to the
parts of the country that it now occupies. One country has voted against 32
abstained, including India, South Africa and China. The French foreign minister
said Russia can and must stop tomorrow. I don't think anyone in that room
expected that to happen, but that was the sentiment of the room. Her Japanese
counterpart said next year we should not meet here to mark the second
anniversary of this senseless war of aggression. With regards to this
resolution, with regards to this session of the UN General Assembly, what does
it mean in real terms? Is it just a symbolic vote or is there some implication
of it? Well, it has no legal implication, so it is largely symbolic, but it does
show where the moral weight of the world is right now. And I think that is the
significance of it, that overwhelmingly countries believe and support Ukraine's
right to exercise self-defence and that is significant coming from this body, of
course, which has at its heart the goal of keeping peace around the world and at
a time when in some quarters support is waning. Here in the United States, for
example, Gareth, there are some in the Republican Party more openly now
questioning the amount of money that the United States is spending on providing
arms for Ukraine. There is no questioning the Biden administration's commitment,
as we have heard from the president over the last few days, but I think what we
have heard from the General Assembly is a global statement of really steadfast
support for Ukraine. But the reality is Russia will turn a blind eye and a blind
ear to that global statement, surely? It won't have any impact or certainly very
little impact on Russia's, let's say, battlefield strategy. I think where it
could make a difference, difficult to quantify, though, is in the arena of
psychological warfare, that this is a message to President Putin that there
remains this globally strong resolve to oppose Moscow's war. Peter, Peter
Bowles, following that UN vote, thank you so much. So that is the political
situation in New York, but what are the lives of those people directly involved
in the conflict? Our correspondent, Clive Myrie, was in Ukraine when the war
broke out and has been to Isium in the east of the country to follow the
accounts of a Russian soldier and the diary of a Ukrainian woman who were
experiencing the invasion at the same time. On May the 2nd last year, Isium was
under Russian control, but Ukrainian forces were hitting back with heavy
artillery. One Russian conscript on the phone to a friend doesn't want to fight.
We are ending up in Isium. We are sending us straight to the front line, a
hellhole, just as cannon fodder. And to go there is f***ing mad. On the same
day, Lubov Listuk writes a new entry in her diary. She's been chronicling her
feelings about the war, from the beginning. May 2nd, 2022. It is impossible to
walk without tears. God, this is hell. The entire city is carved, smoked walls,
homes without roofs, without windows, piles of bricks, glass and debris. I don't
know how people survive. That's so powerful, reading that back now, almost a
year on. How do you feel? Now, when I read it, it's always painful. It's really
tough. Two months later, on July the 22nd, the fighting for Isium is intense.
The Russian hold on the city is precarious, and one soldier calls home to his
wife. How are things going? Yesterday, the heat was pretty bad. What about
leave? If I go home, I'm not coming back. There were 40 men left in our unit,
now only 20. And caught in the middle are civilians, like Lubov. On here? To
escape the fighting, she was hiding in a damp and dark cellar. July 22nd, 2022.
Apparently, two people were killed. I am frightened again, just when I was
thinking about leaving. On September the 6th, Ukrainian troops entered the city.
Writing down her thoughts was the only way Lubov could cope with the trauma of
her city's occupation. This has been the scariest year of my life. So little joy
and laughter, so much fear, pain and tears. I hope I will write that we won this
war long ago, and we have peace. That report by Clive Mairi. Well, millions of
Ukrainians have been displaced since the war began. And around the world, many
people have opened their doors to host refugees. One such family are the Baskins
from London. They're a Jewish family and they saw the plea for help from a
Ukrainian woman and her two sons and decided to welcome them in to their family
home. Initially, they thought they were offering support to strangers, but have
since discovered a surprising link between their families, which goes back
generations. Daniela Ralph reports. For almost a year, Anna Lickollet and her
two sons, Alex and Mark, have lived with Shelly Baskind and her family in North
London. We just wanted to help because we felt that as Jewish people, we've kind
of been in a position where we needed help. As everyone got to know each other
better, Anna told Shelly about her grandfather, Nikolai Diki. During the Second
World War, he took in Jewish families, hid them from the Nazis, saved their
lives. Years later, Anna's grandfather was awarded a medal by the Israeli
government for his courage, honoring him as righteous among the nations. When
she told Shelly about him, something clicked. When I got the photo of the medal,
I looked at it and I thought, I know this. That's so weird. I've seen this
before. It's the medal that my grandfather produced when he was alive. Neither
woman could quite believe it, but archive records showed Shelly's grandfather,
Moshe Hecht, had made the exact medal awarded to Anna's grandfather. When my
grandfather was alive, he had a factory for metal work in Israel. He produced
medals for people who the Israeli government gave medals to. And Anna's
grandfather was one of them. It's unbelievable. When I told my mum and my
father, it's no. Maybe it's another situation, but it's true. Do you think this
will be a lifelong friendship for you both? Yeah. You'll start with each other
now. We're like family now. That remarkable story brought to us by Daniela Relf,
and we'll have more on the situation in Ukraine later in the programme. But I
want to step away for a moment to talk to you about the disgraced Hollywood film
producer Harvey Weinstein. That's because it looks likely he'll spend the rest
of his life in jail following a court in Los Angeles sentencing him to 16 years
on rape and sexual assault charges. It's in addition to the 23-year sentence
that he's already serving. It was allegations against Mr. Weinstein that fueled
the Me Too movement, and dozens of women have spoken out about sexual harassment
and abuse by powerful men since then. Well, our US West Coast correspondent
Sophie Long was following the court case and says that one of the victims, known
only as Jane Doe, told the court that Weinstein's actions had ruined her life.
The sentencing hearing started with Jane Doe reading out a victim impact
statement, and she talked about how she had carried the trauma of what had
happened to her in 2013 with her for many years. She said she'd been a happy,
confident woman until that point, and on that day all that changed. She felt
that she couldn't touch her children. Now, Justice Judge Lisa Lynch was about to
issue the sentencing. Harvey Weinstein himself spoke up and said he wanted to
address court. He thanked the court for allowing him to speak. He said he would
stand. He was sitting in a wheelchair in prison-issue clothes, and he said, I
would stand, but I'm not able to. He said, I am innocent. I do not know her. He
said, referring to Jane Doe, she does not know me. We do not know each other. He
said this didn't happen. And he talked about how a cottage industry had begun
with lawyers making money out of the environment post the Me Too movement. In
the run-up to this trial in Los Angeles, a lot of women in the film and
entertainment business said to me that they felt the momentum of the Me Too
movement had stalled. But I think today is really important. One woman said to
me is that it gives them hope, and it feels like justice. And people are using
words like elation. And we have to remember that Harvey Weinstein was referred
to as the sheriff of Hollywood. In a couple of weeks we'll have the Oscars. And
a lot of A-list stars stood on an Oscar stage and thanked Harvey Weinstein. Some
used to refer to him as God. It's hard to overstate what a change has been seen.
Since the inception of the Me Too movement all those years ago. The voice there
of Sophie Long. Well, let's take a moment now to look at some of the other
stories leading the day's agenda. Peru's government has declared a state of
emergency in more than a dozen areas. That's because of an outbreak of dengue
fever. So far this year, the illness has killed 16 people and 11,500 cases have
been recorded across the country. That's a rise of over 70 percent compared with
the same period last year. Dengue fever is transmitted by mosquitoes and often
found in tropical areas. A billionaire financier and investor has been found
dead from a reported self-inflicted gunshot wound at his office in New York
City. The death of Thomas H. Lee, who was 78, was confirmed by his family in a
statement. Mr. Lee is credited with being one of the early pioneers in private
equity. And hundreds of historical artefacts are being unearthed over the years
and now gathering dust in warehouses. That's because there's not enough storage
space in museums in England. Talks are underway though with the British
government to open a national archive that could then loan the artefacts to
museums because there are fears that the treasured pieces of history could be
lost forever if a solution isn't found. Well, let's turn our attention now to
the world of sport with Richard Eamon. Thank you. We'll start in Wellington
where England's cricketers are batting first in the second test of New Zealand
after losing the toss. Stefan Schammelt is there watching for us. England a 204
for three and Harry Brooks at it again with his 400 in six tests and probably
the best of the lot. He arrived at the crease when England were 21 for three
after being put in on a pitch had plenty in it early on but he's batted
beautifully in reaching three figures from 107 balls. Brooks had 183 with Joe
Root who's 59 not out. There's been a real master and apprentice field to this
partnership and that pitch that was difficult to bat on earlier is looking much
easier in the afternoon. Brooke has 116 England 204 for three. Stefan, thank
you. Well, staying with cricket Richard, we now know one of the finalists, don't
we, for the women's T20 World Cup? We do. The reigning champions Australia, the
first team through after a thrilling five-run win over India in Cape Town.
Really tense finish. Australia looked like they might be heading for defeat
until India skipper Harmon Preet Kaur was run out for 52. That was a decisive
moment. Australia though, we know that they're ruthless. Their opponent could be
their biggest rival. England's play host South Africa on Friday. Let's turn our
attention now onto some football. Two European heavyweights have shown that they
might possibly be on their way back to the top. Yeah, it looks like football
fans have been treated to a brilliant Europa League playoff between Manchester
United and Barcelona. United through to Friday's last 16 draw after winning 2-1
at Old Trafford to go 3-2 on aggregate. And just thinking of the two teams,
they've been defined, haven't they, by a legacy of old managers. Are they moving
past that now, do you think? It looks like it's well known that Manchester
United have struggled since S Verghese Ferguson left. It's 10 years ago now.
Under Eric Tenhar United, much more confident, more disciplined. They've kind of
got their swagger back. He said after this result that he feels like they can
beat anyone. Similarly for Barster, with such a good side under Pep Guardiola.
Now under another former midfielder, Javi, their eight points clear at the top
of their figure, it's an indicator though that they've been struggling over
these years because this was in the second tier Europa League, not the Champions
League. So that's Manjou and Barster. What about the other significant results?
Yeah, Juventus looked impressive beating Nantes 3-0 to go through 4-1 on
aggregate. But the Dutch giants Ajax are out, losing 3-1 to Union Berlin, who've
been so good in Germany this season. Richard, Richard for the moment. Thank you
so much. You're listening to the newsroom on the BBC World Service. We return
now to Ukraine. A year ago, the BBC's James Waterhouse was in Kiev for just six
weeks and then the Russian invasion began. Since then, he's covered the conflict
and spent time with Ukrainians whose lives have been irrevocably changed by that
war. I caught up with him and asked him how the past year has affected the
people of Ukraine. I remember in the weeks building up to the invasion, people
would very calmly say to me, well, we will fight. It's about defending my
country. It's about defending my very existence and my children's future. And at
the time, it was quite a thing to hear, but you sort of thought, well, it may
well never come to that. How do you know until that moment comes? But on the
whole, they were serious about it. I think you had the resilience of the general
population who have had to learn to live with this. You've had the volunteers
who signed up in their millions. And then you've had the transformation of
Ukraine's military and weaponry. And I think Vladimir Putin miscalculated.
Whenever I drive around Ukraine, I think two things. Firstly, you can see why
Russia wants to take it. It's this vast, fertile landscape. And the second thing
I think is I can't believe Russia thought it could take it, given its vastness.
It should have taken it. It was the far superior, bigger force. It still has
huge mass over the Ukrainians. And yet the Ukrainians still managed to stay to
the defense they are. To what degree on the ground and amongst the ordinary
Ukrainian population do they feel continually supported by the West? We see
often lots of calls that frustration etched on the face of Olodimas Zelensky
calling for more weapons, faster weapons, weapons to be delivered more quickly.
But do you feel as though Ukraine still feels that sense of brotherhood with the
West, with NATO? I think in a political sense, they are clearly grateful for the
help that's been provided so far. But you're right, they are frustrated with the
rate it has arrived. Before this invasion, what people cared about was who's
helping us and with what. And there was frustration named at Germany who was
initially hesitant and sending in January military helmets and hospitals. You
know, Ukrainians are saying, well, I can't fire those. And I think that's been
the sentiment ever since. But when you talk about brotherhood, I think it's more
like a like a neighbor across the road that they feel because despite the
political will of Ukraine as a whole on issues of wanting to join NATO and
wanting to join the European Union, they ultimately have not been realized. And
so you have Ukraine sort of falling through the gap. I think people feel that.
And I think that is a deep source of resentment for the majority of Ukrainians
thus far, both the EU and NATO have been noncommittal of just when that will
happen at the moment. It's kind of political platitudes on saying one day, yes,
our future is together. A sense that the country is to some degree being kept at
arms reach. I think so. I think I've seen a lot of official visits come here and
you see Ukrainian flags crossed over with the European Union flag or the UK flag
or the US flag. And you know, messaging is vital in war. And you see Ukraine is
trying to push itself westward. And we've seen in times gone by when whenever
Russia's aggression increases, Ukraine leans further to the west politically.
This full scale invasion has kind of blown that out of the water, but it's still
reaching. It is still not fully incorporated into these wider blocks towards the
west. It is throwing everything westwards politically to try and achieve that
whilst trying to throw everything in a military sense towards the east to keep
Russia at bay. And ultimately, you know, it still hopes to repel Russia
completely, but it feels a long way off from that point. James Waterhouse. Well,
let's finish the programme thinking about that point that James has just made,
the military situation on the ground. Dr Jonathan Marcus is a former BBC
correspondent and now an independent diplomatic and defence analyst. He gave us
his assessment of the conflict now and the outlook for the next few months. This
is not last year's war. The stakes are just as high, but the two armies have
changed. Ukraine's forces not just survived the shock of battle, but have fought
back, inflicting reverses on the Russian invaders. All this came at a cost of
heavy casualties and Ukraine is busy trying to build up new brigades and
divisions for the offensive to come. On the other side, many of Russia's best
troops were killed and their units shattered in the early stages of the
conflict. Moscow has had to mobilise tens of thousands of poorly trained
conscripts. It has enlisted convicts and it has had to reach deep into Soviet
era stockpiles of weaponry to equip its newly organised formations. All this
sets the scene for what could be the most critical period in this conflict. This
latest phase will be a drama in two acts. The first, a Russian offensive in the
east, largely focused on securing more of the Donbas, is already underway. It is
likely to build over the coming weeks. Ukraine's aim will be to inflict heavy
losses on the Russian forces, to try to conserve its own combat power as much as
possible and then to launch what will be the second act of the drama, to go onto
the offensive itself. Many analysts believe that Ukraine's goal will be to drive
southwards to sever the so-called Russian-held land bridge, the band of
Ukrainian territory that links Crimea with Russia to the east. Everything now
depends upon how successful Kiev and Moscow have been in generating, training
and equipping new combat units. Resolving problems in ammunition supply will be
crucial for success. By the time spring turns to summer in Ukraine, we should
know how decisive this new phase of the fighting has been. For Russia, stalemate
may be enough. But Ukraine has to demonstrate its counter-attacking capability.
It must show its Western backers that the huge amounts of weaponry, training and
money that it has received are actually making a difference. Western support for
Ukraine remains strong. But if the war does turn into a stalemate, would there
be similar levels of backing, say this time next year? Perhaps. And this is
maybe President Putin's lifeline. There is no real balance in this conflict and
it goes way beyond the fact that Russia is the larger and, on paper at least,
the vastly stronger player. The war is being waged on Ukrainian soil. It is
Ukraine's towns and infrastructure that are being destroyed. And for Ukrainians,
this is a national struggle for survival. Of course Mr Putin would like Russians
to see the conflict in similar terms. Perhaps some do. But slowly, as the
casualty toll hits home and economic sanctions begin to bite, what then? And
surely in Mr Putin's mind there must be one other fundamental question. How will
Russians judge this misadventure when the guns eventually fall silent? The
thoughts of Jonathan Marcus ending this edition of the Newsroom Programme. But
there is plenty more insight and analysis on the first anniversary of the
initial invasion of Ukraine by Russia on our website. Just head to bbc.com slash
news. This is the BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the
Flying Seagull Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to
bring fun and frivolity to disadvantaged children, children in refugee camps, in
orphanages and care homes. These kids probably have gone through some of the
worst traumas and they don't have access to counsellors or therapists. Ash and
the seagulls aren't therapists, they're clowns, so they do what they do best to
help. Escapism and fun. Give them something to wake up excited about, give them
something to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise what is the point? When the
Greek government allowed children in refugee camps to go to school, the kids
who'd been working with the seagulls did far better than the other kids. If they
can believe themselves to be limitless and valuable, then maybe they can go into
the next challenge of their life with that arsenal of self-confidence. Flying
Seagulls. Child's Play. Tuesday at 9.30pm and 20pmt. Hello I'm Manny Jasmi. On
this week's World Football we hear from Haiti defender Chelsea Suprise. Haiti
have just qualified for the Women's World Cup for the first time. In recent
years Haiti has been rocked by natural disasters, a presidential assassination
and sexual abuse allegations by female players against several men in its
football federation. So Suprise says she's proud of putting the country on the
map for positive reasons. Join us in two minutes. BBC News with Neil Nunes.
Ukraine's President Vladimir Zelensky has welcomed a vote at the United Nations
calling for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops. The
resolution was backed by an overwhelming majority of countries which Mr Zelensky
described as a powerful signal of global support. Friday marks exactly a year
since the full-scale invasion began. Poland is fortifying its border with the
Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. The Polish government fears that migrants from
Turkey and the Middle East are being encouraged to travel to the area where they
could cross into the European Union. North Korea has launched four cruise
missiles into the sea. That's the latest in a series of provocative weapons
tests. A court in Los Angeles has sentenced the former Hollywood film mogul
Harvey Weinstein to 16 more years in prison. The rape and assault sexual assault
charges date back to 2013. He's already serving a long sentence for another
conviction. Madagascar's government says a powerful storm which battered the
island's east coast has killed at least seven people. Cyclone Freddie is now
heading for Mozambique. A senior federal investigator in the United States has
called for an end to the politicization of a rail disaster in Ohio. Jennifer
Homandy was announcing the findings of a preliminary report into the crash which
caused a major chemical spill three weeks ago. Boeing has temporarily suspended
deliveries of the 787 Dreamliner to conduct analysis on a fuselage component.
The company restarted deliveries of the jet last August after they had been
halted for more than a year because of other problems. And a rare blizzard
warning has been issued for parts of southern California from early Friday
through to Saturday evening. That's the latest BBC World News. If you could
describe like a perfect night for me, play like a five-a-side match and then go
home, shower up and get dressed. Go to a fancy dinner. Yeah, go to a fancy
dinner. That's a great day right there. Get a girl that can do both. Gooooooood!
Leading the conversation on the Global Game. This is World Football on the BBC
World Service. Hello, I'm Manny Jasmie. Welcome to the programme. With me the
former Chelsea and Everton winger Pat Nevin and the former USA International
Heather O'Reilly. Pat, just a few months ago we previewed the Champions League
final between Liverpool and Real Madrid and you cautiously said that Liverpool
team of last season might just have been the best that you'd ever seen. This
week Liverpool played Real Madrid again, went 2-0 up and lost 5-2. So what's
gone wrong in this difficult season for Liverpool? Yeah, I mean first of all, I
mean Manny makes a bit of a difference. San Jose has not been the player he was
before, although he can do it in sports. The big, big games they were always
able to turn up before. This season they've just been out chased, they've been
outran a lot of the time. They've missed Van Dijk for a good period of time as
well and he was probably for that period of time the best defender in the world.
He's come back and he's not quite the same. There seems to be problems all over
the place but the biggest and then the simple problem they've got is they're
having to restructure and they're having to change and it isn't easy. So they
can reach the peak. I think the peak had probably just gone over last season but
now the peak has gone and I think people know that and that's why a number of
young players have been brought in and it might take them a little while.
There's a lot of teams doing it, Chelsea are doing the same thing just now and
it's painful when it goes wrong because Real Madrid were fabulous. They were
utterly fabulous. My thoughts on it were Real Madrid were playing at Barcelona.
That will offend a few people. But you know the great Barcelona side of a few
years ago, it was a joy to watch such good football. Hello, the USA have won the
She Believes Cup, an annual four nation tournament after winning all their
games. Before the tournament Megan Rapinoe said that she hoped that the team
would be metaphorically punched in the face, get a bit of a wake up call to
prepare them for the Women's World Cup later this year. Did that happen? Did
they look like they needed it to happen? And can it actually happen? Is there
enough strength in depth in women's football for teams to go and metaphorically
punch the USA in the face? There is enough depth. I think that the teams that
they played in this tournament, Japan, Brazil and Canada are all teams that can
do that to the US. None of the teams did that to the US. So I don't think that
there was this punch in the face. I think that on the contrary, the US won, but
sort of once again did it in an unconvincing manner to, yeah, I guess the
supporters dismayed, they keep winning the games, but it's just done in a way
that is a little bit, yeah, unconvincing. And so everybody's a little bit
worried when the World Cup comes around. So did they get punched in the face?
No. So that was a goal that was pretty much the last play of the entire
tournament. Lidmilla from Brazil scored against the US to make it two to one
just the other night in about the 88th minute. And so it wasn't a punch in the
face in terms of losing the game, but I think that they'll come away from the
tournament happy that they won. They won all three games, but that last play of
the last game will definitely stick with them. And one area of concern I see for
the US team is they're just allowing far too many crosses into the box. And
again, against Brazil, you have two minutes left. You have to block the cross.
You have to block the cross. And Pat, one thing I'd love to know your opinion on
all these players, this new age generation, everybody's putting their hands
behind their back to defend. And that's maybe at the highest level of men's
football or women's football. Once in a while, a crafty player can almost serve
a ball in and hey, if it hits the hand, it's a benefit. Go to the penalty spot.
But for the most part, it's not going to hit your hand. You have to defend
regularly. You have to defend well. It's far more dangerous to not defend well
and to kind of make your body small, put your hands behind your back and allow a
cross in the box. And so I'm watching the US and I'm like, they are allowing
crosses in the box so they don't hit their hand. And I just think that that's
insane. So that's one correction I would like to see. And I think when I think
about, you know, the old school versus new, you know, new age players, I think I
do get a little, you know, OK boomerish. I don't know if we can even say that on
BBC because I don't even know what it means. Some people might be offended by
it. OK boomer, the boomer, the boomer generation, you know, is helping me. Yeah.
Is that you, Pat? Yeah. People are what, maybe fifties. So that's old school.
Then you have me. I'm a, I'm a good old millennial. And now you have this Gen Z
generation, right? And everything with the Gen Z is about what it looks like.
Everything's online. You got it. You literally need to put it online or it
didn't happen. Right. I'm on my high horse right now that these kids need to be
a little bit grittier and just block the cross. Just take the cross, you know,
nothing's better, Pat, you know, as a winger than having somebody stand 10 yards
off you with their hands behind their back. You can place a cross wherever you
want. So did they get punched in the face? No, they just got like a little
scrape on the nose. But maybe if anybody's listening to this program right now
in the US team, I just punched him in the face. Right. Well, as the United
States prepare for the World Cup, three debutants have completed the lineup.
Panama, Portugal and Haiti are to join the other 29 teams in Australia and New
Zealand later this year. For Haiti, it's a rare cause for celebration. In 2010,
an earthquake killed 200,000 people and was followed by a wave of cholera, which
claimed nearly 10,000 more lives and has recently returned. The country has also
been battered by hurricanes, seen a presidential assassination and is in the
grip of gang violence and social unrest. Then in 2020, investigations by FIFA
and the Global Players Union, FIFA, documented at least 34 alleged victims of
sexual abuse, including children at the National Football Center. So Haiti's
World Cup qualification is welcome news indeed, and they'll take on the European
champions England, Denmark and China at the tournament. The day after their
historic victory over Chile, I spoke to write back Chelsea Supris at the team
hotel. She was born in the USA to Haitian parents. Yesterday was in fact a dream
for all of us. There's not many words to describe it and a lot of us will
continue to process it. We did exactly what we knew we could, which is to prove
to the entire world that Haiti is a force. And we were able to exemplify that
energy in a positive way and get the exact result that we were looking for. What
was it like afterwards in the locker room with their tears? It didn't even take
to get to the locker room for the tears to start, to be honest. Some of us,
including myself, were absolutely bawling as soon as the whistle blew. Either
you were crying, either you were smiling, either you were just screaming as a
part of release. It all just came together in such a beautiful form. I think all
of us just held each other so tightly and we really just embraced each other,
all of us. You grew up in the United States where women's football has been a
big deal for a long time. So how special is it for you to have qualified for the
World Cup and to be at the same tournament as the United States? It means the
world to be able to achieve something this great. Not only our girls on this
team, but for our country. It's definitely something that we need, that Haiti
needs, that makes us so proud to represent our country and wear the crest on our
chest. It's no secret that Haiti has struggled and is still struggling, but we
are bringing something so incredibly positive to Haiti and to our people. And so
I think it's everything that we could have hoped for and the gratitude that we
all share in our hearts is it's a feeling like no other. Why did you decide to
pursue an international career with Haiti instead of having a go with the United
States? I had played with the US national team in the youth level. And for me at
the end of the day, to play for Haiti was to play for my family. Although I was
born in the US, Haiti is in my blood. It's my family. It's who I know. So it was
pretty much a natural decision for me. And it's an honor to play with Haiti. For
many people, whenever the Haiti women's team has been mentioned, it's always
been in the context of rape and sexual abuse allegations against members of the
Federation over years and years and years, all of which have been denied. How
much of a shadow has that been over the national team? We're not shook by this.
We're not shook by any of the struggles we've ever had. We have many struggles
you could name in any various order what they could or currently are. But I
think we as a team, our current Federation and our current staff choose to not
linger on the past or negativity or things that could continue to bring us down,
but instead to try to improve and always grow. I'm very proud of all of our
girls and of our staff, the way that we have handled moving forward and honestly
rewarding ourselves for all of the hard work that we've put in. Okay. Well,
let's look ahead to the World Cup. One of the teams in your group is England,
which is probably alongside the United States favorites to win the entire
competition. On Wednesday, they played a very good Belgium team and beat them
6-1. So how are you feeling about that prospect? Well, we are just excited,
number one, to qualify. I think everybody is super quick to talk about what's
next and who we're playing, but we're not foreign to playing big teams, matching
up against top teams and being the underdog. We're going to go in to compete and
we're not scared of anyone. And that's exactly what we're going to show that we
can play and we deserve to be there. And regardless of who we're going to play
against, we're going to treat it with the maturity and the relentless
competitive spirit that we've always shown. Maybe it's too early to ask you this
question, but when you imagine yourself at the World Cup, what's the picture
that you see? Well, to be honest, just for you to even say when you imagine
yourself at a World Cup is an insane statement to actually be living in
currently. So let's just start with that one. And I think the most I would
imagine is seeing the national anthem side by side with my teammates and hear a
roaring crowd to just be in such a surreal moment where you are just speechless.
It's going to be incredible. I tell you, one person who is listening to this
interview is Heather O'Reilly. Oh, wow. She's mentioned all the great strides
that the Haitian women's team has made. And I'm sure she'll be absolutely
delighted for you and the achievement that you and your teammates have recorded.
Oh, wow. I would send her many thank you. She is a legend. And I know many
players all over the world, including myself, know of her history. And it would
be such an honor for her to even be speaking in a positive way about Haiti.
Thank you very much indeed, Chelsea. Enjoy the status of being a Haitian history
maker. Thank you so much. Thank you for having me. And I wish you all the best
as well. That's the Haiti Right Back Chelsea Supris speaking to me from Auckland
and looking forward to her debut, the country's debut at the Women's World Cup
later this year. Heather, I hope I wasn't remiss in mentioning you and putting
words, associating words with you and offering your best wishes to Chelsea. No,
Manny. I mean, we're like the same person nowadays. We've spent so much time
together in me or Pat. We speak with one voice. Please just always speak for me
whenever you feel inclined to. No, thank you for saying that to her because what
they did accomplish was phenomenal. And she just sounds so, yeah, just so
excited, so proud, so joyous that she's representing Haiti. You could tell that
it means a lot to her and her family. And Chelsea also mentioned how much it
means to the country and just to be able to provide this joyous moment, one that
sort of distracts people, I think, of their previous tough times. What an
achievement for the team. I know the entire country will be tuning in this
summer. So well done, well done, well done, Chelsea. And yeah, maybe the US will
be seeing you if we both advance in our groups. And I wish you guys the best of
luck. So well done. Pat, as we discussed last week a little bit, whatever anyone
thinks about the merits of expanding tournaments, you can't overlook the joy
that players like Chelsea are experiencing because they've been allowed to
qualify for this tournament. Yeah, I mean, you can feel it, you can hear it. And
it's and especially because the growth of women's games has been so quick, you
know, in the last couple of years, it's really exploded. And I think they all
know now that they're not just going to something that their friends are talking
about. This is now a worldwide thing, tens of millions, maybe hundreds of
millions will be watching. And the latest she's got that attitude. But I'm also
delighted she said, yeah, but we play against some big teams who are capable of
holding their own. She wasn't just saying we're going to turn up, you know, and
expect to be easily beaten. I mean, it's going to be tough for them against
England. But you know, they've given some tough times. Did they play against the
US recently? They did, didn't they? Three now? Wasn't four now, I think three or
four now? Yeah, it was closer than it has been in years past. That's for sure.
So they are improving. Yeah. And I watched the two goals that got them through
in Des Mornay. She's with Reem, I think. And honestly, what a powerful player,
but what a brilliantly balanced player. They've got some good players in that
team. So it's one of those ones where, and they went with the 21-0 against the
British Virginians. I don't know how much we're going to take it out of that.
But don't take them for granted. I think they will get results in this
tournament. It might not be against England, but I think they will get results.
So it's brilliant to hear the excitement, but it's also great to hear they want
to be competitive. Exciting times for the Haitians. We'll see them in a few
months' time on the biggest stage. Football resumes in Turkey on Saturday with
Fenebacie playing Konya Spohr in the Super League. The season has been on hold
since the devastating earthquakes struck nearly three weeks ago, killing more
than 50,000 people in Turkey and Syria. Among the dead was the Ghanaian player
Christian Atsu and the sporting director of his club Haeta Spohr, Tanar Savult.
Haeta Spohr and Gaziantep are among several clubs who have chosen to withdraw
from the rest of the season. None of them will be punished with relegation.
Haeta Spohr, who are in the second tier, have also decided not to continue
playing, leaving players like the Gambian international Lamine Jalloh scrambling
to find a new club in order to keep playing. We are beat down when we hear that
the president said withdraw from the league. You know, other players is trying
to look in for a club. So it's a big disappointment for me. I saw two teams in
the Super League. That's Haeta Spohr and Gaziantep. I think Haeta, you know,
they cannot play because they lose their director and one of the star players,
Atsu. So I think Haeta is a good move, you know, they don't play football at
this time because it's a bit difficult. In Adana, we are two teams. My club, all
the players are safe and the president, everybody in my club are safe, you know.
For me, my thinking, you know, we can continue the league outside Adana. That's
what Adana Demis for doing in the Super League. They will continue their match,
I think, in Antalya. For us, our president just withdraw like that, you know.
It's a bit crazy, you know. I was so nervous because now we are in rust, you
know, everybody is looking for a club. We are a lot of players, so you talk with
some clubs, they will not offer you good offer, you know. They want you to come
just for loan, you know, what the clubs want and what I want, you know, it's
different story. So still now waiting. It's a bit crazy, you know. What was it
like for you when the earthquake happened? On the 6th of February, you know, we
are sleeping. They have a house, some buildings collapse. I think it was a
tundra, you know, I think it was a tundra. But after when I hear the house are
shaking, now my house 20 minutes, I cannot describe, you know, because
everything was shaking. So I was a bit scared, you know. Everybody is like, I
was thinking, you know, today, you know, I will not survive with my family. But
thank God I see myself still now, you know, with my family, you know, we have to
run out, you know, to be in the car. I have two kids. I have to run down to pick
up my boy and upstairs, my baby girl was there. So I have to catch them with my
wife and run outside to go straight to the car. But after Adena was not safe, we
run back to our club facility that's 30 minutes outside from Adena. So where me
and my family, you know, we settle for all the night, you know, but to be
honest, it's scary, you know, it's very difficult moment. Last two, three weeks,
you know, very difficult. Which clubs are your agents talking to clubs like in
our league, they are in playoffs zone is talking in Shanghai, sport, Bola sport,
um, Ryan is post that super league, um, Ryan is for Istanbul sport, but still
now nothing because they are not offering good offer. And they're taking other
players, you know, so that's why it's still now waiting. So for you, it's how
much they will pay you. That's really important. But I guess at some point you
have to think that if you don't go anywhere, you won't play for at least six
months. Definitely I want to play, I want to play football because we have the
important game also national team. That's next month. We have to play
qualification against Mali. I was doing good in the league, you know, playing
week in week out, but now without playing, you know, you cannot go to national
team at the moment. So I mean, just tell us what your situation is like at the
moment. I mean, where are you all living and how often are you contacting your
agent every day and saying, have you heard anything? Is there any news? You
know, my agent is Italian, but he don't have a lot of market in Turkey. So last
two days we sent a mandate with one Turkish agent. He's a good guy. So he's
helping me at the moment. I'm here in Istanbul safe with my family. I'm training
at the gym every day morning and afternoon waiting for a good call to continue
playing the transfer window close next month on the fifth. So we'll see it till
the last minute, but hopefully 100 percent I will get a team. That's Adana Spor,
striker Lamine Jello speaking to me from Istanbul. Pat is lucky for players like
Lamine Jello that the transfer window is still open in Turkey and he sounds
pretty desperate, doesn't he, to find a team? Yeah, everyone always thinks
footballs are multi-millionaires. All of them are. But it's not really the case.
And there's a lot of players that have to work very, very hard to get by with,
not only for themselves, but for their families and sometimes for those
dependent on them as well. So, you know, it's not being insensitive by him. You
know, so soon after they are quick to say, no, I need to get back. I need to get
back to play football because, you know, his own security, his own family's
security, you know, is in doubt. So it's absolutely no fault of his own
whatsoever. But you need to try and put yourself out there. And it's a difficult
situation because there's quite a few players in a similar possession as him
just now trying to get another club. So I can just say good luck to him. He
sounds as if he's been through a huge amount, as is everyone else in Turkey and
of course Syria as well. Finally, the end of season playoffs in Major League
Soccer in the United States have been changed slightly so that there will be a
best of three matchup in the first round. So two teams will play each other
three times. And Pat, this gives us the perfect excuse to recall the Merseyside
Darby's in the FA Cup in which you played. And I'm pretty sure actually they
were in February. Well, at least some of them were because there were plenty of
them in 1991. So just tell us about those. What's it like when you play the same
team over and over again? Well, it's bad enough any team, but when it's your
rivals, it's Everton versus Liverpool. It's extraordinary because you know each
other far too well. You try to make some tactical changes. The first game was a
draw. I feel as I remember, we should have got a penalty kick. I still bear the
scars. We didn't get it. I was just, of all the penalty kicks, I didn't get my
career. That's the one that hurt most. Then there was a 4-4 draw in the next
game at Goodison Park. To which point everyone just decided not to defend. We
just go and run and chase. It was one of those magical, magical nights for
anyone who was there or even watched it live on television because it was the
early days of showing games live on television. It was extraordinary. And then
we managed to go and win the replay. So it was extraordinary, but it's also that
feeling of, oh, it's you again. And you have to start to rethink and reinvent.
And that's harder for the creative players. It is harder because you have to
recreate something different. And whether it's the defenders, they know how to
defend, they know how to work, they know what their job is. So it's not great.
However, in the midst of all this money, I don't even understand what they're
trying to do in the US here. What do you mean three games? I mean, what do they
add up the scores? Explain. I don't understand. No, no. Yeah. You know what?
There's some technical logistics that I'm still trying to sort out myself, but I
think the whole point of it is you want the best teams to advance. And a best of
three series allows just more chances for the better team to come out on top of
the series and therefore advance through to the championship or further down the
championship rounds. Can I suggest that's what's a league? That's the difference
between a league and a cup, right? And a cup. These things happen. So that's why
you have cups in the league. They can even itself. So this is the problem with
getting the playoffs at the end of the year to get the championship. You're
turning a league into a cup. And that's why you have to do another thing. I
mean, I sound as if I'm complaining here because they are. What about the
baseball players? Now, again, fill me in. In my lack of knowledge here, do they
play six games against each other in a row or something like that? They're not
going to start doing that in the playoffs. Well, sometimes there's a
doubleheader in the same day, Pat. Can you believe that? They played two games
against the same team in the same day. It's nothing sacred. You know, anytime
that something is brought into this game that's different, people are bit up in
arms because, yeah, some of the traditions are very sacred. But I think that
it's worthy to look at some different ways of doing things and if people don't
like it, you know, you scrap it for the next year. But worthy of giving this a
try and an interesting format that I'm sure was well reviewed and talked about
before. No draws are allowed in this best of three matches, so at least it can't
go to any replays. That's it for this week. Best of three in Major League
Soccer. We're down to the best of four in World Football. Four more episodes
left. The first of those is next week. Join us for that. Until then, goodbye.
Goodbye. Goodbye. World Football is a BBC Sport production for the BBC World
Service. This is the BBC World Service with no place like NAMM. On the 29th of
March, 1973. All American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. 50 years
later, a small group of US veterans have returned to Lipdai permanently. We'll
be finding out why. No place like NAMM. Saturday at 12 GMT. In 50 minutes,
witness history with me, Josephine McDermott. Today I'm taking you back to the
Chinese city of Shanghai during World War II. I've been talking to a former
foreign resident, 93-year-old Christopher John Huxdepp, known as John, who was a
child living under Japanese occupation.