TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning, it's six o'clock on Wednesday the 1st of
March. This is Today with Martha Carney in Belfast and Nick Robinson in the
studio in London. Our main news this morning, Matt Hancock is facing claims that
he rejected medical advice that all residents moving into care homes in England
should be tested for Covid-19. The Daily Telegraph has obtained messages he sent
when he was Health Secretary. Mr Hancock says the claims are wrong and he's
being quoted selectively. We'll be analysing what the messages, which were only
published late last night, contain, how they add to the picture we already knew,
and we hope to be speaking to someone close to him later in the programme. Our
other headline this morning, the Prime Minister has said that the DUP must be
given time and space to examine the deal on trade he's struck with the EU. What
difference does the lack of a functioning government make to people's lives here
in Northern Ireland? I've spoken to one woman who's deeply frustrated that a
public inquiry into the mother and baby home scandal has been delayed. I think
the biggest thing for a lot of people is recognition of what happened. It was a
cruel, strict regime. And I've been speaking to James Martin, the Down Syndrome
actor who's hoping to add an Oscar to his film's BAFTA win. I always say to
people, never toss a big buyer's cover because anybody can act. It doesn't
matter if you have Down Syndrome. James is off to Hollywood next week. The BBC
News is read by Caroline Nichols. The Daily Telegraph has obtained more than
100,000 messages which were sent and received by Matt Hancock at the height of
the Covid crisis. The paper says they show that Mr Hancock, who was the Health
Secretary at the time, rejected advice from senior medical officials in April
2020 that all residents going into care homes in England should be tested for
the virus. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock said the story on care homes was wrong.
Our political correspondent Nick Urdley reports. The Daily Telegraph has
obtained 100,000 WhatsApp messages involving Mr Hancock via the lockdown
critical journalist Isabel Oakeshott, who helped write Mr Hancock's memoirs. The
BBC has not seen the full exchanges and thus cannot verify the context or full
contents. But extracts printed by the newspaper suggest that Mr Hancock was told
in April 2020 that everyone going into a care home should be tested with
segregation of those waiting for their results. Over the course of a day,
however, the messages between Mr Hancock and a civil servant suggest that
recommendation was removed with a commitment instead to test all those going
from hospital into care homes. The early decisions around entry to care homes
have been criticised by many with full testing not introduced until later. But a
spokesperson for Mr Hancock hit back saying the report was an agenda driven leak
of confidential documents. Mr Hancock's spokesperson said the report
intentionally excluded a reference to a meeting where the then health secretary
was told a pledge to test everyone would not be deliverable. Rishi Sunak has
told a meeting of Conservative MPs that the DUP should be given time and space
to consider the new deal with the EU on trade in Northern Ireland. The agreement
has been broadly welcomed at Westminster, but Lord Frost, one of the negotiators
of the Northern Ireland protocol, which it replaces, questioned whether any
fundamental changes had been achieved. Here's our political correspondent, David
Wallace-Lockhart. Rishi Sunak seems to be making progress in convincing doubters
in his own party. One Conservative MP said they'd gone into last night's meeting
opposing the new Windsor framework only to be converted by the Prime Minister.
But other key groups aren't convinced yet. The DUP, the main unionist party in
Northern Ireland, say they need more time to look at the deal. Rishi Sunak seems
willing to give them this space. And the European Research Group of Eurosceptic
Conservative MPs say it will take two weeks for their lawyers to look through
the small print. Some disquiet is starting to surface. Boris Johnson's former
Brexit negotiator, Lord Frost, has warned in the Telegraph that EU laws will
remain supreme in Northern Ireland, calling parts of the agreement a bitter pill
to swallow. But the Northern Ireland Minister, Steve Baker, has made clear that
this is the final deal. YouTube has been accused of collecting the viewing data
of children aged under 13, which would be a breach of a UK data privacy code
designed to protect young people. An official complaint has been lodged with the
Information Commissioner's office. YouTube says it's already approved children's
privacy on the platform. A search is continuing for a missing baby amid mounting
fears that the child may have come to harm. Police arrested the parents,
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, in Brighton on Monday. Vincent McAvinney
reports. Hundreds of officers from the Sussex force and the Metropolitan Police
have spent a second night searching for the baby. Drones, a helicopter and
specially trained dogs are being used and the public has been asked to check
sheds and outbuildings in the area. In freezing temperatures, officers have been
combing through a large allotment site to the north of Brighton. Constance
Martin and her partner Mark Gordon, a convicted rapist and registered sex
offender, disappeared in January when their baby was just days old. The couple,
who are now being held on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter, are
refusing to assist the police in the search. Information uncovered by the BBC
suggests UK police forces have lost track of more than 700 sex offenders in the
past three years. Campaigners want the law changed to stop offenders changing
their names to avoid detection. The Home Office says the UK already has some of
the toughest laws in the world. At least 32 people have been killed in a train
crash in northern Greece. Scores were injured when a passenger train derailed
after it collided with a freight train and caught fire near the city of Larissa.
Rescue workers have been searching through the wreckage for survivors. This
passenger describes what happened. The passengers were all relaxed. Some were
asleep. And suddenly there was a sudden boom. Suitcases started falling, many
windows broke. But we in carriage number five were lucky because somehow the
doors opened and we managed to get out. We could see in the other carriages
passengers were breaking the windows to escape. Nigeria's election commission
has declared the governing party's candidate, Bolotinabu, as the winner of
Saturday's presidential election. He won with almost nine million votes ahead of
his main rival, Atiku Abubakar. Two opposition parties have described the vote
as a sham and have called for new elections. Thanks very much. The time is
coming up to seven minutes past six. Let's find out about the weather. Seemed
quite brisk, I have to say, first thing here in Belfast. How is it in the rest
of the country? Let's hear from Sarah Keith-Lucas. Yes, it is in fact the first
day of meteorological spring, but it's not feeling particularly spring like out
there today because we have got that brisk northeasterly breeze blowing and
that's bringing in a lot of cloud for most of us and some drizzly outbreaks of
rain as well. So across England and Wales, first off, we'll hear most places
just about frost free under that bulk of cloud. But we have got some clear
spells in the far south for the likes of Kent and Sussex. So here there's
certainly a little bit of frostiness around first thing. Some outbreaks of
showery rain here and there, especially persistent this morning across parts of
northern England, but through parts of Wales and the Midlands and southern
England too, we've got some splashes of drizzle around too. Top temperatures
about seven to nine degrees under that cloud today. Bit of brightness just
trying to break through this afternoon, particularly for north east England,
around the south coast as well. So you may glimpse a bit of blue sky, but it
will feel chilly when you add on that brisk northeasterly wind. For Scotland and
Northern Ireland through the day, I think most places are set to be dry. Just a
few spots of drizzle, I think, for eastern Scotland, Aberdeenshire, for
instance. Best of the brightness will be towards the Northern Isles, the Western
Isles and also across parts of Northern Ireland. Some sunnier spells just
peeking through during the afternoon and highs around six to eight degrees.
Again, feeling a bit cooler in that breeze. Now the outlook for the next few
days, the weather looking predominantly dry and settled, but then it looks like
things take a U-turn back into winter. Some colder weather on the way as we head
through the weekend and into next week. Thank you very much indeed, Sarah. It is
now eight minutes past six. Let's turn to the morning front pages and also
what's on the news websites as well. The Telegraph leads with the first in what
it says is a series of investigative stories into what is called the lockdown
files. Those with long memories will see and hear the echoes with their
exploration of the MPs expensive scandal. The paper says it's obtained 100,000
leaked WhatsApp messages between the former health secretary, Matt Hancock, and
other officials during the height of the pandemic. It says they reveal Mr
Hancock decided against advice to test all residents going into care homes in
England for Covid. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock has called the report an
outrageous and distorted account of the pandemic spun to fit what they call an
anti-lockdown agenda. The Telegraph also features commentary from Isabel
Oakeshott, the journalist who leaked the messages. She got them while helping
Matt Hancock write his book, Pandemic Diaries. Miss Oakeshott, who's been
critical of lockdown, says she's sharing the trove because she believes the
official Covid inquiry is taking too long and there needs to be a more urgent
examination of how official decisions about Covid were made. She claims the
messages reveal turmoil within number 10 and a shift to what she calls lockdown
zealotry. The Guardian headlines a report by the Commons Public Accounts
Committee, which has found that NHS England's three-year plan to reduce backlogs
caused by the pandemic is already failing to meet its targets. The paper quotes
the report as calling the recovery programme unrealistic with cancer waiting
times at their worst levels. Downing Street has suggested that the new Brexit
deal for Northern Ireland isn't open to negotiation, according to The Times. The
paper has been told that the Democratic Unionist Party faces a straight choice
between accepting it or not. Business leaders are predicting a boost to the UK's
struggling economy on the back of the deal, reports the Daily Express. In the
Telegraph, Lord Frost, who helped negotiate the current protocol, writes that EU
law remains supreme under the new agreement, calling it a bitter pill to
swallow. But he adds that doesn't mean that the deal shouldn't go ahead. The
front page of the Daily Mail leads with the police search for the missing baby
of the runaway aristocrat Constance Martin and her partner Mark Gordon. The
paper says officers fear the child has come to harm, but police are still
holding out hope that the newborn is safe and well, adds the Metro. A number of
the papers feature a picture of a laughing Princess of Wales beating Prince
William in a spin class challenge. Princess of Wheels quips the Daily Mirror,
while the Express goes with the caption, pedal power. And the Financial Times
has a picture of what could become the UK's most expensive home. It says estate
agents are looking to sell the London mansion, set in four acres of Regent's
Park, for as much as £250 million, which would break the previous record of £210
million. The paper's sources say the 200-year-old villa was repossessed after
its Saudi owners defaulted on a loan. The Times reports that the 29,000-square-
foot property has 40 bedrooms, eight garages, luxury lifts, a sauna and a
whirlpool, and was bought for just £15 million just in the late 80s. Only eight
garages. It's not really worth it, is it? Time now is 11 minutes past six. A
good deal for Northern Ireland or one that doesn't cut the mustard? That's the
argument here as politicians examine the detail of what Rishi Sunak announced
yesterday. He indicated to us that the Windsor Framework was going ahead,
whether the DUP agreed or not. Well, I'm joined here in our Belfast studio by
Chris Page, our Ireland correspondent. Morning, Chris. And you've just been
showing me an interesting intervention by an influential figure within the DUP.
Yes, that's right. Plenty of comment on this. The former DUP leader, Peter
Robinson, former First Minister of Northern Ireland, has issued a statement. He
doesn't often intervene in politics these days. He has said the DUP should take
its time in considering whether to support or reject the Windsor Framework,
Rishi Sunak's new deal with the EU for trading arrangements for Northern
Ireland. But in a long statement, there's one sentence that really is worth
looking at. He says it's important to consider whether in rejecting the
framework, we place unionism and Northern Ireland on more perilous ground. So
what I think he's getting at there is an argument that unionist thinkers,
strategists, commentators will make, and that is unionism basically needs the
devolved institutions at Stormont more than nationalism. The best way to secure
the union in the long term is for unionists to actually be involved in governing
Northern Ireland. So while the DUP may in the short term find it's more
electorally profitable to take a hard line, stay out of Stormont, in the long
term when it comes to securing the union, well different calculations at play
there perhaps. And do you think those arguments will be listened to within the
DUP? I certainly think the likes of Peter Robinson's arguments will. There'll be
different voices in the party. Certainly I think there will be those who will be
in favour of a return to devolved government fairly soon. There will be others
who will be saying no, let's stay out longer. What everybody will say is it all
depends on what the collective decision is as regards the Windsor Framework. So
again, the DUP tell us they have lawyers going over the text, seeing what the
various clauses mean for the active union, the legislation underpins Northern
Ireland's place in the UK, for the future of trading relations between Northern
Ireland and the rest of the UK, and for the role of European Union law in
Northern Ireland and how much influence Stormont will have on how much of that
law applies. So I expect it's going to be a fairly lengthy process. I wouldn't,
though the DUP hasn't committed itself to a timetable, I wouldn't say we could
expect an answer really for at least a number of weeks. Always a lengthy process
here in Northern Ireland. Certainly. Chris, thanks very much. Now 6.14, is
YouTube gathering data on what children watch, allowing them to target kids so
they watch even more, even though this would be a breach of the children's
internet code. That's the subject of an official complaint and Zoe Clyman, our
technology editor, can explain more. Who's complaining? What's the complaint
detail, Zoe? Well, at the heart of this is whether young children are watching
YouTube and whether their data is being gathered sort of by default, if you
like. YouTube says its service isn't intended for children aged below 13. And
yet Ofcom, the regulator, tells us it thinks that 89% of 3 to 17 year olds are
watching it. That's children as young as three. And while YouTube's done quite a
lot to protect younger children, it has an app specifically for kids, for
example, and it says it doesn't recommend videos and track data around
children's content, no matter who's watching it. But the issue is your average
three year old probably isn't watching it on their own device and probably isn't
watching it on their own login. They're probably watching it on mums or dads.
And that means that the data that they are giving YouTube, that is things like
what they're watching, how long they're watching it for, where they're watching
it, what device they're watching it on, is all being gathered by the site
because that's how YouTube makes its money, of course. But the big issue is
children are supposed to be protected from this. They're not supposed to be
monitored online. Naive question, Zoe. If they're not being targeted with
unpleasant, hateful content that they shouldn't watch, why does it matter if
children are being encouraged to watch more Peppa Pig or Fireman Sam or whatever
it is? Well, I suppose the issue there is that A, you're sort of potentially
driving behaviour, aren't you? But also, the thing with watching these videos is
you just don't know what's going to pop up. You know, we see situations over and
over again, don't you, where children are accidentally exposed to content that's
been wrongly tagged or been wrongly flagged by an algorithm that they shouldn't
be. The government's hugely worried about this. We've talked enormous amounts
about the online safety bill that's coming in potentially later this year.
That's very much geared about protecting children and keeping them safe online.
The Information Commissioner's Office takes the same approach. It's launched
this children's code and it says privacy has to be at the heart of everything.
Now, the person who's filed this complaint is a campaigner called Duncan McCann.
He says he thinks the solution is YouTube shouldn't track anybody. All of this
should be opt-in only. You should specifically say to YouTube, I don't mind,
track me, watch what I'm doing, serve me up adverts. Of course, the issue is
who's going to do that? Probably not many people. And at the heart of it, that
is YouTube's business model. That's how it makes its money. Zoe Clyman, thank
you. And we'll be talking to that campaigner a little later in the programme.
Time now is 17 minutes past six. After the failure of the business British Volt
to build a huge battery factory in Northumberland, where will our car
manufacturers look to get their batteries as they make more electric vehicles?
Shaun's got more on developments in the sector. Morning, Shaun. Morning Martha.
We've seen those Australian investors, haven't we, take over the running of that
plant in the North East. Not too far away from there, Nissan gets some of its
batteries from gigafactories, as they're called, in Sunderland. What about
Jaguar Land Rover? Today, the Financial Times reporting that UK ministers have
been given weeks to pledge £500 million financial support to its owners, Tata
Motors, which is said to be choosing between Spain or Somerset for a new battery
factory. So a lot's going on. Andy Palmer is former Chief Operating Officer at
Nissan, used to run Aston Martin, now Chairman of the European Electric Battery
Manufacturer, Innobat Auto. Andy, morning to you. Good morning. Does this sound
about right to you? Would you expect Jaguar Land Rover to be asking for that
level of money to build a battery factory in the UK? Yeah, I'm not privy to the
details, but the amount of money doesn't seem unreasonable. Obviously,
electricity costs and energy costs in the UK are high, and the comparison is
being made with Spain. Spain has some of the lowest energy costs in Europe. And
so for a competitive situation, you would need to compensate for that
difference. And the European Union has made battery making one of its strategic
measures, and therefore puts a lot of attention. And that's only going to
increase. As you well know, the US has introduced their IRA scheme, which is the
Inflation Reduction Act. That's made it very attractive to make batteries in the
US. The European Union has seen that as somewhat anti-competitive, but is
nevertheless less likely to react to it and make Europe, EU, very attractive.
And if the UK wants to continue with a car industry in the UK, it's going to
need to compete both with the US and with the European Union in terms of those
incentive packages. Well, your business, Innovat, it does have plans with the
Spanish government to build this electric vehicle battery plant. Were you making
decisions? Are you still making decisions about possibly being in the UK
compared to other countries? We are. We're in much the same space that
allegedly, you know, Jaguar and Land Rover is in. We're making a comparison
between Spain and the UK. Are you asking the British government for money
yourself? So far, we haven't gone into a huge amount of details, but we've found
that the Spanish government in particular is very alive to the opportunity and
very competitive in the way that they come forward. So I think it's really,
really important now that the UK government decides, broadly speaking, does it
want a car industry? And if it does, then it needs to provision probably a lot
more money than it has so far. It had a fund, as you know, of about £850
million. It probably needs a lot more than that, given that if the UK is to
provide batteries, both to the car industry and the energy storage industry,
then it probably needs six of these gigafactories. So there's a lot more to go
yet. And that would be for the UK. But if every country around the world is
offering big subsidies, are we going to end up with way too many battery
factories? No, because the battery manufacturers are choosing between countries.
So there's going to be winners and losers. It's not a question of, you know,
it's Spain wins this current contract, then Spain becomes the big player in
batteries and the UK loses out. So no, the battery makers, you know, making one
of these gigafactories, as it's called, is about a $3 billion investment. You're
only going to make limited numbers of that. And at the moment, we don't have
enough of them. Andy, thank you. Andy Palmer there, Chairman of Innobat Auto,
former Chief Operating Officer at Nissan as well. Tata Motors said to us it
doesn't comment on speculation and market rumours. We'll see what happens next
there. We're hearing from Chris Page before about what Rishi Sunak is doing,
seeking support for his new Brexit deal and others who are talking around this.
Rishi Sunak has been telling Conservative MPs to give the Democratic Unionist
Party time and space to consider the deal, which will be important, of course,
in restoring Northern Ireland's government and the consequences that has for
industry in Northern Ireland as well. I was looking at agriculture yesterday.
Let's have a look at construction today. David Haldane is Chief Executive of
Haldane Group, one of the biggest construction supply companies in Northern
Ireland. David, morning to you. Good morning, Sean. First up, this deal as you
see it that Rishi Sunak has agreed, how would it change things for Haldane
Group? I think it would improve the situation. Obviously, in our business, we
would import products from mainland UK as well as Europe. And in the current
deal, there's a lot of paperwork, additional paperwork that has to be done. And
we have to employ people to do that paperwork. And it would appear on this new
deal that that will reduce the amount of paperwork that has to be done. So
hopefully, we'll reduce the costs. And at a time when all the other costs are
rising, that would be very helpful. How crucial has it been that there hasn't
been an executive in Northern Ireland, there hasn't been a formed government, a
power sharing government there for some time now? I think that's really, you
know, in the short term, obviously, life goes on and things function, but you
can see education creaking, you know, health service creaking. And certainly in
our sector, we've had a situation where water infrastructure is under resourced,
and there isn't enough capacity in the sewage system to allow new sites to be
built. And the planners aren't allowing those sites to be passed. And, you know,
at the moment, it's okay, because they're working off old planning, old plans,
and houses are being built. But in the medium to short term, that's going to
cause a shortage of houses, which will, you know, cause homelessness and house
prices to increase. And you've talked about investing £15 million into your
business over the next five years. Does the Brexit deal mean you can crack on
with that? Or is that, do you need power sharing? Is there something else you're
waiting for? I mean, I think for Northern Ireland, the Brexit deal is, you know,
the new Brexit deal is definitely an improvement. We were in the single market,
and that was meant that all the borders were frictionless, East, West, North,
South. But we have to deal, the country's voted for this, and we have to deal
what's in front of us. So I think it's a real opportunity. And with this deal,
because businesses that will invest in Northern Ireland will have a foot in both
camps in the EU and in Northern Ireland or in the UK. So therefore... And you
see potential benefits for your business, for your sector in that, because Rishi
Sunak was very much making that a point yesterday, that that is a special
position for Northern Ireland to be in. I think a strong economy obviously
drives demand for housing and etc. And, you know, it'll also help our company,
how it runs practically. You know, one of the issues we saw was with the
existing Brexit deal. The amount we had to order from suppliers in the UK had
gone up because the cost of paperwork, we couldn't order in small batches, we
had to order in large batches. Therefore, that was tying up working capital for
our business. And hopefully with the sort of loosening of these regulations, we
should be able to go back to some of the suppliers we're dealing with and the
smaller batches and free up some working capital. David, thank you. David
Haldane there, Chief Executive of one of the biggest construction supply
companies in Northern Ireland, Haldane Group. I've got Lucy Cootes with me,
Investment Director at JM Finn. Morning, Lucy. Morning, Sean. Some big moves
money-wise on the stock markets yesterday. Just looking at Ocado, they posted a
£4 million loss. The share price took a bit of a hit. Which part of the business
are you investors concerned about at the moment? Well, it's all about, it's a
growth story. So it sells its robots and licenses, its robots and warehouses to
retailers. But at the moment, as we've seen with this joint venture with Marks &
Spencer, there is too much capacity. So they have the ability to make 700,000
deliveries a week, but actually actual orders are running at about 400,000 a
week. So we've got to really wait for the demand to catch up. And how is that
sort of playing out? Is this a wider technology story or is this something
specific about goings on at Ocado right now? This is specific to Ocado. I mean,
it is a, everyone sort of sees it as a retailer, but really it's the technology
platform that sits behind that retail joint venture. And that's the bit where
investors are looking for certainty and seeing more licenses rolling out. And
then it just gets more and more recurring revenue, but it's being pushed back in
terms of how long that's going to take to deliver. Another business looking for
more and more recurring revenues is Klarna, the massive buy now pay later
company, who many might think given the amount of times we talk about it and
also the fact you see these kinds of offerings everywhere now to be able to get
something up front and not have to pay the money back for a few weeks or a few
months. Klarna posted the biggest loss in its history, a billion dollars. Why is
it doing that? Yes, it did. It's not all bad news. So that was sort of pretty
much expected. Sounds quite bad. It does, but if you say it very quickly, it's
not that bad. So it was once Europe's most valuable startup, you know, had a
market capitalization, a value of sort of $45 billion. It's now languishing at
about 7 billion. But what we have seen is a growth in the number of shoppers
using this facility. So we're running at 150 million now. Its credit losses are
lower and its growth, merchandising value has risen by 20%. It's not seeing any
further major cuts to costs, which is a positive, and they're promising profits
by the summer. And they're seeing exponential growth in the US, which is a huge
market. So is this a bit like the Amazon story back in the day? Are investors
willing to take on those losses in the short term because they see fruitful
profits further down the road? Absolutely. Absolutely. And certainly you're sort
of seeing the other names in the market of buy now, sort of pay later. We're
seeing the offering from the likes of Apple and Amazon, etc. So this is a growth
credit facility, which is linked very much to online shopping. Interesting.
Lucy, thanks so much. Speak to you again soon. Lucy Coates, Investment Director
at JM Finn. After seven o'clock, I'll be chatting to the boss of a co-op bank
about how they have been getting on and its customers in particular have been
getting on lately. Sean, thank you very much indeed. 29 Minutes, part six.
Here's Rob with the sports news. Morning, Rob. Morning, Nick. Well, FA Cup news
in a moment, but first we'll catch up on the opening few overs of England's
latest white ball adventure, this time in Bangladesh, where Jos Butler's side
are playing the first of three one-day Cricket Internationals in Mirpure with
three T20 games to follow. Our cricket reporter, Kevin Howells, can set the
scene. Morning, Nick. Very good morning to you. It's been a tough start in some
ways for England's bowlers, particularly Joffre Archer, but they have made a
breakthrough at last. Bangladesh winning the toss, batting first. They are
currently in the six over 33 for one, Tamim on 17. The breakthrough coming just
a few deliveries ago, Lytton Dars, LBW to Chris Wokes for seven. An expensive
first over from Joffre Archer, though 12 runs from his first over. Now he's got
18 on the board from two. It's Roy, Salt, Milan, Vince, Butler, Will Jacks on an
ODI debut. Moeen Ali, Wokes, Adil Rashid, Joffre Archer and Mark Wood for
England. Bangladesh won the toss. They're 34 for one in the sixth over. Kevin,
thanks. We'll keep up with the progress in the match during the programme.
Meanwhile, the two and a half year old story of Azeem Rafiq's allegations of
racism at Yorkshire Cricket Club comes to a head today with the start of the
Cricket Discipline Commission hearing in London. It's expected to run until the
ninth of this month and will address Rafiq's claim that the English game is, and
I quote him, institutionally racist. Four FA Cup fixtures last night and the
eye-catching result of the fifth round so far has been a 2-1 win for the
Championship's Blackburn Rovers at the Premier League's Leicester City, winners
of the Cup two years ago. This succinct appreciation of his side from Blackburn
manager Jan Dal Tomasson. Brave on the ball, off the ball intense, but it's a
great achievement and the lads should be proud. They've done really well.
Elsewhere, the All-Premier League tie between Fulham and Leeds was settled by
outstanding goals from Fulham's Portugal midfielder João Palhinha and Manus
Solomon. 2-0 the result. No giant killing at Ashton Gate as Bristol City of the
Championship lost 3-0 to Manchester City. Goals there from Phil Foden who got
two and Kevin de Bruyne. Brighton took their Premier League form to stoke of the
Championship and won 1-0 with a goal from Evan Ferguson. Four matches this
evening of course, coverage on BBC Television and Five Live. And in rugby union,
fly-half Marcus Smith has been released to play for Harlequins this weekend
after being excluded from the England squad to play France a week on Saturday.
Head coach Steve Borthwick said his intention was that Smith should benefit from
game time. Smith came on for a matter of seconds at the end of last weekend's
match against Wales. Fellow fly-half George Ford, well he's back in the squad.
And so here are the tips. Lingfield 3 o'clock, number 6, expert opinion, don't
get many of those here. Wincanton 4.50, number 2, Hititi. Speak for yourself,
Rob. I do. This evening Radio 4 begins a series of six special talks. On Radio
4. Our Father, who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. The Lord's Prayer is
shared by Christians around the world. On earth as it is in heaven. In this
year's Lent Talks, six people reflect on the words of this prayer. As we forgive
those who trespass against us. Sharing stories of forgiveness, fatherhood and
finding heaven on earth. For thine is the kingdom. Lent Talks on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Begins this evening at 8.45. Amen. The time now is 28 minutes to 7.
You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4 with Martha in Belfast and Nick here in
the studio in London. Time now for a summary of the news from Caroline Nichols.
The Daily Telegraph has obtained more than 100,000 messages which were sent and
received by Matt Hancock at the height of the Covid crisis. The paper says they
show that Mr Hancock, who was the Health Secretary at the time, rejected advice
from senior medical officials in April 2020 that all residents going to care
homes in England should be tested for the virus. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock
said the story on care homes was wrong and said that the paper was presenting a
distorted account of the pandemic by using partial leaks designed to fit an
anti-lockdown agenda. Rishi Sunak has urged Conservative MPs not to create what
he called Westminster drama about his new trade deal affecting Northern Ireland.
He said the biggest unionist party, the DUP, should be allowed time and space to
examine the agreement. Police are continuing to search for a missing baby near
Brighton. The child's parents are being questioned on suspicion of gross
negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, who is a registered
sex offender, had been missing for nearly eight weeks. At least 32 people have
been killed in a train crash in northern Greece and more than 85 injured. The
passenger train derailed after it collided with a freight train and then caught
fire near the city of Larissa. The Nigerian Electoral Commission has declared
the governing party candidate Bolotinabu the winner of Saturday's presidential
election. He won with almost nine million votes, ahead of his main rival Atiku
Abubakar, who had nearly seven million. Two opposition parties have disputed the
result. Energy companies are urging ministers to make a swift decision about how
much financial support will be offered to households with their gas and
electricity bills from the beginning of April. Downing Street has said the plan
to cut the level of help is being kept under review. President Putin has signed
an amended language law which bans the use of non-Russian words in official
situations and in government publications. Mr Putin has spoken of the need to
protect his country from what he called degenerate Western culture. Thank you,
Caroline. It's now 26 minutes to seven. Did Mac Hancock ignore advice to test
anyone entering a care home for Covid during the pandemic or did he simply
decide it wasn't deliverable? The claim that he ignored advice, that he rejected
advice from Chris Whitty, is made on the front page of The Telegraph this
morning, which has obtained all the WhatsApp messages he sent to officials,
advisers and ministers during the pandemic. Let's get our heads round what is
new and what is not, what can be concluded and what can't with Nick Erdely, our
chief political correspondent. Morning to you, Nick. The first thing to say is
how on earth has The Telegraph got these messages? Via the journalist Isabel
Oakeshott, who is a well-known lockdown critic. She helped Mr Hancock write his
memoirs, which were published last year and has now decided that it's in the
public interest for these messages to be made public. She's written a long op-ed
in The Telegraph where she sets out her reasons, but basically she thinks that
the public have a right to dissect for themselves what was said in Matt
Hancock's private WhatsApp groups. And the headline this morning, and it's clear
The Telegraph are planning a whole series of headlines in the days to come, the
headline this morning crucially claims, and it is a claim that Mr Hancock was
given advice to test anyone going into a care home at the beginning of the
pandemic, whether from a hospital or from the community, and ignored it. And he
very strongly denies that claim. Yeah, he does. I mean, we've not seen the full
messages, so we don't know the full context or the full contents for that
matter. But the messages which have been published by The Telegraph include one
message from Mr Hancock, where he says that there's an evidence review done by
Chris Whitty, which recommends testing of everyone going into care homes and
segregation for those who are waiting for results. There was then a period of
hours where the position changed and by the evening, the government had decided
that those who were coming from hospitals should be tested and isolated. Now, as
I say, because we don't have the full messages, we don't know for sure. But the
account from from Team Hancock is very different, that there was a meeting on
that day where the then health secretary was told that the testing for everybody
going into a care home was not deliverable and that he acted as a result of
that. So my understanding is that Team Hancock completely reject the idea that
he ignored or rejected advice. But as I say, without seeing the full contents of
the messages, we can't be certain how that all played out. So to be clear about
what we know and what we don't, we do know the messages are real. There's no
dispute that these are his messages. We do know that advice was given and
accepted at the beginning of the day and not by the end of the day. The real
dispute is why that happened. Yes. And the account from from Team Hancock, as I
say, is that there was a meeting where they discussed what they could and
couldn't deliver, and that's why the advice changed over the day. But look, I
think, Nick, that this is going to be highly contentious for the for the simple
reason that for months, years, we've talked about the decisions that were made
relating to care homes, whether the government acted on all the advice it had,
how much it knew about asymptomatic transmission in April 2020 when these
decisions were being made. Of course, it's something that the public inquiry is
going to look at. But these messages are going to, I think, lead to a lot more
debate about the decisions that were taken and whether they should have been
different. Nick Erdely, our chief political correspondent. Thank you. We hope
later in the programme, it's a developing story. These messages only published
last night, Mr Hancock's rebuttal only coming in over time. We hope in the next
few hours to be able to analyse more about what the messages do and don't tell
us. The time now is 22 minutes to seven. The urgent search for the two month old
baby of Constance Martin is continuing. She and the baby's father, Mark Gordon,
who's a convicted sex offender, have been arrested in Brighton. We can talk now
to Yotunde Youssef, who's our correspondent there. Morning Yotunde. And I think
there are hundreds of police officers, aren't they, out looking for the baby,
very worried about the baby's safety. Yeah, that's right, Martha. So a major
search operation here in East Sussex, some 91 square miles of open space in the
north of Brighton is being looked at, combed through. Police vans have been
coming to and from where I am right now, which is near the Hollingbury golf
course and the Roe Valley allotments where the search is ongoing. And you know,
drones, sniffer dogs, helicopters, thermal imaging cameras have all been
involved and the Met Police are leading on this, but they're being supported by
Sussex Police. More than 200 officers are involved and they're continuing their
search this morning. And so Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested not
too far away from here, a few yards from here, after they were spotted by a
member of the public in a shop. And initially, as you know, they were arrested
on suspicion of child neglect. But then they were further arrested yesterday on
suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. Now the police believe the baby was
with them the last time they were seen, which was in New Haven on the 8th of
January. And they're asking people in that area, between Brighton and New Haven,
to contact them with any information that they might have, to check their
outbuildings, to check their gardens. Police say they're completely committed to
finding this baby and we don't know what condition he or she could be in. We
know that they haven't had any medical checks, according to police. And
obviously it's really cold temperatures, about one degree was the lowest today.
But police are still hopeful, even though they say that they feel that the baby
could have come to some harm. Yotunde, thank you. And Constance Martin's father,
Napier, has given a newspaper interview. We'll be hearing more about that after
seven o'clock. It is now 22.7. At least 29 people have been killed in a terrible
train crash in northern Greece. More than 85 people are injured. Our
correspondent, Stephanie Prentice, has been monitoring events in the last few
hours. What's the latest, Stephanie? Well, Nick, this is very much still a live
rescue scene. We've been getting updates from the fire department at the site.
They have now said that 32 bodies have been recovered from the crash and 85
people, as you said, have been injured. Now, the governor of the Thessaly
region, where this occurred, described this collision as very powerful and a
terrible scene. He described a situation where the first two carriages were
almost completely crushed. The two after that were derailed entirely. Now we
have been speaking to some of the people that were evacuated. They've been
describing having to escape these carriages. They were crawling through windows,
crawling over broken glass. A number of them described carriages on fire with
people unable to escape. So this is being described as the worst train crash
Greece has ever seen. The scenes sound utterly gruesome. Do we know how it
happened? Well, of course, along with the initial rush to the scene and the
search for survivors came the question of how this could have occurred. It was a
cargo train traveling at high speed, somehow colliding directly with a passenger
train. Now, the government did call an emergency meeting in the hours directly
after the crash. We are expecting a press conference a little bit later. We will
get a few more details from that. For now, though, we've seen footage this
morning from the scene showing rescuers picking their way through that twisted
metal and debris. It is getting lighter there, and the rescue efforts so far
have been hampered by how dark it is. We know they were going through the
carriages systematically with torches, trying to find those survivors. But as it
gets lighter, we can see they may recover some more survivors. And this is very
much still a rescue and not a recovery mission. Stephanie, thank you very much
indeed. Stephanie Prentice there. It's now 18 minutes to seven. We can turn to
what's on the morning front pages. And we've been talking with Nick Erdely about
the telegraphs reported. We'll be talking more about that throughout the
programme. Crucial is how they got these messages and what their account of why
they're publishing is. And that comes from the author, the writer, Isabel
Oakeshott. She says, under the headline, I had to release these messages to
avoid a Covid whitewash. She says the official inquiry into Covid is already
mired in a secrecy row, as lawyers busy themselves redacting civil servants'
names from thousands of documents. By the time she goes on, all those being paid
vast sums of taxpayers' money to protect reputations are finished. It's hard not
to imagine the whole thing may become a colossal whitewash. Now, what's
interesting about the way the telegraph are doing this story is they've called
it the lockdown files. The pieces are written by something called the lockdown
files team, which is an exact parallel with what they did with MPs' expenses.
And what infuriated people at the time, Martha, you may recall this, who were
involved with that story is they got very little notice of what was going to be
said about them, very little time to respond. And then the paper was able to
move on to another claim and another story. So I think that sort of controversy
likely to follow this particular release of what are nevertheless fascinating
details. Huge amount of information to digest. Other stories on the front pages.
The Times is focusing on what's been happening here in Northern Ireland. The
headline deal is not negotiable, Sunak tells the DUP. And he also talking about
Rishi Sunak appealing to Tory MPs to back him and finally get Brexit done as he
pledged yesterday to push ahead with or without the support of the DUP. An
impassioned plea to critics in his own party. The prime minister also warned MPs
that they have rejected his compromise with the EU. Voters would doubt their
ability to deliver on other issues before the next election. And the Northern
Ireland papers, the newsletter, their front page, Sunak happy to give DUP time
to make up its mind. Donaldson, that's the leader of the party, wants to get
this right. A quote from him. Front page of the Irish news. They have a picture
of Rishi Sunak at a Coca-Cola plant in Lisbon yesterday. Most exciting economic
zone. That's how the prime minister's promising the outlook for the north of the
deal works, the paper says. And the Belfast Telegraph, again, similar picture.
Rishi Sunak with his favorite cans of Coke behind him. Sunak tells the Belfast
Telegraph there's no customs border in the Irish Sea, despite what the EU says.
No morning is complete without knowing the latest about Harry and Meghan. Turn
to the front page of the Sun and you get, wait for it, Frogs It, which is the
headline the paper puts on the news that King Charles, according to the Sun, is
evicting Prince Harry and Meghan from Frogmore Cottage and has offered it to
Prince Andrew instead. I told you no morning was complete without that. No
morning complete or complete without insect news, which I'm happy to bring you
always. And page three of The Guardian. Scientists find 280 million year old
insect that may have transformed life on Earth. And this is before the mosquito
in Jurassic Park became trapped in an amber. Hundreds of ancient insects were
encased in sediment along the banks of the Silver River that flows through the
Urals. Now scientists inspecting the flattened creatures have found a handful
that appear to mark a moment in history. They're the oldest known insects to be
covered in pollen and perhaps some of the world's first plant pollinators. Look,
I'm excited about that. Aren't we all, he said. Fourteen minutes to seven. Our
main news this morning is that the Telegraph has obtained thousands of WhatsApp
messages, which the paper claims show that Matt Hancock ignored advice to get
all people entering care homes in England tested for Covid-19. He says the
allegation is wrong and the paper is presenting a distorted account of what
happened. Let's turn now to events yesterday in Parliament. MPs took a few
moments away from the political hurly-burly to reflect on the life of Betty
Boothroyd, the first so far the only female Commons speaker. Our correspondent
Sean Curran was listening. Just after four o'clock on the afternoon of Monday,
the 27th of April 1992, the House of Commons made history. The main question is
that Miss Betty Boothroyd do take the chair of this House as speaker. As many as
are of that opinion say aye. Aye. Those of the contrary opinion say no. The ayes
have it. The ayes have it. MPs from all sides stood and applauded. Listen
carefully and you can hear her use the catchphrase every speaker uses. Margaret
Beckett was in the Commons that day and rose from her place on the Labour front
bench next to the shadow Chancellor John Smith to join in the ovation. Yesterday
Dame Margaret, as she is now, joined other MPs to remember and pay tribute to
the former speaker who died this week at the age of 93. Over the last 24 hours a
number of people have asked me when I first met Betty Boothroyd and to be
perfectly frank I can't remember but I know it was at least 48 years ago because
that was when I came into this place to which she had not all that long been
elected. Betty Boothroyd was elected as the Labour MP for West Bromwich in 1973
after trying over 16 years and five elections to enter Parliament. Dame Margaret
Beckett said her friend had been dedicated to the House of Commons. She was a
revelation in the chair. She had a rich and robust voice that went with a rich
and robust character. People have said several times she was a performer and she
performed as speaker and she performed extremely well. The current speaker, Sir
Lindsay Hoyle, said Betty Boothroyd was a force to be reckoned with. One of his
trademark appeals to members who took too long to get their words out during
Prime Minister's questions was, time's up! Well Madam Speaker, we are devastated
that your time is up but on behalf of us all you will never be forgotten. You
made history so please rest in peace. The Conservative former Prime Minister,
Theresa May, said the first woman Speaker in 700 years would always have her
place in history but she said MPs who'd been in the chamber during Betty
Boothroyd's time in the chair would remember the way she'd carried out her role.
She always knew the point at which it was right to intervene with a witty
remark, a sense of humour, a gentle put down of a Member of Parliament or a
strong rebuke. And from Betty the rebukes could be very strong. The longest
serving female MP, or Mother of the House, the Labour former Cabinet Minister
Harriet Harman, said this was a sad but proud moment. A proud moment for all of
us women in the House. She was the first and only woman Speaker and she was
brilliant in the chair. A proud moment for Labour as a woman from a working
class Yorkshire background who blazed a trail for Labour in politics and a proud
moment for the House. She was an icon for Parliament. She was admired and
respected not only in this country but also abroad. Another Labour MP, Charlotte
Nicholls, said she had absolutely idolised Betty Boothroyd when she was a child.
There's a picture of me on my fourth birthday where we were allowed on the
nursery that I went to, you were allowed to go and fancy dress on your birthday
and I demanded that my parents allow me to dress as Betty Boothroyd to go into
nursery that day. She became an MP in 2019 but she never actually met Betty
Boothroyd. There was one occasion when I was a newly elected MP where she came
into the tea room and I saw her and absolutely kind of welled up. I was so kind
of starstruck by seeing in the flesh this woman who had had such a profound
impact on my life that I just couldn't get anything out, I couldn't even
introduce myself to say hello. And she reflected that it was important for
people, if they got the chance to meet their heroes, to say hello and tell them
how much they meant to them. Sean Curran reporting there on the tributes paid to
the late great Betty Boothroyd. If you want to hear more of his report you can
do so at Harper's Date on Digital and Longlife. Lovely memories of Betty
Boothroyd. Our last interviewer talking about the Queen actually, the time now
is nine minutes to seven. Russian forces have pressed forward in their drive to
capture Bakhmut in eastern Ukraine. President Zelensky has admitted that the
situation is becoming more and more difficult. Orla Geren, our international
correspondent, is actually in Bakhmut and we can talk to her now. So Orla, just
give us an update on the situation there. Martha, I should correct you there.
We're not actually in Bakhmut, we're in central Ukraine, but over the past month
during our assignment here in Ukraine, I've been inside the city twice and also
with Ukrainian forces on the outskirts. And I think, you know, President
Zelensky is running out of ways to describe how difficult it is. Night after
night he's talking about the situation in Bakhmut and how bad it has become, how
intense the fighting is. He said last night that the enemy was sending constant
waves to storm Ukrainian positions, that Russia was not counting the number of
people it was losing in the fight. Ukraine is claiming that in the last five
days, 800 Russian soldiers have been killed in and around Bakhmut. Now we cannot
confirm those figures and we also don't know how many Ukrainian troops have been
killed over the same period. But we do know that the fighting is intense and
becoming worse and that the Russians are concentrating on trying to take this
city, moving in, attempting to move in from the north. And just explain to us
why it is so important. Well over the past seven months there's been a sustained
Russian bid to get control of Bakhmut, which is an industrial city, a salt
mining city, which used to have about 70,000 people. Now we were in the city
back in September several times when the shelling was already very intense and
the population had more or less emptied out. It has become a symbol of Ukrainian
resistance. It has been referred to by President Zelensky as Ukraine's fortress.
And of course the fact that Ukrainian forces resisted for so long became a real
theme here and a source of pride and gave rise to this social media slogan,
Bakhmut Holds. But there is also a strategic importance to hanging on to
Bakhmut. It's not just about politics and symbolism. When we were inside the
city, Ukrainian forces stressed to us that by continuing to defend it they were
bogging down the Russians, they were tying them down, they were making it
difficult, if not impossible, for them to move on from Bakhmut. Now if the
Russians did manage to take the city, there is high ground just outside Bakhmut,
they could move their artillery weapons to that high ground and from there they
could strike closer to bigger cities here. But worth saying we have been
predicting for a long time, and myself included, that Bakhmut would probably
fall, that the Ukrainians would have to withdraw. We're not seeing that yet and
in fact over the weekend we know that Ukrainian reinforcements have been sent
in. And if Bakhmut was to fall, the two cities that the Russians would then be
targeting, Kramatorsk and Slovyansk, are much bigger. So it would be a huge
endeavour for the Russians to try and go from Bakhmut and move forward. You're
talking about a very long process. Orla, many thanks. Now five to seven. The
police have lost track of more than 700 sex offenders in the last three years.
That's the finding of new research by the BBC. Our Midlands correspondent Phil
Mackie can tell us more. Lost how, Phil? Well, they've just disappeared off the
sex offenders register, Nick. It's thought that a lot of them have done so by
going and changing their names. Now you're allowed to do that, but you're
supposed to tell the authorities if you have. In fact, you're supposed to let
them know of any change in circumstance, not just a change of name but a change
of address. And you're supposed to turn up at a police station every year just
to prove that you are living where you're saying you're living and are using the
name that you're supposed to. So this is 729 people over three years. The BBC
shared data unit sent out freedom of information requests to all 45 UK police
forces. It got responses from 31. So the likely number is slightly higher than
that if we'd had responses from everybody. For context, there are around 70,000
people on the sex offenders register. So we're talking about somewhere between 1
and 2 percent of all of them have disappeared, have gone missing, are no longer,
their whereabouts are no longer known by police forces, which doesn't sound an
awful big number. But actually 700 and perhaps up to as many as 1,000 is
significant and it's causing great concern particularly for campaigners who
represent victims of sex abuse who argue that this just simply shouldn't be
allowed in any circumstances. And they want the law changed. Sarah Champion, the
Labour MP who's been prominent in this debate, is simply saying you shouldn't be
allowed to change your name if you're a sex offender. Is that right? Well, I
spoke to Sarah Champion and she said that actually the rules as they stand, if
enforced properly, could still work. Her argument is just as much about the
resources that are given to police forces to monitor the situation. She said
there should be more. She's raised it with the Home Secretary. In fact, she's
chairing a debate in the House of Commons tomorrow about this issue. And it's
the Safeguarding Alliance, which is the charity that represents sex abuse
survivors, is taking 36 women for whom, who have been abused by people who've
subsequently gone on to re-offend having changed their names, along to sit in
the chamber during that debate. They certainly want the rules changed. But there
are people who represent charities that work with sex offenders to rehabilitate
them saying that changing a name is part of getting on with their lives, helping
them not to re-offend. And about 1,500, we think, have done this legitimately,
have done it and told the authorities. The problem with that is roughly half
that number again haven't done so and have disappeared, many of whom have
thought to go abroad. Phil Mackie there, our correspondent. Thank you. And the
time now is coming up to two minutes day. Time for the weather with Sarah Keith-
Lucas. Hi, Sarah. Hi there, Martha. Well, it's a fairly cool, cloudy day with
some drizzly spots of rain out there as we mark the first day of meteorological
spring today. Now, across England and Wales this morning, we have got a touch of
frost around, especially for the likes of Kent and Sussex with clearer skies,
but most places seeing a bulk of clouds, so just about frost free. Some
outbreaks of showery rain, particularly across parts of northern England. They
should tend to ease a little bit through the day. Through the Midlands into
Wales and southern England, just some drizzly, showery spots, but they're well
scattered, so some dry weather in between too. And top temperatures here between
about seven to nine degrees, but it will feel cooler today when you add on that
brisk northeasterly wind. For Scotland and for Northern Ireland, touch of frost
for the Highlands first thing. Best of any sunshine today will be developing for
the Northern Isles, but also the Western Isles, parts of Northern Ireland seeing
some sunny spells breaking through. It is going to be a fairly cool feeling day
under that cloud, though around about six to eight degrees for most, and you
will notice the strength of that breeze too. Now, over the next few days then,
the weather looking generally fairly dry and settled with lighter winds too, but
it does look like things are going to turn colder and potentially increasingly
wintry as we head through the course of the weekend and on into next week too.
Sarah, thank you. From BBC iPlayer, step right in, perfect timing. The East End
is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter! The order has entered the night. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you are listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.