TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Ba-da-duh-a-dum-dum da-dum da-ahhhh Ba-ba-da- swoją swą cały czas Ba-ba-da-dum
da-dum da-dah ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ TBS Radio, Morimoto Takeru on standby. Odekake
Headline. ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ TBS Radio, Keiichi Katsushika on standby. TBS Radio,
Keiichi Katsushika on standby. TBS Radio, Keiichi Katsushika on standby. TBS
Radio, Keiichi Katsushika on standby. ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪
♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪ ♪♪...............................................................
....................................... You will not obey the God. This program
is brought to you by Charles Stanley's teaching, In Touch. What kind of God is
the Christian God? Many Americans say that God is like a kind old man, and He
will give them anything they want. Some people are strict judges, and some
people are waiting for the punishment. Some people are far away, and no matter
what happens, they do not care. Some people see God like that. Some people are
mistaken about God, even if they are Christians. If we believe that God is a
strict and ungrateful person, then that will affect our way of life. Today, Dr.
Stanley will tell us why we should live a pure and pure life before God. When
you face a difficult situation in your life, and you have to decide whether to
obey God or not, what kind of attitude will you take? Will you obey God? Or will
you think, for example, this is too difficult, I will not obey God, I will lie
so that I can get out of this difficult situation. When you live a pure and pure
life, you will not be able to bear the thought of obeying God or not. Of course,
you may fail. Sometimes you can't do what God tells you to do. But you can't
just obey God or not. You will realize that this is not the way God wants you to
live. There are many times when you make excuses or choose not to obey God. But
you don't know why you choose to obey God. Is it because of your duty? Is it
because you need it? Why? When you don't obey God or when you obey for the wrong
reasons, you may be made to think that you don't know what spiritual influence
there is. Please open the book of the work of the Apostles. Before that, let's
talk about the background. When Peter and John went to the temple, there was a
man who had been paralyzed for 40 years and was seeking a way out. In 3 and 6
Peter says, I don't have a gold or silver, but give me something. Walk in the
name of Jesus Christ, the Lamb. When Peter took his hand and made him stand, he
stood up and was healed. Everyone around him was surprised. Then Peter and John
were taken to the leaders and the elders and asked what they were doing. Then
they answered as follows. In 4, 19, 20 Peter and John said to them, Rather than
obeying God, it is better to obey you to judge whether it is right before God.
We must not speak of what we have seen or heard. What they saw was, of course,
the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ and the resurrection of the Lord. Then they
were released. Then they repented again. Hundreds of people were saved. And they
were arrested again. They were put in a prison cell, but the Lord's servant took
them out. When the servants came, they found that they were not in prison. Then
someone came and reported that they were in the garden. They were taken back to
the leaders and the elders. Then what happened? Look at Ephesians 5, 27-32. When
they brought people to the garden, the Lord's servant asked them, What is the
meaning of this, when you have made it clear that it is not a teaching by that
name? You have spread your teaching throughout Jerusalem, and you are trying to
make us bear the responsibility of that person's blood. Then the people
answered, We should obey God rather than people. Our Lord resurrected Jesus,
whom you killed by hanging on a cross. And the Lord gave you this Jesus as your
Savior to forgive Israel of their sin. We are witnesses to that. The spirit that
God gave to those who obeyed him is also a witness to that. Let's think about it
here. What is it that makes Peter's passion to obey God rather than to obey
people? Have you ever had to say that? Have you ever been put in a situation
where you have to say, I should obey God, not you? What is the passion that
makes Peter to obey God? It is not a duty or a sense of responsibility. It is
not because he is afraid of God. Then what is the reason? The first reason to
obey God is because he fears God. It is to recognize what kind of person God is.
When he was taken to the leaders, let's see what the disciples said. The work of
the Apostles, Chapter 4, verse 8 to 12. Then Peter was filled with the Spirit
and said to them, The leaders of the people and the elders, we are being
examined today about the good work done to the sick man, and what healed him.
You and all the people of Israel should know this. The man who is standing
before you is Jesus Christ, who was resurrected from the dead by God. The stone
that was thrown away by those who built the house became the stone of the cross.
No one else can save him. Under heaven, there is no one else who can save us. Do
you know why Peter said this? Because he was worshiping Jesus Christ. He knew
what kind of person God was. We worship Jesus Christ knowing what kind of person
he is. We look at what kind of person he is. He is the one who created heaven
and earth. He is our Savior. He is far more excellent than the great Pharisee
who threatened Peter. The second reason we follow God is because we are purely
grateful. Our Father God, through the Virgin Mary and Jesus Christ, has
delivered us, made us realize our sins, and given us the gift of faith. What did
God do for us? He saved us. He loved us. He gave us glory. He made us righteous
and holy. He put us in the family of God. We believed and accepted Jesus Christ
as our Savior. We are all children of God. And our Father God has used the Holy
Spirit as a witness that we are all children of God. God has given us a house in
heaven. He has written our names in the Book of Life. When we think about what
God has done for us, we cannot think about not obeying God. Obeying God is a
pure expression of gratitude. The third reason is when Peter said, I should obey
God rather than people, I think this was also in Peter's heart. It is love for
God. Peter certainly loved God. In the most critical moment of Jesus' life, the
moment when he needed his most friend, Peter said, I don't know God. Luke 22,
verse 61. The Lord turned and looked at Peter. Peter remembered the Lord's
words, saying, You will not know me until the rooster crows today. He must have
been thinking of the Lord at that time. His repentance was just to keep crying.
But everyone, Peter loved Jesus. And because of his love, he had courage and
conviction. He was able to say, I should obey God rather than people. Why do you
obey God? Because you are the absolute sovereign of the universe, and you know
that you are the Father of the heavens. Because you have done what God has done
for you, and you are full of gratitude for what you will do from now on. Because
you love the Lord, and you are content with the love of the Lord alone. The
fourth reason for obeying God is because you trust God. What do you think Jesus,
Peter and other disciples said? Because they trusted God. You can't obey God if
you don't trust Him. Here is the reason why we don't obey God. We can't trust
God. If you don't trust God, you will have the following thoughts. God is not as
God says. I know better than God. God can't solve this, so He must do it
Himself. I can't wait for God because I think better. God doesn't know
everything. If God knows what I know, He will do it for me. If you don't trust
God, you can't obey Him. We should obey God because we trust Him. If God says
this, He will do it. God does it no matter what the situation is. We will
encounter situations where we can't find the answer. But God has the answer no
matter what the situation is. God never gets confused, faces difficulties, or is
late. God never gets confused, panics, or is disappointed no matter what happens
in our life. God loves us and wants the best for us. If we trust God, wait for
Him, and obey Him, God will give us the best. God has answered us when we
trusted Him and asked Him for the best. God never forsakes you. If you love God,
you should obey Him. If you trust Him, you should obey Him. This is the fifth
reason we should obey God. When we obey God, we can be at peace. Let's think
about this. Peter and John stood before those who accused them. 1 Peter 4.19-20
Peter and John said to them, We should not only listen to God, but also to you.
We should not only listen to God, but also to you. They said boldly, We should
not only listen to God, but also to you. When we sin against God, our conscience
starts to work. Not only that, but our thoughts become disorganized. Sin causes
doubt, fear, anxiety, and dissatisfaction. Sin makes us make foolish decisions.
On the other hand, when we obey God, we feel peace. God gives us peace that we
cannot get from anything else. We should obey God because we feel peace. Even
though we are going through difficulties and suffering, God does not smile at
us. He is calm. Why? Some people think like this. It must be very hard, but why
can we be at peace? When we follow the way of God, we do not care about the
situation. God gives us confidence, strength, courage, boldness, and a sense of
fulfillment. There is no place where you can be sure of that. The devil may try
to get you to run away. But let the spirit in you remember that you are walking
in front of the absolute Lord of the universe. I am here, I am with you, I give
you strength, I protect you. I am walking with you, I bless you, I give you
glory, I go far beyond your thoughts. When we walk in front of the Lord, God's
face is a proof. But if we do not follow God, we will always have worries,
anxieties, and fears. And we will make foolish decisions. When we follow God, we
feel secure, and that supports us. No one but God can give us that. No one can
promise us that. No matter how much hardship, difficulty, pain, or wound you
have, no matter how you feel, God's presence is in your home, and he knows that
you are protected. If you are living in fear, ask yourself the following
question. What is the problem with my past? What am I doing wrong in the past?
What is binding me? By doing so, you will know why you do not follow God, and
why you do not feel secure. Listen carefully. The way of God, who is flying in
love, does not allow God's children to live in insecurity, and does not allow
them to have confidence, confidence, and confidence. If you are not following
God, you are not following God's plan. In such a case, God will do something
necessary to bring you back to yourself. When you know that you are walking in
the center of God's presence, you feel a sense of security. That is why we
follow God. When you feel secure, you can die without fear. Even in sickness,
you can be sure that you are in the presence of God. If you are in fear,
anxiety, or doubt, ask yourself the following question. Why am I, the child of
God, afraid? The Father of Heaven, who promised me that I would not be close to
any evil, is a child of God who is loved unconditionally. Why am I afraid? If
you examine your heart, you will find that there is something that should not be
there, and something is missing. You do not feel secure without following God's
plan. Think about it. Now is the time to make a decision to follow the Father of
Heaven. If you do not believe Jesus as your Savior, if you are ready to confess
your sins, pray as follows. Father, your words are right. I have done it my way.
I was very stubborn. But I am not happy, nor satisfied. I have no joy or peace.
I am worried about this and that. Please forgive my sins. Please save me. If you
want to pray, God will forgive you and save you. And you will not be afraid of
God. Remember that God is the Father of Heaven who loves you. Jesus Christ is
your Savior and your Lord. And the Holy Spirit will help you to be a person who
is in God's will. Those who follow God can receive the kingdom of heaven. Those
who do not follow God's plan are foolish. Those who follow God's plan are
blessed. Dr. Stanley suggested that we should learn the Bible and learn to
understand God. When we understand God, we will be able to serve and obey God.
In Touch Ministries presents the teaching of Charles Stanley, who touches the
world with his passion for God and love for people. Charles Stanley, a pastor of
the Church of God in New York, USA. He has been a pastor for over 50 years. He
has been a pastor for over 50 years. He has been a pastor for over 50 years. He
has been a pastor for over 50 years. He is a fortune teller. Be positive. Oh Oh
Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Oh Kokoro ni hikari yo Anata no kokoro ni
hikari yo o todoke suru, kokoro ni hikari yo no jikan desu. Kokoro no mado o
hiraite, kiyorakana hikari yo o oketori kudasai. Japanese translation by John
Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow
Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow Japanese
translation by John Barrow Japanese translation by John Barrow