TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 at 11.59pm on Saturday 18th March 2023. Good luck. BBC News at 9 o'clock. It's
understood that the off-duty police officer seriously injured in a shooting in
County Tyrone warned children in the area to run away as the attack was
happening. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was targeted by two gunmen
after coaching football practice at a sports centre in Oma last night. Three men
have been arrested. Police say dissidents, Republicans, are the primary focus of
their enquiry. In the past hour the UN's General Assembly has overwhelmingly
backed a motion calling on Russia to withdraw immediately from Ukraine. The vote
has no legal bearing. One of Moscow's key allies, China, abstained. The
disgraced Hollywood film producer Harvey Weinstein has been jailed for a further
16 years for raping and sexually assaulting a woman in 2013. The 70-year-old was
already serving a 23-year sentence for a separate conviction. His victim, in the
most recent case, described how Weinstein's actions had broken her into a
million pieces. Our correspondent Sophie Long was at the hearing in Los Angeles.
Unexpectedly we actually heard from Harvey Weinstein himself, just as Judge Lisa
Lynch was about to hand down her sentence. He said, I maintain that I am
innocent. I did not rape this woman. She purged herself, indicating that she had
lied in court. Please don't give me a life sentence. The American actor Alec
Baldwin has pleaded not guilty to the involuntary manslaughter of a
cinematographer who was shot and killed on the set of one of his movies. Helena
Hutchins was hit in the chest by a prop gun Mr. Baldwin fired while making the
Western rust. The Environment Secretary Trey's coffee has suggested that turnips
could be a suitable alternative while other vegetables remain in short supply.
She told MPs that consumers should cherish homegrown produce, as some
supermarkets limit the number of cucumbers and tomatoes people can buy. The
football world has been paying tribute to John Matson, one of the sport's most
recognisable voices following his death at the age of 77. In a 50-year career
with the BBC, he covered ten World Cups and nearly two and a half thousand
matches. BBC News. Good night, Radio 4. Here's Victoria Gill with this week's
BBC Inside Science. Hello. This week we are heading to the bottom of the world
because there's some very strange and quite disturbing things happening in
Antarctica. The impacts of climate change on this vast, frozen continent are
coming to light like never before thanks to satellite imaging, submarine,
sensor-laden robots and just scientists with their very insulated boots on the
ground. In the last week it was announced that there's now less sea ice
surrounding the Antarctic continent than at any time since the 1970s, a global
warming low. And what happens in Antarctica doesn't stay in Antarctica. The vast
white surface of sea ice reflects the sun's rays back into space. And as sea ice
expands and contracts, it drives ocean currents that regulate our whole climate
system. It even drives the formation of storms. And the biggest source of
uncertainty about future sea level rise, something that will affect all of us,
is just how much of the continent's vast landlocked ice sheet will actually
melt. It's a huge, important and complicated climate puzzle. So luckily I have
an excellent climate scientist here with me to help unpick it. Dr Tamsin Edwards
is an expert in modelling climate change, particularly for ice sheets and
glaciers. She also co-presents Radio 4's 39 Ways to Save the Planet. Tamsin,
thank you very much for joining us. Thanks for having me. So I'm going to get
right into mine your expertise. We've talked about sea ice, we've talked about
glaciers and ice sheets, land ice and sea ice, quite different things. What's
the fundamental difference? The main thing really is that we have this floating
ice on the surface of the oceans, that's the sea ice. So when that melts,
because it's floating, it basically doesn't really contribute to sea level rise.
But it is important, as you said at the top of the programme, for things like
reflecting the sun's rays away and keeping the planet a bit cooler up at the
poles, up and down at the poles. And then the land ice is the ice that's on,
well, on the land. So that's what we often call the ice caps. Scientists will
call them ice sheets for Greenland and Antarctica, the really huge ice caps, and
then the glaciers in the mountains. And those are the ones that because they're
not touching the water and floating and it already, when they melt due to
climate change, they contribute to sea level rise. But what's happening with
that glacier ice, with that landlocked ice? Because we had some new information
about Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica just in the last week, didn't we,
about its sensitivity to the temperature of the sea? And what new clues are we
getting there? That's right. Antarctica is a really unique and special place in
all kinds of ways. If we think about the glaciers around the world in the
mountains and the Greenland ice sheet up at the top of the planet, those sitting
on land, they kind of are mostly affected by the temperatures of the air. But
Antarctica, a lot of it is sitting on bedrock that is underwater. So a lot of
that ice is touching the oceans and therefore it's sensitive not only to what
the air temperatures are, but the oceans as well. It isn't just a case actually
of you know, you warm the planet with the greenhouse gases as we are doing and
the air temperature goes up and the ocean temperature goes up. There's all kinds
of extra complications because of how the water currents are circulating around
and the saltiness of the water and even the ozone layer, the hole in the ozone
layer kind of contributes to the complexity. So it's a unique place, but
incredibly complicated to understand. Is it right that we're kind of seeing a
more linear sort of parallel climate change response in the Arctic? We're seeing
it warming, you know, even faster than we previously thought. But the response
to climate change in Antarctica has been a little strange and different and
varied. That's right. What we worry about is once you start to go down these
pathways of change in Antarctica, those regions can potentially undergo a kind
of irreversible change. We sort of set the ball rolling down the hill and those
glaciers actually just keep melting and keep losing ice into the oceans and it
becomes very hard to stop over sort of hundreds or thousands of years. So that's
the thing we're really worried about. We don't quite know how far down that path
of setting that off we are, but if we do, the consequences for sea level rise
and coastlines around the world are very, very serious. Yeah. And one of the
people who is working on the ground in Antarctica in that frozen isolated
continent is British Antarctic survey scientist Nadia Frontier, who is a marine
biologist at Rothera Research Station, has the job of diving in the extremely
cold Antarctic waters to study the effect of climate change on marine life
there. Nadia centres this audio snippet from a day working at Rothera. Today is
Tuesday morning and the sun is shining high in the sky and reflecting off the
snow like beautiful diamond particles. You can hear the sound of it crunching
under our feet. I'm helping with conducting some long-term monitoring of the
South polar skewer population, which is an oceanic seabird. So they're flying
above us just over a beautiful ocean expanse of brash ice. So that's lots of
bits of broken up either glacial ice or bits of sea ice, but it's just littering
the water and giving this gorgeous effect of a mosaic. And you can hear we've
got the call of an adult skewer, which we are slowly approaching. So the
beautiful thing about being a marine biologist in Antarctica is that you have
the opportunity to work and help out on quite a variety of different research
projects. So what I'm doing right now is something more terrestrial. So that's
land-based in helping with this seabird monitoring. But as a marine biologist
here, my main aim is to study the benthic community. And that's everything that
lives on the sea floor, ranging from seaweed to invertebrates such as sea
cucumber and anemones. And what I really love about being in a small research
station is that you have the opportunity to help out with so many different
projects. And it just brings a beautiful collaboration and atmosphere that is so
crucial for Antarctic science. So on our island, Adelaide Island, we are
overlooking the West Antarctic Peninsula. And that is to the south of us, a
beautiful chain of mountains, but also quite frustrating because we can't
actually get there. We are separated by the Lebeth Fjord system, which is
probably about five kilometres wide. So we are detached from the mainland. But
in this Fjord, we can see a humpback whale that is logging. So logging is a
behaviour that whales adopt when they are resting at the surface. We get quite a
lot of humpback whales here. And the polar summer starts from November to about
February. And it's really common to have at least five humpback whale sightings
a day. And now we have just walked down from the Antarctic specially protected
area onto a rocky beach. So you should be able to hear the sound of waves
breaking against small fragments of icebergs. We are watching a Weddle seal swim
in the water with its head up against the backdrop of absolutely huge striking
tabular icebergs, which are probably about 10 metres high. There's also a
collection of Adelie penguins on the beach. And one of them is trying to swim in
the snow. And behind us, we've got a proud fur seal that is sitting on a rock. I
do feel really lucky being a researcher here in Antarctica because we have the
opportunity to see habitats that first not many people do see and that are just
absolutely incredible and fragile. And it just drives this fire in me that the
importance of protecting marine ecosystems is so great. And because there are so
few Antarctic researchers, the data we collect and the projects that we do have
even more of a weight. And we've just seen a humpback whale logging again at the
surface. That was Nadia Frontier in Antarctica. So Tamsin, why is it important?
We've had so much technological advance in our efforts to study Antarctica. But
why is it really important to have people working on the ground in research
bases there? It's really important. Sadly, I've never been myself. Have you not?
That was going to be my next question. All my work is really in the kind of
maths and computer modelling end of things. So sadly, I've never been an
identifying if I ever will. I think it's important, partly because I don't know
if automated technologies could ever cover all of the incredible complexity of
what scientists are doing. I mean, they might drill for an ice core and then
take it up and analyse it immediately in a laboratory, in a tent, in the field
basically. And robots and technology and so forth obviously break in those
incredibly harsh conditions. I remember the project, the Lake Ellsworth
campaign, I think it was their hot water boilers that they used to melt down
water, to drill into the ice with hot water. I think they kept breaking, they
ran out of fuel. This is tough stuff. People are hardy and often technology can
let us down because of the incredible conditions. I think also just scientists
need to see these places personally. That's why I'd love to go one day. You want
to see really the details. What are the crevasses you see in those ice shelves
that you're trying to understand in your computer model? What are those lakes of
meltwater look like over the ice shelves that might widen those crevasses and
lead to that ice shelf breaking up? If you're studying biology, what are those
penguins doing? You need to be there. You can't just do it with satellites or
robots. We need to see this place to really understand the uniqueness of the
environment, the way that it doesn't look like anywhere else. It's almost like
its own planet, isn't it? To really get that sense of wanting to take care of
the place and why it's so important to preserve it and keep it pristine.
Absolutely. What do you think people don't realise about it? I was reading about
the ocean current circulation and how that impacts the temperatures in the UK
and makes the UK relatively warmer than places at similar latitudes. The idea of
Antarctica making the UK a bit warmer seems very strange and counterintuitive.
What have you come across in your work that you think maybe people up in
Northern Europe don't realise about the direct impact of Antarctica on our own
climate, our weather, our lives? It's a great question. The whole world is
connected. Antarctica is affected by climate change. The ice that melts from the
Antarctic ice sheet actually causes more sea level rise around the north part of
the planet, the North Pole, the near the south, which is an extraordinary,
completely opposite thing to what we think. That's basically because of an
effect of gravity. When you lose ice from Antarctica, the water around it
doesn't have such a strong gravitational attraction. It sinks locally close to
Antarctica when you lose ice from Antarctica. That water then gets distributed
around the global oceans and causes more sea level rise in the UK than off the
coastline of Antarctica, which is extraordinary and awesome. Absolutely
fascinating. People would really hear about it. Thank you, James, and we'll be
back with you. But now Antarctica is absolutely vast as well, more than 13
million square kilometres, 50 times the size of the UK. The only way that we can
get a view of the extent of the sea ice that surrounds it and the whole of the
continent is from space. Gathering and interpreting all that satellite data is
something that our next guest, Dr. Rachel Tilling from the Cryospheric Sciences
Lab at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, knows all about. We can use the
satellite data to give us the area of the sea ice, both in the Arctic up north
and in the Antarctic down south. Every year we see these news articles about the
Arctic and record minimum lows, but we don't often see that in the Antarctic
because it's a very different region. This year we are seeing a record low area
in Antarctic sea ice extent. It's a very newsworthy result that we're seeing.
It's not just about the extent, is it? It's about the thickness. If you're
looking at the changes in the ice overall, can you get that with satellites too?
I say it's all about the thickness. That's what I do most days because we have
this incredible, and it is an incredible long-term data set of sea ice extent in
the polar regions. But that just gives us a two-dimensional picture. It tells us
the area of the ice. To really know how the ice is changing long-term, we need
to be able to measure the thickness of the ice as well, which gives us the
volume and a much better idea of how much loss of ice we're seeing. I can kind
of logically see, taking a picture from space, you've got this measure of the
area. How do you go into the thickness with satellite measurement? It's not a
direct measurement. We use what we call an altimeter satellite, and that's a
satellite that sends out a signal, either radar or laser, and reflects from a
surface and tells you the height of that surface. In sea ice-covered regions, it
can tell you the height of the ice surface, but it also tells you the height of
the ocean surface between these big blocks of sea ice. You can difference those
to know the freeboard. The freeboard is just the height of the ice above the
ocean. Then we just apply a simple equation to transfer that to sea ice
thickness. What challenges does Antarctica present for you as a scientist in
particular? It is much more challenging because even though we're using the same
theory, and it would be very fair to assume that what happens in the Arctic also
happens in the Antarctic. They're both big, cold places. The sea ice in
Antarctica is actually very different because if you think of the geography of
those two regions, the Arctic is an ocean that's very much protected by land
pretty much all around, whereas the Antarctic is a landmass surrounded by ocean.
You get a lot more snowfall because you've got a lot more evaporation coming off
the ocean surrounding the ice. That snow cover is what really gives us the
problem. It's incredibly thick. It's not just a nice uniform depth of snow. You
get a lot of layers, a lot of deformation. We really need to understand exactly
where our instruments are reflecting from because we can't just assume that it's
reflecting from the ice surface, for example, because it may be reflecting from
somewhere in that very complex snowpack. At present, we don't have the data on
ground to help us say for sure where the radar signal is coming from. Right.
Such a vast constant, such a big place as well with all those layers. The idea
that snow is a problem in Antarctica is, I guess, quite an intuitive problem.
How variable and how complicated and thick can those layers of snow that are
muddying your signal be? The snow can be incredibly thick. I've been down to
Antarctica in the Weddle Sea, which is a little sea near the Antarctic
Peninsula. I have spent a good day digging through snow pits on Antarctic sea
ice. I've dug down two meters. I've stood in the snow pit. It's been towering
above my head and I still haven't hit the ice surface yet. This is the thing
that really complicates our satellite returns. You dig through a snow pit this
deep and there's so many different layers, so many places the radar signal could
be reflecting from. We have something that's hundreds of kilometers up in space
and we're trying to figure out where in the snow we're actually getting a return
from. I spend a lot of my life trying to figure that out. Apart from sending
Rachel to Antarctica to dig to see where the snow ends and the ice starts, how
are you getting around that technically? We're also doing a lot of airborne
campaigns. The European Space Agency were just down in Antarctica flying over
the continent but also over the sea ice. At NASA, we were up in the Arctic
flying over Arctic sea ice and we essentially put mini versions of the
instruments that we have on satellites on these planes, whether that's a radar
or a laser, and fly over and along satellite tracks to get measurements not just
from the satellite but from these smaller airborne instruments that can give us
a better idea of what's actually going on in the snowpack. That was Rachel
Tilling. Now, Tom's and Rachel and her team are looking to fill in some of the
gaps in our knowledge with this satellite technology. Those direct measures all
feed into these models that your focus is on refining so that we can get the
very best models to show us what is happening to the global climate system. How
good are those models proving to be and what is your work focusing on to make
them even more accurate and a sort of more accurate forecast of what we're
facing? They are really good. They've given us the big picture on global warming
for many years now. My particular interest actually is trying to put error bars
on those predictions. You don't just run your computer model once into the
future. You run it many times with slightly different kind of settings to see
what are the whole range of plausible futures, what's the biggest climate change
and the smallest climate change that we might see, what's the biggest sea level
rise and the smallest. That's kind of an art in itself. It's a science, it's a
mathematical field to understand that uncertainty in the future. Then again, the
next stage is we don't just run those computer models and say, oh well, we'll
just believe them and that's what it is. Obviously, they're based on physics and
lots of chemistry and biology and geology and all this science that we've
gathered, but we also test them. We run them, for example, to reproduce the last
several decades of change around Antarctica. Then we compare that with the data
that we've got from satellites, from the 1970s or the 1990s, sometimes a little
bit further back, certainly further back. We have lots of data around the planet
from ships, voyages and weather stations and all sorts. We test them when we
say, well, how well did that climate model do in the past? We try to predict the
past, if you like, and we kind of score them and we only use the best versions
of the models to really found our predictions for the future. The more data, the
better that goes into testing and feeding into those models, I suppose.
Absolutely. These are complex places. One thing I'd maybe like to say is that we
still need to understand climate change to adapt. We know that we're going to
keep having more climate change in the future because it's going to be hard to
turn around our emissions very quickly. We need to adapt to sea level rise. The
seas are going to keep rising even if we cut emissions very quickly. We asked if
we were going to get changes in our weather for years to decades. We need to
understand what the future will look like as well as cutting the emissions to
keep to the Paris Agreement targets and so forth, net zero pledges and things.
It's no longer about trying to work out the what if the emissions were very high
or very low, because as a planet we're aiming for low emissions. It's also about
what climate change is still in the pipeline because we're not going to be able
to stop it immediately because we're still going to be emitting. It's going to
take some time to turn the ship around. Yeah, the detail will show us what sort
of a world we'll actually be living in in the near term, right? Exactly. Thank
you, Tamzin. And finally, with all of that data, we are trying to make sense of
what's happening in Antarctica. But one polar researcher and sound artist has
taken a very different approach to understanding the vast frozen continent. He's
been using recordings captured over years with floating microphones. His name is
Dr. Geraint Reiss Whittaker and he's composed a novel sonic take on how human
activity is affecting life in the cold polar seas. Our climate reporter Georgina
Ranad has been listening. Hello to you, wherever you are in the world. What you
are about to hear is something that has never been heard before. Scientists have
conducted the world's first interview with a humpback whale community from the
Arctic. In this extract from the conversation, the whales discuss the impact
that industrial scale seismic air gun oil and gas surveys has had on them and
their homes. The next voices you will hear will be those of the whales. The main
bombing was continuously in the same area. The highway had been hit there badly
with a bomb, which I found I had to divert again. So frightened, eh? And when
they were passing, I heard it come down and their home got a direct hit. So what
you've listened to is a piece I created called First Contact. I'm from Swansea,
South Wales, which during the Second World War was completely flattened really
by the bombs. And so I thought, OK, what can I do? Use the voices of the people
talking about the devastation of bombing in Swansea as if it was the voices of
the whales talking about the devastation of the impact on air guns having on
them. This is Dr Geraint-Rice Whittaker. He's taken underwater sounds recorded
in the Arctic and Antarctic and turned these little herd noises into immersive
compositions about these places we don't often think about. For this one, he
chose the sound of air guns blasted at sea. So essentially, ships that go back
and forth for two main purposes. One is to look for oil and gas, and then the
other is for scientific surveys. So even scientists use these ships. And what
they do, they emit this massive impulse of air into the ocean to read what's
going on underneath. And so immediately when I heard it, it sounded like a war
on the environment, a war on the ocean. Space pollution is disrupting marine
life. Studies are finding it causes a loss of hearing sensitivity, physical
injury, and increased stress to mammals like whales. Some even stop eating.
Whales use sound over long distances to communicate. But as scientists record
higher levels of human-made noise in the oceans, they're finding that animal
behavior is being disturbed. Due to things like, for example, the winter ice
melting, meaning in the Arctic, for example, shipping lanes are increasing, the
oceans are actually getting louder, and we are having a detrimental impact.
Geryn, I know you've collected quite a few sounds, but how can they actually
help us tackle climate change? Well, I'll tell you what, Georgina, how about we
listen to some of them first? For example, this is the raw seal. This is the
Weddle seal. And this next sound is a really interesting one. It's the singing
ice. So singing ice basically happens when the ice contracts and expands due to
temperature rising, and it creates this noise as the movement of the ice shifts.
So we started there with almost otherworldly sounds of animals, or that seal
call that sounded like a dance beat. But the ones I've found really powerful are
the sounds you might associate with climate change. As we know, scientific
papers are telling us that the Arctic is warming four times faster than other
parts of the world. And when I hear the crunching and thunderous cracking, I can
really visualize the ice breaking and falling into the water. I think it's
really important when we talk about these issues for things we can never really
understand, is using things like storytelling and dystopian narratives to put
ourselves in that position to not only help us to try to think how would it make
us feel, but also it kind of hopefully draws the audience in as well and puts
them in the shoes of the whales. Obviously, whales don't wear shoes, but puts in
the mindset, at least, for them to start thinking about how can we imagine the
impact of what's going on. I was Georgina Ranard and some very unusual polar
sounds there. Tamsin, what do you think of, you know, you dealing the hard data
and getting that hard data into a form where we can really use it to work out
how the world is changing? What do you think of taking that very different
approach to, you know, where he's heard some sounds and treatments of sounds
that I've certainly never heard before? It's incredibly important. I absolutely
place art around science and understanding the world very, very highly. I come
from a family that has a lot of artists in and we need beauty, we need story, we
need imagination to really fully understand this planet. We've got some amazing
schemes where poets and artists can go to the polar regions. There are kind of
various expeditions that they can go on that come back and talk about these
places in ways that move us, that might move us to protect them, that move us to
understand them better, to think about the bigger picture, to think about the
long term future, to think about the long term past. One of my favourite films,
probably my favourite film ever is Werner Herzog's Encounters at the End of the
World. Oh, fabulous. I think he did go on one of these expeditions funded for
artists to go. Yeah. And he filmed talking about why scientists need to go, you
know, why we need to see scientists there. He went and filmed all these
scientists in Antarctica and it's just the most glorious film. It's not a
documentary. This is a kind of common misunderstanding that it's a documentary
about Antarctica and then I think some people get very cross when they think
it's not, doesn't stick to documentary style, shall we say. I was talking to a
couple of Antarctic researchers who weren't a fan of the sort of slightly
eccentric way in which some of the researchers may have come across in that
film. I also think that's a wonderful film and a kind of an interesting
perspective on Antarctica and on that sort of remote field research that you
don't normally get. I suppose that's what this sound artist is going for as
well, a totally different point of view. Absolutely. The point is it's not about
documenting the kind of banal detail of the day to day, it's about finding the
deeper truth. You know, it's about constructing the story of Antarctica and what
it feels like to be there or what it means for humanity to be there, to be
trying to understand it. So it's not about let's just make a video diary. Anyone
can make a video diary. What you need is an artist to reveal that deeper truth
about a place, about our place in Antarctica. Well terms in Edwards, you have
definitely constructed the story of Antarctica very beautifully for us today. I
really appreciate your time. Thank you very much for joining us. My pleasure.
Thank you so much. Well that is all we have time for this week. Inside Science
is produced in collaboration with the Open University and we will be emerging
from the frozen south to be back with you next week. BBC Inside Science was
presented by Victoria Gill and produced by Emily Bird. In a moment Melvin Bragg
will be here with In Our Time. That's after a quick look ahead to the world
tonight. In half an hour here's Razi Iqbal. Thanks Andy. On the programme
there's been an exchange of fire between Palestinian militants in Gaza and
Israel following a deadly raid by Israel in Nablus in the West Bank on
Wednesday. Could this escalation in violence be the beginning of another
uprising by Palestinians? As the police focus on the new IRA, after an off-duty
police officer was shot in Northern Ireland, we look at who this dissident
Republican group is. On vegetable shortages, the Environment Secretary said a
lot of people would be eating turnips right now. We speak to a farmer who used
to be the turnip king and hear why he isn't anymore. And a year since the
invasion of Ukraine and deepening divisions between big powers, we hear how a
new non-alignment movement could emerge. Do join me in half an hour. Thanks
Razi. Now I'm ready for his Melvin Bragg with In Our Time. Hello. Paul Erdos,
1913 to 1996, is one of the most celebrated mathematicians of the 20th century.
During his long career, he made a number of impressive advances in our
understanding of maths and developed whole new fields in the subject. Born into
a Jewish family in Hungary just before the outbreak of World War I, his life was
shaped by the rise of fascism in Europe, anti-Semitism and the Cold War. His
reputation for mathematical problem solving is unrivalled, and is extraordinary
prolific. He produced more than 1,500 papers and collaborated with around 500
other academics. He also had an unconventional lifestyle. Instead of having a
long-term post at one university, he spent much of his life travelling around
visiting other mathematicians, often staying for just a few days. With me to
discuss the career of Paul Erdos are Timothy Goers, Professor of Mathematics at
the College of France in Paris and Philip Trinity College, Cambridge, Andrew
Tlegone, Associate Professor in Mathematics at the University of Birmingham, and
Colby Rowley-Dughal, Professor of Pure Mathematics at the University of St
Andrews. Colva, would you start by telling me something about his early
childhood? Sure. He was born to a middle-class family in Budapest in March of
1913. Both of his parents were high school teachers. They both taught maths and
physics, his mother and his father, and on some level he should have been set
for a pretty comfortable existence. There were two particularly notable aspects
of his early childhood though. So the first was that when she went in to
hospital to give birth to him, his mother already had two girls, he had two
older sisters, and a wave of scarlet fever went through Budapest while she was
in hospital, and as he was being born both of what would have been his older
sisters died. So this was a deeply traumatic event for the whole family, as you
can imagine, and meant that his parents were very very protective of him for all
of his childhood after that. By his own admission he didn't butter his own bread
until he first arrived at Trinity College at the age of 21. And then the second
really significant event that happened early in his life was was World War One
broke out and his father went off to fight in the war and was captured by the
Soviets almost immediately and didn't return for seven years. So he was in a
very very intense relationship just with his mother from an early age. She was
having to to work quite hard and he was left mostly in the care of a governess
while she was out working. He said he taught himself to count at the age of
three by trying to count down the days until he could see his mother for the day
times again. And then as he went through his childhood various anti-Semitic laws
were passed, of which probably the most pertinent to him was one called Numerus
Clausus which restricted the number of Jewish students at universities. So it
was clear from a very early age that it was going to be hard for him to have an
academic career in Hungary. There are these stories of his prodigious
intelligence at the age of three at the age of five. He would say give me a
number and he would cube it or hundred. How did he begin to show his
mathematical talents? When his mum's friends came round he would ask them how
old are you and he would then tell them how many seconds they'd live for. But
then really I guess the big breakthrough was when he was a teenager. So in
Hungary they have this lovely culture of journals, so journals for high school
children, and in them you'll have mathematical problems stated each month. Then
students would write in and give what they thought was the solution and then in
the next month the people that were correct they would be announced. So at that
stage Erdos was one of the most prolific problem solvers in these high school
journals so he sort of made a name for himself as a problem solver even in his
teenage years. He took a first class degree and his PhD at the same time when he
was about 17. Yeah so he went to university, the University of Budapest, age 17,
and even at an early stage he was doing novel research. So he was often meeting
other young mathematicians, people like Paul Turan, George Seccares bouncing off
each other, getting ideas from each other. It was also a very significant point
in his life, not just in the sort of circle around Budapest, but also he made a
name for himself in the number theory community. He reproved something called
Chebychev's theorem and Chebychev's theorem was around since the 19th century,
but he gave a very elegant and simple and clever proof of this. Thank you very
much. Tim, can we have a little more detail about this theorem, Chebychev's
theorem, and the difference between the old proof and the new proof that Erdos
came up with? Chebychev's theorem concerns prime numbers and those are numbers
like 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, which don't have any factors apart from the obvious ones, 1
and themselves. So for example 9 is not a prime number because it's 3 times 3,
but 11 you can only write it as 1 times 11 and so that is a prime number. If you
start asking yourself questions like can you write a formula for the nth largest
prime number, it seems to be remarkably difficult. In fact it's generally
believed now that there is no usable sensible formula for the nth largest prime
number. And just being? And just being some number, so an arbitrary number. So a
formula that would tell you for any given integer like a million or a billion
what the millionth largest number is or the billionth largest number. It's not
believed that such a formula exists. So instead what we try to do is ask
ourselves questions like roughly how many primes are there between one and any
given number that you specify. Can you have a formula that just at least
approximates the number of primes? And Chebychev what he did was solve a problem
known as Bertrand's postulate which says that between any number and twice that
number there must be a prime. But Chebychev's method was in some ways quite
advanced. You need quite a lot of mathematical expertise to read it. Erdos came
up with a new proof of Chebychev's theorem which I've read somewhere it's
described as something that if you've got a maths A level you can understand
this proof. You don't just get that there's a prime between n and 2n but you
also get a reasonable estimate for how many primes there are up to any given
number. When I say reasonable what I mean is you can say that it's at least this
number and at most twice that number something like that. So it narrows it down
to within a factor of two as we would say. Thank you. Kalmer. So his major
university is a starter and he's going to do mathematics for the rest of his
life and then he came across to Manchester University for four or five years.
What was that all about? So he'd been invited by a number theorist called
Mordell to go and work with the group in Manchester. His fame had become quite
great by this point. Isaiah Schur who's a wonderful number theorist had
christened him the wizard for Budapest. So he started really cooking up this
blend of number theory and combinatorics that was to stay with him for the rest
of his life while he was in Manchester. But it wasn't that he only collaborated
with people in Manchester. He started working with everybody he could and at the
end of three years it was becoming increasingly clear that Hitler was getting
more and more dangerous and that he decided he needed to leave Europe for good.
So after a final visit back to Budapest in the summer of 1938 he charged back to
London got on the Queen Mary and set sail for the Institute for Advanced Studies
in Princeton. And did you get anything else out of the Manchester experience?
That was when he first started getting interested in lots of questions about
what the numbers look like on average. So Tim's already given us the definition
of a prime number which is a number that's only divisible by one in itself. He
got interested in the question of how many different prime numbers divide a
given number. So say for example 12 is only divisible by two and three. Eight is
only divisible by two. That's the only prime that divides into eight so that's
got a score of one. Whereas if I go for 30 because that's two times three times
five that's got a score of three. And so he got very interested in the question
of not just is a number prime and can I count the primes but can I count how
many dividers there are of a given number. And he proved his first results in
that direction while he was in Manchester. And it was because of that that and
similar results that he was eventually able to get the fellowship at the the
Institute for Advanced Studies in America. So it was only five years old.
Einstein was its first professor. There were zero students no teaching
responsibilities. One could just go there and do mathematics and theoretical
physics to one's heart's content. And John von Neumann who's famous for many
things including work on the nuclear bomb and game theory and economics managed
to get a fellowship for Erich to go and work there. And I'd financed him did it.
That financed him for the first year. At the end of that first year for reasons
that are unclear he applied for a renewal and wasn't granted it. And Einstein
argued strongly for him to get a further job and said he had used strong words
the like of which he had not used before to try and enable Erich to stay but
somehow he was deemed not the right fit. And there were so many Jewish
mathematicians coming out. There are many clues to why it wasn't the right fit.
I mean he seems to do mathematics all the time with mathematicians and so what
was he doing that upset people? There's a quote saying that Princeton didn't
want to keep him because he was uncouth and unconventional. So he was definitely
unconventional in a sense that he would speak his mind freely. There's stories
about when he's talking with people I mean this is a few days later but talking
with people to do with the Manhattan Project in a restaurant he loudly says oh
how's the A-bomb going? So he's very uncouth in that sense. It's a big thing for
a man that intelligent backed by a person like Einstein to be kicked out isn't
it? I did meet him myself actually but he was pretty old and I was quite young
and by that time I think he had sort of morphed into a sort of eccentric old man
not somebody that one would rub anybody up the wrong way. But America suited him
and yet he had to leave it. So I guess you're now talking about the 1950s yeah
so it's kind of a bit unfortunate so he had a temporary position at the
University of Notre Dame as the Americans call it. He actually was offered a
permanent position there but he turned it down. At some states he wanted to go
to Amsterdam to a conference and they refused him entry back into the US again.
Partly it's just because of the time it was. It was the McCarthy year of the
1950s where America was just suspicious of foreigners particularly from
communist countries. Also there was an FBI file on him. He was walking in Long
Island with some other mathematicians and they didn't see the no trespassing
sign and they just we were talking about maths wandered through to this military
transmitter and then they were sort of nabbed by the FBI and it was all cleared
up but you know it created an FBI file on him and I think it was just an excuse
to get rid of him. Culver, one of the fields of maths that he developed
extensively was Ramsey theory. So away you go. So Ramsey theory starts with a
particular problem which I'm very fond of called the party problem and I'll give
the first interesting instance of it as an example. Now it says how many guests
do you need to have at a party to guarantee that either at least three of them
all know each other or at least three of them all don't know each other. So how
big a party do I have to have if I definitely want three friends that can stand
in the corner and catch up on gossip or to find three people who've not met
before who can who can be introduced to each other. So imagine that I'm hosting
a party and I've invited five friends but maybe they're not my friends. We're
interested in maybe them knowing each other or not knowing each other so these
five people they might know me or not know me. So there's two possibilities and
there's five of them so at least three of them must fall into one of the cases.
It's not possible for two of them to not know me and two of them to know me. The
fifth person has to go somewhere so let's assume that three of them know me and
think about those three people so maybe the three of you I guess at my party and
you all know me then maybe two of you know each other and then the two of you
plus me make three people that all know each other and if that's not the case
then no two of you know each other and so the three of you form three people
that don't know each other and so we managed to do that with six people. If I'd
said that at least three people didn't know me we would have swapped everything
round. That's the first question of Ramsey theory and that shows that six people
is enough if I want three to know each other or not so I can replace that three
by any other number. I can say I want a party that's big enough for 17 people to
all know each other or 17 to not and Frank Ramsey had proved that there always
is a big enough party no matter how many people there's always a big enough
party. Now Erdish came along and firstly found a much nicer simpler better way
of proving that there's always a big enough party and his band on how many
people you need at the party was smaller than the previously known band. He also
was able to show a lower band on how many people so a party size which is
definitely not big enough using some beautiful arguments and essentially took
what had been this single loan result and turned it into an entire theory of
mathematics which people spend their whole careers working on nowadays. Andrew
you want to come in? Yeah so one thing I wanted to say as well is that Ramsey
theory isn't just about graphs and about these parties but actually this
phenomenon occurs elsewhere in mathematics so one of Erdish's most famous open
problems is the happy ending problem and this is a problem in Ramsey theory.
Here you rather than looking at a party you've got a collection of points that
you draw on a piece of paper so imagine you draw three points on a piece of
paper and then as long as they're not in a straight line well those three points
will be the corners of a triangle. Now what about if I give you four points?
Well those four points may not form a four-sided shape because you can draw a
triangle and then you can plop another point in the middle and that's not a
four-sided shape it's not the corners of a four-sided shape what we call a
convex quadrilateral. Actually you can ask this question more generally how many
points do you need to put on a piece of paper such that some of those points
form your favorite I don't know pentagon your six-sided shape of seven-sided
shape and so on. What Erdish and George Sekare showed is actually these there's
always a solution to this problem in a similar way to the party problem there is
a solution if you put enough points on a piece of paper you're going to get your
n-sided shape somewhere in that picture. So this was worked on 80 years ago by
Erdish and Sekares they actually just asked the question of what's the right
answer how small how many points do you need to put on a piece of paper such
that as long as no three of them are in a line then somewhere in that n points
will form the corners of an n-sided shape and we don't know the answer even
though we don't know the exact answer we know there is some answer but we don't
know exactly what it is. Can we go to continue this Tim with you we come up with
the phrase the probabilistic method what's that about and what's its
significance? Well I think the easiest way to illustrate that is to go back to
what Colder was saying about the party problem and the question you can ask how
many people do you need in order to guarantee that some fixed number be it 17 or
100 or whatever either all know each other or all don't know each other. If you
want to show that you need a lot of people then you've got to come up with some
sort of configuration of or some sort of knowledge network so to speak or
equivalently some graph that demonstrates that you really do need a lot of
people and the difficulty with a problem is that if you sit down and try to
design this person knows that person or this person doesn't know that person and
so on it's incredibly difficult to write down a specification that demonstrates
that you really do need anything like as many people as the proof requires and
it genuinely is very very difficult to design this. It just had a brilliant idea
which was if it's difficult to design it don't design it. What you do instead
well it's called the probabilistic method what you do instead is you just choose
your network entirely at random so for each pair of people you toss a coin if
it's heads they know each other if it's tails they don't know each other and it
turns out that if you do that then you can show that it's extremely likely that
you're going to need an absolutely huge number of people before you get your
specified number that either all know each other or all don't know each other.
This is very counterintuitive because you might think that if almost everything
works then surely you can just sit down and write down something that will work
but unfortunately the set of things that you can actually describe is a very
small set and so you can't sort of rule out that all the ones you can describe
happen to be the unfortunate ones that don't work so you know that almost
everything works and this phenomenon actually occurs so what makes it
particularly important is that it occurred in this one example but once you've
seen this example it just changes the way you think as a mathematician and then
you start seeing this phenomenon all over the place. And where does that lead
you? For Erdos it led to a lot of other solutions to problems in graph theory
and other areas where they had seemed extremely hard but once you have this idea
that perhaps you could just try choosing a random object and seeing if that
almost always works they become suddenly much easier. Picking up the word random
calmer, random graph theory Erdos was into that. What did he find and what did
he do with it? So in a series of eight papers with Alfred Rennie who's another
Hungarian mathematician Erdos and Rennie invented the field of random graph
theory from scratch and proved that it was important. So the model that they
were imagining, they had two different ones but I'll talk about one in
particular, is that you pick some number of vertices and you pick a probability
so maybe your probability is a half and you look at all the possible pairs of
vertices and you put in each edge randomly with probability a half and you ask
yourself what can I say about the resulting graph? Is it possible for example
for me to walk along the edges from one vertex to any other or is it going to
break into different bits? Am I going to be able to colour the vertices with
some number of colours such that no two vertices sharing an edge are the same
colour? And this model of random graphs they proved amazingly precise properties
about it but it's turned out to be incredibly important for lots and lots of
real world applications. So for example during the covid pandemic one of the
models that was used when trying to analyse if household bubbling could change
over Christmas, if one remembers that dark Christmas, was modelling our
interactions with each other as a random graph. We're all in households of
between one and about four people and then somewhat randomly we know people in
other households and so if somebody in one household gets infected probably
everybody in that household gets infected but if they randomly meet with other
people the infection might or might not spread along the edges in our graph of
knowing and not knowing and that really does help to feed into questions about
whether or not we could meet each other. Andrew he liked to question himself
didn't he? Pose a problem for himself to solve as well as finding problems that
had not been fully solved with his satisfaction. Yes so his mantra was to prove
and conjecture so by conjecture we mean pose open problems and it wasn't just
for himself that he would pose problems you know what he saw was that it was a
duty of a mathematician to sort of lay the marker points for other
mathematicians to follow and say this is an interesting question. So actually
many of his problems have been solved since he died. One example of this is so
we mentioned prime numbers earlier so one special case of one of his conjectures
is that in prime numbers in a set of prime numbers we know there's infinitely
many but inside them there are arithmetic progressions of arbitrary length so
what do I mean by that? I mean if you take an arithmetic progression is you
start with some number and then you have a series of numbers whose differences
are the same something like 2, 5, 8, 11, 14 they all differ by three there. So
that was for example a special case of one of Eddish's problems that was solved
about 18, 19 years ago by Green and Tao. So if you've got a set of prime numbers
then there's always going to be an arbitrary long arithmetic progression so you
can go on forever finding this arithmetic progression and that's quite
counterintuitive actually because as was mentioned earlier primes are kind of
sparse there's infinite many but they get less and less frequent or the density
of them inside the whole numbers is less and less frequent and so to have this
regular structure Eddish was just great at posing problems and I think sometimes
he was willing just to take a punt and he would pose a question that was just
interesting to him and sometimes they would pay off and they would leave to lead
to fruitful research directions and sometimes they weren't necessarily paying
off but the point was he was so willing to go out there and and pose problems
that it's it's led to new directions emerging in mathematics. Do we need to say
more about randomness in in relation to number theory? Absolutely, so one of the
many fields which Eddish founded and the one that he described himself as being
proudest of is known as probabilistic number theory. Now number theory is about
properties of the whole numbers and the bit of it he was most interested in is
this question of divisibility by primes that's come up a few times before now
and it doesn't seem like randomness should have anything to do with it. I mean
the fact that 12 is two times two times three is not random that's set in stone
but together with a Polish mathematician Mark Kacz they worked out that if
rather than looking at individual numbers and asking how many different primes
divide a number they started looking at large sets of numbers say all the
numbers up to a million or all the numbers up to a million million and asked how
many primes divided all of them and looked at the count and drew a graph of it
say not graph in the sense of vertices and edges but graph in the sense of like
a bar chart say the resulting chart winds up looking just like the bell curve
histogram that we see across all sorts of uh real world things so were you to
toss a coin a thousand times and record the number of heads and tails and then
do it again and do it again and do it again and record how many heads you got on
average you'd expect to get about 500 heads but you wouldn't get perfectly 500
heads every time you'd get mostly 500s and 499s and 501s slightly fewer 502 and
so on and it would come down in that that lovely bell shaped curve that i'm sure
lots of our listeners have seen in many contexts he discovered that we get a
curve like that when we ask about the number of prime divisors and it's kind of
incredible i put my little laptop to work coming down yesterday on the train and
asked it to do this count for me for all the numbers up to a million and his
formula predicts that the average number of prime divisors should be between two
and three a bit closer to three than two now you can't have two and a half prime
devices of course so what my computer returned to me was that the most common
answer was three and then shortly after that was two and then shortly after that
was four and then there's a few primes and powers of primes and then five and
six and seven with the smallest numbers there's only seven numbers less than a
million that are divisible by seven primes so even a million i could see this
kind of bell curve phenomena beginning and nobody had thought of mixing
probability and divisibility by primes like that before and you can once you've
got the idea of doing that you can ask all sorts of other questions too. Jim,
you seem as and you've seen is more of a problem solver than a theory developer
do you agree with that? I do. If you look at the problems that he posed once you
start thinking about them it may just look like a whole lot of isolated problems
but once you actually start thinking about them you realise that there are
difficulties or quite deep difficulties associated with the problems and that in
order to solve the problems you're forced to come up with ideas you suddenly get
a sense that Erdos these problems hadn't come out of nowhere they'd come out of
some quite deep thought nevertheless it is the case that there is a contrast
between the way different mathematicians operate and some would say that what
they're really trying to do is improve their understanding and if they improve
their understanding then solving problems will be a consequence of that and
others and Erdos is more like the other kind would say that what they really
want to do is solve problems by solving problems they will improve
understanding. There was a very nice metaphor of the mathematician Alexander
Grotendijk who said that he just he considered the idea of a nut you want to
open a nut two approaches one is you get a nutcracker and you squeeze as hard as
you can until the nut breaks and then you've got inside Grotendijk's preferred
approach was to put the nut into some sort of liquid and just leave it there for
a very very long time until the shell softened and is opened very easily so
Grotendijk regarded himself as more of a theory builder somebody who wants his
understanding to improve until problems get solved easily and I think Erdos was
more of the other kind where he just wanted to go straight in and directly
attack. Andrew can you tell us we can get it towards the end now what's an Erdos
number? Yeah so an Erdos number is a bit of mathematical fun really we like to
measure our distance as mathematicians from Erdos so if you are poor Erdos you
have an Erdos number of zero if you've written a paper with poor Erdos you have
an Erdos number of one if you've written a paper with someone that's written a
paper with Erdos you have an Erdos number of two and so on and so forth so to
put in some context because Erdos had about 500 co-authors there's about 500
people with an Erdos number of one already there's more than 10 000 people with
an Erdos number of two and it's not just mathematicians so Albert Einstein has
an Erdos number of two for example so most mathematicians have an Erdos number
somewhere between one and five and actually I you know it's not that impressive
to have a small Erdos number I'd be more impressed with finding someone with an
Erdos number of 10 mathematician because I'd wonder how did they get that far
removed from Erdos's work. So each of you what's your Erdos number and what does
it mean starting with you Colburn? Well my PhD supervisor Peter Cameron
collaborated with Erdos and I have since published with my PhD supervisor so my
Erdos number is two. Likewise I have an Erdos number of two so I worked with a
mathematician called Sascha Kostovska who happened to work with Erdos so that's
my Erdos number as well. And mine should be two because my supervisor was a
close collaborator of Erdos but actually I have never had a joint paper with my
supervisor so for a long time it was four and then a few years ago it went down
to three. I collaborated with someone who collaborated with someone who
collaborated with Erdos. It's a cross question to ask them but just just as much
as I'm interested how do you rate him? I think the biggest compliment I can make
as a discrete mathematician as a combinatorialist is that it's very hard to work
on a problem and not be influenced by Erdos so what I'll do when I'm approaching
a problem is I'll try and do things randomly I'll do the probabilistic method or
think oh is there some Ramsey type behaviour here? So as someone working in his
field I think on a weekly on a monthly basis I'm influenced by him so in that
sense he was incredibly important. Yeah I would say the same I also work in very
much sort of Erdos style mathematics. You can't escape his influence nor would
you want to because he had such amazing ideas. His insistence on beauty in
mathematics and finding joy in mathematics have really changed it for all of us.
There was a lovely limerick about him which I'd love to tell which he was
delighted by so a conjecture both deep and profound a search that a circle is
round in a paper by Erdos written in Kurdish a counterexample is found and Erdos
was so pleased by this he tried to publish a paper in Kurdish but unfortunately
couldn't find a journal to do so but that sense of playfulness and joy in what
we do is a wonderful thing to have left the rest of us. Well that was terrific
thanks Colver, Rony Dougal, Andrew Traglone and Timothy Gowers and our studio
engineer Jackie Marjoram next week Megalith the stone monument's first built in
Britain around 6 000 years ago. Thank you for listening. In our time with
Melbourne Bragg is produced by Simon Tullotson. Now a quick look at the weather
forecast tonight northern areas will be cloudy and wet in places but it will
gradually become drier with clear spells developing. It'll be windy in contrast
southern areas will start clear and dry but cloud and patchy light rain will
move in from the north later. Tomorrow southern England and Wales will be cloudy
with patchy rain during the morning it'll become drier in the afternoon with
sunny spells. We are making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed
via third party services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently
listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio
or smart speaker and hearing this message please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile this service is available to stream on BBC
sounds. This is BBC Radio 4 92 to 95 FM 198 longwave digital media.