TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 a series about Hindi cinema, the romantics. This is the BBC World Service, the
world's radio station. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service
with Rob Young and Catherine Biarra-Hunger. In Nigeria, the governing party
candidate has been declared the winner of the presidential election. Official
results show Bola Tunabu got 36% of the vote. But the main opposition parties
have dismissed the poll as a sham and demanded a rerun. We'll get the latest
from Nigeria. Police in Israel say all Israeli suspects detained over rioting
against Palestinians in the occupied West Bank on Sunday have now been released.
We'll go live to the West Bank. Flooding caused by Cyclone Freddie is
threatening crops, homes and other buildings in Mozambique. A United Nations
official in the country will give us an update. And a Bolivian man has recounted
his experience of being missing in the Amazon for a month, one of the longest
known periods someone has survived in the rainforest alone. But first, here's
the latest world news. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. A late-night
collision between a cargo and a passenger train in central Greece has killed at
least 32 people and injured 85. Rescue workers are still scouring the severely
damaged carriages of a passenger train. The collision happened outside the city
of Larissa. MetaSyprikar has more details. In the passenger train, we know that
there were 350 passengers. The ones who were rescued described a very strong
boom after which they could feel suitcases falling. They realised something was
very serious. And the problem was that the first two carriages caught fire. The
scene is really very devastating. In the other carriages, the passengers managed
to get out, some smashed windows and got out. Conditions for the rescuer...
Conditions for the rescuers are described as very difficult. The army has been
mobilised to help. Nigeria's governing party candidate, Bolotinobu, has been
declared the winner of Saturday's disputed presidential election. He won with
almost 9 million votes, ahead of his main rival, Etiku Abubakar, who had nearly
7 million. The two main opposition parties have called for new elections, saying
the vote was a sham. The Electoral Commission has denied this. Our Nigeria
correspondent Mayeni Jones has more details. This is the moment Bolotinobu has
been waiting for his whole political career. Known as the Godfather of Lagos,
he's a trained accountant. During his time as Governor of Lagos, he was credited
with reshaping Nigeria's commercial hub. While campaigning, he popularised the
Yoruba phrase, Emi Lohan, meaning, it's my turn. His supporters say his skills
as a political operator and businessman are exactly what Nigeria's ailing
economy needs. But his detractors believe he lacks transparency and isn't in
good enough health to handle this nation's complex challenges. He takes office
amidst rising insecurity and unemployment. The French President Emmanuel Macron
is starting a four-nation tour of Central Africa with a visit to Gabon, as
France reshapes its strategy on the continent. It follows bruising exits of
French troops from Mali and Burkina Faso. Our Africa editor Mary Harper has more
in this report. It's telling that none of the countries Mr Macron is visiting is
in the Sahel, a region until recently replete with French troops and now a
hostile environment for France, which has been accused of failing to curb
Islamist militancy. Mr Macron is seeking friends elsewhere on the continent,
Gabon, Angola and the two Congos. France and other Western powers are battling
for influence in Africa. Russia, China, Turkey and Gulf countries are all
flexing their muscles, some closing their eyes to bad governance. World News
from the BBC. Three journalists from one of Egypt's last remaining independent
media outlets are to be put on trial. The three women work for the liberal
online newspaper Mada Masar. They're charged with offending legislators from the
nation's Future Party, which strongly supports President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
If convicted, the journalists could face prison sentences of up to two years.
The coffins of 65 victims of a migrant shipwreck in southern Italy have been
laid out in a sports hall in Crotone in the Calabria region. They died when the
overloaded boat that set sail from Turkey broke up in a storm on Sunday. About
80 people survived. Others are still missing. The US Supreme Court has had
arguments over the legitimacy of President Biden's plan to give loan relief to
millions of students. Six Republican-controlled states have brought the case,
arguing Mr Biden is exceeding his powers. He promised to cancel $430 billion
worth of student loans after the COVID pandemic. A ruling is expected in June.
This Democratic Congressman, Maxwell Frost, says President Biden's plan is
needed. We need to ensure that our people don't have this crushing student debt,
so that way they can thrive, that way they can move to ownership. You know, Gen
Z is on track to be the generation that owns the least amount of wealth. And I
know what it's like, too. People know me for being Gen Z, but also being able to
not afford an apartment here in D.C. And so this is part of this greater
struggle to ensure that people have the resources they need to have true freedom
in this country. British medical researchers are developing a new technology,
which they say will enable transplant organs to be selected more effectively
than by humans by using artificial intelligence. Currently, surgeons must
examine body parts by sight. An algorithm will enable an assessment to be made
from a photograph of a donor organ, comparing it with tens of thousands of
images of other organs. BBC News. Thank you for that, News. And welcome to
Newsday from the BBC with Rob Young and Catherine Birahanga. This half hour,
we've got stories for you from Nigeria, where the results of the presidential
election have been announced, and also stories from the West Bank and
Mozambique, too. And Isaac's going to be here with all your sports headlines
with all the latest from the most recent FA Cup matches. Nigeria's governing
party candidate, Bolatinebu, has been declared winner of Saturday's disputed
presidential election with almost nine million votes. That's ahead of his main
rival, Atiku Abubakar, who had nearly seven million. The announcement was made
by the head of the Nigerian Electoral Commission, Makmud Yakubu. Tinugubu Bola
Ahmed of the APC, having satisfied the requirements of the law, is hereby
declared the winner and is returned elected. With President Mohamedu Buhari
stepping down, many Nigerians hoped a clean vote would open the way to a leader
able to tackle insecurity, ease economic malaise and manage poverty in one of
Africa's most populous countries. The Election Commission has so far said the
vote was free and fair, but opposition parties have called for the weekend
election results to be scrapped, alleging massive manipulation of tallies. Many
voters, such as these in the southern city of Port Harcourt, are furious that
delays and alleged voter rigging have once again marred an election. That's what
I'm saying. This is so close to depressing. It's close to depressing. People are
crying. People are crying that even when we came out to vote, to participate in
this election with everything that makes us us, and then eventually you go back
and then you manipulate and you want to do whatever you want to do, then what
are you telling us? Then you come out again the next day, you put in the person
you want to put in, the next four years, the next eight years. You think we'll
come out again? Sad. I'm not angry, I'm pained. I'm just sad because it's not
fair actually. This has been going on for all the elections. Since growing up,
what I've been hearing or what I've been seeing, they're always rigging, always
changing results and all that. At least there should be a change for once in our
lives. There should be a change in this country that this particular person wins
or this particular person, his numbers are going up. Just leave it like that.
Let another person win, another person take it. Emotional voices there from Port
Harcourt. Ereti Heba Kingibe of the opposition Labour Party has just been
declared the new senator for one district of the capital, Abuja. She spoke to us
earlier, but did she have any evidence that the vote had been rigged? I don't
have concrete evidence about the whole nation. It's clear in my constituency
that there was a strong attempt to manipulate the results. It just wasn't
possible because the margins were so high. So it didn't matter how much they
tried. They tried counselling whole local governments. But of course, we
complained that the law did not allow for that. Then they counselled wards and
other parties, not just my party, said you cannot do that. If there's
overvoting, you have to counsel the specific polling unit. Four days to declare
the senatorial elections of the FCT. So I know the experiences of this place.
And I can tell you there are lots of things I cannot say publicly that I know
happened that makes me know that the elections all over the country were the
same way. Ereti Heba Kingibe there. Well, look, we can speak to the BBC's data
journalist in Lagos, Yusuf Akim Peli, who's on the line now. Welcome to the
programme, Yusuf. It is a complicated system, isn't it? But so Mr Tinabu has
reached the threshold then and won all the necessary votes that he needs to be
president. Yes, at least according to INEC, the constitution stipulates that
whoever will emerge must have the highest number of votes and also win 25
percent of two thirds of the states in the country and the FCT. So and also the
question also stipulates what FCT means. So FCT more or less is counted as a
state. So that means you have to win 25 percent of two thirds of 37 states in
the country, which Mr Tinabu has been able to reach this threshold in 27 states.
So he more or less meets it. But then it's still up for the courts to decide if
anybody challenges the interpretation of that provision of the constitution.
Fine. FCT, you mentioned the federal capital territory, Abuja. What about, it
was reported on Saturday that perhaps turnout was high in an awful lot of areas.
Given that we've now got the final results, what do the figures tell us about
the proportion of people registered to vote that did actually vote? With what's
the data we have, there is clear level of voter apathy. But I mean, that could
be as a result of the reported suppression of voters. And this enraptures many
some places due to the failure of some of INEX materials coming early or even
sometimes malfunctioning. So this is, I mean, Nigeria has seen continuous drop
in terms of turnout for elections. But this time around, it was astronomically
lower than it was in previous years. For instance, that's vote rich, that could
be always, that a candidate can always have like a million votes. There is no
candidate who had a million votes in any state this year. The highest anywhere
they had was 900 and the closest to that is 500,000. So you could imagine if
turnouts were higher, we would have higher number of votes than we currently do.
Now the Election Commission has said that the results point to a free, fair and
credible process. Several opposition parties disagree with that position. Do you
think an official challenge to the courts is now likely? Yes, I mean, it's in
the offing. The three opposition parties, PDP, LP and ADC, two of whom emerged
second and third, according to INEX, have challenged the electoral body saying
the election is a sham and they had called for a re-election. But if INEX is not
heeding to this, then definitely the courts will be the judge. And when is a
challenge likely? Is there a timetable set down for when that must either be
lodged or when the court must make a judgment? Yes, so it will likely take
place, they would have lodged, taken, filed a suit in the next 21 days and the
court would decide in a couple of months. It could even enter into the
administration of the new president-elect. And it's often a long legal battle,
right from the High Court to the Appeal Court and up to the Supreme Court. So we
are in for a long judicial battle here. And in the meantime, given that at least
two of the opposition parties are disputing the outcome of this election, what
are people fearing about how Nigerians may react to this announcement of Bola
Tinebu being the next president? Yeah, it's a cocktail of reaction. There has
been people, I mean the temperature in the room, you could see that there is
people who believe they've been disenfranchised, their vote hasn't counted and
they are feeling so embittered about this. So we have those and we also have
those who believe they voted, won and their vote counts. Because the crux of the
whole rigging allegation is the fact that the INEC officials failed to upload at
real time the results from the different polling units into its server, such
that it cannot be manipulated once it is up in the server. And the fact that
INEC went through the route of manual entry and manual reading of the results
made people believe there could be chances of misrepresentation and also
manipulation. Thank you. Youssef Akimpourida who's a BBC journalist in Lagos.
You can get the latest on Nigeria's election and indeed a profile of Bola Tinebu
on the BBC website, that's at bbcnews.com. And we're going to be returning to
events in Nigeria in about 20 minutes time. You're listening to Newsday from the
BBC with Catherine and Rob and here with the latest sports news is Isaac
Fanning. Hello there Catherine. Yeah, four FA Cup matches on Tuesday night to
tell you about. A bit of a surprise as Championship side Blackburn Rovers beat
Leicester City 2-1. Phil Foden scored twice for Manchester City as they beat
Bristol City 3-0. Brighton got a 1-0 victory away at Stoke and Fulham beat Leeds
United 2-0 in the only all Premier League tie. French prosecutors have opened a
preliminary investigation into an alleged rape by Morocco defender Ashraf
Hakimi. A source close to the investigation has confirmed a 24-year-old woman
has accused the Paris Saint-Germain fullback of raping her at his home in the
French capital on the 25th of February. Neither Hakimi nor PSG have responded
publicly to the accusation. In boxing, the rematch between undisputed light
heavyweight champion Katie Taylor and Amanda Serrano has been postponed after
Serrano suffered an injury. The two made history last year becoming the first
women to headline at the iconic Madison Square Garden in New York and the
rematch was due to take place in Dublin in May. So we will see who Katie Taylor
will fight later on this year. Thank you, Isaac. Yeah, more sports in about 20
minutes. We're going to get some business news now. Katie Silva, our business
correspondent in Singapore, joins us. Hi again, Katie. And the United States is
going to impose restrictions on chip companies that want to receive federal
support. Why is that? It's all part of this tussle between the world's two
largest economies, the US and China. And the US has been trying to protect its
chip industry. It sees it as an issue of national security. And as such, we saw
last year, them enact the Chips and Science Act, it's called. It's all about
trying to encourage chip makers to set up shop in the US in places such as
Arizona. So they're trying to attract the likes, for example, of TSMC or
Samsung, two of the world's largest chip makers, to draw them away from Taiwan
and South Korea, which is where they're typically based. Now, as part of these
new restrictions, they've said basically they've got a federal fund at the
moment, they're putting in US$39 billion. But this could raise to about US$100
billion, they're saying. But there are some restrictions on this. So they're
saying that these companies, if they want some of this cash, then they are not
going to be able to expand into China or quote, other countries of concern for
10 years. They're also saying, for instance, there's other regulations, if these
companies make more profits than were expected, they're going to have to return
some of that money to the US government. And interestingly, they're also saying
that these companies, if they receive up to a certain amount or beyond, they're
going to have to provide childcare for their workers to address. Another one of
the criticisms that many say when it comes to this US Chips Act, which is they
say there's worker shortages, and they don't have the right sort of employees
and therefore this childcare stipulation. The other one as well is that they're
saying that they cannot be using these funds for share buybacks or dividend
payments. Now, the Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo, when she made these
comments, she said it's about national security and not lining the pockets of
chip makers, so to speak. And we saw, for example, as the chip shortage really
kicked off on the back half of the pandemic, the US realised they had
significant vulnerabilities in this area and as such, we're seeing this huge
investment. Thank you, Katie Silverler, for explaining that story from the
business desk in Singapore. This is Newsday from the BBC World Service. And
that's where we leave the World Service here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning, I'm
Caroline Nichols. We've got all of the latest news, sport and weather coming up.
We hear about opposition to fast-growing chicken breeds and a school holiday
spent searching for a bittern. But before all of that, what does the future hold
for musicians in Britain? There's a crisis in UK music education. In today's
climate, there's a lot less funding available to support many young musicians
who would like to pursue their interest. I'm Soweto Kinch, a musician myself,
and in a new three-part series, I'll be finding out why the future of British
music is under threat. If you don't have adequate provision in our schools, that
is going to have an impact on the talent pipeline and it is going to have an
impact in terms of the diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of
becoming an elitist occupation? Rethinking music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds
starts next Tuesday morning at 11.30. Now on Radio 4, here's Sarah Keith-Lucas.
Thank you, Caroline. Good morning. And now, the shipping forecast issued by the
Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0505 on
Wednesday, 1 March 2023. The general synopsis of midnight. High, bailey, 1043.
Expected fair ows, 1038 by midnight tonight. The area forecast for the next 24
hours. Viking, north at zero. Northerly veering north-easterly, five or six,
occasionally seven at first, becoming variable four or less later. Rain at
first, good, occasionally moderate at first. South at zero, east forties.
Northerly or north-easterly, four to six, becoming variable three or less. Fair,
good. West forties, chromity, fourth. Northerly four to six, veering north-
easterly, three to five. Showers, good. Tyne, dogger, west fisher. Northerly or
north-easterly, four to six, becoming variable four or less. Showers, good. East
fisher, German bite. Variable four or less, but northerly, veering north-
easterly, five at first in north-west German bite. Fair, good. Humber, Thames.
East or north-east, three to five. Showers, good. Dover, white, Portland,
Plymouth. West four or five, occasionally six at first in Portland and Plymouth.
Showers in Portland and Plymouth, good. Biscay, north-east, four to six,
decreasing three or four. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. Fitzroy, sole.
Easterly or north-easterly, four to six, decreasing three or four, veering
south-easterly later in west. Showers, good. Dundee, Fastnet, north-east, four
or five, occasionally six at first in Fastnet. Showers, good, occasionally
moderate. Irish Sea, north-east, four or five, occasionally three later.
Showers, good. Shannon, Rockall. East or north-east, veering south-east, four or
five, occasionally three later. Showers, good. Malin, Hebrides. East or north-
east, two to four, occasionally five at first. Showers, good. Bailey, variable
four or less, becoming south-east, three to five for a time. Rain, good,
occasionally poor. Fair Isle, north or north-west, four to six, veering north-
east, three to five, becoming variable two to four later. Rain at first, good,
occasionally poor at first. Faroes, north or north-west, three to five, becoming
variable four or less. Fair, good. South-east Iceland. Westerly or north-
westerly, three to five, backing south-westerly, four to six, decreasing two to
four later. Showers, good. And now weather reports from coastal stations for
0400. Tyree Automatic. North by east, three, thirty miles, 1040, falling slowly.
Stornoway. North three, nineteen miles, 1042, falling slowly. Lerwick. North by
west, three, eleven miles, 1039, falling more slowly. Lucas. West by east, two,
more than thirty-eight miles, 1039, falling slowly. Bridlington. North-east,
two, 1033, falling. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. North-east, five, eleven
miles, 1030. Greenwich Light Vessel Automatic. Five miles, 1029. Jersey. North-
east by east, two. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. East-north-east, six, 1029.
Scilly Automatic. North-east by east, five, fourteen miles, 1030, falling
slowly. Valencia. North-east by east, calm, 22 miles, 1036, falling slowly.
Ronaldsway. North-east by north, three, 1036, falling slowly. Mallinhead. North-
east by east, four, 24 miles, 1039, falling. And now here is the weather
forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for
the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at 0500 on Wednesday, 1st March
2023. General Situation A slow-moving high to the north-west of Scotland will
give strong north-easterly winds at first over eastern and south-western waters.
Then the winds will ease off as the high declines slightly during the next
couple of days. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head, including Orkney. Northerly, veering
north-easterly, three to five, occasionally six at first in east. Showers, good,
occasionally moderate. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North or north-east,
four or five, occasionally six at first. Showers, good, occasionally moderate.
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North or north-east, four or five, decreasing two
to four later. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. Whitby to Gibraltar Point.
North four to six, veering north-east, two to four. Showers, good, occasionally
moderate. Gibraltar Point to North Forland. Northerly or north-easterly, three
to five. Showers, good, occasionally moderate. North Forland to Salisbury.
Northerly, four or five. Showers, good. Celtsey Bill to Lime Regis. North-east,
four or five. Showers, good. Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of
Scilly. North-east, five or six, decreasing four. Showers at first, good. Land's
End to St David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. North-east, three to
five. Showers, good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's
Channel. North-east, four or five, occasionally three later. Showers, good.
Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. North-east, three to five. Showers, good.
Isle of Man. North-east, three to five. Mainly fair, good. Loch Foyle to
Carlingford Loch. North-east, three to five. Showers later, good. Mull of
Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel.
North-easterly, three to five. Showers later, good. Mull of Kintyre to
Udnamerken Point. East or north-east, three to five. Fair, good. Udnamerken
Point to Cape Wrath. East or north-east, three or four, occasionally five at
first. Showers at first, good. Shetland Isles. North or north-west, veering
north-east, four or five. Becoming variable two to four later. Rain or showers
at first, good, occasionally moderate at first. And that completes the Shipping
Bulletin. I'll be back with a general weather forecast in a few minutes. Thanks
Sarah. This is BBC Radio 4. It's half past five on Wednesday, the first of
March. Good morning, this is News Briefing with Caroline Nichols. The Prime
Minister has told Conservative MPs not to create drama over his new Brexit deal
for Northern Ireland. Dozens of people have died after two trains collided in
central Greece. In business, high street chains are closing at their slowest
rate in eight years as takeaways thrive. And in sport, Blackburn fans are a step
closer to Wembley after their team beat Leicester for a place in the FA Cup
quarter-finals. The Prime Minister met Conservative backbench MPs last night and
urged them not to put pressure on the Democratic Unionist Party for an instant
verdict on his new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland. Speaking to the 1922
committee, Rishi Sunak said people did not want to see another Westminster
drama. The DUP's support for the Windsor Framework is key to restoring the
power-sharing executive. Our Northern Ireland politics presenter Mark Carruthers
says it's not sure which way they'll go. Everybody has agreed that there are
opportunities, but there are some voices, particularly within unionism, who say
this is not simply about trade, this is also about sovereignty. And for some
within the DUP, Geoffrey Donaldson's party, the biggest party within unionism,
that is a real problem. And we don't have any white smoke yet as to what the
DUP's settled position is going to be. The fire service in Greece says at least
32 people have been killed and more than 80 injured after two trains collided
head-on outside the central city of Larissa. The incident involved a passenger
train travelling from Athens and a freight train. Rescuers have been working to
save passengers and extinguish a fire caused by the crash. Hundreds of police
officers have spent a second night searching a large area near Brighton for a
missing baby, amid mounting fears that the child may have come to harm. Police
have arrested the baby's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, on suspicion
of gross negligence manslaughter. Four men arrested in connection with the
shooting of an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone have been released. Two
men, one aged 71, the other 47, are still being questioned about the attack on
Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Oma a week ago. He remains critically
ill in hospital. The first complaint has been made against a major technology
company for breaching what's known as the Children's Code, the rules for online
services in the UK which are likely to be accessed by children. A campaigner,
Duncan McCann, has complained about YouTube to the Information Commissioner
Office, saying under-13s are having their data collected. YouTube says its main
service isn't meant for children that young. Mr McCann explains the change he'd
like to see. They don't collect any unnecessary and process any unnecessary
information. And that the best way to ensure that they are only collecting the
data of adults who are properly consenting would be to then have a process where
adults can sign in to the tracking, recommendation systems, profiling, targeted
ads. Police in Peru have discovered a mummy, believed to be at least 600 years
old, inside the cool bag of a food delivery worker. The man said the mummy, who
he nicknamed Juanita, belonged to his father and called it his spiritual
girlfriend. Experts say the mummy was likely to have been a 45-year-old man.
Police are considering whether to charge the delivery worker. Now Sarah Keith-
Lucas is back with today's weather. Thank you Caroline. Well it's the first day
of meteorological spring, so a change in season but not much change in the
weather at the moment. We've still got high pressure to the north-west of the UK
and that's driving in quite a lot of cloud and quite a cool, brisk north-
easterly wind and a few drizzly showers around too. So let's look at all of
England and Wales first off. Most places cloudy first thing but we have got some
clear skies in the far south so a touch of frost first thing for the likes of
Kent and Sussex for instance but most places just about frost free, a degree or
so above freezing and some drizzly spells of rain for many areas in fact,
particularly persistent for central and eastern parts, some slightly drier and
slightly clearer skies out towards the west. But temperatures today about 7 to 9
degrees across England and Wales but feeling cooler in that brisk north-easterly
wind. For Scotland and Northern Ireland we've got a mostly dry day ahead but
there just will be one or two showers for eastern Scotland. Aberdeenshire for
instance, best of any brightness will be further west across Scotland, the
Western Isles, parts of Northern Ireland seeing a bit of brightness breaking
through the cloud at times too and top temperatures here around about 6 to 8
degrees and we'll see lighter winds compared to further south across the UK. Now
overnight tonight then again most places largely dry, a little bit of drizzly
rain for Northern England, Northern Ireland and southern Scotland but clearing
skies towards the south so again a touch of frost and tomorrow brings another
largely dry day, more sunshine in the south, fewer showers tomorrow and less
breezy than today. Thanks Sarah. Time now for a look at the papers. The Daily
Telegraph leads with the first in a series of investigative stories it's calling
the Lockdown Files. The paper says it's obtained 100,000 leaked WhatsApp
messages between the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock and other officials
during the height of the pandemic. It says they reveal Mr Hancock decided
against advice to test all residents going into care homes in England for Covid.
A spokesperson for Mr Hancock has called the report an outrageous and distorted
account of the pandemic, spun to fit what they called an anti-lockdown agenda.
The Telegraph also features commentary from Isabel Oakshot, the journalist who
leaked the messages. She obtained them while helping Mr Hancock write his book,
Pandemic Diaries. Miss Oakshot, who has been critical of lockdowns, says she's
sharing the trove because she believes the official Covid inquiry is taking too
long and there needs to be a more urgent examination of how official decisions
about Covid were made. She claims the messages reveal turmoil within Number 10
and a shift to what she calls lockdown zealotry. The Guardian headlines a report
by the Commons Public Accounts Committee which has found that NHS England's
three-year plan to reduce backlogs caused by the pandemic is already failing to
meet its targets. The paper quotes the reports as calling the recovery programme
unrealistic, with cancer waiting times at their worst levels. Downing Street has
suggested the new Brexit deal for Northern Ireland is not open to negotiation,
according to The Times. The paper has been told the Democratic Unionist Party
faces a straight choice between accepting it or not. Business leaders are
predicting a boost to the UK's struggling economy on the back of the deal,
reports the Daily Express. In the Telegraph, Lord Frost, who helped negotiate
the current protocol, writes that EU law remains supreme under the new
agreement, calling it a bitter pill to swallow. But he adds that doesn't mean
the deal shouldn't go ahead. A number of the papers feature a picture of a
laughing Princess of Wales beating Prince William in a spin class challenge.
Princess of Wheels quips the Daily Mirror, while the Express goes with the
caption PedalPower. The Financial Times has a picture of what could be the UK's
most expensive home. It says estate agents are looking to sell the London
mansion, set in four acres of Regent's Park, for as much as £250 million, which
would break the previous record of £210 million. The paper's sources say the
200-year-old villa was repossessed after its Saudi Arabian owners defaulted on a
loan. The Times reports that the 29,000-square-foot property has 40 bedrooms,
eight garages, luxury lifts, a sauna and a whirlpool, and was bought for just
£15 million in the 1980s. Now business and the closure of high street chains in
the UK is slowing down. With the details, here's Katie Silver. New research
shows that chain stores are closing at their slowest rate in eight years, with
takeaways, convenience stores and amusement arcades proving the most resilient.
The accountancy firm PwC calculated that last year more than 11,500 outlets shut
across Great Britain. That's 32 closures every day. There are still far more
chain stores closing than opening, though, with bank closures being the highest.
The conservative peer Lord Balfe has said the government needs to get real and
raise public sector pay to end strikes. An adviser on austerity measures to
David Cameron, Lord Balfe told the BBC strikers have a valid claim about pay not
keeping up with the rising cost of living, and an interim award should be
considered this year. It may lengthen the inflation. That may be a price we have
to pay. It's a case of common sense, and you can't just cut workers' living
standards and expect them not to complain. The Financial Times is reporting the
owner of Jaguar Land Rover has told the UK government it will need more than
half a billion pounds of government aid if it is to build a new battery factory
in Britain. It's understood the Indian-owned Tata Motors is choosing between
Spain and Somerset for its plant, with British ministers given weeks to make the
decision on financial support. On the markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones finished down seven-tenths of a percent at 32,656. The FTSE 100 also lost
seven-tenths of a percent, finishing at 7,876. In Japan a short time ago, the
Nikkei 225 was up 50 points at 27,495. On the currency markets, the pound is
trading at $1.20. Against the euro, sterling is at 1.14. That makes a euro 88
pence. Sport now, and four teams are through to the quarterfinals of the FA Cup.
Richard Newman rounds up this morning's headlines. The Leicester manager Brendan
Rodgers says he is to blame for their surprise FA Cup last 16 defeat at home to
Blackburn Rovers of the Championship. The 2021 winners were beaten 2-1.
Manchester City eased through to the quarterfinals with a 3-0 victory at Bristol
City. Fulham beat Leeds 2-0. And Brighton were 1-0 winners at Stoke. The
Brentford striker Ivan Toney is facing a lengthy suspension after accepting he
broke the Football Association's rules on betting. Cricketers are not allowed to
gamble on their own sport. Toney is understood to have admitted to the majority
of the 262 offences he was charged with but is contesting others. England's
cricketers step up their preparations for their defence of the men's 50-over
World Cup when they start a one-day international series in Bangladesh shortly.
Joss Butler's side are without the test players, who've just been involved in a
thrilling one-run defeat in New Zealand. The British tennis number one Cameron
Norrie has pulled out of the Mexican Open because of fatigue. He'd played back-
to-back ATP Tour finals, both against Carlos Alcaraz, winning the latest one in
Rio. And the professional cyclist Antonio Tiburi has been suspended by his team,
Trek Segafredo, after shooting dead a cat which was owned by a politician from
San Marino. He says he was trying out an air rifle. Finally, a glance back at
some of the stories that were making news on this date in earlier years. In
2016, a man accused of murdering 29 people in the Rio Lara bomb attack in Oma in
1988 was released from prison after the case against him collapsed. Prosecutors
decided inconsistent evidence meant there was no reasonable prospect of
convicting Seamus Daly. He's always denied the charges, despite being found
liable for the bomb in a civil trial three years earlier. Michael Gallagher,
whose son Aidan was killed in the explosion, was disappointed but not surprised.
It's soul-destroying and if you notice here this morning there's not very many
families because I think most families have given up on justice. They've given
up on the criminal justice system because they've been let down so many times.
That was the Rio Lara bomb attack in Oma in 1998. Charlie Chaplin's coffin was
stolen from a Swiss cemetery in 1978, three months after his funeral. It was
found 10 miles away two months later. On this day in 1973, Pink Floyd released
Dark Side of the Moon. More than 45 million copies have since been sold, making
the album one of the best-selling of all time. In 1953, Joseph Stalin suffered a
stroke, leading to his death four days later. Hundreds of suffragettes smashed
shop windows in The Strand and other streets in central London in 1917. The
leader of the Votes for Women campaign, Emmeline Pankhurst, was jailed for two
months. The SS City of Glasgow left Liverpool in 1854. It was bound for
Philadelphia with 480 people on board. But the passenger steamer was never seen
again and the fate of the ship remains a mystery. In 1815, Napoleon Bonaparte
returned to France from exile on the Mediterranean island of Elba. He marched on
Paris and ruled again for a period known as the 100 days, before his defeat at
the Battle of Waterloo. And that's the end of News Briefing. Now prayer for the
day with Father Matthew Roach Saunders, the Catholic priest at Welsh Martyrs'
Church in Aberystwyth. Good morning. Be joyful and keep the faith. These words
of St David can be a guide for us as we celebrate his feast day today. I'm in
Rome where 900 years ago this year, David was recognised by the then Pope
Callixtus II. Later today, Pope Francis will meet with several thousand pilgrims
for his weekly general audience. Most recently, the Pope has been covering the
theme, the passion for evangelisation, discussing the call that Jesus gives to
his disciples, both to the first twelve and to today's, to share the good news
he came to announce. It's tempting for someone who wants to follow Jesus to
worry about needing to find the perfect way to do this. I recently heard that
certain Italian recipes are so specific to a local town or village, that if
someone in the next village were to imitate the recipe exactly, it would never
be considered the same dish because the place it came from was different.
Amazing. I think there's something in this for the modern day disciple. Rather
than hold back from sharing our faith because we might not do it correctly, it's
beautiful to recognise that the way one person will do it will differ from
another, even if they follow the same methods. For St David, what unites all
this beautiful difference is the interior joy with which a disciple lives his or
her life. Joy invites. You see someone laughing a full body laugh and you want
to join in. And not only in laughter, a joyful person shows in the midst of
their pain a deep and lasting peace and it looks attractive. Someone like this
is someone I want to follow. I want to know what makes them tick. I want to know
what gives them purpose. For the disciple of Jesus, his joy alive in us can
truly change the world. Lord Jesus, you know the weight I carry today. Help me
to be a sower of peace and joy, whatever I bear in my heart. Help me to know you
bear it with me. Amen. Prayer for the Day was presented by Father Matthew Roach
Saunders, the Catholic priest at Welsh Martyrs' Church in Aberystwyth. Now on
Radio 4, on farming today with Anna Hill, should breeds of fast-growing
chickens, which account for 90% of the chickens we eat, be banned? Good morning.
Animal welfare campaigners want fast-growing chicken breeds to be declared
illegal. That's 90% of UK birds. Is it a serious challenge? At best, it's a
frivolous distraction and at worst, if it were to be upheld, then it simply will
compound the problem we're seeing at the moment around cost of production and
food inflation. We'll hear from both sides later. First today, farmers in
Northern Ireland say the new Windsor framework is not changing enough. Sheep
farmers in Northern Ireland have traditionally bought stock in Great Britain to
bring in new blood to their flocks. But since leaving the EU and with the
Northern Ireland Protocol, that's been much more difficult and in some cases,
impossible to do. I asked Alistair Armstrong, chair of the National Sheep
Association in Northern Ireland, how much impact the Northern Ireland Protocol
had had on sheep farmers there. There was an awful lot of lambs stuck in
Scotland. Farmers weren't able to get them in. Currently, if we go to buy sheep,
they only can come in if they have been scrapey tested. So we're very restricted
in what we can bring in till Northern Ireland. Well, we've had a look through
the new Windsor framework, specifically about livestock movements and there's
not much in there. So we did ask number 10 for a response. They said, livestock
will continue to move via the red lane to reflect the fact that the island of
Ireland is treated as a single epidemiological unit, such as for the movement of
livestock. However, technical easements have already been put in place to help
with the movement of livestock between Northern Ireland and GB. What's your
reaction to that statement? We're able to sell in GB, but it's buying new
bloodlines, new genetics that we require here to come in from GB. That there
hasn't got any easier. They've made some ground, but it's nowhere near what we
need to bring in new genetics. And then we also, if we do buy something and it
meets the spec for coming in, it's 60 days for a male before he can travel to
Northern Ireland and 45 days for a female. There's a big delay in there. You're
saying that even under this new framework, you're still going to have
difficulties. We are going to have severe difficulties. The only way we can be
relaxed to EBIT is if we're buying directly from farm, but prime stock, the top
end, people want to take them to an open market. Do you think they've forgotten
to include it? There doesn't seem to be much detail there. It's about the food.
Farmers are a small minority and people with their pets, we all have pets. They
seem to be relaxing things there whenever people's holiday and that they'll be
able to bring their pets with them and make things easier. Whilst livestock,
they have forgot about us to a certain degree, which doesn't make things easy.
Alistair Armstrong from the National Sheep Association in Northern Ireland. Now
all week we're talking about pigs. Today a medicine that controls a serious
illness in piglets will soon stop being used and there's concern that farmers
will turn to antibiotics instead. Zinc oxide prevents post weaning diarrhoea,
but when it's excreted in pig slurry it can pollute soils, so its use is ending
across Europe. Sarah Fulkingham joined vet Jim Morris on a farm near Driffield
in East Yorkshire. Coming into a freedom farrowing unit where the sows have
given birth about two weeks ago here and their piglets are suckling on their
mothers. It looks like there's about a dozen there and the sows are able to walk
around. Piglets are weaned at about 28 days. It can be a stressful time for them
and it's a time when they can get diarrhoea. I'm joined with Jim Morris who's
the senior vice president of the Pig Veterinary Society. In this country and
abroad on the continent zinc oxide is used in the feed to try and prevent
diarrhoea. First of all how serious is the diarrhoea in piglets? What's the
problems there? Before we started using zinc oxide, which has been in for about
30-35 years, some farms struggled with post weaning diarrhoea caused by E. coli
and could get up to 20% losses in their piglets at weaning. So as I just look
into this crate here, these piglets, they're at two weeks old I understand,
another two weeks and they'll be taken away from their mothers and that's the
stressful time for the piglets isn't it? Yes, being weaned is a stressful time.
They go from feeding on mum to feeding themselves, being kept in a litter to
being mixed with other pigs and all of those things are stressful. Because of
that it's important that we do our best to minimise that stress because when you
get stressed you become more susceptible to getting infections that can cause a
severe, often fatal, diarrhoea. So farmers are now using up their supplies of
zinc oxide which goes in the feed. It'll run out by summer, now looking for
alternatives or looking to exist without it basically and some farms have done a
dry run to see what the effects will be. What has happened on those farms? Some
farms have coped fine without it. Some farms have had horrible diarrhoea and
needed a lot of interventions to try and sort it out and some have actually had
to go back on to zinc oxide while they think about what else to do. Were they
all different types of systems? We've seen indoor farms and outdoor farms both
that have taken it out and had no issues and ones that have had big issues and
it seems to be the same and it doesn't seem to be. From the type of farm what is
important is how you look after the piglets. Mum needs to be feeding them well,
if you're using creep feed you need to make sure that they're taking that
properly and we've certainly seen with some pigs using a creep feed will help
that transition process. As a last resort farmers are allowed to use antibiotics
under veterinary supervision. Is there a risk that they're just going to use a
lot more antibiotics which is bad news for resistance? Over the last five years
pig farmers and their vets have done an enormous amount of work to reduce the
amount of antibiotics, trying to prevent disease rather than treat it. The worry
is that if we have an intractable diarrhoea caused by an E. coli and the only
thing that's going to be able to treat that is an antibiotic, for the welfare of
the piglets that's what we're going to have to do. So there is a big question
mark over possible increase in antibiotics? Yes. There's a big worry that that's
what we're going to see and we're going to start undoing the good work that
we've already done. Vet Jim Morris. And from pig welfare to poultry, the RSPCA
is backing a legal challenge which says fast growing breeds of chicken, which
are slaughtered at around six weeks old, should not be allowed. The charity, the
Humane League, are seeking a judicial review in the High Court, arguing that
fast growing broilers have intrinsic animal welfare challenges, including being
unable to support their own weight. Kate Parks is a poultry expert with the
RSPCA. She told me why they're backing the case. Well the RSPCA has long held
serious concerns about the welfare impact of faster growing breeds of chicken
and also the lack of clarity on animal welfare laws, which is why we wanted to
support this judicial review. We believe we've got the scientific evidence to
show that these faster growing breeds of chickens face problems and we want to
be able to present that to the court. You did set out a broiler welfare protocol
in 2017. Does your support for this case mean that that isn't working? The RSPCA
broiler breed protocol that was set out in 2017 sets out a way of assessing the
health and welfare benefits or issues of any particular breed and it's the
evidence from that trial that actually we are hoping to take to the court and be
able to present the findings to support the claim that faster growing breeds do
suffer health and welfare issues. We know that 90% of chickens in the UK are
from fast growing breeds. If that was declared illegal though, that would
actually bring down the national poultry industry wouldn't it? Is that what your
aim is? No, our aim is not to bring down the industry. We want to support a
transition to higher welfare systems and higher welfare breeds. We do know on
the flip side that between 5 and 10% of producers do use slower growing breeds.
So we do know it is commercially viable. We know that there is already a
transition to the use of more slower growing breeds through the Better Chicken
Commitment. It has been reported that by 2026 about a quarter of UK chickens
will be produced to the Better Chicken Commitment standards which includes the
use of slower growing breeds of chicken. There was this commitment for better
chicken, however very few people have taken that up. Only two supermarkets as
far as I know and several food outlets and also the slower growing chickens will
be much more expensive. Is that the right thing to do while people are finding
it hard to pay for food on the table? Yes, we do appreciate the challenges and
obviously at the moment it is a difficult time for consumers with the current
cost of living crisis. We do know from looking at RSPCA Assured products that we
haven't necessarily seen a trade down from RSPCA Assured into standard chickens
as a result of the current cost of living crisis. We are mindful of these issues
but we do still believe it is the right direction to be going in. Kate Parks
from the RSPCA. Richard Griffiths is Chief Executive of the British Poultry
Council. I asked him if he agreed that fast growing chickens suffer welfare
problems. We have world class welfare in this country and the poultry meat
sector has always followed the science when it comes to welfare. So this court
case if brought, at best it's a frivolous distraction and at worst if it were to
be upheld then it simply will compound the problem we are seeing at the moment
around cost of production and food inflation. It's not a frivolous thing. The
people who have launched this campaign are extremely concerned about the welfare
of the chickens. And let's just listen to Dr Siobhan Mullin who is now at
Queen's Belfast. She spoke to us when she was at the Bristol Vet School. The
faster growing birds are much less active. They're very motivated to go to the
feeder and eat and sit and actually don't really take much interest in things
around them. So it is quite a change that we've managed to breed into them. So
we've listened to what Dr Siobhan Mullin said. What's your reaction to that?
We're always engaged and always willing to discuss how to improve welfare. We
have to consider where welfare sits alongside food production and making sure
the shelves are stocked. What we're doing is being very productive and efficient
and still maintaining very high welfare standards. These are faster growing than
previously, but that is a reflection on the skill and expertise that embodies
the industry at the moment. But they're genetically selected to grow faster,
aren't they? It's nothing to do with how they're reared. Can you prove that the
welfare problems in these chickens don't occur? They're too heavy to stand up.
They're not moving very much. They're not actually really living like a chicken.
Well, I think that's the narrative that's being pushed, of course, but it's
simply not true. The birds are at the core, one of the most valuable parts of
our production chain. And their health and welfare is central to us being able
to provide food. There are some supermarkets and some food outlets who have
agreed to only sell slower grown chicken. There is a place, isn't there, for
slower grown chicken? If the marketplace can support other systems, lower
stocking density or slower growing or both, then that's the area we're happy to
provide, but the majority here is the core meat protein that the majority of
people in this country eat. So, there is a trade-off here and ultimately we need
to get the returns in the marketplace for whatever system we're growing in.
Richard Griffiths from the British Poultry Council. That's all we have time for
this morning. I'm Anna Hill. The studio manager is Ilse Laderman and the
producer in Bristol is Rebecca Rooney. Now on Radio 4 Tweet of the Day, the
RSPB's Matthew Capper recalls the joy of hearing a bitten. I grew up in Rutland,
but as a family we used to disappear to the coast, particularly North Norfolk
and I had a book all about where to watch birds in East Anglia and there were a
number of sites that mentioned bitten and I used to pester my mum and dad all
the time if we could go to those sites and I have to say I never saw one. At the
time bitten was on the verge of extinction in the UK and it wasn't until I was
19 and I made a particular trip to Minsmere down on the Suffolk coast and
finally saw my first bitten and I can tell you it was just a seminal moment. The
call is phenomenal. They do a call that's basically called a boom. Bitten's
boom. It can carry two or three miles and actually if you fast forward 20 odd
years later I was doing my dream job. I had arrived here at Old Moor managing a
site with a small reed bed and we sat down early in my time here and just tried
to work out a plan for could we get bitten on this site and it was only
literally a year later we had a booming bitten. In 2013 they bred successfully
four young, the first four juvenile bittens in South Yorkshire probably since
the late 1600s early 1700s and I can't tell you how satisfying that is from a
bird that as a kid I actually thought was a mythical creature has now come to
life as part of my work which is fantastic. This is B.