TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
As GMT, you're listening to the newsroom from the BBC World Service. I'm Gareth
Barlow, coming up. Voter enthusiasm is high and so too is our determination to
conduct credible elections. Nigerians are preparing to go to the polls in a few
hours time. Three candidates are in the running to become the president of
Africa's most populous country in what's been described as the most hotly
contested election in decades. Also to come. This is by far the biggest
logistical operation Turkish voters have ever faced. The fault line that they're
having to cover is over 100 kilometres long. We take to the air above Turkey as
vital aid is delivered to communities struggling after the deadly earthquakes.
Plus in the United States, California braces itself for unlikely winter storms
with the authorities warning of the risk of blizzards and will bring you all the
action from the world of sport. This is the BBC. The race to succeed, Mohammedu
Buhari, who's served the maximum two terms, is the most open since the military
left power nearly a quarter of a century ago. Mianny Jones explains. There's
nervous anticipation on the streets of Lagos, Nigeria's commercial hub. On the
eve of the elections, the city's infamous traffic evaporated as many headed back
to their home states to vote. There are 18 candidates in the presidential race.
The free front runners are the ruling parties Bo La Tinubu, former vice
president Atikwa Bubakar and the surprise story of the campaign, Peter Obie.
He's offered an unprecedented third alternative for those, especially young
people, who are frustrated with the two parties who run the country for the past
24 years. Whoever wins will have to tackle rising insecurity and a failing
economy. Russia is facing another round of Western sanctions a year after
launching its invasion of Ukraine. The European Union announced a tenth set of
measures targeting those spreading propaganda in support of Moscow or delivering
drones. The measures have been delayed by Poland, which complained that they
were too weak. Earlier the United States, Canada and Britain imposed further
restrictions. Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau detailed his country's
measures. We are announcing new sanctions on 129 individuals and 63 entities,
including Russian Deputy Prime Ministers, ministers, other members of the Office
of the President of Russia, members of the Russian military and those involved
in the production of artillery and weapons used in Ukraine. Finance ministers
from the G20 leading economies have been discussing relief for indebted
countries. They've been meeting for a second day in the Indian city of
Bangalore. The head of the IMF, Kristalina Gyogieva, admitted that disagreements
remained on the question of debt relief, but she said there was a commitment to
overcome them. There are still questions over the scale of losses which
creditors should accept. Anthony Albanese will shortly become the first serving
Australian Prime Minister to march in the gay and lesbian Mardi Gras in Sydney,
one of the world's largest. But his presence has attracted criticism, as Phil
Mercer reports. Anthony Albanese has attended Sydney's Mardi Gras before as an
opposition MP, but as a sitting Prime Minister he's making history by marching
in one of the world's largest LGBTQI events that could attract up to 300,000
spectators. He said he was committed to removing inequality based on sexuality
or identity. But critics insist Mr Albanese is pandering to a small minority
that's hijacking Australia's social agenda. Phil Mercer reporting. You're
listening to the latest world news from the BBC. The President of Peru, Dina
Boloate, has ordered the ambassador in Mexico to return home in response to
comments by her Mexican counterpart. President Andres Manuel López Obrador
described the Peruvian government as unconstitutional. He said Ms Boloate's
predecessor Pedro Castillo had been illegally ousted. Ms Boloate became
president in December after Mr Castillo was impeached following an attempt to
dissolve Congress. Floods and landslides in south-eastern Brazil are now known
to have killed at least 54 people with about 30 still missing. Most of those
killed were in and around the coastal town of São Sabústio in São Paulo state
where more than a month's worth of rain fell in 24 hours last weekend. A winter
storm is dumping rain and snow on southern California. There's a blizzard
warning for parts of Los Angeles County for the first time since 1989.
Snowflakes and sleets swirled around the Hollywood sign in the mountains behind
Los Angeles. David Willis explains. A massive low-pressure system driven from
the Arctic is said to be to blame for the sort of conditions that saw some
awaken to snow on their gardens and neighboring rooftops. Weather forecasters
say the higher mountains around LA could see more than two meters of snow in
some places, with winds gusting at up to 96 kilometers an hour. Officials are
warning of the danger of similarly high winds and flooding in some coastal areas
and heavy rain is expected to continue to buffet the region throughout the
weekend. Zoo keepers in the United States are seeking advice on how to keep a
four-year-old Andean bear in his enclosure after he escaped, briefly, for a
second time in a month. The bear, called Ben, was photographed sniffing rocks
while ambling down a path at the St. Louis Zoo in Missouri after apparently
clawing through heavy-duty steel cargo clips securing his pen. Staff described
the bear as very curious. BBC News. In just over two hours time, voters in
Africa's most populous country, Nigeria, will head to the polls to select their
next leader. The outgoing president, Mohammadu Bihari, is stepping down after
nearly eight years in power. His successor will inherit a country beset by
worsening insecurity and economic hardship. A total of 18 candidates are
campaigning for that top job, but opinion polls indicate that only three have a
realistic chance of trying to turn the country around. Bola Tenubu of the
governing APC, Atiku Abobaka from the opposition PDP and Peter Obi of the Labour
Party, who has the support of Nigeria's youth, are all seen as potential winners
of one of the most unpredictable elections in recent times. It's the first time
since the end of military rule in 1999 that the dominant two-party system is
facing a real challenge. The run-up to Hasno be marred by election, but the
Electoral Commission chairman, Mohammadu Yakububu, has said he's confident that
the poll will happen smoothly. Generally speaking, the situation nationwide is
calm. As far as our preparations are concerned, there has been no incident
involving the personnel or huge quantities of materials deployed by the
Commission. Voter enthusiasm is high, and so too is our determination to conduct
credible elections. Now, as I mentioned, Nigeria is Africa's most populous
nation. Over 200 million people live in the country. 87 million are eligible to
vote. That's a record number, as the BBC's Marnie Jones reports from Lagos.
Obviously, the numbers are higher than ever because of the rising population,
but the percentage of people that have collected their voter's card is the
highest that we've seen since the country transitioned to democracy 24 years
ago. And I think that what that tells you is that there's real engagement in
these elections. We've talked throughout the campaign about how this is the
first time that we've had three main contenders for the post of presidents. And
I think that what that's done is it seems to have motivated a lot of people to
get involved in this election. I think it's also because of the state that the
country is in now, right? You know, we're going through an economic crisis.
Inflation is at 21 percent. Food inflation is even higher. Unemployment is at 33
percent. So lots of people feeling the pinch. And then also insecurity is
another major issue that's affecting people's day-to-day lives. And I think that
all of, seeing all of these problems has made a lot of Nigerians want to make a
change, want to see a difference. It seems that lots of people have gone above
and beyond to get their voter's card this time around. Things in Lagos are
actually surprisingly quiet. And I think it's because a lot of people have been
traveling back to their homesteads for voting. You can only vote in Nigeria
where you registered to vote. And for a lot of people, that's where they're from
originally, their home states. There were concerns with the current cash crisis,
which some of your listeners might be aware of. There's an acute shortage of
cash in Nigeria at the moment because the currency has been redesigned and not
enough new bills have been printed. So there were concerns that because of this
shortage of cash, lots of people might not be able to travel. But certainly
traffic seems a lot lighter, which would suggest that people have already
started heading back. We'll follow the developments closely here on the BBC
World Service. Now then, the first anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine
was widely marked in many countries on Friday, especially in the West. The
milestone has given the opportunity for supporters of Ukraine to reaffirm their
commitment to President Zelensky's government. To that end, the European Union
has approved another round of sanctions against Russia, and they include
measures against those spreading propaganda in support of Moscow. Meanwhile, the
US has also said it will provide Ukraine with more weaponry. Here's the Pentagon
press secretary, Air Force Brigadier General Patrick Rider. Earlier today, the
Department of Defense announced $2 billion in additional security assistance.
This package reaffirms the steadfast support of the United States for Ukraine by
committing additional unmanned aerial systems and electronic warfare detection
equipment, as well as critical ammunition stocks for artillery and precision
fires capabilities that will bolster Ukraine's ability to repel Russian
aggression. In addition to that, earlier, the G7 Group of Wealthy Nations, which
includes the United States, said it would punish any countries helping Russia
evade those sanctions. Our State Department correspondent is Barbara Plattuscha,
and she says the White House is standing firm on its support for Ukraine.
President Biden did participate in a meeting with the Group of Seven Leaders,
that's the group of the largest developed economies, and urged them to stand
strong in their support for Ukraine and to show that the US would not waver, as
he says. There was this announcement of new military aid, $2 billion worth.
Also, more sanctions, and this would target around 200 entities and individuals,
many of them tied to technology and military industries that are evading or
trying to evade existing sanctions in Russia, but also in other countries, and
the Treasury Department said this was the most significant trench of sanctions
yet. It's been very tough so far, but they haven't been as devastating as the
West expected, and that is partly due to a handful of countries, actually. So
you have China, which has continued to do business with Russia, but also others
like US allies such as Turkey and India have continued to do business. And
they're sort of an example of a middle ground of countries that don't support
the invasion, but they see it more as a European and American problem than a
global one, and they want to look after their own interests. A recent poll
showed that 48% of Americans support continuing to send weapons to Ukraine.
Shortly after the war started, that was 60%, so that number has dropped. Then
politically, you have the Republican Party divided. There is bipartisan support,
but there is an element on the right wing of the Republican Party that wants to
either stop or at least reduce the aid. Having said that, all the people who
signed the checks, so those are the leaders of the committees that matter, they
all do support continuing aid to Ukraine. In one further development, though,
speaking to ABC News on Friday, President Biden said he's ruling out for now the
request by Kyiv to supply Ukraine with F-16 fighter jets. So then, one year on,
how is the invasion being viewed across the border in Russia? A question I put
to our Russia editor, Steve Rosenberg. I was watching TV today here in Russia,
and they weren't focusing at all on the fact that it's one year since Vladimir
Putin gave the order for Russian troops to go into Ukraine. Obviously, they were
reporting on the situation there, but they weren't focusing on the anniversary,
and I think there's a good reason for that, because this special military
operation, as Putin still calls it, was supposed to have been done and dusted
within days, weeks maximum. It's now entering its second year, and over the
first year, this operation has resulted in very heavy Russian military
casualties. Hundreds of thousands of Russian citizens have had to be drafted
into the army. It has been quite a disaster for the Kremlin. Having said that,
Vladimir Putin seems determined to continue and seems to believe that he can
secure victory. Whilst the Russian population isn't really talking about the
war, the West very much is. The EU has announced a tenth round of sanctions, the
US has announced more military support running to the billions, more sanctions
as well. What impact will they have on Moscow, on the President? You know, a
year ago, when we saw that tsunami of international sanctions being announced
against Russia, many people had predicted that a few months later, the Russian
economy would collapse. It hasn't. These sanctions haven't forced a Kremlin
U-turn. And, you know, if he had a dictionary on his desk in the Kremlin, I'm
sure that you wouldn't find the words de-escalation or off-ramp or defeat in
there. He seems determined to continue. He seems to believe either that, you
know, he can secure a victory, or perhaps he thinks that he's in it so deep now
that he doesn't see a way back for him. He's telling the nation, really, get
used to the situation. Steve Rosenberg there, and for more of Steve's insight
and analysis, head to our website, it's bbc.com slash news. Frigid temperatures
are causing chaos in Southern California and Los Angeles, and it's bracing for
the first blizzard in more than 30 years. Snow and sleet are already swirling
around the Hollywood sign, and part of a major road, Five Freeway, has been
closed. Coastal flooding and landslide warnings have been issued, and the
meteorologist, Eric Volt, says there's more misery to come. Part of the reason
it's so powerful is the amount of cold air that we experienced even earlier in
the week. We had a lot of wind and cold temperatures. The snow levels fell down
to about 1,000 feet, which is in foothill areas of most communities. And we're
expecting, over the next 24 to 48 hours, a lot of heavy rain, a lot of intense
downpours, even some lightning at times with small hail. Our North America
correspondent is David Willis, and I caught up to him shortly before we came on
air. Where I am, Gareth, it is absolutely bucketing it down with rain. And a
short while ago here, officials extended a so-called flash flood warning out of
concern that heavy seas, combined with winds of what they say could be up to 96
kilometres an hour, could leave some coastal areas here underwater. They're also
urging people to only travel if it's an emergency, and they, of course,
previously issued a very rare blizzard warning, fearing that some of the higher
mountains around this city of Los Angeles could see more than two metres of snow
in some places, accompanied, of course, by those high winds, which would pose
dangers of their own. Now, normally, at this time of the year, winter is more or
less over in Los Angeles, and you can see the Hollywood sign and the palm trees
that surround it from miles away. Well, I can tell you, I've just come from
there, and from the normal vantage point, it is invisible. It is shrouded in a
dense cloud of fog and heavy rain. I'm thinking back to all the times that you
and I have talked about the weather in California or Los Angeles, and it's
generally because of wildfires and forest fires and issues like that. How
unusual then is it for this to be transformed into potentially a winter
wonderland? What's unusual about all this is that we've seen the so-called fire
season resulting from the long-running drought here get longer and more intense,
it seems, with every passing year. And not only are these blizzard-like
conditions contrary to what people in this part of the world have become used
to, they are also, in very sharp contrast to the situation on the East Coast,
meteorologically, which normally sees very harsh winters, and where this year,
the winters have been fairly mild. I travelled yesterday from Washington, D.C.,
where it was sunny and very warm, to Los Angeles. I arrived here to the sort of
temperatures that I should have left behind in Washington. It's absurd. Like you
say, the East Coast is far more used to this kind of weather. Are people
prepared? I don't think we've really seen anything quite like this. As I said,
this is the first blizzard warning that's been issued here since 1989, and hence
there are a lot of warnings, the most basic being don't go out, stay indoors,
it's going to get really bad out there. The voice of David Willis. Search and
rescue operations are continuing in southeastern Brazil after record levels of
torrential rain caused severe flooding and deadly landslides around the beach
town of São Sébastiau in São Paulo state. At least 54 people have been killed in
hillside communities and more than 30 are still missing. Wendy Urquhart has this
report. Torrential rain has been battering southeastern Brazil for more than a
week, sending rivers of mud down hillsides. Homes perching precariously on the
slopes didn't stand a chance. One thousand rescue workers, 50 vehicles, 14
helicopters and 53 engineering teams were deployed to disaster areas in São
Paulo state to help find survivors. They've managed to pull dozens out of the
mud, but many more didn't make it. Valdemar, who's a resident of São Sébastiau,
is haunted by the fading cries of his mother. All my houses were broken down.
The broken tiles and shingles fell on us, leaving us injured. Everyone was
frightened. I called out to my mother hoping she would answer, but all I heard
were three cries from her and nothing else. At that moment, I knew that she was
taken away from us forever. Nearly 2,000 people were forced to evacuate their
homes temporarily, and some 760 are now homeless. President Luis Inátheolula da
Silva flew over the disaster area earlier this week and reiterated the dangers
of building in high-risk areas, but his words are unlikely to make a difference.
At least 9.5 million people have built flimsy homes on the hillsides of Brazil.
Most of them are in areas that are at high risk of flooding or landslides. And
that's where we leave our colleagues on the BBC World Service for today. Good
morning. Welcome to BBC Radio 4. I'm Vijay Galas. Thank you so much for joining
us. It's 25th past 5 on Saturday, 25th February, the 80th anniversary of the
peerless George Harrison. As he would have no doubt reminded us this morning,
all the world is birthday cake. Take a piece, but not too much. Sarah Keith-
Lucas is standing by with a shipping forecast for us, but first let's hear
what's coming up this evening here on Radio 4. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC Radio drama. The Huntsman now purposefully directed his
footsteps. Analyzing the most groundbreaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical. It's this room. He just took your wallet. You can go to
different places and tell the stories from different points of view. Dramatic
beats with me, Michael Simmons Roberts. Everything in British storytelling on
television owes so much to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Tonight at 8.
Now let's head down to the BBC Weather Centre and join Sarah Keith-Lucas.
Morning Sarah. Morning, Vijay. And now, this shipping forecast issued by the Met
Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0505 on Saturday,
25th February, 2023. There are warnings of gales in Viking, North-Adsira, South-
Adsira, Forties, Fisher and Biscay. The general synopsis of midnight. High,
southwest Bailey, 1026. Expected West Fair Isle, 1030 by midnight tonight. Low,
Biscay, 1003. Moving slowly west and losing its identity. The area forecast for
the next 24 hours. Viking, North-Adsira, South-Adsira, Forties. North-Adsira,
5-7. Occasionally gale 8 at first, then decreasing 4 at times. Wintery showers,
good. Occasionally poor at first. Cromartie, 4th. North, 4-6. Vearing northeast,
3-5. Showers, good. Tyne, Dogger, Fisher, Germanbeit, Humber. Northalee, 5-7.
Occasionally gale 8 at first in northwest Fisher. Vearing northeast, 4-6.
Showers, moderate or good. Thames, Dover. North, 4-6. Vearing northeast, 5-7.
Showers, good. White, Portland, Plymouth. Northeast, 5-7. Showers, good. North
Biscay, easterly or northeasterly, 5-7. Occasionally gale 8 at first. Showers,
good. Occasionally moderate. South Biscay, cyclonic, becoming northeasterly
later, 4-6. Rain or showers, good. Occasionally moderate. South Fitzroy,
northerly 4-5. Becoming cyclonic, 3-5. Rain or showers, perhaps thundery at
first. Moderate or good. Occasionally poor at first. North Fitzroy, Sol.
Easterly, veering easterly, 5-6. Occasionally 7 in east. Decreasing 4 at times
in west. Showers, good. Occasionally moderate. Lundy, Fastnet, Irish Sea. East
or northeast, 4-6. Showers, good. Shannon, northeast, veering east or southeast,
4-6. Showers, good. Rockall, Malin, Hebrides. Northeast, veering east, then
southeast later, 3-5. Showers, then fair, good. Bailey, variable 3 or less.
Becoming southerly, 4 or 5. Occasionally 6 later in northwest. Mainly fair,
good. Ferral, north 4-6. Veering northeast, 3-5. Becoming variable 3 or less
later. Wintery showers, then fair, good. Occasionally poor at first. Ferros,
variable 2-4. Becoming southwesterly, 4-6 in west and north. Occasional rain
later, good. Occasionally moderate. Southeast Iceland, variable 3 at first in
southeast. Otherwise southwesterly, 4-6. Occasionally 7 in north. Rain at times,
moderate or good. And now the weather reports from coastal stations for 0400.
Tyree Automatic, northeast by north 4. 24 miles, 1023, rising slowly. Stornoway,
north 3, 12 miles, 1023, rising slowly. Lucas, north northwest 2, 27 miles,
1021, rising more slowly. Bridlington, north 5, 1015, rising slowly. Sandetti
Light Vessel Automatic, north 5, 11 miles, 1012. Jersey, northeast by east 4, 16
miles, 1013, steady. Channel Light Vessel Automatic, northeast 5, 1014. Silly
Automatic, east northeast 5, 13 miles, 1015, rising slowly. Valencia, east
northeast 2, 14 miles, 1019, falling slowly. Longlesway, northeast by north 3,
1020, rising slowly. Malinhead, northeast 4, 9 miles, 1022, rising slowly. And
here is the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at
0500 on Saturday 25 February 2023. General Situation High pressure currently
centred to the west of Scotland will drift slowly eastwards towards Scotland
during the next couple of days. Today, the resulting north to north-easterly
airflow will bring further showers to eastern and southern parts of the United
Kingdom, whereas most western and northern areas will be dry. Cape Wrath to
Rattray Head, including Orkney. Northerly 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first in
east, veering north-easterly 3 or 4, becoming variable 3 or less later. Showers
then fair, good. Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed North 4 or 5, occasionally 6
at first except in firth of 4, decreasing 3 at times later. Showers, good.
Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North 5 or 6, veering northeast 4 or 5 later.
Showers, good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point. North 5 or 6, veering northeast 4 or 5
later. Showers, good. Gibraltar Point to Northfalland. Northerly, veering north-
easterly later, 4 to 6. Showers, good. Northfalland to Celsi Bill. Northerly,
veering north-easterly 4 to 6, occasionally 3 at first in west, increasing 7 at
times later in east. Showers, mainly in east, good. Celsi Bill to Lime Regis.
Northeast 4 or 5, occasionally 3, close in shore and 6 further offshore. Showers
for a time, good. Lime Regis to Lanzend, including the Isles of Scilly. Easterly
or northeasterly 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in west. Showers, good. Lanzend to St
David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. East or northeast 4 to 6, mainly
fair, good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's Channel.
Northeast 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, decreasing 3 at times later, fair,
good. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway. North or northeast 3 to 5, mainly
fair, good. Isle of Man. Northeast 4 or 5, occasionally 3 later, fair, good.
Lockfoil to Carlingford Lock. Easterly or northeasterly 3 to 5, occasionally
variable 2 at first in north, fair, good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre,
including the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. North or northeasterly 2 to 4,
veering easterly or northeasterly 3 to 5, fair, good. Mull of Kintyre to Ardner-
Merkham Point. Northeasterly 3 to 5 at first in north, otherwise variable mainly
easterly 2 to 4, veering south-easterly later, fair, good. Ardner-Merkham Point
to Cape Wrath. Northeast 3 to 5, veering east 3 or 4, then south or southeast 2
or 3 later, showers at first in north, good. Shetland Isles. North 5 or 6,
decreasing 3 or 4, backing northwest 2 to 4 later. Wintery showers, then fair,
good, occasionally moderate at first. That completes the shipping bulletin. I'll
be back with a general weather forecast in a few minutes. Thank you, Sarah. This
is BBC Radio 4, it's half past five on Saturday 25 February. Good morning. This
is News Briefing with Vigialis. There are signs the UK and the EU may be close
to agreeing a deal on post-Brexit trade in Northern Ireland. Health officials
are drawing up plans for dealing with a bird flu pandemic after a girl in
Cambodia died from the disease. And in sport, England's cricketers are in
control of the second test against New Zealand in Wellington. Talks between the
UK and the EU about a deal covering post-Brexit trade arrangements for Northern
Ireland are intensifying. Downing Street has described negotiations leading into
the weekend as positive, following repeated delays to a formal announcement. The
current Northern Ireland protocol avoids a hard border with the Irish Republic,
but requires checks on goods arriving from other parts of the UK. Here's our
political correspondent, David Wallace Lockhart. The DUP, Northern Ireland's
main unionist party, wants to see significantly less EU oversight. There are
signs that a new deal is close. Rishi Sunak has spoken with retailers and
business representatives. The Foreign Secretary James Cloverly has pulled out of
a long planned trip to the Middle East at the beginning of next week. While
alterations to the protocol seem imminent, it may be difficult for Rishi Sunak
to get the type of wholesale change that the DUP and some in his own party are
looking for. Health officials in the UK have been drawing up plans to deal with
a possible bird flu pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in Cambodia after
contracting the H5N1 strain of the disease. The UK Health Security Agency has
said that high levels of transmission in wild birds present a constant threat,
but there's no evidence the virus is getting better at infecting humans. Tens of
millions of people are preparing to go to the polls in Nigeria's presidential
election. The contest is being seen as wide open, with three candidates vying to
succeed, Muhammadu Buhari, who is stepping down after reaching an eight-year
constitutional term limit. The run-up has been marred by violence, but the
Electoral Commission Chairman, Mahmoud Yakubu, has said he's confident the poll
will happen smoothly. Generally speaking, the situation nationwide has come as
far as our preparations are concerned. There has been no incident involving the
personnel or huge quantities of materials deployed by the Commission. Voter
enthusiasm is high, and so too is our determination to conduct credible
elections. A fifth man has been arrested in connection with the shooting of a
police officer in Oma. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is critically ill
after the attack on Wednesday. Officers say they are treating the shooting as an
act of terrorism, and they're focusing on the dissident group, the new IRA. The
Defence Secretary Ben Wallace has said the British Army's Ajax armoured vehicle
programme is back on track following numerous setbacks. The vehicles are yet to
enter service despite a £5.5bn deal being signed more than 12 years ago. Efforts
have been made to address issues with vibration and noise to allow the Ajax
personnel carriers to enter service in about 18 months' time. Almost a million
more households in England, Scotland and Wales can now start applying for
government help with their winter energy bills. They include those who live in
park homes, care homes and properties off the grid who've been unable to claim
up to now. It's been a difficult winter for these residents of a park site in
Nottinghamshire. You just try to adjust things even if it's only a little bit,
you know, just to keep that bill down a bit more. On the morning when I get up,
I wrap myself in a blanket, because it's time that I put my heating on. Because
we are a small minority, I do believe we have been forgotten. The government
says it knows it's a difficult time for families and it's working to get support
to households. Artifacts from a warship which sank off the Norfolk coast more
than 300 years ago are going on display in Norwich for the first time. Hundreds
of people died when the Gloucester hit a sandbank but not the Duke of York who
went on to become King James II. Among items on show are the ship's bell, a pair
of spectacles and a silk petticoat found in a chest. Now, Sarah Keith-Lucas is
back with the forecast. Thanks, Biggie. Well, we've got high pressure sitting to
the north-west of the UK today, and that means we're going to see mainly dry
conditions for western areas, but there'll be a few scattered showers moving in
for eastern parts and quite a cold north-easterly breeze developing today too.
So let's look at all of southern England, Wales, the Midlands, north-west
England, south-west Scotland, northern Scotland and northern Ireland. Chilly
starts the day, few misty and foggy patches around, particularly for northern
Ireland. Best of the sunshine will be through the morning hours. Later on this
afternoon we'll see that cloud just tending to increase bubbling up through the
course of the day and it will feel quite breezy as well. But further east, so
eastern England, north-east England and eastern Scotland, here we've already got
a few scattered showers around and I think we'll move a little bit further
inland away from the coast as we move through the course of the day as that
cloud builds. Cold north-easterly breeze, so it really will feel quite chilly if
you're exposed to that breeze. And some of those showers are a little bit wintry
over the highest ground, say for the borders, perhaps down towards the North
York moors as well. Now top temperatures across the UK, somewhere between about
5 to 8 degrees today, but feeling colder if you're exposed to that brisk breeze
in the east, where gusts could reach around 45 miles per hour. Over night
tonight it's looking quite cold and frosty, particularly for Scotland, where
temperatures will be down to around minus 2 or minus 3 degrees, close to
freezing further south. And tomorrow, fewer showers than today, little bit more
sunshine, lighter winds and highs around 7 or 8 degrees. Sarah, thanks very much
indeed. Time now for a look at the papers. Several report that Rishi Sunak is on
the verge of announcing a new Brexit deal. The Guardian says the agreement would
overhaul post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland, bringing to an
end a two-year standoff with the European Union. The Daily Telegraph reports
that following positive breakthroughs in the past week, a legal text could be
presented to Parliament as soon as Monday. But the paper says it's not yet known
whether the deal will be accepted by the Democratic Unionist Party. According to
The Times, Rishi Sunak is prepared to publish the agreement with or without the
DUP's endorsement. The paper says the Prime Minister is also facing a direct
clash with Tory Eurosceptics, one of whom has warned he risks civil war. Some of
the front pages picture events held to mark the first anniversary of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine. The Financial Times shows women paying their respects in a
cemetery in the western city of Lviv. The paper's main story focuses on more
sanctions being announced against Moscow amid what the FT says are mounting
concerns about the role China is playing in the Russian war economy. An
editorial in The Daily Telegraph strongly criticises a peace plan proposed by
Beijing, saying it all but calls on western countries to stop supplying arms to
Ukraine while overlooking and excusing Russia's unprovoked aggression. A
mother's plea for her daughter's killer to be blocked from leaving prison is the
main story for The Daily Mail. The paper says the man, Robert Brown, is due for
automatic release in November after serving half of his 26-year jail term for
manslaughter. Diana Parks tells the Mail he still poses a risk to her family and
the public and she wants the Justice Secretary, Dominic Raab, to intervene. A
Minister of Justice spokesman tells the Mail that Mr Raab will do everything in
his power to keep the most dangerous offenders behind bars. The Daily Express
credits the Queen consort with Forcing Royal Dahl's publisher to announce that
the author's books will be printed in their original form. The paper says
Camilla was shocked and dismayed about the removal of portions that could cause
offence. An editorial in The Sun bemoans the publisher's apparent U-turn. One
minute woke. The next, a joke, is the paper's verdict. The Daily Mirror and The
Daily Star say some shops have run out of turnips after the Environment
Secretary Terry's coffee suggested them as a way of getting around shortages of
other fruit and veg. The Mirror pictures empty supermarket shelves and says the
Minister's advice sparked a run on the root vegetable. Recalling their turnips
were the favourite food of the Blackadder character Baldrick. The Star has the
headline, Not Such a Cunning Plan, milady. A school cricket coach from Cumbria
has spoken to the Times about his one regret from teaching the rising England
star Harry Brooke, who's thrilled the sport by breaking batting records. Martin
Spate confesses that he told the school's head of hockey that Brooke would one
day make the England team. The hockey coach swiftly put on a £100 bet at odds of
£100 to one. Unfortunately, he explained, Spate, I did not. It's more now, and
in cricket, England are dominating in the second test against New Zealand in
Wellington. With more on that and the rest of the headlines, here's Paul Sarras.
The tourists declared on £435 for eight and reduced the host to £138 for seven
before rain stopped play in the evening session. James Anderson and Jack Leach
each took three wickets as England looked to seal a 2-0 series whitewash.
Elsewhere, England's women were knocked out of the T20 World Cup beaten by the
host South Africa by six runs in the semifinal yesterday. Rugby Union Six
Nations Championship returns today after a rest weekend. Wales host England in
Cardiff. The England head coach, Steve Borthwick, says they're looking forward
to the challenge of taking on a hugely experienced Welsh side. Their forward
pack of things got more than 500 caps in it on its own. So I think we're playing
against the team that knows how to prepare for test matches. And we're at a
different stage. We haven't quite got that same level of experience, but I think
we've got a load of young players who are desperate to do well. We've got a
group of players who care deeply about the England rugby team. And we want to
build a team that we can be proud of and our supporters can be proud of. Ireland
face Italy in Rome in today's other match in the Six Nations. In football, a
second half goal from Mano Solomon salvaged a point for Fulham in a 1-0 draw
against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Craven Cottage in the first of the weekend's
Premier League fixtures. There are six more matches in the Premier League today,
with the leaders Arsenal travelling to Leicester City. Bournemouth hosting
Manchester City and the bottom two meeting at Elland Road, with Leeds hosting
Southampton. In snooker Kyronn Wilson will face Sean Murphy in the semi-final of
the players' championship after a 6-1 victory over Gary Wilson in the last
eight. Ali Carter awaits in the final. In tennis, Andy Murray is up against the
third seed, Daniil Medvedev in the final of the Qatar Open in Doha this
afternoon, after coming from a set down to beat Yury Lhachka in the last four,
and Wigan registered their first win of the Super League season, with a 60
points to nil thrashing of Wakefield Trinity. Well, Sarah's. Finally, a glance
back at some of the events that were making news on this date in earlier years.
A year ago, Ukraine said thousands of machine guns had been distributed to
volunteers who wanted to defend the capital on the second day of Russia's
invasion. Details of how to make petrol bombs were broadcast on television. In
2016, a report heavily criticised the BBC for failing to stop the sexual abuse
carried out by Jimmy Savile and Stuart Hall. The BBC's director general at the
time, Lord Hall, said he was deeply sorry for the hurt caused to victims. In
1991, the director of public prosecutions announced that the convictions of the
Birmingham Six, who were wrongly jailed for IRA attacks on two pubs in
Birmingham, could no longer be considered safe and satisfactory. The men who had
always maintained their innocence were released from prison within weeks of the
decision following a third appeal hearing. On this day in 1972, miners called
off a seven-week call strike, which had left Britain so short a par that the
government declared a state of emergency. Members of the National Union of Mine
Workers accepted a deal equivalent to a 21% annual pay increase, the Prime
Minister Edward Heath warned that tough times lay ahead. The fight against
rising prices must be fought with no holds barred. And now, after the miners'
strike, it must go on more vigorously, not less. If we don't fight hard enough
or even worse if we lose, then once again we all suffer. In 1964, the boxer
Cassius Clay became heavyweight champion of the world when he beat Sonny Liston
in one of the biggest upsets in the sports history. Liston, who had been thought
invincible, retired at the end of the sixth round of the fight in Miami. And in
1920, the world's first air traffic control tower was commissioned by the UK
government. The tower was built at Croydon in South London. And that look-back
completes today's news briefing. Now, it's time for prayer for the day with the
Reverend Dr. Sarah Rowland Jones, the Dean of St David's Cathedral in
Pembrokeshire. Good morning. Next Wednesday is St David's Day. 900 years ago,
his international significance was recognised by the then Pope, Callixtus II. We
shall be celebrating St David, Dehui Sant, and this anniversary throughout the
coming week, with prayers from various places associated with him, according to
later accounts of his life. I'm recording this in Jerusalem, which St David may
have visited in the sixth century, and where, it is said, he met the patriarch
who made him Archbishop of the Britons. We have no way of knowing whether he
made the journey or not, though we do know that pilgrims from Britain were
certainly travelling to the Holy Land from the fourth century onwards. Indeed,
nearly 200 years before St David's supposed visit, St Jerome complained at
pilgrims coming to Jerusalem from near and far. He wrote, I do not presume to
limit God's omnipotence or restrict to a narrow strip of earth, him whom the
heavens cannot contain. He went on to say, access to the courts of heaven is as
easy from Britain as it is from Jerusalem, for the Kingdom of God is within you.
Lord Jesus Christ, thank you your presence is not restricted, and that you are
with us wherever the pilgrim journey of life leads us. Help us, like St David,
to know the Kingdom of God within us, and as St David famously taught his
followers, may we also be joyful, keep the faith, and be diligent in doing the
little things you put before us. Amen. Dr Sarah Roland-Jones. Now on Radio 4,
Forethought with Ollie Mann. Hello and welcome to Forethought. Today's show is a
little different because it marks the end of this series of talks after a run of
12 years here on Radio 4. Now I've presented these programs for the past five
years, but producers Giles Edwards and Sheila Cook have been involved since the
start, finding speakers, working with them on their scripts and helping them
perfect their mic technique, which in lockdown basically meant helping them
soundproof their bedrooms. So for this farewell episode, Giles is producing, and
Sheila is our speaker. Hi Sheila. Hello Ollie. Fancy seeing you here.
Absolutely. Well it is very strange to be this side of the glass as it were,
across the table from you as opposed to trying to whisper sweet nothings about
where do we go next in your ear. I think the thought basically was we can't
afford to bring back all our favourite speakers, so you're the budget option. So
you're just going to bring us some best bits in audio form. Take it away. When
the controller of Radio 4 commissioned Forethought back in 2011, he wanted a
series of talks that would give the network something different. A point of view
was already well established as the weekly essay slot where a small number of
high-profile writers aired their opinions. Forethought, by contrast, was to be a
platform for many voices, including people who'd never been published or who'd
never broadcast before. Each speaker would take part only once and share not
just an idea, but also the personal experience that shaped it. It was this need
to find speakers who had a story to tell, as well as an interesting idea to put
forward, that led to over a decade of encounters with remarkable people. I've
been lucky enough to produce 148 out of nearly 400 talks. Each one was
different, but together they left me with a sense of hope, especially when
speakers had overcome adversity. One of the first contributors I had the
privilege to work with was a teacher and headmaster, Dick Moore. Thanks to his
job, I knew he'd be comfortable speaking in public, but how would he feel about
broadcasting the details of a family tragedy? I was apprehensive before our
first meeting, concerned not to intrude on private grief. Dick's son, Barney,
had taken his own life at the age of 21 after struggling for years with
depression. I needn't have worried. Dick's openness and his sense of urgency to
help other young people who were suffering with mental illness made him want to
tell Barney's story. He'd already started to campaign for greater awareness in
schools, and his script reflected his understanding of what needed to be done.
Sticking plasters don't work. Bolton counsellors and one-off training are but a
drop in the ocean, he said. Real progress requires long-term commitment and a
genuine desire to change the culture. Life's not about waiting for the storms to
pass. It's about learning to dance in the rain. At the recording of Dick's
forethought, in front of a live audience, I could feel the intensity of the
silence as everyone listened. After the broadcast, the response was huge. People
called it courageous and required listening for all schools, family and friends
of teenagers. And speaking to Dick recently, it was gratifying to hear how
forethought had proved to be a springboard. In the ten years since, he's given
500 talks to schools and 100 talks to businesses in the UK and abroad. Using
personal experience to help others also became a mission for Stuart J. Cole. In
2016, his compelling forethought told the story of how he conquered his
addiction to drink and drugs. He was in what he described as such a terrible
cycle leading to his own self-destruction, that he decided to take himself as
far away as possible from his home environment in London. Leaving his girlfriend
and daughter behind, Stuart took the extreme step of getting himself arrested
and jailed for possession of drugs on the Caribbean island of St Lucia. During
two years in prison, he wrote the story of his life in tiny handwriting on
scraps of paper, which he subsequently turned into a book. Through writing, I
was able to offload the past, he said, to envision the future and find ways to
make it happen. He returned to the UK, studied and trained as a drugs and
alcohol worker, and married his girlfriend. I spoke to him recently for a World
Service documentary about drugs in prison, and found him still helping others to
overcome addiction and rebuild their lives. We used to go on the road with
forethought before the pandemic struck, often recording at summer festivals for
their atmosphere and a ready-made audience. At Womad, the World Music and Arts
Festival, the Syrian musician Maya Yousaf delivered a particularly moving talk.
She's a virtuoso performer on the Kanun, a 78-stringed Middle Eastern harp. Maya
migrated to the UK after the outbreak of war in Syria. Her voice broke with
emotion as she wondered when she could return to Damascus to see her parents
again. It was a poignant moment which underscored her idea of using music to
help refugees. Maya explained how she realised that the Kanun evoked the sound
of Syria, the sound of home, for people who'd fled their country. So she started
to use her music to help people cope with their sense of dislocation. And she
developed a work called The Seven Gates of Damascus, especially for displaced
children. To me, the act of playing music is the opposite of death, said Maya.
It is a life and hope-affirming act. To me, music is my healer and an antidote
to what is happening, not only in Syria but across the whole world. Another kind
of hopeful message came from speakers who wanted to preserve something important
from our past or our present way of life. In a fast-changing world, they urged
us to see what was of value, to guard against its destruction by forces outside
our control. The cultural historian Travis Elbrough wanted to protect public
parks as institutions for the people. Andrew Martin argued for keeping cash in
the face of the advancing tide of electronic banking. Cash spared him, he said,
from feeling every transaction was monitored, and it also acted as an aid to
thrift. I have become like my dad, said Andrew, who 40 years ago would be
deflected from a whimsical purchase because it would mean breaking into a tenor.
And Dr Mark Williams spoke from his experience as a GP about the need to
preserve the traditional home visit. While he embraced new technology and
artificial intelligence to improve treatment for his patients, he argued that
the home visit still played a vital role. The truth is, said Mark, that home
visits give us the best insights into our patients' real lives. One of the most
memorable forethought speakers and someone who I felt honoured to work with was
Amy Golden. After suffering from meningitis as a baby, Amy was left severely
physically disabled. She can move only her right arm, and she can't speak. Amy
communicated by pointing to letters on a board. I could have a board with an
electronic voice, she said, but I like the attention of the other person. If you
want to know what I want to say, you have to focus on me. You can't ignore me or
pretend I'm not here. You have to concentrate hard to see what I'm saying. And
we always get there in the end. We had to work out how to do the recording so
that Amy could be in her wheelchair centre stage. The solution was for an actor
Rhiannon needs to sit alongside Amy reading her script. Rhiannon's sensitivity
and the chemistry between her and Amy made it feel as if she really was Amy's
voice. A composer and director Craig Christie, who heard Amy's forethought in
Australia, felt moved to write a musical about her life. Amy herself starred in
the glorious show called Get On With It, in a tribute to her positivity, which I
saw on the opening night. As Amy said, I try to get on and think of other
things. Most days are good. Best not to take things too seriously. If you can't
laugh, there's no point. I live in the moment. I go with the flow. Life is too
short. I am happy now because if I wasn't like I am, I wouldn't be who I am.
When I first met Adam Morse, I understood why he felt he'd found a new power
because of his challenging circumstances. It was as if he possessed some kind of
special aura. At the age of 19, Adam found he was losing his sight to a rare eye
disease. His ambition at the time was to be a film director and he was
determined that this wouldn't stop him. He eventually found a backer for his
first feature film, despite being registered blind with only slight peripheral
vision. Adam told the producer, cinematographer and lead actor about his
disability, but he kept it secret from the rest of the cast and crew. He waited
until the film was about to be premiered before revealing the truth. Everyone
was incredulous, whereas Adam had always been confident of his ability to direct
actors despite his loss of sight. I may not be able to judge physical appearance
anymore, but I can connect onto someone else's frequency to gauge how they are
feeling, he said. It's as though I'm using my inner eye to look into someone's
soul. I reflect on the last 11 years as a period of my life that reshaped me
spiritually. Sometimes our faith is shaken, but I find that the universe always
gives after it is taken. Adam has since gone on to blaze a trail for differently
abled filmmakers and actors. Most recently, he appears as a sighted person in an
impressive short film called Suppression. Producing Forethought has been a
delight because of the chance to meet so many interesting and extraordinary
people. Few of them are famous, and yet they all have remarkable stories to
tell, stories which have left me with a sense of hope, hope for humanity, for
its resilience, creativity, imagination and will to make things better. Many
have faced great challenges in life. Some of their experiences have been painful
and private, yet they've been willing to share their stories in order to
communicate their ideas and insights, often calling for society to change. At a
time when so much in the news seems bleak, it's good to remember that our
forethoughters are out there, and if we look, their like are all around us,
quietly making the world a better place. Sheila, thank you, and thank you for
listening. With that, we are done. Remember, you can check out almost every
episode we've ever made of Forethought, the full archive, on BBC Sounds, and if
you head over to the Forethought podcast now, you'll hear Sheila and I chatting
a little bit more about our memories of making this show over the last 12 years.
Sheila Cook was the speaker in Forethought. It was presented by Ollie Mann, and
the producer was Giants Edwards. On BBC Radio 4... We are all a unique
accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem Sisay
looks at uniqueness. Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it
happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of
graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me!
Lem Sisay is the one and only. He'll like an all. Starting next Friday morning.