TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Tom Sanders. Good evening. The Metropolitan
Police has admitted it didn't do enough to investigate Wayne Cousins for
indecent exposure before he killed Sarah Everard after a judge said the failure
to do so may have emboldened him. The fact that no police came to find him or
his black car to question him about these incidents can only have served to
confirm and strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief in his
invincibility. Investigations are underway after three people died in a car
crash in Cardiff, having previously been reported missing by their families. The
head of the business lobby group the CBI has stepped aside while claims of
misconduct at work are investigated. Hospital consultants in England are to be
balloted on strike action in another pay dispute in the NHS. Ukrainian military
commanders have urged President Zelensky to strengthen the defences of the
besieged city of Bukhmut. Victims of Wayne Cousins who murdered Sarah Everard
have said he could have been stopped if their reports of flashing offences had
been properly investigated. The former Metropolitan Police officer has been
jailed for 19 months after pleading guilty to three charges of indecent
exposure. The offences took place in the months before he abducted, raped and
killed Ms Everard. Some of his victims gave emotional statements at the Old
Bailey, with one saying she had survivor's guilt. The Met has apologised and
said it could have done more and will do so in future. Our special correspondent
Lucy Manning was in court. As Wayne Cousins sat with his head bowed on the video
link from Franklin Prison, the Old Bailey heard the former police officer had
repeatedly exposed himself in the weeks and days leading up to Sarah Everard's
murder. In November 2020 he stood naked in front of a woman and masturbated as
she cycled along a narrow lane in Woodland between Deal and Dover. Three months
later he exposed himself at least twice at a McDonald's drive-thru. The last
time was just four days before kidnapping Ms Everard in London. His number plate
was passed to the police but they didn't check it in time. His victims described
to the court how it had left them feeling threatened and fearful. One of the
McDonald's workers sobbed as she said she felt the Met police didn't properly
investigate what Cousins had done to her days before Sarah's murder. We have
used a different voice to protect her identity. I had no one contact me or ask
me for a statement. It was only after Sarah's murder that I became involved. If
he had been held accountable when we reported the crime, we could have say
Sarah. The judge, Mrs Justice May, was also damning about the failures to
investigate Cousins. The fact that no police came to find him or his black car
to question him about these incidents can only have served to confirm and
strengthen in the defendant's mind a dangerous belief in his invincibility, in
his power sexually to dominate and abuse women without being stopped. The
Metropolitan Police and Kent Police now have investigations into their own
failures to uncover Cousins' sex offences. The Deputy Assistant Commissioner of
the Met, Stuart Cundey, apologised. Like many, I wish that Wayne Cousins had
been arrested for these offences before he went on to rape and murder Sarah
Everard. And for that, I'm sorry. I recognise that the confidence, the trust in
us as the Met Police and the trust in our ability to respond is something that
we've got to earn back. Another police officer who investigated the murder of
Miss Everard, Detective Chief Inspector Catherine Goodwin, has thanked the
victims who came forward, saying they showed strength and dignity in the face of
Cousins' attempts to scare and demean. In total, detectives have identified six
incidents of indecent exposure linked to Cousins before he murdered Sarah
Everard. But despite most of the victims reporting each case to the police, no
further action was taken. Our Home and Legal Correspondent Dominic Cacciani has
been looking at whether the offence is being taken seriously enough. For almost
two centuries, indecent exposure was often brushed aside as a minor offence,
with offenders prosecuted under antiquated nuisance laws from Georgia and
Britain. Today, it's a sexual offence, but critics say it's still not taken
seriously enough. Just 458 men were convicted in 2021, about 5% of the annual
number of incidents. Only a quarter of them were jailed, and mostly for less
than six months. Yet research from the US shows up to 10% of men who expose
themselves escalate to physical sexual assaults, and experts say many of this
group may be showing warning signs years before they attack. Cousins' first
known incident was in Dover in 2015, when he was in the civil nuclear
constabulary. A Kent police officer is facing a disciplinary hearing over how
that report was handled, given detectives later realised Cousins could have been
identified. Had he been caught, he would have been sacked. No one can say he
would not have gone on to kill, but it might have been harder for him to present
himself as a police officer and trick Sarah Everard into his car. Three people
who were reported missing have been found dead in a crashed car in Woodland, off
a main road into Cardiff. Two other people have been taken to hospital with
serious injuries. The group was reported missing on Saturday, after they failed
to return from a night out, but the vehicle was only discovered today, near a
busy roundabout on the A48. Our Wales correspondent Hal Griffith has spent the
day at the scene. Flowers and balloons mark the spot near where the car was
found in a thicket of trees in the early hours of this morning, around 48 hours
after the group were last seen. They started their night out in Newport on
Friday night, driving for more than 70 miles around South Wales, before reaching
Cardiff in the early hours of Saturday. Over the weekend, their families had
appealed on social media for help in finding them, but it wasn't until yesterday
that the police search was launched. Eve Smith, Darcy Ross and Raphael Jeanne,
all in their 20s, were found dead. Sophie Russon and Shane Loughlin are in
hospital with serious injuries. Tamsin Samuels was friends with two of the
women, Eve and Darcy, and says they felt officers ignored their calls for help.
They weren't listening to us when we said, this is not like the girls, they like
a party, but they weren't going to go out for that long and not contact any of
us. So it was out of character? 100%. And I think the police could have done a
lot, lot more. A lot more. And how does it feel to be here now to see this
place? I mean, to bury a friend at 20, 21, no-one should do that. The crashed
car has been removed and the police cordon taken down. The case has been
referred to the Independent Office for Police Conduct in line with normal
procedure. The Director General of the Confederation of British Industry, Tony
Danker, has stepped aside while an investigation takes place into his conduct at
work. The CBI says it's been made aware of new reports about his behaviour after
complaints were made earlier this year. Our business correspondent, Esicht Carr,
has more. The CBI is one of the UK's largest business groups, representing
around 190,000 firms. The man at the head of the organisation, Tony Danker,
regularly acts as the voice of business at the highest levels of government.
It's emerged that last Thursday the CBI was made aware of new reports about Mr
Danker's workplace conduct. He's stepped aside while an independent
investigation is carried out. The CBI has also revealed that a previous
allegation concerning Mr Danker was made in January. It says it was thoroughly
investigated and didn't warrant a disciplinary process. The Guardian newspaper
had approached the CBI over the complaints, which it understood included claims
from a female employee that Mr Danker made unwanted contact with her and she
considered this unwanted contact to be sexual harassment. Mr Danker has posted a
statement on Twitter saying that he is mortified to hear that he's caused
offence or anxiety to any colleague, adding that it was completely unintentional
and he apologised profusely. He says he's cooperating fully with the
investigation. The Doctors' Union is to ballot consultants in England on strike
action in their dispute about pay and pensions. The British Medical Association
says 35,000 of the most senior doctors will be asked to vote on industrial
action after a poll suggested almost nine in ten members were in favour. Our
health reporter Jim Reid has more details. The BMA said any strike action would
mean the most senior hospital doctors running a bank holiday service on
weekdays. In practice, that is likely to mean urgent and emergency care would
continue, but outpatient appointments, routine surgery and some other treatments
would be put on hold. The union said a full ballot of its members would take
place around the middle of April, with a series of strike dates likely in the
spring, depending on the outcome. Dr Vishal Sharma is the chair of the BMA's
consultants committee. Consultants in England are all too aware that our take-
home pay has fallen by 35% in real terms since 2008-2009. That's the equivalent
of working four months of the year for free. Junior doctors who make up every
grade below consultant level are expected to start their strike action next
Monday, while fresh talks are to begin tomorrow between the government and
groups representing nurses, ambulance workers and midwives in England. Unions
have warned that industrial action, which is currently suspended, could resume
if progress is not made by the end of the week. Rail companies are threatened to
pull out of national talks with the RMT union unless its members are allowed to
vote on the most recent offer to end strikes. The transport secretary, Mark
Harper, has also urged the union to let members consider the deal from the rail
delivery group. The RMT is due to strike again next Thursday as part of the
long-running dispute over pay and conditions. Our transport correspondent Katie
Austin reports. Since the RMT's national executive committee rejected what the
government and employers called best and final offers last month, the dispute
has in effect ground to a halt. The government and industry have maintained
reforms are needed in exchange for any pay increase, but the RMT asked for an
unconditional pay offer and no detrimental changes. The union said it consulted
extensively before the rejection, but the rail delivery group has now made clear
that if members aren't given a vote, something a smaller union, the TSSA, has
done, national level talks may stop and negotiations would have to be started
with individual train companies instead. Network Rail's boss Andrew Haynes has
also questioned the point of resuming talks following previous frustrations. The
RMT has said it is focused on coming to a negotiated settlement. Firefighters
have voted overwhelmingly to accept a new pay offer, ending the threat of
strikes. The new deal includes a 7% increase backdated to July last year, plus
an extra 5% from July this year. The fire brigade's union called the result a
testament to the power of collective action. One of Britain's most violent
offenders, Charles Bronson, has told a public parole board hearing that he is
now a born-again artist and no longer angry. The 70-year-old, who now uses the
name Charles Salvador, has spent most of the past 50 years in jail. His prison
offender manager said he wouldn't be able to cope if he was freed. Our Home
Affairs correspondent Daniel Sandford watched the hearing. Bronson was born
Martin Peterson and was first jailed for armed robbery in 1974, almost 50 years
ago. Since then, apart from a couple of short breaks, he's spent his whole life
in prison. He became notorious for taking 11 hostages while inside and for a
series of prison rooftop protests. In 1999, Bronson held an art teacher hostage
for almost two days and at that point he was jailed for life. His parole hearing
is only the second ever to be held in public. He was sat with the parole board
panel and his lawyer in prison in Milton Keynes, with the media and the public
watching via a video link at the Royal Courts of Justice in London. His prison
offender manager told the hearing that there have been fewer outbursts in recent
years and he was less violent, but she said he didn't have the skills to cope
with being released from jail. He spends around 23 hours a day in his cell and
only mixes with three other inmates. With a shaved head and a handlebar
moustache and wearing a suit and round sunglasses, Bronson himself gave evidence
at length in a gravelly voice. He started by saying, I've had more porridge than
Goldilocks and the Three Bears and I'm sick of it. I've had enough of it and I
want to go home. The hearing was punctuated by laughter. It had only been going
an hour when Bronson said, I'm getting bored, mate. When asked about hostage
taking, he said, there's nothing like wrapping a governor up like a Christmas
turkey. The parole board has to decide whether he's safe to be released from
prison or perhaps moved to an open prison. Bronson finished his evidence by
saying, Give me a chance, a break, to prove to you people that I'm just a normal
geezer wanting to get on with his life. The government has called into question
whether the former civil servant Sue Gray followed the rules when she accepted a
job as chief of staff to the Labour leader, Sakeer Starmer. The Cabinet Office
Minister, Jeremy Quinn, told MPs his department was looking into the
circumstances of her resignation. Ms Gray led the investigation into parties in
Downing Street during lockdown. Here's our political correspondent, Jonathan
Blake. Sue Gray's move to work for Labour was exceptional and unprecedented, Mr
Quinn said. Responding to a question from the former Attorney General Sir Robert
Buckland, who said many Conservative MPs had been surprised and disappointed,
the Minister said the impartiality of the civil service was constitutionally
vital. Rules stated, he said, that the appointments watchdog, ACOBA, had to
approve any job offer before it was announced and that the Cabinet Office had
not yet been told that Ms Gray had notified officials. He also raised the
requirement for civil servants to declare outside interests and get permission
to contact opposition parties. Labour's Deputy Leader, Angela Rayner, accused
the government of indulging in the conspiracy theories of Boris Johnson. Sir
Keir Starmer said there was nothing improper about hiring Sue Gray, but wouldn't
confirm when he first approached her about becoming his Chief of Staff, only
that it was recent and after the Partygate investigation had concluded. You're
listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4. The main news so far, the
Metropolitan Police have said the conviction of Sarah Everard's killer, Wayne
Cousins, for indecent exposure while he was a serving officer, has brought shame
on the force. Tony Danker has stepped aside as head of the CBI, while
allegations of misconduct at work are investigated. Still to come... Sweet home
Alabama Where the skies are blue Farewell to the last original member of Leonard
Skinnet. Former colleagues of the Deputy Prime Minister, Dominic Raab, have
spoken to BBC News about their experiences as an inquiry into bullying
allegations against him reaches its final stages. Dozens of people, including Mr
Raab, have given evidence to the investigation, led by the senior lawyer Adam
Tolley KC. Mr Raab, who's also Justice Secretary, has strongly denied the
claims. Here's our political correspondent, Ione Wells. Dominic Raab faces eight
formal complaints from his time at three government departments, involving at
least 24 different people, who cannot speak publicly while the investigation is
ongoing. We've spoken to others who worked closely with Mr Raab. Their words are
spoken by BBC producers. Somebody who advised him in a senior role claimed his
behaviour impacted not just people, but policy too, as it had the effect of
shutting up those who were supposed to advise him. I didn't personally feel
bullied. I did observe though what I would characterise as bullying behaviour.
He was somebody who expected high standards of people. He, however, was pretty
belittling in terms of how he would go about those things, and he would
frequently humiliate members of his private office. At a flick of a switch, he
could turn incredibly angry and pretty offensive. One former parliamentary staff
member said Mr Raab wasn't a bully, but the reports about him sounded familiar.
There were a handful of occasions where I observed him make a member of staff
cry because he was not happy with their work. If a member of his staff had
delivered some work which he didn't think was at the standard it should have
been, he could tear it apart, frankly, literally at times. Literally? As in
literally rip up people's work? I did observe that. But another parliamentary
staff member and one official we spoke to who has given evidence to the inquiry
said the allegations did not make sense to them. He was always very focused on
the job, but always super nice. And what was your response when you heard about
media reports accusing him of bullying? I was sad because it didn't correlate at
all with my experience in the slightest. It's hard work because he's a
perfectionist, and he will go above and beyond to deliver for a department where
he wants to make changes. The lawyer investigating allegations about Mr Raab's
behaviour will present his findings for the Prime Minister to judge. Mr Raab has
said he will resign if the complaints are upheld. The government has said it
hopes to open more legal routes for asylum seekers once it has what it calls
control over the UK's borders. Most routes are currently available only to
people from specific countries, such as Afghanistan and Ukraine. Tomorrow,
ministers will introduce legislation to ban migrants who cross the Channel in
small boats from ever returning to the UK. Labour and some campaign groups say
the proposals are unworkable. Here's our political correspondent, David Wallace-
Lockhart. Earlier this year, Rishi Sunak outlined five priorities for 2023. The
final one was passing new laws to stop small boats crossing the Channel. Last
year, more than 45,000 people made this journey. This legislation will be
published tomorrow. Proposals will include detaining anyone who makes a cross-
Channel journey before deporting them to their home country or a third country.
They'll be banned from ever returning to the UK. Ministers have defended the
plans as common sense, and No.10 has said that once borders are under control,
more official routes for asylum seekers can be opened. But some have questioned
how the plans will work, pointing out that one of the government's key tools for
deporting asylum seekers, a deal with Rwanda, is still caught up in legal
challenges. Labour have accused ministers of simply chasing headlines. Downing
Street says they can bring in tough new legislation while remaining part of the
European Convention on Human Rights. Ukraine's President Zelensky has been urged
not to retreat from the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. There have been
reports suggesting Ukrainian troops have started to withdraw from Bakhmut, which
has been virtually flattened after six months of Russian attacks. From Kiev,
here's our correspondent James Landale. President Zelensky said the fighting in
eastern Ukraine was painful and challenging. That's because Ukrainian soldiers
are dying to protect a city that largely lies in ruins. Independent analysts
have suggested Ukraine might be considering a limited withdrawal from eastern
Bakhmut. But Mr Zelensky met senior commanders, and his office said they spoke
in favour of continuing the defensive operation and strengthening their
positions in the city. He and they know this battle is costing the lives of
thousands of Russian soldiers, and they hope their enemy will emerge
substantially weaker, regardless of who ends up controlling the city. Russia has
reportedly been making some advances, but there is further evidence of divisions
between the Russian army and the private mercenaries leading much of the
assault. Evgeny Prigozhin, the head of the Wagner Group, accused Russia's
Defence Ministry of failing to give his fighters the ammunition they needed. A
14-year-old Ukrainian girl has died after being found unconscious on a beach in
South Devon. Police say they were called to the Dorlish area on Saturday to
investigate reports of a missing teenager. Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei has condemned a series of poisonings targeting schoolgirls and women at
university as an unforgivable crime. Hundreds of incidents involving toxic gas
have been reported across Iran since the end of November. In his first public
comments on the attacks, Ayatollah Khamenei said there would be no amnesty for
anyone involved. Ten former heads of Israel's air force have written to the
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu urging him to abandon his plans for
significant changes to the country's justice system. They described the
government's proposals as a grave threat to national security. Mr Netanyahu has
faced weeks of street protests by critics who say he is trying to undermine the
independence of the judiciary and weaken democracy. In an unprecedented move,
fighter pilot reservists from an elite air force squadron have refused to attend
training. Our Middle East correspondent Tom Bateman reports from Jerusalem.
Nearly all of the reservist pilots in the Israeli air force's 69th squadron have
refused to join a one-day training exercise this week. One unnamed pilot told
the Israeli press they were signalling that we don't want to serve a dictatorial
regime. It is being seen as an unparalleled political move by some of the most
strategically important reservists and a sign of how opposition to Mr
Netanyahu's planned legal overhaul is spreading. Reservists are a key component
of the military and many in other units have also threatened not to turn up for
duty. Amid increasingly fractious protests and few signs of compromise, the
coalition is pressing on with reforms it says will stop overreach by the judges.
Mr Netanyahu is hitting back at the boycott. He tweeted a photo of his military
ID from 1967 saying, when we are called for reserve duty we always turn up. We
are one nation. The broadcasting regulator Ofcom has found that the television
channel GB News broke its rules when a presenter made what it called potentially
harmful and misleading claims about Covid-19 vaccines. Mark Stein, who has since
left the channel, claimed last April that booster jabs increased people's risk
of infection, serious illness and death. GB News denies misleading the public,
saying it was merely challenging official narratives. In the city, the 100 share
index ended the day 17 points lower at 7,930. On Wall Street a short time ago,
the Dow Jones was up 124 points at 33,515. On the currency markets, the pound is
trading at $1.204. Against the euro, sterling is at 1 euro and 12.7 cents, that
makes a euro worth 88.8 pence. Scientists and legal and ethical experts meeting
in London have heard concerns that new rules on gene editing introduced by China
are not tough enough to stop medical malpractice or possible irreversible damage
to human life. The alteration of DNA in embryos has not been approved
internationally as safe. The issue is being discussed at a conference at the
Francis Crick Institute. Our science correspondent, Palab Ghosh, has more
details. Gene editing enables researchers to make precise alterations to a
person's DNA at an early embryonic stage, but it's not yet been proven to be
safe to use in practice. There was an outcry at claims five years ago by a
Chinese scientist that he'd created children that had been genetically altered
to be resistant to HIV. Dr He Jianqiu was imprisoned for three years. Chinese
authorities have recently introduced stricter rules for the use of the
technology, setting out requirements for ethical approval, supervision and
inspections. But Dr Joy Zhang, an expert on controls on gene technology in
China, told delegates at the gene editing meeting in London that she was
concerned that Dr He was able to set up clinical research on another inherited
disorder a year after his release from prison. We could actually be looking at a
quite simple case of regulatory negligence. Who is keeping an eye on him and
what kind of approval he has and needs to seek? Any talk of accountable research
or good governance in China would be hypocritical. A spokesperson for the
Chinese Academy of Science told the conference that the country had accelerated
the introduction of new laws on gene editing and they were in accordance with
international standards. But other scientists at the meeting backed the view
that China's regulation of gene editing may still fall short, particularly when
it comes to keeping an eye on private companies. Others, though, say it's not an
issue only for the Chinese, and Western nations too need to keep a close eye on
how bioscience firms forge ahead with this exciting but controversial
technology. Sir David Attenborough's latest BBC television series, Wild Isles,
will feature the behaviour of some of British wildlife never before captured on
camera. It's the first time Sir David has focused his attention on the UK and
will reveal how vulnerable some native species have become. Our climate editor
Justin Rolatz has had a preview. Welcome to a place that is astonishing. At 96
years old, Sir David Attenborough is back on the road, visiting a series of
remote locations to bring you the British Isles as you have never seen them
before. There are some stunning scenes. Their strategy is one of surprise. Orca,
killer whales, hunt seals off the coast of the Shetland Islands. It wakes up and
flees, but there's a pup here too. The orca takes its catch out into open water
and there shows younger members of the pod how to drown it. The imagery is
spectacular. The BBC has put the same sort of resources into this as to a major
international series such as Planet Earth. The series has captured animal
behaviours that have never been filmed before, including our biggest bird of
prey, white-tailed eagles, hunting barnacle geese in flight. The goose is so
heavy, the young eagle has to struggle to hold on. And the series has a powerful
conservation message. Sir David warns our wildlife is under threat. So rich in
places, Britain as a whole is one of the most nature-depleted countries in the
world. Never has there been a more important time to invest in our own wildlife,
to try and set an example for the rest of the world and restore our once wild
isles for future generations. Wild Isles will begin next Sunday at 7 o'clock on
BBC One. The last original member of the US rock band Leonard Skinner, Gary
Rossington, has died aged 71. The guitarist appeared on their best-known song,
the nine-minute Free Bird, all their albums, and co-wrote their 1974 hit, Sweet
Home Alabama. It's not known how he died, but he had suffered a series of heart
problems and had emergency surgery in 2021. Our arts correspondent David Silito
looks back at his life and music. Originally conceived as a way of giving the
vocalist, Ronnie Van Zandt, a bit of a rest, the epic Free Bird became the
band's defining song, and it began with Gary Rossington's sly guitar. Gary
Rossington from Jacksonville, Florida, was one of the original members of the
band, which had been named after a PE teacher who'd objected to his long hair.
Their big break was supporting The Who. It was only two weeks, but it just
changed everything for us. You know, we'd never seen so many people, especially
to play in front of. It was like crazy. That's when we first started drinking.
We never drank. And it scared us so bad, we started drinking, and we got a
bottle from The Who. It was his riff that turned into another of their hits,
Sweet Home Alabama. But this was a group that had more than its share of
misfortune. Gary Rossington was, in the 70s, seriously injured in a plane crash
that killed three members of the band. There was also a near-fatal car crash,
drug addiction, and in recent years, heart attacks. But he continued to perform.
His last concert was in February, ending, of course, with Free Bird. The
headlines again. The Metropolitan Police has said it is sorry the former officer
Wayne Cousins was not caught before he raped and murdered Sarah Everard, after
he was jailed for a string of indecent exposure offences. Questions are being
asked about why a car which had crashed in Cardiff, leaving three people dead,
wasn't found for two days after the driver and passengers were reported missing.
The Director General of the CBI, Tony Danker, has stepped aside, while an
investigation into his conduct at work takes place. Hospital consultants in
England are to be asked whether they're prepared to go on strike in a dispute
over pay. And Ukrainian commanders have urged President Zelensky to strengthen
the defence of the devastated eastern city of Bakhmut, despite recent reports
that it's about to fall to Russian troops. BBC News. And the news was read by
Tom Saunders. This is BBC Radio 4 In a Moment. A taxidermist, cartoonist, and an
impressionist meet. No, it's not my dream dinner party, but they are plotting
how to blow up the galaxy. That's next. Music education in the UK has been in
decline for years. We've actually seen an overall decrease in the number of
schools that are offering those qualifications. It's decreased by about 35% over
the last 10 years. But music plays an important part in our lives. From the
classroom. It's very good for the emotional well-being of children. It's good
for the economy. We want to be doing as well as we possibly can do. Because this
island exports so much music across the whole of the world. I'm Soweto Kinch, a
musician. And I'm finding out what needs to be done to keep UK music alive.
Rethinking Music on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Starts tomorrow morning at 11.30.
The Museum of Curiosity now on Radio 4, where we're asking the question, how
much soup would it take to destroy the galaxy? Music The Museum of Curiosity.
Hello, my name's John Lloyd and I'm the Professor of Ignorance at Solent
University. Welcome to the Museum of Curiosity, a vast and imposing edifice,
expanding faster than the visible universe, but with a snug and woolly vibe,
cosier than the cosiest tea cosy. And here's the bobble on our hat, the Museum's
curator, Anna Tuchinsky. Hello, John. Hello, Anna. And how's your green policy
for the Museum going? Ah, well, so glad you have asked. You know that revolving
display of pork pies in the cafe? Now, let me guess, is it now powered by a
donkey on a treadmill? No, because that's obviously ridiculous. It's been
replaced by a herd of wild boar and a rack of spears. I'm afraid if you want
meat from now on, you're going to have to earn it. Right. Well, on that note,
let's meet this week's steering committee, fresh from the pub and all completely
ist, dramatist and impressionist, Steve Nallan, artist and taxidermist, Polly
Morgan, and roboticist turned cartoonist, Randall Munro. Hello. Hello. So,
Steve, first of all, you've done a lot of celebrities in your time. Can you
remember who was the first celebrity you impersonated? I was about six years old
and I listened to Dame Edith Evans reading children's stories and she had a
weird voice and I loved it. And I'll give you a burst. To be born or at any rate
to be born in a handbag seems to me to display contempt for the decencies of
family life. I'm six. Imagine that coming out of you when you're six. There we
are. Polly, what was the first animal you taxidermised, if that's the verb? It
was a pigeon, a humble pigeon, a street pigeon. Did you just found it? No, no, I
specifically wanted a pigeon and I think it was found for me by George, the
teacher that I found up in Edinburgh. Randall, you write comics for a living,
but you started out building robots for NASA. So will a robot ever be able to do
your current job? I don't know. I sort of hope so. You just want the time off.
No, yeah, I mean, I like reading jokes and if I could get a computer to generate
jokes, then I could just read those. It would be great. Now, Steve, you're an
actor, writer, drama teacher and a man of many voices. You began your career in
the 1970s on the Northern Workingmen's Club circuit before sweeping to invisible
national fame as one of the key impressionists on Smitting Image, where you
brought to life a multitude of characters, including Margaret Thatcher, Andrew
Lloyd Webber and the Queen Mum. Your work ranges from stage and screen to video
games and puppetry, and you've recently published your first novel for young
adults, The Time That Never Was, based on your extraordinary childhood. You've
done so many things. Tell me about your whole life, from your earliest memories
till we met at Smitting Image in 1983. Briefly. Well, it was Hitchcock who said
that drama is life with the boring bits cut out. So let me just, you know, the
first thing I remember actually was being in hospital because I had consumption
when I was three. And I was sent away and, you know, in isolation. And then the
next thing that had a big impact on my life was my mother came home. I was about
nine years old and she came home and she just sat on a couch and died. My father
was schizophrenic, so my sister and I had five difficult years with him. And
then we ran away and lived in my grandmother's attic. But the odd thing about
all this is that it sounds like the Yorkshireman sketch from Monty Python, but
actually it was the best possible childhood for somebody who wants to be a
writer or a performer. We all have survival mechanisms, and my weird survival
mechanism was to talk to myself in the future. I was always interested in the
idea of time travel. And the future me said, look, don't worry about all this.
It will turn out OK in the end. So I was producing this would-be puppet show,
which we hadn't started, and we couldn't find a really good Margaret Thatcher.
And you wrote to me saying, I can do Margaret Thatcher. And I thought, OK, I'm a
BBC train guy. I've got to see everybody. So this guy turns up. I think you're
wearing a boiler suit, Steve. Something like that. Yes. You were very young. And
I said, OK, fine. Do your Thatcher impression then, please. And you said, well,
I'd rather you ask me a question as if I was the prime minister. And I said, I
really must get on. OK, Prime Minister, can you tell us about the current state
of the British economy? Oh, goodness me. You know, we're not in a very good
state at all. It's very, very sad. I spent 11 and a half years getting Britain
back to where it should be, Great Britain. And look what has happened since. I
don't know why you're laughing. It isn't funny. Polly, so I don't know why,
because we're talking about puppets and things. If somebody commissioned you,
would you agree to stuff a human being? No. I have been asked. Have you? I have.
Well, I believe it was a genuine request. They put so much care and attention
into the email and the back story that I just I felt like it must be genuine. He
straight away just launched off into this story about his grandmother and what a
treasured member of the family she was. I was sort of reading it with this
growing sense of doom, thinking, why is he telling me about his grandmother? He
said she sits in front of the TV all day in the same armchair and she's a big
fan of taxidermy. And she said to us recently, I thought, oh, it's coming. How
about getting me stuffed when I die? So we did have a discussion as a family and
they decided they'd like to have her sitting in the same armchair with them in
perpetuity. And would I be able to facilitate this? And I'm ashamed to say, I
don't think I even replied to the email. I was a bit shocked. Steve, what do you
make of that? I was thinking, why is it that I'm good at doing indomitable women
like Beryl Reed or Margaret Thatcher? I think it was my grandmother. You know, I
lived with this wonderful woman and she was exactly like those people. She
didn't speed glom at them and she didn't have their jobs. But I was sort of
attracted to and I think that's the psychology coming through of why I'm
connected to these alpha women. Thank you so much, Steve. Maybe afterwards you
can teach Anna how to do an impression of me and then I can take the rest of the
series off. Coming to you now, Polly, you're a British artist living and working
in London. You have no formal art education, but you're self-taught and make use
of unusual materials like concrete, polyurethane and of course dead animals.
You've worked with Banksy, had exhibitions all over the world and you've
recently opened a new taxidermy exhibition called False Flags. Tell me, what's
that all about? Well, the title I've taken as it's a practice in naval warfare
of raising a neutral or enemy flag to misrepresent your identity. Well, I'm kind
of using that as an example of the power play between predator and prey, where
camouflage and mimicry and subterfuge are used to communicate deceptive
messages. You're not sort of setting up prey and predator in a sort of tableau?
No, it's not quite as literal as that. No, I'm being a little bit kind of
looser. It is art, isn't it? You're using taxidermy as an art form, like a rat
curled up in a champagne glass or something like that. It's not just stuffing
them. No, I mean, I've never been a very traditional taxidermist. Well, I never
have been a traditional taxidermist. I learned the craft from traditional
taxidermists in order to then kind of subvert it a bit, I guess. Your work is
incredibly visceral, Polly, when you first see it. I mean, do people react sort
of violently? Do you get hate mail or anything like that? I've had a little bit
of hate mail over the years, but nothing that I can't really handle. Problem is,
if you were to send you a dead thing in the post, that's doing you a favour,
really. Well, exactly. A horse head on the bed would be quite useful. I'd just
skin it and mount it. Thanks, Polly. Maybe it's time we opened a taxidermy wing
in the museum. We could absolutely stuff it with stuffed... Look, I'll get my
coat. So, over to you, Randall. You left your job building robots at NASA to
draw cartoons full-time in 2006. Your amazing XKCD is described as a webcomic of
romance, sarcasm, maths and language, and is archived by the USA's Library of
Congress. As its creator, you have won a Hugo Award at the World Science Fiction
Convention. That is honestly my ambition in life. And have had an asteroid named
after you. As well as your collected comic strips, you've written four books.
Your most recent, What If... 2, provides serious scientific answers to absurd
hypothetical questions. So, what's the most absurd question you have ever asked
somebody else? Well, I was really excited to sort of learn over the course of
doing my comics that, you know, people who do real serious scientific research
will sometimes read them. And I have found, if I reach out to them, they're
often happy to answer questions that I would assume they would find too
ridiculous to answer. So, I always have a lot of fun talking to experts in
things, scientists. And one of my favorites was I talked to Chris Hadfield. Oh,
yeah. Former commander of the International Space Station and test pilot. And I
first talked to him for my previous book, How To, about how to land a plane.
Where my plan was, I was going to come up with scenarios. Suppose you closed
your sleeve in the cockpit door and you couldn't reach the controls, but you
could throw dinner rolls from the in-flight meal at the controls. And I was
expecting that I would ask him more and more ridiculous questions and he would
just hang up on me eventually. But I got through my entire list of questions and
he just gave answers for all of them. It turns out test pilots are very hard to
fluster by throwing strange situations at them. I was just looking at XKCD today
and, God, that's a rabbit hole. You just can't get off it. I know. It's
dangerously addictive, XKCD. And you must have lots of people doing it. Oh, it's
all me. It's all you. Really. You must get nothing else done. You know, I post a
comic three times a week. The people who did all the newspaper comics I read
growing up, though, like Calvin and Hobbes and The Far Side, they do seven times
a week. So, really, I'm a slacker. And the other thing I wanted to know is,
because you've written a book called Thing Explainer, complicated stuff in
simple words. So, obviously, you know, the part of what you do is always making
things as simple as possible. Was the simplicity of your stick figures a
conscious choice based on that or are you terrible at drawing? I mean, there's
synergy there. It's a little bit of both. The thing with stick figures is that
it's all about simplifying to remove the parts of an image that aren't as
important, because then it sort of highlights what you include. And sometimes a
really simple drawing can be easier to project yourself onto. Like when there's
an emergency exit sign and there's a little figure running over the door, it's
not carrying a handbag. It doesn't have a hairstyle. You don't put clothes on
it. Because if you did, you'd be like, oh, who is that person? You know, why do
they have that bag? Yeah. Where did they get that jacket? You know, you're like,
what story am I being told here? But when it's just the figure, just enough to
show that the person is running, you can see yourself in it. You think, oh,
that's a sign telling me about running and something I should do. That's great.
Thank you, Randall. I've never written a comic book, so I don't know this rocket
science exactly. But then I don't know anything about rocket science either. And
that's just two of the many things that qualify me to be the world's only, well,
as far as I know, professor of ignorance. OK, Anna, let's open up the vault,
please. Security check. What is it this time? OK, I'm going really old school.
We're going back to ancient Egypt. Are you going to ask me the riddle of the
Sphinx? Because I already know the answer. No, I'm not going to ask you that
anymore. I declare the museum open for donations. Steve, what would you like to
donate to the museum? A tiny little thing really in our body, terribly
underrated. So I think the human larynx and more specifically, my little larynx
once I finish with it. That's very self-sacrificing of you. Well, no, I mean,
I'm going to keep it till the very end. And then you can have it and Polly can
stuff it. I don't stuff throats. It's not part of my job. You stuff the whole
thing. No, I really don't. No, I just I just I skin the body and I bin it all.
I'm sorry. All right. Well, we'll call off the dissectors for now. But why is it
that you would like us to have your larynx? Impressionists, we micromanage our
larynx. But sometimes if you practice a voice for too long, you can actually
cause yourself damage. And I did a voice from a family guy. It was a very
strangulated voice and it caused me a problem. So I had to go and they wanted to
see if I was over rights. And so they put a camera down my throat and they said,
while you're here, can we record you? And we'd like to use it in teaching. And
they said it was the second most interesting larynx they'd ever seen. And I
said, well, who was the first? And I don't mind coming second to a
ventriloquist. Randall, do you what would you think is the most extraordinary
body part? I don't know. I think maybe the strangest part of the body might be
the bone marrow. You know, the sites where the immune system does a lot of its
development. Man, the more I've learned about how the immune system works, the
more I think, wow, that's just the coolest thing in the world. You have these
cells that they'll like find a piece of a virus or a particle that it doesn't
like. And then they parade it past a gauntlet of immune cells and like activate
them. And then those immune cells are sent past different tissues in the body to
make sure it doesn't activate and lock on to any of those. And if it makes it
through both those processes, it's sent out into the body to protect you. And so
it's like you have this whole factory in you that's developing new antibodies
and new T cells and things to protect you. I feel like it's completely outside
my control. It's just like I have this swarm of autonomous robots patrolling my
body that I don't know anything about or how they work. And I think that's just
fascinating. Bone marrow is a very good way to commit the perfect crime, I've
always thought, because if you do receive bone marrow from a donor, which, by
the way, everyone should be bone marrow donors because very important and
needed. If you receive it, then your DNA becomes the DNA of the donor, I
believe. So then you can do whatever you like and they'll get the blame. Yeah, I
know. I know a guy whose blood type changed after he got a bone marrow donation.
So he had to update all his forms. Wow. That's amazing. Yeah, extraordinary. But
is bone marrow, is it in all the bones or how does that work? Well, I'm not a
biologist by any means. I don't know, Polly, maybe you know more about bone
marrow? No, I'm feeling guilty here. I chuck it all away. All of this good stuff
you're describing. I'm so superficial. I just keep the skin. Sorry, your larynx
would go straight in the bin, Steve. So, Steve, you're donating your larynx once
you're done with it. How would you like us to display it? Would it, for example,
would it sit on the plinth, Steve, and still work so that you could forever be
doing impersonations of people? Perhaps you could be Roy Hattersley announcing,
you know, closing and opening times at the museum. Well, of course I could. And
it opens whenever you want it to. And it closes when we decide it closes. And it
will not close before we decide it will close. And that's the policy of the
Labour Party. The thing about the larynx, though, is it only works in
conjunction with breath and the mouth and the head. And to create the voice, it
needs to work with everything else in order to create that sound. It's not
isolated. In a way, as well, you'd need the whole body in a way to get the
impression to work. Are you offering? No, no, no. We don't want the whole body.
I don't want the whole body. I'm saying that now. OK, please. No, we're all
going to throw the rest of you away, Steve, and just keep the larynx. But thank
you. So, Polly, what exhibit would you like to donate to our museum? I would
like to donate a hog-nosed snake in a Tupperware box, please, if you don't have
one already. OK. I don't think we do have one. No, oddly enough. Oh, that's
remiss of us. Thank God you came along. That's very specific. Why the hog-nosed
snake in the Tupperware box? Well, as we've discussed, I do get sent some
strange things in the post sometimes and I get offered odd things. I should say
none of my animals are killed. They all die of natural causes. So I spend a lot
of time on the phone to breeders or people who might be there at the point of
death. So I've established some relationships with snake breeders or snake
rescue centres, most of whom are very helpful and doing really good things. But
I've come across a couple of rather odd ones, people, I mean, not snakes. And
one in particular was quite unreliable and he just would never send things when
I asked him to or when he said he was going to and then he would send things
without announcing them at other times, which isn't very convenient. And one day
I remember I spent weeks trying to get these snakes from him that he'd said he
had. He said he had a big box of 10 dead snakes that he'd collected over a year
or so in his freezer and he was going to post them to me. And I had this lovely
young intern working for me at the time. And then she texted me on the morning
to say that they'd arrived. And I said, oh, wow, I'm so happy. Finally, he came
through. And then she texted me very quickly again saying, call me. So I called
her up. She sounded really shaken when she answered the phone and she said,
Polly, the snakes, they did turn up. I mean, the box arrived, but it's not 10
dead snakes. I said, well, what is it? And she said, it's one snake and it's
alive. At this point, I said, OK, well, where is it? And she said, it's in a
Tupperware box and I've left it on the desk and I've looked it up and it's
called a hog nose snake. So at this point, I just thought, OK, this guy is just
playing a joke on me. And he's always been unreliable and difficult. And I
thought he'd obviously just decided to do something slightly malevolent. She
said, don't worry, I've looked it up. It's not toxic. And then we did a little
bit of research into it and found out that the hog nose snake plays dead when it
feels threatened and does it so effectively that it can lie on its back for
hours. I mean, just until the perceived threat has gone to the point where it
will emit a foul odour. It will open its jaw. And even if, you know, it's got a
little trick up its sleeve, it sometimes can produce a droplet of blood as well.
To give the guy the benefit of the doubt, we think perhaps he had startled this
snake before he packed it in the box and he assumed it was dead and put it in
looking like that. And she fortunately, because all thanks to the Tupperware
box, which I thought is crucial because it's acted as quite a good observation
chamber. She thought she saw it move and then she thought she was going crazy
because she came back to it and it was still lying dead. And then over a period
of time, she left it there in the box and just watched. And then eventually it
flipped itself over and started to move around again. Wow, that's spooky. And is
a snake the strangest animal you've ever found in a box? Oh, no, not really. I
mean, I have a history with dead animals. Obviously, I work with them. But in my
family, we had so many animals growing up. My dad worked with them. I think my
mum slightly gave, I was a third child and she gave up a little bit with me and
I would have a sort of a bit of menagerie. There was a bird flying around in my
bedroom. It was an injured pigeon with a splint. But it was my dad was trying to
fix its broken leg on my floor. And then I had hamsters that I bred. I didn't
mean to breed them. I think we got two that we thought were female and obviously
that turned out to be wrong. And then we ended up with loads of them. And they
were just always in the house and they were dying and we would bury them. And I
remember once being out with my mum and sister. My sister was a teenager. She
had a headache and she was complaining about this headache to my mum. My mum
pulled out a box of anadine from her handbag and said, well, take a couple of
these. You'll be okay. My sister opened the box and screamed and something fell
on the floor. And we looked down and it was this little tiny, little dead, hard
hamster. And my mum, who's very unfazed by anything, just went, oh, sorry,
darling, wrong box. We would always be putting them in little boxes around the
house before we buried them. And she picked up the wrong one that day. So Polly,
you've donated the snake in the original Tupperware. Is that how you would like
it to sit in the museum or do you want something more elaborate? No, I like the
Tupperware. I like the humble things. It's a good observation chamber, I think,
to watch it from. Thank you, Polly, for bringing a hog-nose snake in the
Tupperware box to the museum and for the hysterical story that goes with it.
Randall, what would you like to give to the Museum of Curiosity? I would like to
donate 10 to the 39 litres of soup. OK. That's more than your recommended daily
allowance of soup, I think. Why is it that you're giving us that? Well, this
comes from a question that someone asked me in What If 2. I find that some of
the best science questions come from little kids. I think when adults ask a
science question, they try to make sure it sounds smart. Like they try to add in
science concepts or like ask a question where they think it has a really
interesting scientific answer involving black holes or space, time, or plutonium
or the speed of light. And little kids ask sort of very simple questions where
they don't know the answer. They don't have any idea what it's going to be. And
there was a little girl named Amelia, five years old, who asked, what would
happen if the solar system were filled with soup out to Jupiter? And I like this
question because it ended up taking me through a lot of really interesting
physics and sort of surprising branches of science because it turns out if you
put that much soup in one place, it would be so massive that the gravitational
pull would be strong enough that even light wouldn't be able to escape. So the
soup would collapse inward toward a point and forming a, it would be a black
hole. And then I went on to explore like, what would it be like if you were
inside it at the moment all this soup was created? And, you know, how long would
you last before you were crushed? And this ended up being like one of my
favorite questions that anyone had asked, looking at what would happen to the
solar system, to everything inside it, and eventually to the galaxy as the soup
started gobbling up nearby stars and cutting a swath through the Milky Way. I
seem to remember in the book she's called Amelia the Destroyer, you kindly
christened her. So she gets a lot of blame for this. I bet she's pleased. Yes, I
feel like if I'm a kid, I would be, you know, they'd say this has caused a huge
catastrophe, you know, and I'm the five year old part of me definitely would
want credit. Yeah, definitely. Just on soup and how children can be deployed for
science. There was this amazing study, I think a couple of years ago, where it
was a parent at a London school called Jake Baum, and he wanted to find out
cures for malaria, basically. So he was a professor of cell biology and
infectious diseases. And he suggested to the teacher of the school where his
kids went, that all the kids bring in a vial of the soup that their parents made
for them when they're sick. And then they spin out the soup in a centrifuge, and
then they test it on malaria parasites, and they'd see if there's anything
useful in it. So all the kids brought in all the soups, and he actually found
five of the soups reduced the growth of malarial parasites, which is about the
same as the leading malarial drug. So it was one of them chicken soup, because
that always seems to be the one people suggest. Yes, there was definitely some
chicken soup, although the massive flaw in his study was he forgot to ask the
parents to write down the recipes. So when he got the five key ones, they could
not remember what was in it. With any of those studies, anytime I see a study
that says, you know, this substance will reduce the growth of this bacteria in a
petri dish or the growth of cancer cells, I always like to remind people, so
will a handgun. It's a good point from the scientists on the panel. OK, so,
Randall, we've got your 10 to the 39 litres of soup in the museum that is going
to destroy us all. So can I suggest that we don't accept it all at once? Can we
take it in installments, maybe starting with 10 litres, so a few cans? And if
you're OK with that, how would you like us to display it? I think next to the
schedule showing when the next cans are going to be delivered, because I like
either it's going to be a schedule that's like you have 30 seconds and there's
more soup coming in, or even if you do that, the schedule will have to go on to
like, you know, past the lifetime of the universe. Be like on Tuesday, and then
there's a whole bunch of digits for the year. We're going to be getting another
10 litres of soup. Is the schedule going to end up being so long that that
creates a black hole and sucks us all in? You know, it might, yes. We could have
a problem. You've derailed me for the next 20 minutes. I've got to figure out
how long would it be to write out. How many sheets of paper does that take and
how massive would that be? We'll leave you to that. We'll expect an answer by
the end of the show. Just the paper to write it down is going to create a black
hole. It's a fraught with danger, this. But listen, thank you, Randall. We're
delighted to accept 10 litres of your soup into the museum as a first
installment. And we look forward to building it up to the full amount gradually
over time until the end of the universe. So there we have it. The museum's
collection now includes a voice box, a snake in a box and a bucket of soup.
Sounds like a new tasting menu from Heston Blumenthal. I'd like to thank Steve,
Polly and Randall. And I'll leave you with Albert Einstein's much less famous
equation. If A is success in life, then A equals X plus Y plus Z. Work is X,
play is Y and Z is keeping your mouth shut. That's all from me and from the
museum this time. Goodbye. The Museum of Curiosity was curated by John Lloyd and
me, Anna Tershinsky. The donors were Polly Morgan, Randall Munro and Steve
Nallan. The exhibits were catalogued by Mike Turner, Mandy Fenton, Jade Gebbie,
Cameron Loxdale and Lydia Mizen. The producers were Sam Holmes and Li Ying Li.
And it was a BBC Studios production for Radio 4. And this time tomorrow, Mark
Watson looks at the week that was as a metaphor for our lives. Doubtless
exploring the many and varied dangers of messaging services. On BBC iPlayer.
From the wilds of County Kerry to the Caledonian pine forest. From the Yorkshire
moors to the reed beds of Suffolk. From an ant's nest in Gloucestershire to
beneath the waves in Shetland. Our magical wildlife revealed close to home. Wild
Isles with David Attenborough starts next Sunday night on BBC iPlayer.