TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 UK and please include a phone number then listen to Moneybox Live on work after
50, just after three. BBC News at midday. The former Health Secretary Matt
Hancock has strongly rejected claims that he ignored expert advice to test
everyone moving into a care home in England for coronavirus at the start of the
pandemic. Thousands of WhatsApp messages leaked to the Daily Telegraph suggest
that in April 2020 Mr Hancock initially endorsed the view of senior medical
officers who wanted all new residents swabbed but mandatory testing was brought
in only for those leaving hospital. Lord Bethel, who was a health minister at
the time, told the Today programme there was a good reason for the change. There
was an operational meeting to talk about how you were actually going to test
people and how many actual tests we had. The reality was there was a very very
limited number of those tests. The thing that held us back was not a dispute
about the clinical advice, it was simply the operational ability to deliver
tests. Mr Hancock has accused the Telegraph of selective reporting and says the
right forum to analyse what happened is the independent inquiry. The sociologist
Professor Robert Dingwall, who advised the government on Covid, fears its
conclusions will come too late for the next public health crisis. I think it is
important because clearly there is now planning underway for the risk of a bird
flu pandemic and it's really critical that the right lessons are learned. We
can't really wait for the inquiry to sort of grind through its processes and I
think we do need a much more urgent debate. The director of the FBI has said he
believes that the Covid pandemic probably started as a result of a leak from a
Chinese laboratory. Beijing has rejected the conclusion as political
manipulation. The World Health Organization previously described the leak theory
as extremely unlikely. Our China correspondent Stephen Macdonald reports. The US
intelligence community had a history of misdeeds involving fraud and deception,
according to China's foreign ministry spokesperson. As such, Mao Ning said their
conclusions regarding the origins of Covid-19 had no credibility. This followed
FBI director Christopher Wray saying his agency had believed for a long time
that the coronavirus could most likely be traced back to a lab leak in China.
The US has accused Beijing of hindering investigations into the source of the
coronavirus. A promised follow-up study by the World Health Organization has not
happened. At least 36 people have been killed in a collision between two trains
in Greece. A passenger service from Athens crashed head-on with a freight train
near the city of Larissa just before midnight. The Greek prime minister is
visiting the site, where rescue teams are still searching the wreckage. More
than 60 people are in hospital, six of them in a critical condition. This
survivor, who was in the fourth carriage of the passenger train, described what
happened. We broke the windows with our backs. All I remember is feeling a very
strong braking. And suddenly I saw sparks and flames on the sides of the
windows, then a sudden stop. This made me all panic. And we just wanted to get
out as soon as possible, so we tried to break the glass. What we saw in front of
us was chaos. More than 200 police officers are continuing to search for a
missing baby, a day after the child's parents were arrested on suspicion of
gross negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were detained in
Brighton following a nationwide manhunt. Officers said they had not provided any
information on the whereabouts of the baby. A public hearing is about to get
underway in London, examining allegations of racism at Yorkshire Cricket Club.
The claims were made more than two years ago by the former player Azim Rafiq.
He'll give evidence in person to the disciplinary panel, along with the former
England captain Michael Vaughan. One of France's most successful footballers,
Juste Fontaine, has died at the age of 89. He scored 13 times for the national
side at the 1958 World Cup in Sweden, the record for a single tournament. BBC
News. This is BBC Radio 4 and now it's time for you and yours with Winifred
Robinson. Hello, welcome to Radio 4's Consumer Programme. Today, the latest
government offer to encourage us to have greener home heating is failing and for
familiar reasons. So from a point of view of getting someone to do the work and
being confident what you're going to get, I don't think it was easy. We'll be
looking into all of that, why souvenir hunters are piling into McDonald's in
France. Food inflation is still soaring but it's even worse if you have to buy
free-from products. Whereas a small loaf in the normal bread aisle would be
about a pound, pound 40 at the most, here we're looking at £3.50 for a Tiger
Bloomer, £2.95 just for a standard loaf. And the landlords saving their pubs by
closing the kitchens. If you could take me back in time and not put up the food
cost as much as they've gone up in the last two years and not put up the energy
cost as much as they've, I would still make the same decision. Is pub food on
the way out? If you'd like to get in touch, email us please, you and yours at
bbc.co.uk or tweet us hashtag you and yours or text us to 84844. Arnold Clark is
one of Britain's biggest car dealers. It has 200 branches. It sells 300,000 cars
a year. Just before Christmas, it was hit by a cyber attack. The company says
customer data, including bank details, email addresses and ID documents like
driving licence and passports, may have been leaked onto the dark web. Its
customers are only just finding out about it now. Letters went out to them last
week, I have to declare an interest here because I've had a letter warning me
that my own data has been breached and telling me I'm at increased risk of
fraud. I bought a car from Arnold Clark in Northwich in 2017. Well Stephen
Dutton lives in Liverpool and he got his letter from Arnold Clark on Friday. So
Stephen, commiserations then. When did you last have dealings with Arnold Clark?
Well that's a bit of a coincidence. I'm actually, I was actually born in
Northwich. Okay, that is a coincidence. I was born in Liverpool, you were born
in Northwich. So tell me, when you last had dealings with Arnold Clark? The last
time I bought a car was January 2017 and that was a cash deal. Before that I had
one because the car I had before, we had a very bad car crash, me and my two
sons, and that was 2013, 14, that was on finance. Do they service your car? I
mean would they have taken your bank details more recently than 2017? I tend to
get my services at other places basically, the people that I know. So, go on.
Yeah, I have been back there once before where there was a small problem, that
was probably about a year after, but no I've not really dealt with them for
about say five years, but they have made, I did have two very strange phone
calls often after I bought the car in 2016 saying one, they were from Manchester
and they needed to take my car in for a service. Yeah, I was living in
Liverpool. Just let's stick with this data breach if you would, Stephen. Did you
know about it before your letter came? No, I didn't. No, no. No, I never knew,
nothing from December or Zany was from Friday. This letter was dated on the 20th
of February and the more you read it, to be honest, the worse it gets. Arnold
Clark won't say how many customers have had the data stolen, but in that letter
they say they have paid for everyone involved to have a credit monitoring
service from the credit checking company Experian and they're going to pay for
that for two years and it wrote a link down, didn't it, in the letter and told
you to go and register with Experian. Did you do that? I did that, but when I
got on it was still asking me for all kinds of different accounts that they can
check and I didn't put them in. You were scared? Yeah, because it was basically
saying to put your credit check up more, put your personal account number in and
your credit card numbers and all that kind of stuff. You see, I did it and it
didn't ask me for any of that at all. It just asked me to verify some old
addresses and what bank accounts I had, just to verify that I had credit cards
with different companies and so on. So I did sign up for it, but you decided not
to? No, I just don't. Going back a few years I've actually got £40,000 missing
in a pension as well, which has been stolen. You're just too cautious? Yeah,
credit cards being used and my auntie going back years, she's sadly passed on.
She had a lot of money stolen from people like that. Well Stephen, let me bring
Richard Forrest in because he's a lawyer who specialises in data and privacy
claims cases and he's going to try to bring legal action against Donald Clark to
get compensation for customers. Richard Forrest, have you been able to find out
how many people might be affected in this data breach? Oh hi, thanks for having
me. What we do know is you are running into the thousands, absolutely, and
that's both north of the border and south of the border. The exact number, I
think that will pan out over time, but you're certainly looking at the thousands
and I suspect it could well be over 10,000 quite easily. How long then is a
company allowed to hold onto your data anyway? There's certain requirements for
that. As a law firm, we will hold files for up to six years and I know a lot of
this, what it seems to be coming out is a lot of the information that was hacked
was from agreements held in 2019. Now they may well be able to justify having
those agreements given that we're in 2023, but that will, so those are the kind
of questions that we'll be asking as to whether that was absolutely necessary to
hold that data at the time and that will again come out as part of the legal
action I would expect. You're looking to claim compensation on behalf of
customers. How much would you reasonably expect Arnold Clark to pay? I mean does
it depend what happens to people now or would you be compensated just for the
worry? In terms of the distress and the worry arising out of the claim, that
would probably form part of the biggest aspects of the compensation. You're
going to get awarded for the extensive data that was breached, which in this
case is significant. Arnold Clark will have to tell you that, won't they? Yes,
Arnold Clark will have to confirm the data. We've already got a good idea of the
data in terms of name, contact details, date of birth, bank account details,
possibly passport, driving licence, which I would consider to be extensive
personal data and then bearing in mind everyone individually is impacted
differently by these events, it would be done on a case-by-case basis as to the
level of that distress and that would form part of the overall compensation,
which could easily run into thousands of pounds. Per person? Yes. Could it break
Arnold Clark? I think given the size of the people that it's impacted, it's
going to be a very worrying time for them and it's the extensive data as well
and what we now know is that the data has been published on the dark web. Yes,
how do you know that? We were trying to get confirmation about that from Arnold
Clark but without success, but I've seen that reported in the trade press. How
do you know it was really leaked on the dark web? There's various press reports
confirming that and I know from people who have been with Arnold Clark that
there has been a ransom demand made. Really? Yes, there was a ransom demand made
and… Oh yes, to Arnold Clark, not to individuals. Yes, that's correct. Sure,
sure. Yes, of course, yes, and it's our understanding that there was then an
amount of information put on the dark web when that wasn't complied with and I
understand there's been a further amount of information put on the dark web. So,
I'm not quite sure at this moment in time how Arnold Clark are looking to deal
with any further ransom requests given that the information as far as we're
aware has been published, but that is always a concern. But I mean, they
shouldn't be paying it, should they? Because then they're just going to land
another company in the same sort of mess. But that's a bit of a problem and it
can be a bit of a policy decision. If they do pay out, what's going to be the
wider implications of that? And again, I think even if a ransom is paid, for
example, I don't think that would give the consumers any real peace of mind in
any event, given who now holds the data. No. Okay, thanks so much. That was
Richard Forrest and Stephen Dutton. Obviously, it's a story we'll be coming back
to. Arnold Clark sent us this statement saying, while this crime and theft of
data was inflicted on Arnold Clark, we recognise the impact it can have on our
partners and customers. We take their safety and the safety of their data very
seriously. We've already taken several proactive steps to help them and since
the incident occurred, we've engaged on a regular basis with the police and the
Office of the Information Commissioner. There are more gloomy predictions this
morning about the prospects for pubs. The British Beer and Pub Association is
warning that without help from the Chancellor in the budget this month, 2,000
pubs will close with the loss of 25,000 jobs. And a funny thing's happening with
the pubs that are left. Figures from the research agency CGA suggest that
they're shutting down their kitchens to survive. It found that last year,
drinks-only pubs owned by chains had stronger sales than the pubs they owned
that serve hot food. Independent pubs offering hot meals were the most likely to
close. Peter Brown writes about pubs and beer and Geoff Bell owns the Eap Castle
pub in Rye. Geoff closed his pub kitchen. He told me why. First of all, I'd say
I did it in October 2020, so before the acute phase of the energy crisis and the
cost of living crisis. But when, of course, we were in the middle of the Covid
period and the writing was very much on the wall, you know, an inflationary
period was going to be coming ahead quite clearly. And I just saw that the
future was a bit bleak for the same old model. And I most importantly wasn't
really enjoying doing. So my reason was a kind of some degree of economic
foresight in the circumstances we were in, but also it was a lifestyle choice
and a decision that, you know, this wasn't how I want to run my pub and how I
think ideally pubs should be run. So, Geoff, why weren't you enjoying having the
kitchen and the food? I'm not giving away a trade secret when I say that chefs
can be quite difficult to deal with. So there is that. There is moreover, I
mean, seeing the fact that prices began to have to rise due to ingredient cost
prices and that had been happening for years. This is really key to understand.
I've been in the pub industry for about 15 years now. I've seen prices of food
rise above everything else in that time in a way that people perhaps haven't
noticed in the shops at retail. And, you know, you're beginning to think that
the pain point for customers on what things cost, you kept having to rise it all
the time. Then we had a shortage of staff. So something that had always been
quite stressful was becoming very difficult to keep the actual plate spinning at
all. Pete Brown, why do you think it is then that food is no longer the big
drawing in thing, the big reason why people are going to the pub? I think
there's a bunch of different things and pubs compete with so many other things.
On top of all the things that Geoff has mentioned, which are all true, you've
got things like, you know, what lockdown did was revolutionised home delivery
services. And we all got into the idea of things like Deliveroo and Just Eat.
Yeah, we go out for a meal when we can't be bothered to cook ourselves or we
want a bit of a treat. And there's other options on that now. At the same time,
when times are hard, we still want the occasional treats. And it's much more
affordable to just nip out for a casual pint than it is to go out and spend
£30-£40 on a meal. Geoff Bell, how are you managing to bring people into the pub
now if they're not coming for the hot meals? I mean, herein lies the problem of,
you know, I wouldn't advise everybody to close their kitchen because I have a
very specific drink offer, very specific. It's very focused on small,
independent breweries from around the UK and sometimes beyond. It's focused on
natural wine, of which we have quite a culture down in Sussex where my pub is.
We have local producers producing that. Ditto real cider. We're in a cider
region. I keep people fed with local cheeses and charcuterie and pork pies that
are handmade for me locally and great bar snacks and things. So, you know, I
make sure there's a compelling offer with something to eat, albeit not from a
hot kitchen. Also, dare I say, my pub has a nice setting. It's in a town of a
few thousand inhabitants that gets a lot of visitors but has a big permanent
population. That permanent population now spend more time in the town because
those that used to commute are more likely to work from home. I have a nice big
beer garden, either log fire, a low ceiling with beams, you know. Sounds lovely.
I have a good set up. I have a good set up for it. So, I'd like to think there's
a compelling reason to, as Pete says, go out for a bit of a treat, have a few
drinks, even if you're not going to eat out and my place suits that. Pete Brown,
given that it's so much cheaper to drink at home, why do you think people will
still go out to the pub? For decades now, it's been cheaper to drink at home
than in the pub. Beer prices, especially in supermarkets, have stayed relatively
flat for the last 20 years, whereas they've really gone up in pubs because pubs
like Geoff's can't afford to just absorb all the costs the way that a big
supermarket chain can. You get so much more in a pub than just the beer. There's
so much difference when you're sitting on your sofa with a can of lager and
being in a pub that's got a range of stuff that's been curated for you, the
atmosphere, just the sense of being out of the house. We like getting out. We
like just kind of changing the scenery and the atmosphere of a pub is absolutely
key. It's that warmth and that kind of welcome that we don't really get anywhere
else. Geoff, was the profit always in the drinks anyway? Yes. There's the honest
truth. If you could take me back in time and not put up the food cost as much as
they've gone up in the last two years and not put up the energy cost as much as
they've, I would still make the same decision. What I've found is that the
amount of time you can actually devote to being a good host and having a lovely
pub when you're not worried about all the incredibly high overhead and high
stress items going on behind that kitchen door, you end up with a much better
business that more easily, dare I say, is profitable because you're just you're
removing a huge amount of the overhead from the business, huge amount. Pete
Brown, were you surprised by that other line that came out of this research that
nine out of 10 of the pubs that closed last year were independent pubs, truly
independent, where the owner could bring in any drinks that they liked? Yeah, I
was absolutely shocked by that and really saddened by it because the independent
pubs tend to be the best ones because they're the ones that carry the
personality of the landlord. But when I think about it, it sort of makes sense
because the big pub companies, I think at the moment it's all about cash
reserves. If you've got a lot of reserves, you can subsidise it, you can keep it
open while you're losing money. If you're a one-person operation, you simply
haven't got those reserves and they were depleted by COVID, they were depleted
by lockdowns. Pubs got nowhere near enough help from the government during
lockdown and you're on your kind of last legs and it takes one little final push
just to push you over the edge. So yeah, it shocked, I hadn't thought of it, but
when I did hear it, it did sort of make sense. That was Pete Brown and Geoff
Bell, the owner of the Ypres Castle in Rye, speaking to me this morning. France
has introduced some of the toughest anti-waste laws in Europe. Food businesses
aren't allowed to use disposable cutlery, crockery or packaging to serve people
who eat in and there's a ban on unsold non-food items being sent to landfill. At
the same time, they've made it easy for people to recycle their rubbish. Liza
Louis is a reporter who lives in Paris and she can tell us a bit more about it.
Liza, hi. These laws are so comprehensive that it's taken five years to
implement them. Briefly run through for us, if you would, what they have done so
far. Well, the first rules came into effect in 2021. As you said, they included,
for example, a ban for businesses on the sale of single-use plastic straws,
disposable plastic cutlery. So since then, you'll find paper straws or pasta
straws, you know, long, thick pasta with holes in them, in it. And shops are no
longer, they are no longer allowed to distribute free plastic bottles in
businesses and they have to invest more in water fountains. Also, when you look
at establishments that are open to the public, like railway stations, libraries,
schools, etc., they are required now to provide water fountains. And France also
got rid of, you know, plastic tea bags and plastic packaging for fruits and
veggies until a certain weight. And as you said, companies are no longer allowed
to destroy unsold items like electronics or hygiene products. Such a ban was
already in place since 2016 for food products, actually. And so supermarkets
couldn't destroy those. And the government has now taken further rules, actually
further measures to reduce waste here in the country. Yeah, as I said, they're
not allowed to give out anything disposable if you are eating in and an
unintended consequence is that people have been rushing to McDonald's, not for
the food, but to use the rubber French fries holder. Tell me about that. Yeah,
that's right. I mean, it seems it has become some kind of a, you know, a
collector's piece, these red French fry holders. Lots of people going there,
also posting on social media saying, you know, I've got one at home now. It's
really nice. So you take your own? Sorry, you take your own? You buy one and you
take your own? Well, you go there, you get one with the fries, they're providing
the fry holder and then you take the fry holder home. And managers say there was
this whole discussion, yeah, is McDonald's in France going to run out of fry
holders? And branch managers have said, you know, well, either they've said, I'm
not really concerned. I think it's an initial run on this and it will ebb away.
And some other managers have said, we're quite preoccupied. And they've even put
up signs saying, you know, our tableware, our French fry holders are equipped
with GPS trackers. So don't take them. Don't steal them. That was obviously a
bluff. Yeah, exactly. Liza Louis in Paris. Thank you so much for that. Could we
do a similar thing here? Sam Roberts runs Boston Tea Party. It's a chain of 23
cafes in the southwest of England and the Midlands. And Dan Dicker is the chief
executive of Circular & Co in Cornwall. He works with McDonald's and Burger
King, advising them on how to reuse their rubbish. Good afternoon to you both
and welcome. Dan Dicker, there's a difference between reusing something, isn't
there, and recycling it. Many businesses recycle, but not many reuse, do they?
No, no, not at all. And that's quite a common problem. And I think, especially
when the industry and the public actually is that if you're recycling, you're
feeling like you're sort of doing your bit. And if you put it out to recycle it,
it's effectively going to be reused. But everybody forgets the actual true
definition of recycling is it has to end up being reused. That final loop in
that cycle is it has to be reused. So, you know, it's very imperative that we
kind of switch to that mindset within industry and the public that it's all
about actually reuse. And reusable themselves, you know, we're developing
reusables now that are coming through that are actually made from that recycled
material. So it's that whole circular motion that we're all trying to get into
place. Sam Robert, you run 24 cafes, and I know that you believe that you would
already be obeying now the rules that the French have imposed. Tell us what you
do. Yeah, that's right. So, yeah, we got rid of all single use straws and
plastic bottles in 2017. And actually, we're ahead of the curve now, because in
2018, we got rid of all single use coffee cups. We don't have any cling film in
our kitchens. So in terms of single use plastics, we're definitely ahead of the
curve. I was just gonna say, is it more expensive? Yes, it is. Yeah, it
definitely has cost. That is definitely true. But I guess, you know, we have to
accept that what's the cost to the environment? What's the cost to the sort of
wider the wider planet? And I, you know, we're of the opinion that businesses
need to, you know, pay the cost of the rubbish that they produce. We've seen
very little traction in terms of legislation. So I'm really pleased. And then
we've been consulting with DEFRA as an organisation that there looks to be some
legislation coming in that will deal with the problem and start to reduce the
billions of tonnes of waste that the UK produces every year. Dundee, in France,
these anti-waste laws, as we've just been hearing, mean that the restaurants
have to reuse everything they give you. So if you're sitting in to eat, and
McDonald's has created this reusable rubber red fries holder for people who eat
in and people love them so much, they're stealing them, they're taking them
home. Why don't they do that here? I think it's interesting, because I think
they will. And I think, you know, people like McDonald's and Burger King and the
bigger brands are obviously having to do it in other European countries. And I
think quite wisely, they're looking to see how those kind of test beds, as it
were, actually operate and how it works out. You know, some of it's gone very
smoothly, other things have not. I think there's a bit of small print in some of
this legislation that certain companies have missed, and they've had minor
panics on what they're going to produce. So I think there's an interesting
learning curve going on. And I hope the UK government is kind of, I hope their
strategy is to look at that, take the learnings and then deliver something, you
know, that's equally comprehensive, if not better. And I think one of the really
interesting areas, and it'd be great to ask Sam, is that with a lot of the
pilots that we've been involved with, with some of these bigger brands, is
they're still, they're running pilots, but they're still offering the single use
alternative at the same time. So the data coming out from those pilots is not
that positive. I mean, there's lots of learnings. And don't get me wrong, it's a
great start. You mean, it's not that positive that people are choosing to use
the stuff they can then chuck away? Yeah, if they're given the option, they're
given the choice, then they still invariably lead to the sort of what's deemed
the more convenient route, whereas Sam hasn't given them that choice. And I
think it's fascinating that he's made that, you know, commercially viable. And I
think we can all learn from that. And I think big industry can learn from that
as well. Sam? Yeah, look, I mean, we have a scheme here and we've proved its
viability. So, you know, if you focus on takeaway coffee cups alone, we have a
scheme that's fully, you know, it's circular. So we issue reusable cups if
people want to come in, they can bring their own cup, or we have a loan scheme.
And we have seen customers, you know, eagerly take it up, bring up, bring our
loan cups back, which are then sanitized and washed and reissued. So actually,
it does work. We've got a business model that shows that you can do it. But in
the absence of legislation, you know, our challenge is that we've gone early and
we've gone by ourselves. You know, and then that has put some pressure. And as I
said, it definitely does add cost. But from our perspective, we've got a model
here that we've shown can work, is business sound and reduces waste to zero. Sam
Roberts and Dicker. Thanks both. Now, food is still rising in price. And
according to the retail analyst, Cantar, this week, it went up by just over 17%
compared with this week, a year ago. It's way ahead of the general rate of
inflation that's running at just over 10%. And when you look at the free from
foods, the ones for people allergic to wheat, gluten or milk, the cost of food
is even higher. Kevin Mosley has been checking that out. I'm in a large
supermarket, looking at the free from aisle, typically, you'll find them about
half an hour's length. And at the centre of the offering is often bread. And
it's a good place to start just to show you the contrast in prices. It's quite
hard to bake a standard sized loaf gluten free. So most of them are the
equivalent of a small loaf. So whereas a small loaf in the normal bread aisle
would be about a pound, pound 40 at the most, we're looking at £3.50 for a Tiger
Bloomer, £2.95 just for a standard loaf, and for unbranded loaf £1.95. It gets
even pricier when you start then looking at specialist bread products. So a wrap
£3.50, you can get an equivalent pack for about 90 pence. Also crumpets £2.90
for four, six jam tarts that will cost you £2. So quite significantly more
expensive. So turning to breakfast cereals, here the prices are comparable to a
branded cereal. So £2.50 for Corn Flakes or £3.15, but a lot more than own brand
which you can buy in the cereal aisle and a gluten free Nutibrax which is
equivalent of Weetabix £3.80 for 24. And most of the products you'll find on
Free From are free from gluten or dairy products. So the two biggest brands
you'll find here are Warburton's and Alpro, but there are more specialist
products as well and they just get even more pricey. Stuffed without eggs for
example, or cheese. So there's a jar of pesto here, vegan pesto £3.10 and Bisto
gravy £4. So even before you factor in the cost of living increases, you're
always going to be paying a premium for what are quite often staples like bread
and pasta if you have a food allergy. Kevin Mosley shopping for Free From. Well,
Helen Armstrong is a celiac and she is from Sheffield. She blogs as the Steliac
and Marcus Strip is from Spoon Guru. He works with retailers including Tesco to
try to make it easier for people with allergies to find food that they can eat.
Welcome to both. Helen, would you explain what a celiac is and what it is you
can't eat? Yeah, sure. So celiac disease is an autoimmune condition where your
body starts to attack its own tissues when you eat gluten. This is because the
immune system is mistaking substances inside gluten for a threat. So it starts
to attack healthy tissue and this causes damage to the small intestine, which
means it's unable to absorb nutrients from food. Left untreated, it can lead to
conditions like osteoporosis, anemia, and very rarely bowel cancer. So if you
eat something with gluten in it, what happens to you? So for me, my symptoms are
sort of severe stomach cramps and diarrhea. And I still get that if I
accidentally eat gluten, but it can manifest itself in a variety of different
ways, including fatigue, mouth ulcers, skin rash, neurological symptoms like
brain fog, things like that. Helen, how much does having this allergy to gluten
then, how much of a difference does that make to your weekly food shop and your
bill? Yeah, it's big. It is expensive to be celiac, unfortunately. So as a rule,
as Kevin was saying, the gluten-free staple food items cost about two to three
times more than regular ones. And that includes things like your cereals, your
breads, but it's also things like snack bars, you know, my child has packed
lunch, so they're expensive as well. He's a celiac too, is he? Yeah, yeah. So my
14-year-old was diagnosed in lockdown. So you're shopping for the two of you.
You were just saying that the things you put in his packed lunch are expensive.
Have you noticed the food price inflation then on Free From? Yeah, I've noticed
a bit of a mix, really. So some products have only gone up a few pence, and
other products have increased quite a lot, up to 50%. So perhaps not to the
extent of what we're seeing with regular staple foods where prices are doubling,
but that's going up on prices that were already quite expensive. I think what
will have an impact is people who were buying gluten-free for lifestyle reasons
might be buying less or going for cheaper options. So the market could shrink,
which might have a knock-on impact for people who actually need gluten-free
food. Marcus Driffrum, Spoon Guru. Prices for food generally are soaring, and
the Free From food starts off more expensive, we know that. Manufacturers say
they cost more to produce, and that they do everything they can to keep the
prices down. Is there any evidence that prices for Free From products are rising
at a faster rate than the equivalent food for people who don't have any
allergies? Good morning. So yes, there's been a number of research that's come
out recently that showed that the prices of Free From foods have gone up
disproportionately to standard products. The grocer, for example, showed last
year that 260 individual products across the Free From range have gone up, and
some have gone up by a significant margin. Free From gravy, for example, costs
twice as much as normal gravy now. Free From bloomers cost more than three times
the normal bloomers, and some chocolate-like quality straight is more than four
times expensive when you buy the Free From version. So there's clear evidence
that people with allergy are paying a premium to support their needs. Marcus,
how can people with allergies try to keep their food bills down then? It's
tricky because you have limited choice. You can't trade down. You have to stick
to foods, you know, that are safe. Now, we set up our company to deal with this
specific problem because my household is also affected by allergy. My wife has a
gluten allergy. I don't eat meat. And when we set up the company seven years
ago, we noticed how difficult it was for people to find relevant foods for their
needs. So there are a number of things shoppers can do. First of all, they can
use digital tools like retailers' apps or their website to apply a filter. So if
you, you know, one of our clients is Tesco, if you go to Tesco and you apply the
gluten-free filter or the nut-free filter, Tesco searches the entire product
catalog for suitable foods, not just the Free From aisle. So apps, digital
tools, filters are really helpful in finding foods that you can eat and where
you can also have confidence that they are reliably labeled. Helen, do you try
to do that, you know, to make sure that you're limiting how much of this Free
From stuff you're buying, you know, that you're not accidentally opting for Free
From when you could get something that wouldn't do you any harm in the
mainstream supplies? Yeah, I mean, I think originally, initially, when people
are diagnosed, they feel like they can only shop from the Free From aisle. But
in fact, there is a lot of food available in the shops that doesn't contain
gluten. And sometimes we call those accidentally gluten-free products, things
like baked beans, rice pudding. But obviously, you still got to always check the
label. So yeah, I'm a big label checker. You do have to become quite savvy,
because sometimes you can find the same products cheaper outside of the Free
From section. So there was a particular example of a brand of pesto where they
market a version as gluten and dairy-free, which is more expensive than their
regular brand. But the regular one is actually already gluten-free. So it's much
cheaper. Mark, as manufacturers cut their ranges back in the pandemic, didn't
they? And some products don't seem to have come back at all. Is it the same with
Free From? Is there also less choice? Yes, there's even less choice now. And
choice was already limited before COVID. Celiac UK, for example, is a charity
that showed that even before COVID in 2021, there was a reduction in gluten-free
products. And this has only become worse since COVID. Marcus Strip, Helen
Armstrong, thank you both. The government's latest green heating scheme for
England and Wales to try to encourage people to install heat pumps has been
described as seriously failing by politicians on the House of Lords Climate
Change Committee. The boiler upgrade scheme offers grants of £5,000 towards the
cost of an air source heat pump, and £6,000 for a ground source heat pump. Now
take-up has been so low that the committee says that the national target for
green heating is very unlikely to be met now. Part of the problem with the
scheme is the hurdles that you have to clear. First, there's the cost. A heat
pump costs up to £14,000 to install. To qualify for a grant, your home must have
an energy performance certificate with no outstanding recommendations for loft
or cavity wall insulation. And then you have to find an accredited fitter to do
the work. Baroness Parminter is chair of the House of Lords Climate Change
Committee, and she's on the line now. And Baroness Parminter, how does the take-
up of these grants then compare with what the government had hoped would happen
with this scheme? Well, our study shows that about only half of all the budget
will be used if it carries on at the rate of installations that the scheme are
achieving at the moment. There's been about 14,000 applications for the scheme
in the slightly less than a year that the scheme has been running, and that's
really disappointing given we know that 17% of our greenhouse gases in the UK
come from our homes, and we've really got to get serious about getting low-
carbon heating installations into our homes. Now I mentioned some of those
barriers, you know, the rules that are in force. You have to have an energy
performance certificate, and if it recommends loft or cavity wall installation,
you have to have done that. Then you have to find an accredited fitter to do the
work. These rules have been drawn up to try to protect people from being conned,
haven't they, in the way sadly consumers were conned with previous green heating
schemes. Now it's hard to see a way around that, isn't it? Well, clearly there
are some barriers to people putting in heat pumps, and we of course want
consumers to be adequately protected, but some of the scheme mechanisms that
have been put in place actually are running counter to both helping consumers
and getting the scheme in place. I mean, you mentioned EPCs, the energy
performance certificates, and our analysis shows that they're not consistently
valuing the installation of a heat pump, and it's sometimes they're actually
resulting in a poorer EPC rating once you've actually put a heat pump in. But
the other issue which we identified as very much as a barrier is the overall
lack of awareness in the UK, both of the need to move to homes which are heated
in a net zero way. The government's own figures show that there's 62% of people
have little or no awareness of the need to change their heat, their homes, and
80%, 80% have little or no awareness of heat pumps. The government can't expect
this scheme to work unless it is giving people more information about why heat
pumps are the way forward in the future. A government spokesman told us that
despite it being a challenging year for the energy sector, this scheme, the
boiler upgrade scheme, has paid out £38.3 million in vouchers to installers so
far, and they say they have recently launched what they call a targeted
marketing campaign to increase public awareness. Will that do the trick? Well,
no, it won't. That targeted marketing campaign is a combination of sponsored ads
on search engines and other social media outlets. I mean, what we're talking
about here is getting a message across in the same way that during the pandemic,
the government had to change people's behaviour at very short notice. They spent
a lot of money, rightly so, on above the line advertising to tell people why
they needed to change their behaviours. We need the same level of activity to
help people understand how they need to change their home heating systems. In
this country, nearly 75% of our homes are heated by gas boilers. We've got to
move and move quickly to the low-carbon alternative of heat pumps. In two years'
time, the government also told us this in their statement, all new homes will be
required to have heat pumps fitted as standard. Do you think realistically that
might be the only way that they'll be fitted at scale? Well, I think there's a
problem with that figure. I mean, as you mentioned earlier on, there is not
enough installers of heat pumps. At the moment, there's about 3,000 heat pump
installers as opposed to about 130,000 installers of gas boilers. The government
say themselves they're going to need 12,000 installers by 2025 if we're going to
get both this scheme working and homes introducing heat pumps. So we need more
installers. But you rightly say that the government have said that from 2025,
all new homes will have to have low-carbon heat. The problem is that the
government is putting out mixed messages about what type of heating that should
be. They're still leaving open the option for those homes to be fed by green
hydrogen, despite the fact that heat pumps are a well-used form of heating
installations in homes on the continent. It's going to be very difficult for us
to produce enough green hydrogen at scale. So we don't believe that using
hydrogen is a sensible alternative for home heating in the short to medium term,
and the government should close that option down. Baroness Palminter, thank you.
We can hear now from someone who had a heat pump fitted using one of these
grants from this boiler upgrade scheme. Anthony Hibbs lives in Newcastle-under-
Lyme and he says choosing an installer was the hardest part. From the start,
when I first decided I wanted a heat pump, I was interested in a heat pump, to
find an installer wasn't easy. You do several sort of online requests for a
quote or a site visit to see what they can do for you, and that bit is tricky.
One did a quite sort of intensive on the phone Zoom quote, you go around the
house. Another local company, he came to the house, again, he seemed to want to
tear the whole house apart. He got some strange ideas of, you know, you needed
all new pipe work, you needed all new radiators, pipes would have to go
underground outside to the unit because it needed to be away from the house. But
then I found a company called Abacus Energy Solutions in Liverpool. I researched
the company, they've been working for about eight years, two engineers have been
doing it themselves, they're just expanding now, so they've got contractors to
do the install. So I decided to go with them. So from a point of view of getting
someone to do the work and being confident what you're going to get, I don't
think it was easy. You could quite easily be put off at that stage. It's Anthony
Hibbs. Well, the government wants 600,000 heat pumps to be fitted over the next
five years. And to reach that target, the charity Nesta says we'd have to be
training at least 4,000 installers every year. Now, 4,000 installers is more
than the total number of installers currently operating in the UK right now.
That's reckoned to be around 3,000. And there is currently no single clear route
to qualify as a heat pump installer. Andrew Folen is the managing director of
Heat Pump Installers UK. It's a company in Huddersfield. One of the problems is
if your niece or nephew goes to college today to be a heat and engineer, they've
got to train in gas before they can go in heat pumps. I don't think that's
right. So we've actually found a college now. It's not our local college. It's
not Leeds. It's not Kirklees. We've got to go as far as Castleford now,
Wakefield College, to send our princesses there. And what they're doing there is
they've broke it down. So if you go to any of the local colleges, you've got to
go all the way. You've got to have gas-based evidence to be qualified as a heat
and engineer. Then you go back and do the heat pumps. I think that's crazy. It's
a lot of time wasted. If we've got enough gas engineers out there right now for
the gas boilers that are out there, why are we still teaching these apprentices
about gas? Why are we not telling them about the future of heating and air
source and ground source heat pumps? So we're committed to what the government's
saying and lowering carbon emissions and trying to hit these targets. But it
just feels a little bit like our hands are tied. So at the moment, people who
want to apply for a grant from the boiler upgrade scheme and search for an
accredited installer, they might struggle to find one. Ian Rippon is the chief
executive of the body that runs that accredited list of heat pump installers.
It's called the Micro Generation Certification Scheme. Ian Rippon, do you think
that criticism of this latest government grant scheme is fair? It's been called
a failure by politicians on the House of Lords committee. I would say that it's
a little early to say that. I think certainly there's been a slow start to the
uptake of vouchers onto the scheme, but compared to previous schemes, actually,
lessons have been learned. The boiler upgrade scheme is more accessible to
consumers and contractors alike. There are only 3,000 heat pump installers in
the UK, as I said, compared with 130,000 registered gas heating engineers. How
are you going to get more of them trained? Well, really good challenge and
interesting to hear from Andrew there in that piece that you just played. MCS
has recognised that there is a gap here. The sector that we're part of deserves
its own dedicated apprenticeship. So, we have designed a new apprenticeship
standard that we hope will go live later this year, where there won't be
training in gas. You'll be trained as an apprentice in the new technology, low-
carbon technology like heat pumps. How long will it take, though, to train? It's
a three-year programme, but you're working in industry during that time. There
are other training programmes available to upskill existing experienced
qualified plumbers and heating engineers. There are short courses available
there that MCS mandates that you must have a qualification to be MCS certified
in one of those. But we're almost doing this the wrong way around. The industry
is a symptom of an industry that's growing. We should have developed the
apprenticeship programme, and then the short courses sort of fall out of that.
But, you know, never too late. We now have a programme that's going to go live
with colleges, and we're very excited about the prospect of having students
learning about heat pumps and not about fitting sanitary wear or gas boilers.
The government told us that heating engineers can train to install heat pumps in
just one week. Is that true? It is true, as long as you've got the prerequisite.
So, you can't, you'd need to be an experienced qualified heating engineer, time
served, if you like. You're then topping up your skills to be able to fit a low
carbon heating technology like a heat pump. There are considerations when you're
fitting a heat pump, such as designing the system appropriately for the home
that it's going into. So, considering the fabric of the home, its heat loss,
those are almost forgotten skills, if you like, of the UK heating industry. So,
it's brushing them off, rediscovering them and then working with the new
technology. And that can be done in a week. Our preference, of course, is that
we have more people going through a dedicated apprenticeship route. But if we
can't meet the target for heat pumps, and it doesn't look like we can, we're
going to need gas fitters for a very long time in the future, aren't we? It's
always been the thought that we are going to need gas fitters for a while yet.
There's going to be gas boilers, people will need them maintained. And we're
actually encouraging government with the new future home standard, which
consults this year, so that from 2025, new homes will not be connected to the
gas grid. I think that will create a real impetus around heat pumps by default.
I've got a new build house, and it came with a gas boiler fitted. I think that
will get into the consumer psyche that actually these new eco homes, efficient
homes will come with a heat pump as standard. Ian Rippon, thank you. Wizz Air
has been described by the Daily Mail as Britain's most hated airline. The Civil
Aviation Authority has described Wizz Air's treatment of passengers as
unacceptable. The company operates short haul flights from eight UK airports,
including Birmingham, Edinburgh, Gatwick and Luton. More than half of its UK
arrivals were late last year, and it's missed a deadline set by the regulators
to settle hundreds of compensation claims from passengers whose flights were
cancelled. It's also failed to pay compensation when customers have taken their
claims to court and won. We get a lot of complaints here at You and Yours about
Wizz Air. Jim Martin is from Hove. Christina Glasspool lives in Somerset. Hi
both and welcome both. Christina, Jim, let's hear what's happened to you then.
Christina first, tell me your nightmare with Wizz Air. Yeah, so this all started
back in June last year, so almost nine months now. We had a five hour delay and
we sort of turned up in Sicily without, lost all our train and bus transfers,
and so we basically asked for compensation. But unfortunately they agreed to
pay, but nine months later on we're still in a position where we haven't
received the funds. What's it like when you try to contact Wizz Air? It's a bit
of a nightmare. So they don't have much in terms of communication. We've tried
to sort of contact the call centre, but the call centre staff don't actually
deal with claims, and so they can't provide any information and it costs a lot
of money. And then in terms of emails, they just tend to sort of send a generic
email back, and all of it's kind of pointing to platforms that are linked to the
EU, which we're no longer a part of, which I've tried to express numerous times,
and they don't provide any support at all. So it's been a bit of a nightmare to
be honest. And if they were willing to pay you, Christina, what would you be
entitled to? Well, that's what's really frustrating. They actually agreed to
sort of, I think they agreed almost within a month to pay us, I think, 800 euros
in terms of compensation, but we just never received that payment. And it was
actually more than what we were originally asking for, but we just wanted to get
payment for the inconvenience and the fact that we had to pay for a taxi, which
cost us almost 200 quid. Jim, what happened to you? Yeah, we bought four tickets
for my family to travel to Tenerife in August last year, which cost £1,347. On
the flight out from Gatwick, we were delayed by over three hours. But on the
flight back, the flight was cancelled altogether. There were no Wizz Air staff
to help us, huge queues at the assistant's desk. And then we got the last flight
out, ended up in Stansted, and another taxi driver like Christina, and sort of
missed the next day's work through getting back sort of so tired and so late.
The cost of making our own way home was £1,645. And then after three hours
delay, the airlines are due to have to pay compensation of £340 per person per
flight. So we were looking at a claim for Wizz Air of over £4,400. But you can't
get it out of them? Absolutely not. No, it's been exactly like Christina said,
it's been a total nightmare getting everything. They seem to be totally
haphazard, incompetent and trying obviously desperately not to make the claims.
They claim they made payments and they hadn't come through, it just went on and
on and on. Let me bring in Sally Gethin then, she's an aviation analyst and
she's also a journalist. So Sally, we know a lot of airlines had problems last
summer, didn't they? A lot of flights were cancelled and delayed. What makes
Wizz Air stand out though? Well, Wizz Air has come to the attention of the
regulator, the CAA, which there were 811 complaints against Wizz Air per million
passengers, which is way beyond other airlines. Other airlines lodged less than
half that amount. I mean, any complaint is valid and needs to be addressed, but
Wizz Air is far and away the front runner. And I think you have to look back at
its history in a way, it's a fairly young airline to be able to understand
what's going on. They were aggressively expanding even during the pandemic and
really trying to compete with Ryanair really and take the crown in that regard.
And they're continuing to expand actually and continuing to invest in a massive
new fleet of aircraft. Nothing is holding them back. But the problem is that
they're not delivering on this customer service, which magazine also did a
survey and they came out bottom of the league table for being the worst airline
delivering customer service. And they're based in Hungary and they're an outlier
in the sense that they're the worst culprit for all of this. And they're
focused, I think, too much on creating profitability. They've actually been
operating a loss for a long time. They're expecting to come out of that next
year with this aggressive expansion plan. To make matters worse, they're taking
their focus away from the U.K. now in terms of their future. They've pulled out
of Cardiff Airport. They've pulled out of Doncaster Airport, which caused that
airport to shut. And they're focused more on Central and Eastern Europe to the
Middle East. So, they're a bit all over the place, really, and they're really
hard to pin down for the regulator. Yeah, they've missed a deadline that the
regulator, the Civil Aviation Authority, set them to resolve all outstanding
complaints and county court judgments by Christmas. Realistically, is there any
more the regulator can do? Well, the bigger picture to this is that the
government has actually conducted a consultation from passengers. There was a
consultation period in the first quarter of last year, and the government is
supposed to be gathering all the answers and coming up with a better consumer
policy. I mean, because also we have the summer of travel chaos as well. But
that's sort of still in limbo at the moment. And in the meantime, the CAA is
pledging that it's really going to go after all these airlines that are not
honoring their commitments and not providing the basic level of care. And
they're using all the tools at their disposal. There's also alternative dispute
resolution, aviation, ADR, but it doesn't have the teeth that it needs. This is
really just based around mediation, for example, and the CAA trying to put
pressure on those airlines. But ultimately, the law really needs to be tightened
up in this regard, and the government needs to come out with its decision, its
outcome based on that review that I mentioned. Sally, Gethin, Christine and Jim,
thanks all. We invited Wizz Air to come on the programme, as you'd expect. They
didn't want to, but they sent us this statement. We're deeply sorry for the
inconvenience customers have experienced when claiming compensation. Last year's
disruption meant we had to deal with an unprecedented number of claims. We are
working hard to put it all right and resolve all outstanding claims as quickly
as we can. We have increased the size of our customer services team, and
customers can now escalate their judgment details via a chat service on the
website. Lots and lots of emails have been coming in today. This one on the data
breach, Arnold Clark. Peter Russell says, I've had constant battles with
companies, including estate agents and car dealers, over taking copies of
driving licences and passports. Criminals got access to my data a few years ago.
Once your personal data has been obtained, no amount of compensation can put it
right. This one on free from, I'm a celiac. We were talking about how the price
of free from groceries has really risen. This one, I'm a celiac, diagnosed 30
years ago. It's really costly. I've also had non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancer
caused by my being a celiac is very rare. Hen's teeth, according to the
oncologist, but I had to have 18 months of chemotherapy. But luckily for me, it
worked. That's it for today. Tomorrow, it's one of our Gap Finders interviews,
and I'll be speaking to Ben Drury. He's the co-founder of Yoto. It's a screen-
free audio player for children. And then at around half past 12, it will be
sliced bread. And this week, Greg Foot is having a bit of a lie down. He's
investigating mattresses, whether their claims that they will give you a better
night's sleep really do live up to the hype. And same time tomorrow, then just
after the news at 12. Thanks for listening. You & Yours was produced by Kevin
Mosley. The studio managers were Amy Brennan and Simon Highfield. Now it's time
for a check on the weather. And here's Darren Bett. Thank you very much, Arlene.
Good afternoon. Maybe a few changes to come for tomorrow. Some of the country
will see a bit more sunshine, which will be a nice change. But today, the wind's
still coming in from off the North Sea. So it's picking up a lot of cloud that's
driving its way across much of the UK. And the cloud is thick enough to give us
quite a sprinkling of showers across England and Wales and also some eastern
parts of Scotland. Still one or two heavy showers, actually, across the
northeast of England. And it feels chilly underneath all this cloud and when the
showers come along because the breeze is a little brisker today. Temperatures
not really changed much from earlier on in the week. So still seven to nine
degrees, but a chilly breeze will be blowing. We may start to see some changes,
though, tonight in some areas. There's much cleaner air, drier air and clearer
skies across continental Europe. And as we pick up more of an easterly breeze,
we should see some of that coming into East Anglia, the southeast of England and
into the Midlands. And that could lead to a frost by the end of the night. We're
also going to find some clearer skies coming down into the northern half of
Scotland. So temperatures here could be down as low as minus two by tomorrow
morning. Other parts of the UK will hang on to more cloud, maybe not quite as
many showers, but still some here and there. And underneath the cloud,
temperatures will be typically three or four degrees. Heading into tomorrow
then, and we're going to see some sunshine across southern parts of England,
developing in mid and south Wales, perhaps through the Midlands and across East
Anglia, although East Anglia and the Midlands could turn more cloudy in the
afternoon. We've still got some light showers around, though, tomorrow, and
these are more likely across northeast England, southeast Scotland, maybe one or
two showers for Northern Ireland. Further north across Scotland, though, we'll
have some sunshine and it should be a decent day here. The winds will be lighter
tomorrow, but still temperatures again, seven to nine Celsius. Thanks, Darren.
That was Darren Barrett at the BBC Weather Centre. On BBC Radio 4. I think
there's something peculiar about this house. I hear noises. A modern retelling
of the classic thriller by Patrick Hamilton. The gas lights over there, they
sometimes go right down, then after a while, they go right back up again. The
origin of the word gaslighting. Do you think we should be seeing the doctor
again? I'm telling the truth, it happens. Rebecca Knight and James Purefoy star
in Gaslight. Why do you keep hiding? I really haven't touched it. You don't even
believe that yourself? Available now on BBC Sounds. In sickness and in health,
my darling. On 92 to 95 FM, 198 longwave on digital.