TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Science. BBC News at 8 o'clock. Rishi Sunak says
he's giving everything to get a new deal with the EU on post-Brexit trading
arrangements in Northern Ireland over the line. In an interview with The Sunday
Times, the Prime Minister said the Northern Ireland protocol had unbalanced the
Good Friday Agreement. Unionists in Stormont objected to the original terms,
with the DUP refusing to form a power-sharing executive. The police have been
given more time to question four of the five men arrested in connection with the
attempted murder of an off-duty officer in Oma on Wednesday. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell is critically ill in hospital. Votes are being counted
in Nigeria's presidential elections. It's expected to be a close result between
three candidates, two from the traditional major parties and a third, Peter
O.B., who's galvanised the support of the young. Our correspondent Yemasi
Adegoke is in the north-east of the country. She says there were some isolated
incidents of violence at polling stations. Some group of men were some wearing
masks, others had their faces revealed, stormed some polling units, harassing
voters, intimidating them, cutting away voter materials, election materials,
destroying ballot boxes and papers, injuring some voters in the process as well.
Police in Inverclyde have recovered two bodies during a search for the crew of a
tug which capsised off Greenook yesterday. The bodies have not yet been formally
identified. The families of the two missing sailors have been informed. Finance
ministers from the major G20 countries who have been holding talks in India have
failed to agree a closing statement because of differences over the war in
Ukraine. The hosts India said Russia and China had objected to parts of the
document condemning Russian aggression. In Robbe Union, England have beaten
Wales 20 points to 10 in their Six Nations clash at the Principality Stadium in
Cardiff, its Wales' third successive loss in the tournament. In the early game,
Ireland beat Italy 34-20 in Rome. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. It's 100 years
since the BBC first aired its first radio drama, a scene from Shakespeare's
Julius Caesar. In this week's Archive on Four, Michael Simmons Roberts
celebrates a form that continues to be a vibrant and evolving cornerstone of the
British cultural landscape. In silhouette against the pallid moon, all night he
runs, all night the vast bronze horseman at his back, a chase down every alley,
every road, embankment track. I'm in studio today recording a dramatisation I've
written of Pushkin's poem The Bronze Horseman with the director and my namesake
Susan Roberts. We're not related but I've worked with Susan on many dramas over
the years. Her other credits include the incredible verse drama Black Roses, The
Killing of Sophie Lancaster. Radio drama studios like this one have been
gathering together writers, directors, actors and sound designers for a century
now, so it feels timely to take a step back and look at this great dramatic
form. It's an international form but for much of that time the BBC alone has
broadcast drama to around 7 million listeners a week and has commissioned
annually hundreds of hours of new dramatic writing in original dramas,
adaptations and continuing serials. To try to sum up all that history in one
hour is a fool's errand so this is more like a love letter to an art form that's
given me and many others so much. I'll be picking some prize clips from the
capacious drama archives and we'll be hearing from some of those who helped
shape it. To begin at the beginning as a radio dramatist once said, the BBC did
a radio version of Shakespeare in 1923 but the first drama commissioned
specifically for this new medium was A Comedy of Danger in 1924 by the writer
Richard Hughes. This is Richard Hughes recalling that pioneering production.
Radio drama sounds solemn but rarely things are all pretty casual those Savoy
Hill days. Our audience were used to using their eyes. This was a blind man's
world we were introducing them to. In time they'd accept its conventions but
how'd they react this first occasion? Better make it easy for them just this
once. Something which happens in the dark for instance, an accident in a coal
mine. So the characters themselves keep complaining they can't see. Oh don't,
don't. Perhaps we could get the listener to turn out these lights and listen in
the dark. Here's the first line for you said Playfair. The lights have gone out.
The lights have gone out. What happened? Where are you? Here. We could make
nothing sound as it was meant to sound. The studio was a vast padded cell
designed to make voices sound as if they were floating in outer space. How are
we to make our voices sound like an underground tunnel? Playfair solved that one
by making his cast put their handsome heads in buckets and the Welsh choir we'd
collected. The script called for distant snatches of him singing but once
started nothing could stop these chaps. Playfair put them in the corridor
outside with a soundproof door he could open and shut. That's what we did for
echo and volume control. A far cry from the modern control panel and a producer
in a glass case jumping from knob to knob. I thought that was really good for
us. Yeah it did. It flowed really well. Okay we're back in the sister's house.
Page three. Do everything to EBU R128. Now rather than PPMs we use that. Right.
It's a different way of doing levels basically. The modern radio drama studio
offers a vast array of technological tricks and slights of hand which I pretend
to understand. But thankfully studio manager Sue Stone Street understands them
very well. Back in 1924 when making Comedy of Danger the producer Sir Nigel
Playfair, an eminent night of the theatre, had to improvise. Incidentally the
play was recorded in Savoy Hill as Richard Hughes mentioned just off the strand
before the BBC built Broadcasting House. Apparently writers like HG Wells and
George Bernard Shaw were greeted with whiskey and soda when they turned up for
the BBC at Savoy Hill. I did get offered a coffee this morning but there's no
doubt standards have slipped. Can I take your cup Michael? Yes of course. The
climax came when we said we wanted an explosion. Even popping a paper bag would
blow every fuse in Savoy Hill. But Playfair was something of a genius, an
utterly unscrupulous. Reporters and critics were going to listen in a room
specially provided for them with its own loudspeaker. So Playfair staged a
magnificent explosion in the room next door to the press room. Our explosion got
top marks to the press. They never discovered they'd heard it through the wall.
Okay we're just going to stop a minute and come and reset. Yes a reset. I want
to look at some specific examples at plays that show the range and qualities of
radio and what makes it unique. But before we do I have a question to ask my
guests three lovers of this form. If radio drama didn't exist as an art form at
all how would you make a pitch for it? What would it offer? Goodness that's a
very deep question. Caroline Raphael is a drama producer, director, former BBC
commissioner and was the first woman to head up BBC radio drama. Yeah but I
think I would pitch it as an opportunity to go beyond what the other forms are
doing. Audio dramas very often described as an absence and it's always an
absence of the visual and I think to describe it and to think about creating
something that takes everything and I do truly mean everything from other
storytelling forms but allows that extra dimension which actually Angela Carter
described as the third dimension which is the listener's imagination. This is a
dramatic form that allows the listeners to actually collaborate with the writer
to kind of create something themselves. I'm a huge believer that what goes on in
our own heads is so much stronger, so much more powerful. Radio drama can play
with time, it can play with location, it's just a sheer amount of possibilities
which sometimes particularly for new writers can be quite overwhelming but I'm
pretty sure that almost everything is possible in audio drama. Well it's poetry
and storytelling in human consciousness and the best way of achieving that is
through sound to the mind and the human imagination. Professor Tim Crook was a
maker of audio drama and is now one of the most eminent academics on the
subject. When Martin Esslin, the third editor director of BBC radio drama talked
about BBC radio drama being the National Theatre of the Year he was absolutely
correct. It's given recognition to people who then go on to become the most
significant writers of their time, you know from Carol Phillips, Tom Stoppard,
Joe Orton and then as a new generation it's not a blind medium, it's intensely
physical. It's visceral, the sound has physicality, a velocity that reverberates
through touch and all the other senses as well. So it's complex, beautiful and
poetic. And finally Ayesha Menon, writer, director, maker of radio drama and one
of the most esteemed writers working in the genre today. There's space in order
to do things that you wouldn't be able to do on screen, there's so much more
opportunity because you can go to different places and tell the stories from
different points of view and the listener is imagining it in whichever way they
can. So there is sort of scope for so much more to happen on radio. Instead of
passively watching something, this is a medium through which the listener can
make their own pictures in their head and so it's more proactive than watching
television. We're going for chaotic moving around rather than a choreographed
sense of because of time and everything. It's just taking time. Well we best get
on then and our first category of radio drama makers is The Fabulists. Those who
see radio as a primary medium for conjuring mythic fantastical worlds. This is a
post-n speech 20, 3 take 3. Born in 1940 I was a child of the radio age,
although then we still called it The Wireless. One of radio drama's greatest
fabulists was the writer Angela Carter. Towards the cottage door the huntsman
now purposefully directed his footsteps. I think it was via a completely natural
medium. It really gave her in some sense the building blocks for some of her
subsequent work. The documentary Writing in Three Dimensions gathered together
the recollections of her friends including Susanna Clapp and Marina Warner and
also gave voice to some of her own writings about radio drama. I started writing
for radio because of a sound effect. I made it quite by accident. Sitting in my
room pencil in hand, staring vacantly into space, I ran the pencil idly along
the top of the radiator. It made a metallic almost musical rattle. It was just
the noise that a long pointed fingernail might make if it were run along the
bars of a birdcage. Now I thought what kind of person might have such
fingernails? Why, a vampire famed for their long sharp fingernails. All the
better to eviscerate you with. Angela Carter's radio work puts the listener at
the heart of fantastical worlds with a terrifying intimacy. Never more so than
in her Company of Wolves from 1980. You can just see how completely entranced
she was with audio and about the possibility and Company of Wolves is a good
example. How swiftly she writes about how easily, how without any obstacles or
stumbling blocks or any special effects almost, you know, a man can turn into a
wolf and a wolf can turn into a man. She witnessed the unimaginable
metamorphosis, the coarse gray, the tawny bristling pelt springing out from the
bare skin of her visitor, the great jaw slavering, his red eyes now burning with
far greater intensity than the coals in her hearth. Audio's ability to make
things transform, I just think is completely magical and that's why, although I
will admit they're not necessarily my favorite genres, things like science
fiction, ghost stories are all so intense and powerful in audio drama. I think
that's where making make believe real is just such a kind of magic thing that
audio can do. Little girl is not timid, she's excited and she wants to do
everything that is prohibited. That is the pleasure of fairy tale very often
that the reader or listener hears the prohibitions and realizes that what is
being prohibited is actually what is to be desired. Great gray grizzled head,
let me scratch your lovely ears. You can hear the clouds move can't you? You can
hear the grass grow such sensitive ears so quick of hearing and I can see the
lights move on your fur poor beast. Shall I pick the lights out? Would that be a
kindness to you? The radio plays our voices in the dark, she describes them as
that herself. They connect very deeply to something that continued all her life
which was the vividness of the narrative voice. Radio lent itself absolutely
perfectly to that and the intimacy she's really interested in in her landscapes,
the inner turmoil, inner pleasure and that in scape that is in all her novels
can be captured on radio. I do believe since you got here before me that you owe
me a kiss. Once you're lost in the woods of an Angela Carter fable it's hard to
find your way out but we have promises to keep and the experimentalists are
waiting for us. Well each to his meat but I am meat for no man. Brilliant that's
the one. Can we keep going? This is page 42, speech is 17 to 27, I just take
what? I bring you more animal noises. This time it's not a Lupine visitor in
what sounds like a demonic farmyard from a 1950s radio play by Samuel Beckett
when BBC radio set out to be at the vanguard of experimental European drama. But
if Aisha's experience is anything to go by Beckett's animals aren't popular with
pets. Everyone's a critic. I started listening to the Beckett and my dog went
nuts because it starts off. I can't hear this now and then it just the kids came
home and it was all chaos so I'm really sorry. I had to shut it down and that
was the end of Beckett for me for now. I was merely cursing under my breath
Gordon Mann under my breath and the wet Saturday afternoon of my conception. My
back tire has gone down again. I pumped it hard as iron before I set out and now
I'm on the rim. Oh what a shame. No if it were the front I should not so much
mind but the back the back the chain the oil the grease the hub the brakes the
gear. No it is too much. In a letter to Nancy Cunard Beckett wrote that he had
never thought about radio play technique until the BBC invited him to write one.
He describes how in the dead of night he got a nice gruesome idea full of
cartwheels and dragging feet and puffing and panting which may or may not lead
to something and it did lead to something. All that fall was inspired by his
childhood memories of the road to Fox Rock station renamed Bog Hill station in
the play along which Mrs Rooney walks to meet her husband Dan from the train.
This is worse than the Matterhorn. One of the joys about the scale of
commissioning there were so many spaces in which to broadcast work at times in
which you knew the listener would be in a different frame of mind be able to
concentrate to a greater or lesser degree and then the wonders of the third
programme and later on radio 3 that there was room to experiment. I use none but
the simplest words I hope yet I sometimes find my way of speaking very bizarre.
Barbara Bray was a script editor when Beckett wrote All That Fall and became a
friend and confidant. It was John Morris who first met him and on the strength
of Waiting for Godot wanted to get him to write something for radio but he
didn't accept commissions so he just said he would do his best to try to write
something that would do and the result of that was All That Fall. I suppose you
wouldn't be in need of a small load of dung. Dung? What class of dung? Staidung.
I like your frankness, Christie. But he loved writing for new media and he
always hit the nail right on the head and sort of hit the media square in the
middle. Dung? What would we want with dung at our time of life? Did you see much
of Beckett yourself? Yes. Tell me about working with him. Out of this world. He
was somebody who always instinctively understood what other people were trying
to do in the way of creation and so on and knew what he was trying to do but he
was unlike some of the representations of his attitude. He was always completely
ready to revise and to change and to take other people's opinions because
essentially when you write for performance you're writing something which is
potential. You're not writing otherwise have it done by machines. So his own
productions or his collaborations with productions were endlessly open. He seems
to have affected an enormous change in radio drama with his requests for the
strange sound effects in All That Fall. Do you remember? Well that's a paradox
because we did that. We thought it would be a good idea to have human voices
producing these natural sounds and actually afterwards he thought maybe it would
be better not to but I mean I didn't agree with him about that. He doesn't have
to agree with him about everything. I think it was one of the things that made
it so striking at the time as it was. The lynch twins jeering at us. Will they
pelt us with mud today do you suppose? Let us turn and face them. Threat
number's your stick. Samuel Beckett is not the only major playwright to seize
the creative opportunities of audio. Tom Stuppard, Harold Pinter, Carol
Churchill. It's a stellar list but for Beckett in particular I think it's the
tension between his stylised colloquial language and an unsettling experimental
sound world that characterises his radio work. And there are other wonderful
effects. I mean the trains passing each other at the station. It's like
something out of the Goons show isn't it? We were in touch with what they were
doing on French radio and there the French radio had in the Ruelle University a
radiophonic workshop. The first radiophonic workshop as far as I know and they
had a few broken down pianos with chords tied with bits of string in which they
made very weird and wonderful noises. But we were very lucky because we came
back and said we want one please and they set up the radiophonic workshop and it
was from that and the freedom and the resources which were given to that that
radio kind of took off exponentially or from the sound point of view the sound
effects point of view. Can we just have a bit of slower walking as well just in
case we need it somewhere. What take is this? I'll just question that bottle
slightly. Yeah. Because I hear the stuff on it I don't think it would have. Yeah
I can hear the stuff too. Do you feel a spot effect here than you used to in the
old studio? Yeah I mean that's been a transition over the years that when I
started as a studio manager the first job was to do all the grams all the spot
as it was playing out with the actors and I had a reputation for being able to
run backwards silently because of course you can't have and if you've got two
people running actors you can't have a third set of footsteps. So they used to
get me on things that required you'd be able to run backwards quietly. That's
all been done digitally now. Yeah. So mostly even down to footsteps and things
it's been put on digitally because our post-production has got so much more
sophisticated you're actually building pretty much the whole sound world
digitally. It's a massive massive change and actually one of the things that
Lockdown did was it pushed us even further. I think of all the radio drama has
developed the most with computer technology and the technical producers really
are sound designers and they're so important you really need a whole raft of
creative people. This is page high, page 13, take two. You need to be more
careful. What? He just took your wallet. Aside from the technological feat of
making an entire drama remotely during Lockdown, Aisha's wonderful vivid version
of The Jungle Book makes her our example of another great strand of audio drama
creation, The Adapters. As a listener to and a writer of radio adaptations
myself, I believe they can bring you a closer encounter with a great novel or
poem than screen adaptations which necessarily do the visuals for you. But stop.
Yeah, I was lucky enough to direct Jungle Book. We recorded it through Lockdown.
So I was waking up at three o'clock in the morning in England and working with
actors who are all in different studio booths in India. So we were on Zoom and
we had all these little screens and there were scenes where there were mobs and
there were protests and there were political campaign parties and I mean it all
seemed so impossible at three o'clock in the morning with all those tiny little
screens on my computer. When we did our previous audio dramas we had a list of
places that we need to visit and record on the streets of India. Trains coming
and going, platform announcements, auto rickshores. We'd sit in rickshores for
hours sometimes getting them to slow down and go faster and all that. So when it
came to Jungle Book we had to dig into our already found sounds and access all
of them beggars and buses, things like that and we were so shocked that we had
all of it. It just took a long time to find because they were all from previous
projects. So that's how Jungle Book came about. It was pieced together bit by
bit and it was John Dryden who did the sound design on that and thank goodness
he did because besides the two of us, no one else would be able to find all the
tiny bits that we recorded for different dramas and we were like, oh remember
that temple bell from Six Suspects and then pull that out from somewhere? That
was what we were going through to make a Jungle Book. It makes me think actually
this is such a collaborative medium isn't it? Yeah, we have this amazing team in
India and some of the things they came up with were just brilliant because it
takes what you've seen in your head to a whole new level and we have the scene
at the end where it's only a dream sequence but it's meant to be that this
politician who's been really horrible gets beaten up by a mob of people and they
started to get so angry. They were so angry at one point and I just kept letting
it roll because it reached a level that I hadn't anticipated and I realized this
is real. You know people's frustration with politics and with what's happening
in India and how the rich seem to get away with a lot more. It all was happening
in this moment on these tiny screens and it was lovely. We just we stood all
together and it sounded real which was shocking from that whole situation. The
one of our categories that we haven't talked about yet is this one, The
Adapters. This is obviously has been a really major function from the very
earliest years of radio drama. There were Shakespeare plays, famous great novels
being adapted for radio and it's still one of the strongest threads in radio
drama. Yes I think it's an absolutely glorious strand and I think it's glorious
in two ways. One is that that lovely warm experience of experiencing, I was
about to say reading again, but in a curious way you do feel as if you're
reading the book again and to go back to those familiar characters, go back to
the original story and then of course there's the discovery of works which very
often I will then go and read. I think the other really interesting thing that
radio has done in terms of dramatizations is it's looked at writers that aren't
necessarily as well known and particularly writers in translation and suddenly
just a whole other library shelf full of books and ideas and places become
available to you. BBC radio adaptations have included many of those overlooked
or lesser known novels and poems but even when you're dramatizing a household
name like The Jungle Book, audio drama allows its creators to affect remarkable
transformations. Of course. They didn't know what to do with the baby so they
handed me to the wolves, not real wolves. That was the name of the gang adopted
mother and father belong to. Look at the way he's fighting. I suppose there have
been so many adaptations of Jungle Book and there have been so many animals so I
thought why don't we take it back to what Kipling intended really. He was
talking about human beings and so I've tried to find the equal of all those
animals in the real world. And there was bugs. He taught us how to fight. They
called him the Panther. You know so snakes were the prostitutes and the families
were you know the wolves and the monkeys were the beggars that sort of thing and
it was sort of easy because in India there's so many different you know
stratters of society. There's so many different people that layer the landscape.
It just sort of became a picture in front of me as soon as we started imagining
it this way. The strength of the pack is the wolf and the strength of the wolf
is the pack. Very good colour. Brilliant that's the one. So Sue I want take
four. There's just one line that lines 16. There is huge scope for conjuring of
worlds in audio drama but one of its most powerful strands is built on the
simplest premise. The soliloquists is our term for makers of audio drama
stripped back to a still small voice in your head as in Lee Hall's Spoonface
Steinberg. I was never right since I was born. This means that I do very bad
writing and that I can't speak proper and that I'm backwards and that I am a
special child but why is a mystery for what they have not got an answer. Radio
drama in its archive will belong to its time even when we listen to Lee Hall's
Spoonface Steinberg 25 years ago. It was doing something which was enormously
courageous. Kate Rowland directed a child actor Becky Simpson to interpret and
perform a script of immense power and depth and courage. Ma'am said when I was
born it was at a dark night and it was raining and thundery and all the cats and
dogs and things were under the tables and the wind was screeching around
everywhere and everything was quite horrible but I didn't mind because I was
just little and I was in the hospital and ma'am kissed me and when she looked at
my face she noticed that it was round. From Newcastle Lee Hall told me about his
choice of monologue as the classic radio expression. Before that I'd written
about four radio plays and what I realised within the plays that monologues
seemed to work really well and a lot of the plays had been about children so it
was a kind of logical thing to see how far I could go with one voice but
actually an hour long fiction especially for a child is it was kind of a big
risk. Well it certainly worked and the other thing that seems to be a great risk
about it is the idea that you can get into the head of an autistic child because
the one thing that everybody agrees about autism is that nobody else quite gets
into into the mind of an autistic child. That's what it means really isn't it?
Yeah well that's what interested me in autism. I think I would have been less
interested in doing a drama where people are interacting with an autistic person
but the idea of getting in their mind and seeing how they see the world slightly
differently from us perhaps but also a character study of somebody with autism
that doesn't make autism the issue but is allowing you into what's human about
them. And everyone came and looked at my face and they laughed and said I was
spoon face because when they looked at my face it was round as a spoon and when
you look into a spoon you see this face just like mine and that is how I came to
be spoon faced Steinberg. I think the notion of the soliloquy like spoon face
Steinberg is incredibly powerful and certainly as a director of audio drama that
notion of working with an actor and you are you are speaking to somebody. I
always ask somebody when they're doing performing a soliloquy or an internal
thought okay tell me who do you think who would you like to be telling the story
to and often when I was commissioning these single voice pieces I was always
wanted to know again as a writer who do you think this person is speaking to or
in particular why have they started to speak to me now. So I do not believe that
I fell on my head I do not believe that I was affected or it was dad's fault for
the floozy or mam's fault because I was unattended. I believe that I was
supposed to be backward I believe it was all part of what is supposed to be me
and when I was born God came and touched me on my head down he came and touched
my soft spot and made me me. Her doctor Dr Bernstein is the son of survivors of
Auschwitz his mother was a child in Auschwitz so Lee Hall writes beautifully
when the character Spoonface Steinberg describes how the children drew
butterflies when Bernstein's grandmother was singing opera and then the
butterflies would fly from the pages and escape the horrors of the present world
touches of humanity which are poetic and which resonate in human consciousness
and which are the very beauty of sound radio drama. The tradition before that
mainly was you wouldn't risk a child actor with a script so complex and
challenging. And some little children wrote poems and some little children drew
pictures and even today you can see the pictures of butterflies on the outside
little butterflies that were flying up to God beautiful butterflies with tender
wings that would brush their faces and kiss them better before they flew careful
little butterflies in all the death and the murder and everything and that day
when he told me this I cried for the butterflies and the little children and all
our sad faces drifting up to heaven. This is a sort of scene you could only
really do on radio isn't it getting right inside somebody's head yeah that was
good thank you let's have another go. What I'm particularly fascinated by is how
you can take the notion of a soliloquy but plant it within a kind of more full-
blown audio drama that for example you might get a narrative voice you might get
somebody's inner thoughts you might get several characters inner thoughts and
then you start pushing down and you start thinking so is that inner thought
active is this part of what's going on now is it reflective are they speaking
out loud or are they thinking and then of course when you're getting an actor to
perform it it's completely different again the whole relationship with the
microphone changes. You did a bit of it yeah. The director's find it very
different medium as well because it was interesting hearing one of the actors
earlier saying he hadn't done much radio and then you explain to him it's kind
of homework of radio from the outside radio drama you can go into and out of
people's heads and it was like he suddenly okay I can do that and then it worked
is it very different for an actor. Yeah I think so and I think in any other
medium you know of course you can go in and out of someone's head on film and or
in the theatre but it's really clunky whereas on radio I mean it's so obvious
because you can't see anything you can literally go anywhere at the snap of your
fingers and going in and out of the head is the most fantastic tool for a writer
because you can play with all sorts of different perspectives you're playing
with the listener as well and we can do it on the turn of a sixpence you know. I
think that's what appeals to so many poets and has done over 100 years poets are
drawn to radio drama and radio drama knows how to nurture poetry. I mean it's a
language medium isn't it that's why poetry and radio are so close always but
particularly in drama you are totally reliant on the language and the delivery
of the language without the visuals there I mean that's why I absolutely love it
you have to get the nuances of each line right and the delivery right because
you just change the meaning if you don't get it spot on it's endlessly
fascinating. Say is it right. The programme which follows is a parable play
suggested by Robert Browning's poem Child Roland to the Dark Tower okay. Yes the
poets that's our next strand of audio drama makers it's why I'm here in a radio
drama studio when I was starting out as a poet reading about great 20th century
poets it was evident that radio drama was to them an instinctive continuation of
their poetry it wasn't a leap like writing a novel might be. For poets like
Dylan Thomas, Sylvia Plath, Ted Hughes and many more radio drama was another
poetic form and it always felt like that to me too but first among equals as a
radio poet has to be Louis MacNeese with his masterpiece The Dark Tower written
in the wake of his experiences in the Second World War. This is a foreign land
where no one will interfere with us. No one, no man perhaps. What do you mean by
that? Look round you Sylvia see the deserted port the ruined shacks the slag
heaps covered with lichen and behind it all the frown and fear of the forest
this is the dragon's domain. Roland how childish you are. You think so. Where I
think poetry and sound drama works so well is that because you're dealing with a
creative expression in sound and the word borrowing from the oral culture
tradition you're actually working in the meeting of intensity between sound
poetic expression in words and what's between the words and what's behind the
words and the human imagination. The other reason why I think poets work so well
in radio drama is because of the dream as Louis MacNeese said the fact being in
fantasy and the fantasy being in fact a chapel up there in forest in the forest
sure boss or chapel old chapel in forest before a forest grew but needs repairs
now bad haunted too the corridors of broadcasting house are full of ghosts we
need bonus for them ghosts but for me as a poet Louis MacNeese is perhaps the
most powerful presence not only was he a major poet of the 20th century
including his writing for radio drama he was also a producer a sound designer a
bbc editor who commissioned work for countless other poets even the manner of
his death was linked to radio an illness reputedly brought on by a soaking on a
trip to a cave while recording sound effects for a radio drama the actress Jill
Balkan wife of MacNeese's fellow 30s poet C. Day Lewis frequently appeared in
bbc drama and features productions Louis MacNeese and his work were the subject
of a radio lives documentary he had the most beautiful manners in the studio and
made one feel completely comfortable and completely welcome and he seemed to
shed that aloofness and what you call the the lonerness if one can express it so
when he was in the studio and he made one so completely at ease i think he just
had a natural way with performers he had a nice habit if he sent you a script of
enclosing little notes with them with indications and he did tend to write for
actors and of course in those days in terms of the radio thing he wrote very
much for voices i mean he was conscious of the fact that his zine would have a
tenor a baritone a mezzo he was technically very interesting about that look
hide glows in his darkness glows it will burn me up Roland before we part this
chapel is now closed i'm sorry one felt that perhaps he was wasting his time
away at the bbc i don't think he was now in in fact his achievement was really
quite considerable he devised an entirely new form of verse drama after all
which i think was very important the radio players seem to me to be one of the
most interesting aspects of his output and particularly the way i think that he
he went on these kind of mythological voyages these mythological quests either
to the dark tower or around the mad islands and they were all a method really of
exploring himself and his own time and i think that was tremendously interesting
and he created a marvelous new form in the radio play of something completely
individual to himself i think what was new about it what was particularly new
about it i think was his use of the medium itself that it was tremendously fast
moving juxtaposing scenes of all shapes and sizes of feeling the complete
freedom of the medium i think and of course it is particularly well adapted to
that particular kind of strange quest that he went in for in which you do not
know half the time whether you're you're in reality or unreality or on what
island you are or whether or not you're talking to a real person or a ghost and
so on and so forth all of which louis manipulated was quite remarkable skill i
find that the worst thing about it is this the desert is something familiar and
with no end no end tick tock tick tock band and grit bones and waste a million
hours all the same a million minutes is part of human existence that
storytelling communicates fantasies as an expiation as a solace and radio and
online podcasting being the sound bearing arena for that beautiful artful perts
have done so well oh okay so continuing the storytelling it's just picture
painting and we've got sound going on underneath w h oden famously wrote that
poetry makes nothing happen there's a big debate about that but it's an even
bigger question for our next strand of radio drama makers the activists what
happens when radio drama has an urgent political impulse behind it you're not
the first person to see horrors we learn to watch them without feeling a thing
we can see pictures of starving children that still eat our dinner while we
watched that's what we need to survive now you would think if you really want to
affect social political change you don't sit down and write an audio drama but
particularly the playwrights of the 60s 70s and 80s people like carol cherchell
and carol phillips there's quite a lot of that there's quite a lot of what you
could describe as activist radio drama am i wrong to suggest that it was
particularly strong or focused around those those decades i think it might very
well be focused around those decades but i also wonder if you could patch it as
it were against what was happening in television drama with the end of the
wednesday play with the end of play for today that what radio did was give
people who had something they wanted to say about society now radio was very
open to these different voices i don't think a radio play is going to change
anything but it does crawl its way into people's thinking the other thing i by
the way i would also say of course is you can turn a radio play around pretty
quickly compared to television or film because of the listenership that the bbc
knew it had you can get the most extraordinary plays like carol cherchell's not
not not not not enough oxygen which listening to again was terrifying because it
was first broadcast in the 1970s but actually the state of pollution and the
state of the environment has got even worse i was so make myself think what on
earth would i have thought when i if i had first heard that in the 1970s and
it's a real call for action look where i think i think it was a bird what what a
bird in the small brown i think it was a bird a sparrow a sparrow is a small
brown bird i didn't see should i open the window no yes yes yes yes you might
see oh did carol cherchell's play ever stop appalling environmental crises and
pollution from cars and industry no it didn't but i would be shocked and really
surprised if any listeners at that time hadn't had if they didn't have already
have some kind of awareness of this is where the planet is heading and it still
has something to say political activist radio drama may be primarily associated
with the 70s and 80s but according to tim crook it has a much longer history
radio drama has always been i would say extremely political right from the word
go in the 1920s the tom stop out of his time reginal barkley he wrote the first
and rather poetic anti-war play the white chateau specifically for radio drama
in 1925 his attack and criticism of capitalism in machines in 1927 commissioned
but never broadcast led to the first great censorship rao so the political
activist tradition in radio drama is very very powerful and what's so
fascinating about carol cherchell and carol phillips is that i think they
express their politics with art tiger tiger i was starting to think you weren't
coming he's into tea or first oh yeah what's he saying all that stuff going on
like you might expel me carol phillips his first play for radio it was produced
in 1984 the wasted years is rooted in radio drama truthful characterization of a
windrush family and their children it's honestly and subtly and beautifully
looks at the terrible experience of the initial windrush migrants having to cope
with appalling racism the challenging destruction of their dreams but i can't
take this place anymore it's killing me it's driving me mad you know after 10
years i'm about to become a madman in england they can put a man on the moon but
i still live in an abet with a wife and child quiet quiet still trapping his
father's tired stupid nothing dead end job and every place you turn these damn
evil people calling you name this and name that the father in anger he decides
to return to the west indies and there's a quite remarkable and powerful line
because if he stays he's worried he might kill somebody cynthia his wife and the
mother of the two boys soli and chris she stays to continue to live the dream
she does it through hard work honesty very high moral values and the most
beautiful and brilliant motherhood and what's so remarkable so brilliant and so
powerful in this first play for radio by somebody who's gone to be one of our
great contemporary novelists globally is that in the first radio play everything
exquisite and successful and everything possible you can do in realist at the
same time political but it's more social consciousness than political activist
radio drama carol phillips does you know i don't know what the hell are we doing
in this place no you're just tired of course a tired woman but you have to ask
yourself what i'm tired of that play never ceases to move me so intensely as an
example of dramatic social documentary of the 20th century and it's getting part
of the secret history of british culture sound drama radio drama everything in
british storytelling film television owes so much it's intrinsic to radio drama
it would be poorer and may not have its success in the world without it i would
go so far as to say it would not have its success in the world without it we're
going our way together for a week us from tomorrow going away where the country
the seaside wherever you want to go great hey we all need a rest and we need to
talk don't we sellaman yeah mum yeah we need to talk about what what about
everything everything chris you're big lads now you've grown up practically
before i had time to blink that's lovely thank you very happy about that back to
headphones guys page 28 to 30 this is page five speech 13 take two perhaps i
should have been there so you just stood back and let him make this huge
decision one that's of course there is very very quiet activism in the archers
and there always has been badly done helen please disappointed in you maybe i
didn't get it wrong these last few days if you look at the story of rob and
helen and coercive control the story about nick dying of sepsis i'm sure there
are charities or activists queuing up for the archers to find the right way of
telling a story that will bring it out into the open i think that in terms of
activism and radio drama the archers is sort of currently probably outstripping
them all there's a reason don't make up excuses rob listen the archers brings us
to our final strand the serialists those returning dramas many of them genre
sets the detectives the comedians the soaps that forged our relationship with
radio perhaps more than any other form they're some of the most popular radio
broadcasts ever made the cornerstones of bbc audio drama throughout its history
i think i'm right in saying that the archers may be the longest running
continuing drama anywhere in the entire world radio's always had a tradition of
returning serials but whether it was mrs dale's diary or wagner's walk the dick
barton wonderful crime detective paul temple for example just that kind of
excitement and anticipation that a new story was going to be told and in recent
years i would cite things like stone brief lives and i think that quietly
alongside these highly imaginative and and very important single plays there was
this the notion of storytelling on the radio that there you will always be told
a story and sometimes it'll be a new story and sometimes we will take you back
to your characters and to world that you recognize and the pleasure that that
can bring um not always made by the radio drama department i would say a lot
made by what was the light entertainment department very much part of the kind
of the architecture and the whole structure of what radio drama was offering and
it illustrates the point that these strands of audio drama are more like a braid
the activists are also the poets the poets are also the fabulists and the
writers are not the only makers here a radio script is like a musical score
which is nothing without the players the conductor so radio drama is nothing
without the actors the directors the sound designers commissioners and editors
the development of the radio play in the long run depends upon three things
intelligent listening informed criticism and good writing for the microphone too
many authors who've fought players around for years seem to say to themselves oh
well it's no go let's bang it along to survive help and they do i wonder if they
ever realized that a play written with a real eyed medium of the microphone is
so rare that its appearance is hailed almost as shouts of joy will this hundred-
year-old art form survive another century our digital world has opened up
exciting new ways of making and broadcasting audio drama to new audiences it's
no secret that financial pressures on the bbc have hit radio drama slots yet
it's still the most accessible dramatic form we have no travel or expensive kit
required to receive it in your car or on your headphones whenever and wherever
bbc radio drama reaches around a million listeners a day you'd have to sell out
the olivier theater 870 times over to match that audience as long as people want
to tell stories in this way and want to listen to them then this most intimate
and shapeshifting dramatic form is worth fighting for in its most essential
sense even if stripped of all the devices of radio illusion radio retains the
atavistic lure the atavistic power of voices in the dark and the writer who
gives words to those voices retains some of the authority of the most antique
teller of tales absolutely perfect that's the one thank you that's it that's it
that was great except that's not quite it i know many of you will be screaming
at the radio what about this play what about that play what about pinter what
about plath what about stop art well you've got a point for me the big question
is what about dylan thomas's late great polyphonic play for voices let's end
with a beginning to begin at the beginning it is spring moonless night in the
small town starless and bible black the cobble street silent and the hunched
quarters and rabbits wood limping invisible down to the slow black slow black
crow black fishing boat bobbing sea dramatic beats was presented by michael
simmons roberts and produced by jeff bird it was a naked production for radio
four joanna lumley and roger alam are back it's been three years since we've had
one at one a day without an argument in a comedy capturing the ups and downs of
40 years of marriage you just don't like being told what to do don't tell me
what i like there it is they're passionate about life do men ever entirely grow
up i think you know the answer to that one and each other i do hate dancing but
i love you oh the new series of conversations from a long marriage your 630
comedy