TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-01-08H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Martha Carney in Belfast and Nick
Robinson in London. Good morning. It's seven o'clock on Wednesday the 1st of
March. The headlines this morning, The Daily Telegraph has obtained WhatsApp
messages which it claims show that Matt Hancock didn't follow advice to give
coronavirus tests to all residents going into care homes in England. Mr. Hancock
has denied the claims and says his messages are being selectively reported. We
hope to be speaking to someone who understands his account of what really did
take place and of course we'll be reporting on the detail of what's in those
published messages. Rishi Sunak says the Democratic Unionist Party must be given
time and space to consider the new post-Brexit trade deal for Northern Ireland
but he says the agreement won't be changed. A search is continuing for a missing
baby in Brighton. The children's parents are under arrest. The BBC News is read
this morning by Caroline Nichols. The Daily Telegraph has obtained more than a
hundred thousand messages which were sent or received by Matt Hancock at the
height of the Covid crisis. The paper says they show that Mr. Hancock, who was
the Health Secretary at the time, rejected advice from senior medical officials
in April 2020 that all residents going into care homes in England should be
tested for the virus. A spokesperson for Mr. Hancock said the story on care
homes was wrong. Our chief political correspondent Nick Urdley reports. The
Daily Telegraph has obtained 100,000 WhatsApp messages involving Mr. Hancock via
the lockdown critical journalist Isabel Oakshott who helped write Mr. Hancock's
memoirs. The BBC has not seen the full exchanges and thus cannot verify the
context or full contents. But extracts printed by the newspaper suggest that Mr.
Hancock was told in April 2020 that everyone going into a care home should be
tested with segregation of those waiting for their results. Over the course of a
day however, the messages between Mr. Hancock and a civil servant suggest that
recommendation was removed with a commitment instead to test all those going
from hospital into care homes. The early decisions around entry to care homes
have been criticised by many with full testing not introduced until later. But a
spokesperson for Mr. Hancock hit back saying the report was an agenda-driven
leak of confidential documents. Mr. Hancock's spokesperson said the report
intentionally excluded a reference to a meeting where the then Health Secretary
was told a pledge to test everyone would not be deliverable. Rishi Sunak has
said the Democratic Unionist Party should be given time and space to consider
the new deal with the EU on trade in Northern Ireland. He spoke to a meeting of
Conservative backbenchers last night saying there was no pressure for an instant
answer. The deal has been broadly welcomed at Westminster but Lord Frost, one of
the negotiators of the Northern Ireland Protocol which it replaces, questioned
whether any fundamental changes had been achieved. Here's our political
correspondent David Wallace-Lockhart. Rishi Sunak seems to be making progress in
convincing doubters in his own party. One Conservative MP said they'd gone into
last night's meeting opposing the new Windsor framework only to be converted by
the Prime Minister. But other key groups aren't convinced yet. The DUP, the main
Unionist party in Northern Ireland, say they need more time to look at the deal.
Rishi Sunak seems willing to give them this space. And the European Research
Group of Eurosceptic Conservative MPs say it will take two weeks for their
lawyers to look through the small print. Some disquiet is starting to surface.
Boris Johnson's former Brexit negotiator, Lord Frost, has warned in the
Telegraph that EU laws will remain supreme in Northern Ireland, calling parts of
the agreement a bitter pill to swallow. But the Northern Ireland Minister, Steve
Baker, has made clear that this is the final deal. Four men arrested in
connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in County Tyrone have
been released. Two men, one aged 71, the other 47, are still being questioned
about the attack on Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in Oma a week ago.
He remains critically ill in hospital. A search is continuing for a missing
baby, amid mounting fears that the child may have come to harm. Police arrested
the baby's parents, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, in Brighton on Monday.
Vincent McAvinney reports. Hundreds of officers from the Sussex force and the
Metropolitan Police have spent a second night searching for the baby. Drones, a
helicopter and specially trained dogs are being used, and the public has been
asked to check sheds and outbuildings in the area. In freezing temperatures,
officers have been combing through a large allotment site to the north of
Brighton. Constance Martin and her partner Mark Gordon, a convicted rapist and
registered sex offender, disappeared in January when their baby was just days
old. The couple, who are now being held on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter, are refusing to assist the police in the search. Two trains have
collided in northern Greece, killing at least 32 people. A train with 350
passengers on board and another carrying freight crashed between the cities of
Athens and Thessaloniki. Causing several carriages to leave the tracks. Dozens
of people have been injured. Our Europe correspondent Nick Beek reports.
Survivors have been speaking of a nightmarish 10 seconds in which their train
smashed into the freight service before immediately catching fire. Some of the
350 passengers were able to escape from the burning wreckage, but dozens were
not. More than 40 ambulances were dispatched to the crash site to the north of
the city of Larissa, and rescuers have said they were still finding bodies after
five hours of intensive searching. One passenger carriage appears to have been
crushed completely, with part of the passenger train now at right angles to the
track. The cause of the collision is not known, but this is the deadliest rail
crash in Greece for many years. The Nigerian electoral commission has declared
the governing party candidate Bola Tinabu the winner of Saturday's disputed
presidential election. He won with almost 9 million votes, ahead of his main
rival Atiku Abubakar, who had nearly 7 million. Our correspondent in Nigeria,
Mayeni Jones, reports. This is the moment Bola Amed Tinabu has been waiting for
his whole political career. Known as the Godfather of Lagos, he's a trained
accountant. He was a member of the pro-democracy National Democratic Coalition
in the 90s. Forced into exile by military ruler Sani Abacha, he returned to
Nigeria after the latter's death, and became a politician just as the country
returned to democracy. His supporters say his skills as a political operator and
businessman are exactly what Nigeria's ailing economy needs. But his detractors
believe he lacks transparency, and isn't in good enough health to handle this
nation's complex challenges. He takes office amidst rising insecurity and
unemployment. The first complaint has been made against a major technology
company for breaching what's known as the Children's Code, which are the rules
for online services in the UK likely to be accessed by children. A campaigner
says YouTube has been collecting the data of under-13s. The video platform says
its main service isn't meant for children that young. Here's our technology
editor, Zoe Kleinman. YouTube gathers data about what its users are watching,
where they're watching, and which device they're using. The firm uses this data
to recommend other videos, keeping people on the site as long as possible,
maximising the adverts they might see. But children's viewing isn't meant to be
monitored. YouTube says it's developed many tools to keep young people safe,
including a kids app for younger children. But Duncan McCann says many young
children watch YouTube on their parents' devices and logins, and aren't as
protected as they should be. He thinks all data gathering should be an opt-in
only process to ensure that no children are accidentally exposed to
inappropriate content or advertising. If YouTube is found to be in breach of the
Information Commissioner's Office Children's Code, it could face a large fine.
The ICO said it would take the complaint seriously. New research suggests that
just 5% of secondary schools in England give priority to poorer children when
deciding admissions, while those who are in care or with foster parents do get
priority. There are concerns that disadvantaged children miss out because most
schools focus on how close a pupil lives to the school. The government says the
vast majority of families will be offered a place at one of their top choices.
Here's our education correspondent, Hazel Shearing. Researchers at the
University of Bristol looked at how more than 3,000 schools admitted pupils in
September 2020. 96% of schools gave precedence to children with siblings already
there, and 88% were more likely to give places to local children. The Nuffield
Foundation charity says prioritising local children reinforces geographic
inequalities by excluding those who can't afford to live close to the top-
performing schools. It's urged schools to promote fairer access through their
admissions criteria. The NAHT teaching union said the government should fund all
schools sufficiently so that they could access the best education no matter
where they live. Hazel Shearing reporting. Time now is nine minutes past seven.
There's still no sign of the two-month-old baby of Constance Martin. Two hundred
police officers have been working through the night in an urgent search in
Hollingdean in Brighton. She and her partner Mark Gordon, who spent 20 years in
prison for a sex offence, have both been arrested on suspicion of gross
negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin's father Napier has given an exclusive
interview to the Independent newspaper. We can talk now to Geordie Gregg, the
paper's editor. Good morning. Good morning. It's a terribly sad, sad story. When
I spoke to Napier yesterday, you know, it's the double agony of being estranged
from a child, and yet that bond and link of a father are impossible to sever. He
fundamentally wished she had done what she did not want to do, which was to hand
herself in. He did not want to see his child or even his grandchild, who we do
not know the circumstances of as yet, on the run. The longer they're on the run,
the worse it got for them. This is a story which caught the national mood for
empathy, but also concern as the welfare of the baby is really, you know, above
all. I could feel with him, it's the reversal of nature for any parent to lose a
child. You know, it's an agony that haunts. But in this case, we don't know what
has happened as yet. You know, we've got the 200 police scouring the fields and
the woodlands, but what we do know is that, you know, these parents are, you
know.....have not seemingly brought their child in, and that is of huge, huge
agony and pain for the parents. And Napier couldn't have been more moving,
strong, sensitive and stercle about telling, you know, every parent's worst
nightmare. And as you say, that even though they'd been estranged, his affection
for his daughter shines through in the kind of things that he was telling the
Independent. Yes, I mean, he talked of his beloved daughter and, you know,
whatever the weather, he's going to be there for her. I mean, he came to the
Independent, you know, because, you know, he felt it was a...he'd done an
earlier interview and he felt trusted, but he also wanted to get the story out
to as wide an audience as possible, because it wasn't known exactly where they
were. Had they fled? It seemed unlikely, that their passports had been...gone
missing. But it was never known, and so I think he was desperate to get the
message out widely, and I think that's why he came to a national digital
organisation. You know, we have 12 billion views on our website, and, you know,
hopefully this will bring a close to a chapter for them, but, you know,
everyone's concern at the moment is sympathy for everyone looking for this baby,
in particular Constance and the father, even though they may have made huge
mistakes. We don't know at this stage, and it's a story which has captured
everyone's empathy, but also, you know, there's an element of tough love in
Napier's message too. As he says, you know, he really regrets they did not hand
themselves in, as that would have eased them in so many ways with the
repercussions, and, you know, everyone has to take responsibility for their
actions, and this may cause them more difficulty than if they had on day one,
when the story first broke, have handed themselves in. And what can you tell us
about the family and Constance herself? I think she studied drama, didn't you?
Yeah, I mean, they're an incredibly nice, elegant, sophisticated, you know, warm
family. I mean, you know, Napier is one of six, he's got his great sisters, the
parents, Napier's parents, so the great-grandparents of the baby were, you know,
pillars of the community. Marianna was the trustee of the British Museum. They
couldn't have been more respected, and it's even more surprising and horrendous
that they should now see their granddaughter on the run with a man who was
convicted of horrendous sex crimes, spent 20 years in jail. They're both on the
run, desperate, the baby missing, everyone fearing the worst, the police fearing
the worst. I mean, it's one of those stories which has got awful drama but also
great tragedy looming over us, as they do seem to be, you know, in the
shadowlands of the nation, on the run, baby still missing. It's one of those
stories which just gets everyone by the throat. And, you know, we'd also
reported that there had been great vulnerability for Constance, as she'd been
earlier caught up in a strange cult preacher's church in Lagos, again under the
manipulation of a man who appeared to prey on vulnerable people. He's no longer
living, this preacher in Lagos, but, you know, the family, I mean, Napier
thought this was part of the story which has led her to where she is today. But,
you know, his message is very simple, you know, the love of a father, he wants
to... Even though that's very difficult, and he makes no bones as to how to
overcome the estrangement and how to overcome all the trauma she's going
through, but he lives in hope, as does Virginie, you know, Constance's great
mother, who also had put out a message of love and hope. Which you've reported.
Geordie Gregg from The Independent, many thanks. It is a quarter past seven,
another important story that broke overnight and is developing as we're on air,
as more and more information comes through, which raises this vital question.
Did the Health Secretary ignore medical advice which could have saved lives?
That is the explosive claim made by The Daily Telegraph this morning, which has
obtained 100,000 messages sent by Matt Hancock to officials, advisers and other
ministers during the pandemic. The Telegraph claims that the messages show that
Mr Hancock ignored advice from the Chief Medical Officer, Chris Whitty, to test
all those being admitted to care homes at the start of the pandemic. The
emphasis there is on the word all, those entering from the community, as well as
those from hospitals. Now, Mr Hancock, in the last few minutes, has issued a new
statement, we'll hear it in a few minutes, in which he says that he is being
wrongly quoted and that the story is unfair. There's no dispute, though, that
the messages being printed by The Telegraph are real. The Telegraph has
published this particular exchange between Mr Hancock and one of his advisers
from 14th April 2020. Text from Matt Hancock, Health Secretary, on 14th April
2020. Chris Whitty has done an evidence review and now recommends testing of all
going into care homes and segregation while awaiting result. This is obviously a
good positive step and we must put it into the dock. Text from Alan Nixon,
Department of Health, Parliamentary Special Adviser, on 14th April 2020. I
wasn't in testing meeting. Just to check, officials are saying your steer is to
remove the commitment to testing on admission to care homes from the community,
but keep commitment to testing on admission to care homes from hospital. Is that
right? Text from Matt Hancock about 40 minutes later. Fine, tell me if I'm
wrong, but I'd rather leave it out and just commit to test and isolate all going
into care from hospital. I don't think the community commitment adds anything
and it muddies the waters. Have that for a Q&A response. In The Telegraph, in
the last few minutes we've received this statement from Matt Hancock. I'll just
read the headline for the moment. I'll give you more detail in a second, though.
These stolen messages have been doctored to create a false story that Matt
rejected clinical advice on care home testing. This is flat wrong. Let's talk
now to Fraser Nelson, familiar voice of the programme. He's editor of The
Spectator, of course, but also a columnist on The Telegraph. Morning to you,
Fraser. Good morning. Before we come to the response to the denial, many people
only getting their heads round the story for the first time now, let's go back.
How did The Telegraph obtain these messages and why is it right to print them?
Well, the messages were not stolen, as Matt Hancock says, but given by him to
Isabel Oakeshott, who was the ghostwriter of his memoirs. Now, she therefore
came into possession of one of the most extraordinary sources ever to fall into
the hands of journalists or historians. Something like 2.5 million words, three
times the size of the Bible, of messages between Matt Hancock, Boris Johnson,
Chris Whitty. This tells you what was being said behind closed doors during the
time of the pandemic, one of the most crucial parts of British history. No,
nevertheless, he would say, wouldn't he, he gave her access to the messages as a
research tool. He did not give her permission to print them in full. That's
right, he didn't. But she decided on balance that it was better to make these
public because the millions of people affected by these decisions deserved
answers. And this is what journalists do. Journalists open doors and show people
what's being said and reveal things that ministers would rather it wasn't
revealed. Now, what Mr Hancock would argue is journalists also have an agenda.
And in this case, Isabel Oakeshott, and if you'll forgive me, I think he would
say you, Fraser, have an agenda of proving that lockdown was not just
unnecessary but costly in terms of lives and money, and that the Telegraph is
spinning what it got to prove that case. Yes, that's what Matt Hancock would
say, but it's not the case. I mean, journalists end up with an agenda to
reporting what was said. I backed the first lockdown where it happened. I mean,
nobody knew anything at the time. I think the agenda, though, ought to be
scrutinising what was said and done, asking whether it squares with the evidence
and basically just asking questions of the government. Okay, well, let's do that
now on this specific exchange. I think we just played, I think, what you'll
agree is the crucial exchange for this story. There'll be many others in days to
come. What do you believe we learn from that? Well, I think the most important
thing, by the way, the Telegraph was so many disclosures over the coming days.
But what jumped out to me reading those messages was the overall tone of them,
the quite cavalier way in which decisions were taken without any evidence. We
were told all the time, this is following the science, that's following the
science. But in so many occasions, from all sorts of things, major decisions
affecting the lives of millions were taken without any science at all. They were
taken for political considerations. And we can now see, because all of these
exchange of messages show, that there was nothing really to promote. And this is
the case. Like, why, for example, did Matt Hancock decide that Chris Whitty was
wrong? On what basis was he overruled? Well, let me read to you what he says, if
I may, and then see what your reaction is. Because he does give much more detail
in a statement that we asked for, just as we came on air and have just received.
Forgive me, it's a little bit long, but I think it's worth listening to. Matt
Hancock received a response to his request for advice from the Chief Medical
Officer, says a statement issued in his name, that testing was needed for people
going into care homes, which he enthusiastically accepted. Later that day, he
convened an operational meeting on delivering testing for care homes, where he
was advised it was not currently possible to test everyone entering care homes,
which he also accepted. Matt concluded that the testing of people leaving
hospital for care homes should be prioritised because of the higher risk of
transmission, as it wasn't possible to mandate everyone going into care homes
got tested. Just one more line that is relevant. The Telegraph claims this
statement from Mr Hancock's spokesman have doctored the messages by excluding a
key line from the text by the man we heard quoted there, Alan Nixon. Nixon says,
I wasn't in testing meeting, which changes the context of the exchange depicted
in the article. What do you make of that? I imagine that that's going to be the
response to lots of these things. The messages, he will say, didn't say the
whole story. To be honest, in that exchange, there was plenty of time for him to
make that point, but he didn't. To me, that's what jumps out. The way that these
decisions are taken without really anybody quoting or citing evidence, it's very
done, as it had to be those days, in a very quick, almost cavalier fashion.
There are several more examples like this, where we're going to find out the
basis on which so many decisions, not just testing, but on restrictions, on what
will happen to children, on pinging and self-isolation duration, the basis on
which they were taken. And this puts a lot more light on the subject than we
were shown at the time. Fraser Nelson, columnist with The Telegraph. Thank you
very much indeed. Of course, we have asked for an interview with Matt Hancock.
His statement ends with this quote, which may explain why we're unlikely to get
the interview. This story, he says, categorically shows that the right place for
this analysis of what happened in the pandemic is in the public inquiry. The
time now is 23 minutes past seven. And none of the UK's banks have seen its
profits increase in the last year. Shaun's got the details. Hi, Shaun. Hi,
Martha. This is the Co-operative Bank, no longer part of the Co-op Group, of
course, as a reminder. It saw its profits increase fourfold to more than £130
million last year. I've got Nick Slate, the chief executive, with me. Morning,
Nick. Good morning. Last year was your first profit for a decade. The following
year, we've heard now that those profits have shot up as interest rates go up.
Now, you say in your results you're making more money as savers' rates rise more
slowly than borrowers'. Can you explain why you can't give savers a better
return or borrowers a lower rate? Well, we are passing back, I think on average,
we pass back about 60% of every rate rise to our savers. We are passing what we
think is an appropriate amount onto our savers, and we also pass it onto all of
our on-sale and off-sale, whereas some other institutions only pass it onto
their on-sale and would encourage their off-sale customers to move to on-sale
products. Just briefly, the difference between on-sale and off-sale? So you
could have a product, the savings product, that is now not being sold, but your
customers are on your balance sheet still. Add with it, so if you've already got
a product. Some interesting stuff in these results, Nick, talking about fraud as
well, and how that's a concern across the sector, and you saw a higher rate of
fraud last year. Why did your customers have that? It's the fraudsters are
getting ever more sophisticated. That's the challenge that we have in a digital
environment, and we put a lot of effort into protecting our customer base, and
actually we carry the pain basically in our P&L. So we compensate our customers
into around about the 90% mark basically for fraud. So what I'm talking about is
the fact that it's a cost of being in the payments business basically, and
you're continually trying to ensure that your customers are kept safe. And
you're backed by private equity and hedge fund companies. You've been looking
around in recent years at buying other businesses. Will you be making another
bid for TSB? Nothing planned at all. As you can imagine, we have some
sophisticated shareholders, and we would just like any other institution
continually look at inorganic options and keep our eyes on the competition.
Sainsbury's Banks mortgages maybe? Possibly. But anything like that is something
that we will always look at. And if the price is right and it makes sense, then
I'm happy to progress those sorts of things. Nick, thank you so much. Chief
Executive there of the Co-operative Bank. And Sean, thank you. Now, 26 minutes
past seven, let's hear about the day's sport with Rob. Hi, Rob. Hi, Martha.
England's Test Cricketers may have just finished their series in New Zealand,
but the White Bull squad is now engaged in the first of three one-day
internationals in Mirpur against Bangladesh, who won the toss and are batting.
And we can get the very latest again from our cricket reporter, Kevin Howes.
Just approaching, good morning, Rob. Just approaching the end of the 17th over
Bangladesh, 89 for 2. Just seen Bowen Alley complete his third over, gone for 20
runs so far. Reasons for both teams to be reasonably happy with this,
particularly, I think, from an England perspective, Mark Wood. He's back bowling
for England. Took a couple of months off bowling Pakistan just before Christmas.
Just his third delivery. He bowled Tamim Iqbal for 23 of 32 deliveries. The
speed of that delivery, 92 miles per hour. It's his first ODI wicket in two
years. Bangladesh, 89 for 2 after 17 overs. Kevin, thank you. Four FA Cup fifth-
round fixtures last night with Manchester City providing the most convincing of
the results, a 3-0 win at Bristol City, with Phil Foden getting the first two
goals and Kevin de Bruyne at the third. Our football commentator, Alistair Bruce
Ball, was there. Good morning, Ali. Good morning, Rob. Kevin de Bruyne was
running into a good stretch of form. Yes, he is. Yes, I saw him score at
Bournemouth at the weekend. He's been out of the Manchester City team for a
while. I think, as ever, it's going to take a very good team to stop Manchester
City winning any competition. Bristol City have been on a good run in the
Championship. They were absolutely no match for their illustrious opponents last
night. That Kevin de Bruyne goal you talk about, a 25-yard finish, he made it
look as simple as tying his shoelaces. They didn't even use Erling Haaland last
night. Yes, yes. Leicester beaten by Blackburn yesterday. That's probably the
outstanding result of the fifth round so far. Four more fixtures this evening.
One of Manchester United and West Ham must go out with Southampton playing
Grimsby, Tottenham at Sheffield United. So, in theory, Alistair, the competition
may be left with just four clubs in the competition's sixth round, the Premier
League, that is. It feels like an interesting possibility. It does, Rob. I mean,
you know, there's seven teams left in at the moment. It could be seven at the
last eight, but if you look at tonight's games that you mentioned, Tottenham, I
think, will face a real test at Sheffield United, who are another team going
well in the championship. And the way Southampton have been playing recently,
forgive their fans for feeling a little apprehensive about the visit of League 2
Grimsby Town. I always felt Leicester might look a little bit vulnerable last
night, and so it proved. And what of this midweek fifth round? It's a bit tough
if you don't like football on your telly, with both the BBC and ITV showing
matches live last night. Also tough on fans, of course, required to travel big
distances in midweek. Well, I mean, I thought the atmospheres at Ashton Gate,
where I was last night, and at Craven Cottage for the Fulham Leeds game, were
absolutely vibrant. And both teams I watched were really committed to getting
through. There was no taking it easy. But you're right, the fixture schedule,
you know, in this congested season is relentless. It's a long way to go tonight
for Grimsby fans and Tottenham fans. And yeah, as you say, I think there's
plenty of non-football fans who wonder why more of it is replacing their
favourite shows on free-to-air television. Saying that, Rob, people who love
their FA Cup might be delighted by that. It all goes back to the scheduling of
the World Cup in Qatar. Yes, exactly. That's why everything's been squished in,
Rob. OK, well, thank you, Alastair. Four more FA Cup matches this evening.
Burnley at home to Fleetwood, the other one, plus two Premier League fixtures
with Arsenal at home to Everton, seeking a five-point lead, Arsenal at the top
of the table. Liverpool, they're also playing their home to Wolves. Coverage, of
course, on BBC Television and Five Live. Full details of all your football on
the BBC Sport website. And in rugby union, fly-half Marcus Smith has been
released to play for Harley-Quinns this weekend, after being excluded from the
England squad to play France a week on Saturday. Head coach Steve Bortwick said
his intention was that Smith should, I quote him, benefit from game time. He
came on, Smith, for a matter of seconds at the end of last weekend's match
against Wales. Here are the tips. Lingfield, three o'clock, number six, expert
opinion. Wincanton, 4.15, number two, hititi. Thank you very much indeed. It is
time to find out what is coming up on the moral maze and the man who knows the
answers in the studio, Michael Burr. Morning, Michael. Morning, Nick. God seems
to have more than a walk-on part in the race to be Scotland's new leader. The
first hustings will be held tonight in a contest that's been dominated by faith
rather than politics. The former front-runner Kate Forbes looks now to be the
back-marker, having acknowledged her membership of the Evangelical Free Church
of Scotland means that she's opposed to gay marriage and having children out of
wedlock. The old beliefs have collided with the new religion, as some see it, of
human rights. Time was a successful politician had to at least pretend to be
religious. What's changed and is it for the better? The moral maze after the
news at eight tonight. Fascinating, Anne. The day's weather cloudy for most
today and tonight, with a few isolated showers, a brighter day tomorrow. You're
listening to Today on Radio 4 with Martha Carney in Belfast and Nick Robinson in
the studio in London. At 29 minutes to eight, Caroline Nichols has a summary of
the news. The Daily Telegraph has obtained more than 100,000 messages which were
sent and received by Matt Hancock when he was the Health Secretary at the height
of the Covid crisis. The paper says they show that Mr Hancock didn't follow
advice from senior medical officials in April 2020 that all residents going into
care homes in England should be tested for the virus. A spokesperson for Mr
Hancock said the suggestion that he had rejected clinical advice was
categorically untrue and said his messages had been stolen and doctored to
create a false story. Rishi Sunak has urged Conservative MPs not to create what
he called Westminster drama about his new trade deal affecting Northern Ireland.
He said the biggest unionist party, the DUP, should be allowed time and space to
examine the agreement. Four men arrested in connection with the shooting of an
off-duty police officer in County Tyrone have been released. Two men, one aged
71, the other 47, are still being questioned about the attack on Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell in Omagh a week ago. He remains critically ill in
hospital. Police are continuing to search for a missing baby near Brighton. The
child's parents are being questioned on suspicion of gross negligence
manslaughter. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, who's a registered sex offender,
had been missing for nearly eight weeks. Information uncovered by the BBC
suggests UK police forces have lost track of more than 700 sex offenders in the
past three years. Campaigners want the law changed to stop offenders changing
their names to avoid detection. The Home Office says the UK already has some of
the toughest laws in the world. At least 32 people have been killed in a train
crash in northern Greece and more than 85 injured. The passenger train derailed
after it collided with a freight train and caught fire near the city of Larissa.
The Nigerian Electoral Commission has declared the governing party candidate
Bola Tinebu the winner of Saturday's presidential election. He won with almost
nine billion votes, ahead of his main rival, Atiku Abubakar, who had nearly
seven million. Two opposition parties have disputed the result. Caroline, thank
you very much indeed. It's 27 minutes today. Today is National Offer Day.
Families in England and Wales will find out whether they've been offered a place
at the secondary school of their choice. They've been warned that this year
could be more competitive than ever, with a record number of 11-year-olds
seeking a place. We'll find out the figures, the latest figures, later on today.
New research confirms that the key to obtaining a place is to live close to the
school or have another child already attending. Just 5% of schools give priority
to poorer pupils in their formal admissions policy. In a moment we'll hear from
the former Education Secretary, Justine Greening. First Doctor Ellen Greaves
joins us. She carried out that research. She's a research associate at the
University of Bristol. Morning to you. Since 2014, schools have been able to
give priority for pupils eligible for the pupil premium, which is a measure of
income disadvantage based on eligibility for free school meals. And what we
found is that in 2020, almost no state schools have chosen to give this priority
to pupils eligible for the pupil premium. So there's only around 40 schools in
England which currently meaningfully give priority to pupil premium pupils.
There we are. That was clearly a tape of Doctor Greaves. She, in the tape, was
not able to say good morning back, but we got the key points of her research.
And Justine Greening is here and live. And good morning to you, Justine.
Morning, Nick. Thank you very much indeed for coming in. Now, yes, it's
interesting and important, you might say, that poor children are not given
priority, but wasn't it ever thus? Well, I think it has been a persistent
problem in the education system, but for a government that wants to level up
Britain and has education as one of those 12 missions, this report should be a
real wake-up call. It should ring alarm bells in both the Department for
Education and the Department for Leveling Up. And for parents around the country
who will be getting those offers back for their children today, I think it
remains unacceptable that there is insufficient focus on making sure we close
gaps, particularly for children from more disadvantaged areas in education. Now,
what the research shows is that there are two things in particular that tend to
determine whether you get into school. Where you live, are you in the catchment
area, which means the wealthier you are, the easier it is to buy a home next to
a very good school, or that you've already got a child at the school, so-called
sibling policy. Are you suggesting that ought to be changed? What I'm saying is
that there are already some academies, for example, like the co-op academy
chain, that specifically aim at opening up schools in areas that are
disadvantaged. But essentially there are two steps you can take to try and
tackle this problem. Either we ask academies to properly open up to children who
are from more disadvantaged backgrounds, either through their admissions policy,
or we ask them, as we did with grammars when I was Education Secretary, to come
forward with a proper plan of how they're going to open up, how they're going to
work with primary schools. Or you have to have a much stronger challenge on
place-based improvements in education and introduce more opportunity areas,
which were tailored strategies on education in local areas with challenges, but
that had support from the DfE, from employers, from the NHS, from a range of
actors on the ground, all working together. The actuality, Nick, is we need to
do both of those things. What do you say to those who say, well, hold on, it's
the academies that have helped make the problem worse? Critics of academies,
founded, of course, by Tony Blair's government, continued by Conservative and
the coalition government, would say we used to have systems to get a better
sense of who should go to what school. They were called local authorities, local
education authorities. That's what they did. And, of course, academies have been
part of how standards have managed to be raised in the UK. But all we're saying
here, I think, with this report, is that it's not enough. And having seen how
they've operated, we now need to make sure the pendulum hasn't swung so far to
one direction that we've lost sight of what we actually wanted to see academies
do on both sides of the house, Labour and Conservative, which was to raise
standards for children from particularly disadvantaged areas. Are you sure that
the sorts of policies you're talking about would really make a difference? The
BBC did some analysis recently that suggested a quarter of state grammar schools
in England still let in hardly any poorer children, despite actually trying to
improve their admissions policies. It simply doesn't work. But that research
also showed that a third had actually significantly improved the numbers of free
school meal children who were getting access. So you need to have a similar
approach here, I think, where you are asking schools to set out clear plans on
how they are going to improve access and what they are going to do to achieve
those plans. Now, what would you say to supporters of your old party, the
Conservative Party, I suspect, and maybe the sort of story that gets written in
Conservative-supporting newspapers, which is there is a move to stop our
children getting into their local schools. It's tough enough as it is. There's a
lot of anxiety for parents, for pupils this morning. And you're going to make it
even more complicated by saying, well, they might not even get into their local
school. But there has to be a good school for every child. This isn't and
shouldn't be about a competition, and that's why you also need to complement any
changes on access to good schools with much more ambition on place-based
education to raise standards in areas that haven't currently got good schools.
We can't continue to see that happen if we are really going to be a country that
delivers levelling up. Rishi Sunak has his five priorities. Education isn't in
those priorities. I hope when he revisits those to move on to a fresh set for
the election that education will be at the top of that list. Justine Greening,
former Education Secretary. Thanks for coming into the studio. Thank you. Time
now is 19 minutes to eight. Time for a look at the papers, and I'll focus on the
ones here in Northern Ireland. And a column in the Belfast Telegraph using a
phrase which you hear a lot here, while the devil will be in the detail, this is
Sam McBride writing and talking about the kind of cynicism, the dishonesty that
he talks about that surrounded this issue in the past. He says that even if Mr
Sunak's been wholly truthful in relation to his deal with the EU, the memory of
past betrayal and deception means that politicians and the public will be ultra-
sceptical of what they're being told and test its veracity, like the boy who
cried wolf. Past government lies have consequences which linger. The Irish News
has a more positive approach to the framework which was announced yesterday,
quoting the Prime Minister saying the North could become the world's most
exciting economic zone. And it quotes different business leaders, BBC-based,
Belfast-based, OCO Global, which has offices around the world, says it's a wave
building and we sense it from some of our own offices in Germany, France and
even China, where there's an interest in this kind of proposition, that being
that Northern Ireland having a unique position in having access not just to the
UK home market but also to the European single market, as Rishi Sunak
characterised it. And then finally, the Daily Mirror, the edition here, is about
bread. Lose your loaf, Fred, there's no bread. And that's because there's going
to be a strike, bakers have gone on strike at the Belfast Hovis plant. Oh my
goodness, no tomatoes, no cucumbers and no bread. Now in other stories on the
front pages, there's an interesting angle on that Brexit deal on the front page
of The Guardian. Allies see end in sight for Johnson ambitions. Their political
correspondent reports that Boris Johnson's supporters are increasingly doubtful
that he could make a comeback as Prime Minister after being, quotes, humiliated
over his Brexit deal with the European Union. The Times reported that that deal,
the new deal at least, that Rishi Sunak has done, is not negotiable. That's the
message Sunak telling the DUP, according to the Times front page. The big news
of the morning is the Telegraph's printing of the first of a large number, more
than 100,000 texts, between the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock and his
advisers and other ministers. We'll analyse that more at ten past eight, as
we've already done in the previous half hour. Matt has a little word, the
cartoonist on the front page, showing a man dressed in full PPE, masks, gloves,
suits. This is for protection, he's being told. Nobody will recognise you now,
Mr Hancock. The time now is 18 minutes to eight. Now if you've got kids, you'll
know that most of them don't watch TV, they watch screens, usually phones or
tablets, and that means lots of YouTube videos, even though the company says its
services aren't appropriate for children under 13. Now an official complaint has
been made to the Information Commissioner about YouTube, which is being accused
of gathering data which allows them to target children. We can talk now to
Duncan McCann from the organisation Five Rights. Just explain to us what you
mean about the platform gathering the data of children. Well what basically
happens when anybody goes and watches YouTube is the service is gathering data
in order to improve its algorithms, in order for it to recommend more videos.
And the easiest way to imagine it is that as our children go in and spend time
watching YouTube, it's like having a group of adults standing behind them, all
with clipboards, noting down the IP address where the video is coming from, what
video they're watching, and kind of taking these details, putting those details
into a kind of profile of our child so that they can then be recommended more
videos ultimately to meet the commercial interests of YouTube, which is to keep
people on the platform for as long as possible, because ultimately that's how
they monetise the platform, is by us watching videos and watching the ads
associated with them. Now what YouTube have said in response is that there's a
dedicated YouTube Kids app and also that they limit data collection and use on
videos made for kids only to what's needed to support the operation of the
service. There is absolutely YouTube Kids, but what I see is that YouTube is
trying to have their cake and eat it. They've designed this platform which they
say is not suitable for children and yet have loads and loads of videos and know
that there are millions and millions of users who absolutely are under 13 and
viewing that. The Ofcom figures are clear that over any given period about 90%
of under 13-year-olds are accessing YouTube. And indeed again, it's not even
just a parental choice at home. When I was, during the pandemic and as schooling
has become more hybrid, I lost track of the number of times that my children's
school was actually pushing us onto YouTube and getting it as part of the
learning. So even if as parents we kind of excluded it, our children would still
be encouraged to go to YouTube. And so YouTube really needs to do the hard work.
If they want to have under 13-year-olds on the platform, they need to do the
hard work to put in place the system so they can process that data legally. And
what I'm saying is that they are not because as you rightly said in the intro to
the piece, YouTube says that there really aren't under 13-year-olds on there and
so we're not putting in the legal provisions to process the data legally. So
what is it that you'd like to see the Information Commissioner's Office to do?
So what I really want them to do is first of all take on the investigation. It's
really important to say that the ICO, the Information Commissioner's Office has
some discretion as to whether to take this on. So it's really... Yes, they say
they're going to consider the complaint, that's what they've told us. Yeah,
absolutely. So within three months they have to give me a response as to whether
they're going to take on the investigation. I really hope that they do. It's the
platform most used by children and is a really fundamental issue around data
protection. But more importantly than that, obviously the ICO has within its
power to issue a fine. That would be a normal outcome should they find any
wrongdoing. But I'm much more interested in some of the other tools in the
Information Commissioner's toolkit such as requiring them to delete the data. It
seems strange to me that many cases where companies are found to have illegally
collected data, once they've paid the fine they're then allowed to keep that
data and that just doesn't seem the right way around. So I'd like them to both
delete the data and also adjust the algorithm because the important thing to
remember about a company like YouTube is the reason that they collect all this
data is not just about profiling the individual child but it's about building a
recommendation algorithm that learns from all the videos we've seen. So they
should also adjust that. Finally, you mentioned having children yourself.
Parents do have a part to play here as well, don't they? Absolutely. And so in
my house we talk a lot about how these services work and ultimately what we need
to do is teach our children how to engage with the digital economy. I think it's
really important though to acknowledge that we need to protect children not
where we think they are or where they should be but where they actually are. And
so that's a really, really important aspect of what I'm talking about. Useful
advice. Duncan McCann from Five Rites, thank you. Thank you very much. Time now
is 14 minutes to 8. It's time for Thought for the Day. The speaker this morning
is Angela Tilby, Canon Emeritus of Christchurch Cathedral, Oxford. Good morning.
The name that produces horror, judgment and sympathy in different people.
Shamima Begum, the 15-year-old from Bethnal Green Academy who travelled to Syria
to join Islamic State and is now in a refugee camp in northern Syria. Her status
has been the subject of much controversy. Three years ago the Home Secretary
ruled that she should never be allowed to return here and last week this ruling
was judged lawful, though there's still scope for appeal. Much of our response
to Shamima Begum is instinctive and emotional. That sullen look, so distanced
and detached, her woodenness in interview, there's nothing here to like. For
some of us she's become an image of irredeemable evil. Her flight to what she
hoped would be paradise was a sign of a warped soul and she represents an
abiding danger. Many believe that the harshness of the camp is what she truly
deserves and that we're well rid of her and her like. Think what she might do if
she were ever to come back to Britain. On the other hand, she was 15 and for
many young women 15 is a difficult age, open to so many influences and yet
regarded as responsible, lured by social media and yet relatively inexperienced,
above the age of criminal responsibility and yet drawn by the Manichean drama of
powerful ideologies. I don't remember much about being 15 but I do remember it
as a time of turbulence. I took the step into a personal Christian faith which
has changed my life. But I was also worried, anxious and sometimes dramatically
depressed every day because every decision at the time seemed irrevocable,
loaded with enormous significance. So my instinct is to feel for her, to want
her to have a chance and yet. Her case may well be decided not on our sentiments
but on pragmatic grounds. Most other countries are repatriating those in refugee
camps who have been involved in Islamic State. On Monday there was a warning
from the judge who is the independent reviewer of our terrorism legislation that
the UK could end up damaged if it fails to take responsibility for her and for
other British-born inmates of the camps. She still stares at us, though now she
wears an open-neck shirt and dark glasses on top of her head. It's as though
she's challenging us to judge her one way or another, which we're all doing as
we pile in with our views. But perhaps we should turn away from her to consider
our own responses. Is the instinct to mercy naive? Is the age to condemnation
unjust? In the case of this enigmatic young woman, we learn much more about the
condition of our own hearts than about her. That was Thought for the Day with
Angela Tilby. The time now is 11 minutes to eight. It's been described as one of
the greatest scandals of our time, the way that unmarried mothers were sent to
draconian homes throughout the island of Ireland and forced to give away their
babies. A public inquiry was due to begin in Northern Ireland, but that was put
on hold, like so many issues, after the power-sharing executive here collapsed.
The plan had been to have an independent panel gathering evidence for survivors
in a non-confrontational way, which would then feed into the public inquiry. The
process was devised by Professor Phil Scraton from Queen's University here in
Belfast, best known for his work into the Hillsborough disaster. Now we're
concerned, obviously, with Stormont being down, that there will be delay,
further delay, brought on by the fact that a public inquiry can't be appointed.
And that has to be resolved. If it's not resolved by Stormont coming back into
being, it has to be resolved by direct rule from Westminster. Professor Scrolls-
Scraton, well, I've been an hour south of Belfast, into the Armagh countryside
to meet Adele Johnston, one of those anxiously awaiting for the public inquiry
to get underway. Hello, dear. Hello. She's very vocal. Come on, come on, come
on. Hopefully she'll keep quiet afterwards. A warm welcome from Lola and Baby B,
two King Charles Spaniels belonging to Adele Johnston, a tiny woman with a blue
rinse, and I mean a bright blue rinse, an exuberant personality which is in
stark contrast to the sadness of her early life. I was born in 1951 in Belfast
in a mother and baby home. And eventually I was adopted by a family who also
resided in Belfast. What were you told about why you'd been adopted? I was told
that my mother was a prostitute and that nobody wanted me. And they were more or
less rescuing me. Terrible thing to be brought up with that idea. Yes, that
remained all my life. It was repeated on several occasions that I was the
unwanted child. And then what happened to you as you grew a bit older?
Unfortunately, I was groomed by a pedophile when I was about 10, 11, and I then
had a very warped view of love relationships, what a relationship meant. And
eventually I became pregnant and I was then moved to Marion Vale in Newry. How
old were you? I was 17 and a half. And what happened to your baby? My baby was
eventually adopted when he was about three months old. And he went to a family.
I was told that I had no choice, that this was the thing to do. I wasn't fit to
look after him. I wouldn't be able to look after him. But when you grew older,
you decided that you wanted to meet your child. And what was that like? I
searched for him many times, but then backed off because I was afraid of
disrupting his lovely life, as I hoped he had. And eventually he actually came
looking me. I mistakenly thought because he was a boy he mightn't want to find
his mother. That was a big mistake. He always wanted to know what was behind
that closed door. And he had been told that I was a heavy drinker, that I came
from a very rough area in Belfast, and that again was a myth. So eventually I
met him, and it was the most wonderful day of my life. I knew he was mine when
he walked into the room. I recognised him, even though I'd never seen a
photograph. So what did it mean to you that you were finally able to meet each
other? It meant the world. I actually said that I can die now. That hole in my
heart, deep inside me, was filled. And no matter what the future was going to
bring with him, I knew that he had met me, I had met him. Let's go back to when
there were these mother and baby homes. And for people who haven't heard about
it before, why is it such a scandal? To be incarcerated in a mother and baby
home, you didn't break the law. You actually broke the moral code of mostly
churches and organisations. So you were put into these places by your family,
the clergy, your doctors, your social workers, and they were all in collusion.
You were kept in that place, and your civil liberties were removed, your human
rights were removed, your child was removed, and you were told that you were
never going to look after that child or fit to look after that child. You left
that place after giving birth to a child, and were expected to go back into
society and continue on with your life. That was catastrophic for many people. I
think the biggest thing for a lot of people is recognition of what happened. It
was a cruel, strict regime. Not like having your baby nowadays, where
everybody's all excited and bringing flowers and cards and what have you. There
was no excitement. There was no cards, there was no flowers. Most of us were
left to give birth alone. We were left in a hospital, alone, with no visitors,
nobody to hold your hand, nobody to help you. And I know that it's one of my
abiding memories. Even when I went on to have later other children, that memory
still dwells in the back of my head. And when I had my second child, I was
terrified that somebody would come and take him. Looking around at your house,
Adele, it's absolutely filled with your hobbies, with the wool, with your pets,
with animals. It's a lively, happy home, it says to me. But for many of the
women, they've carried the trauma, haven't they, of those early years throughout
their lives? I am fortunate that I have been able to build a reasonably good
life, even though the trauma is still inside me and I have had counselling over
the years. But a lot of the victims and survivors of the mother and baby homes
do not have that support. They have sought to fill their lives with alcohol,
inappropriate or bad relationships. And really, they are the most vulnerable of
our society, and they need to be gathered up and looked after. And the quicker
that we go forward into this inquiry, the better, where they can get some form
of recognition, some form of redress and acknowledgement of what really happened
to them before it is too late. Adele Johnston from the Birth Mothers and Their
Children for Justice campaign, which represents 300 people altogether. Three
minutes to eight now, time for the weather. Here's Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thanks,
Nick. Well, it's the first day of meteorological spring, but the weather not
feeling particularly spring-like out there. We've got quite a cool north-
easterly breeze with us, and although there's quite a lot of dry weather on the
cards today, there's a lot of low cloud too, and that is producing a few drizzly
showers around this morning. So for England and Wales first off, then we've got
some clearer skies in the far south, so there's been a touch of frost for the
likes of Kent and Sussex too. Most places, though, just about frost-free under
that cloud. And the showers are actually quite persistent this morning across
parts of northern England. They should tend to ease a little bit later on, and
hit and miss drizzly showers further south across England and Wales too.
There'll be a bit of brightness breaking through the cloud at times,
particularly for East Anglia and the south-east, perhaps north-east England and
the far west as well. Could just see a glimpse of blue sky, but generally it's
looking quite grey. Top temperature's around seven to nine degrees, but feeling
colder than that today when you add on that north-easterly breeze. And for
Scotland and Northern Ireland, largely dry here. We have got some showers around
this morning for parts of the borders, up towards Aberdeenshire for instance
too. Further west is where you'll see some breaks in that cloud, so a bit of
sunshine for the Western Isles. Northern Ireland's seeing some glimpses of blue
sky, and it will brighten up too for the Northern Isles today. But the highs
here are around six to eight degrees, feeling chilly though in the breeze. Now
the next few days are looking fairly similar, so a lot of dry, settled weather,
lighter winds and more sunshine compared to today by tomorrow, but things are
set to turn colder again through the weekend. Sarah, thank you. Next week, Helen
Lewis begins a new series of forward-looking conversations. Welcome to the
Spock. When we're in the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are
different than the decisions that we would make if we were looking from the
outside in. Bold thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or
remember that these inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human
connection can save a life. I'm Helen Lewis, with a new series of close-up
conversations. More big thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world, and
hearing some of the personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best
decisions I've ever made in my life was making that step. The Spock starts next
Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Coming up in the next hour, a
new island has been discovered in the Solent. We need more volunteers to train
guide dog puppies, despite our last appeal. Martha's been talking to James
Martin, the man hoping to add an Oscar to his prize list, and the latest.