TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Begins this Wednesday evening at 8.45. Amen. BBC News at midday. The bodies of
more than 40 migrants, including a baby, had been washed up on the coast of
southern Italy after their boat broke up in rough seas. Around 80 people
survived the shipwreck. Danny Eberhard reports. The small, apparently
overcrowded boat broke up just off the coast in heavy seas. Footage shows timber
smashed into pieces washed up along the beach, along with parts of the hull. A
group of survivors, thought to number about 80, made it to shore. Images show
them huddled in blankets, being attended to by Red Cross workers. Some have been
taken to hospital. Initial reports indicate they're from Iran, Pakistan and
Afghanistan. It's still not clear how many people were on board the boat when it
sank, nor where it had departed from. The Italian Prime Minister, Giorgia
Maloney, has expressed her deep sorrow at the tragedy, which she's blamed on
people traffickers. The government has hinted that politicians in Northern
Ireland could be given new powers as part of a fresh deal on post-Brexit trading
arrangements. The Deputy Prime Minister, Dominic Raab, said the UK was on the
cusp of securing a new settlement with Brussels, involving less onerous customs
checks on goods travelling from the British mainland to Northern Ireland. And
speaking on Sunday with Laura Koonsberg, he hinted that the Stormont Assembly
would have a say on any new EU rules that would have an impact on the region. If
there are any new rules that would apply in relation to Northern Ireland, it
must be right that there's a Northern Irish democratic check on that. That would
mark a significant shift in the paradigm of the arrangements. And I think that's
good news. Mr Raab said if trade was made easier by the new deal, there'd be
less of a role for the European Court of Justice. But Mark Froswauer, the
chairman of the Eurosceptic European Research Group of Tory MPs, told Sky News
that wasn't enough. Just putting a couple of intermediate phases in, but in a
situation where you still end up with the European Court of Justice, is
effectively sophistry. I mean, we're not stupid. What we want is a situation
where EU law is expunged from Northern Ireland, so it is treated on the same
basis as England, Scotland and Wales. Mr Raab has also said he'll resign if an
allegation of bullying is upheld against him. He faces eight formal complaints
about his time in previous jobs as justice secretary, foreign secretary and
Brexit secretary. The union representing senior civil servants, the FDA, has
called on the health and safety executive to investigate claims of widespread
bullying in Whitehall. The government says it doesn't tolerate such behaviour.
Jordan is hosting a meeting between senior Israeli and Palestinian security
officials to try to bring an end to a surge in deadly violence. It's the first
such gathering in years. Israel's national security adviser and the head of
Palestinian intelligence are taking part. 62 Palestinians and nine Israelis have
been killed so far this year. Police Scotland say the body of a man found in the
Highlands is that of the missing walker, Kyle Sambrook. An extensive search was
launched when he failed to return home from a trip with his dog. Claire Runacres
has the details. Kyle Sambrook, who was 33, left his home in West Yorkshire to
walk and wild camp with his beagle, Bane, in the Highlands last Saturday. He was
last seen in the Lost Valley area of Glencoe. He failed to return home on
Tuesday as planned, and a major search was launched involving mountain rescue
teams and the Coast Guard. Police say his body and that of his dog were found
yesterday afternoon. His family have been informed. Officers say there do not
appear to be any suspicious circumstances. Thousands of people in Australia have
paid their respects to Olivia Newton-John at a state memorial service in
Melbourne where the singer and actress grew up. She died from breast cancer last
year at the age of 73. Dolly Parton and Elton John were among the stars paying
tribute to her at the event. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Now John Lloyd
returns with a brand new curator, Anna Tashinsky, to welcome you to the latest
series of The Museum of Curiosity. The Museum of Curiosity. The Museum of
Curiosity. Hello, my name's John Lloyd, and I'm the Professor of Ignorance at
Solent University. Welcome to The Museum of Curiosity, universally and eternally
free. We ask that you spend only time and pay only attention, although we now
also accept contactless. To which end, let's meet someone who has never had a
social media account and so is completely contactless. It's our brand new
curator, poached from the podcast, No Such Thing as a Fish, Anna Tashinsky.
Hello, John. Hello, Anna, and welcome to The Museum. Now, what do you hope to
achieve in your tenure? Well, I'm very excited to be here, and here is my plan.
So the modern world is full of all this dreadful technology. I avoid it all, so
we will be removing anything that I deem unnecessary. Right, that explains why
the wifi isn't working and why I can barely see you through the gloom. Well,
Professor, we're saving energy with candles. Candles? Exactly. Cost-effective
and a little bit romantic. The epitome of this show, I think. Yes. Well, let's
begin our dark and arduous journey and meet this week's panel. Comedian Chris
McCausland, entrepreneur Bill Liao, and actress Maria Margulies. Hello. Hello.
Chris, we've got a techie theme today, and you're a tech and gadget fan. How can
you convince me, a fobe, to care about them? I think the trick is to imagine how
awful your life would be without all of your modern gadgets, but then also to
completely ignore how much better your life would be without all of your modern
gadgets. Bill, you're pretty techie, and you certainly invest in
environmentally-friendly tech companies. Do you pay them in green
cryptocurrency? Yeah, we love to pay in vapor, but most of them are smart enough
not to accept vapor. So yeah, we actually have to use cash. Miriam, would you
say you're a high-tech or a low-tech model? I think I'm low-tech, but I'm an
aspiring high-tech. I always want to do more than I can, and that's why I get in
a muddle on the computer. OK, you're ready for the upgrade. I'm not going to
Windows 11. I've got to draw the line somewhere. Oh. So coming to you first,
Chris, you're a regular on TV panel shows like Would I Lie To You? and something
called QI. You're currently touring your new stand-up show, Speaky Blinder,
great title. You present Radio 4's You Heard It Here First, have appeared on the
Royal Variety Performance, and won Celebrity Mastermind. Yeah, but I'm not the
academic, John, so I did 90s Grunge Rockers Pearl Jam. Is that a real group?
Yeah. I've never heard of them. It's a rude name. Is it like 10cc? No, no, no,
it's not. That's one of those myths. I've never heard the rude thing, and now
I'm desperately internally speculating as to what is big about Pearl Jam. I want
to know what's rude about 10cc. It's a certain volume of liquid, Miriam. Do you
mean sperm? Well, I'm unfamiliar with sperm. I haven't seen sperm since the
First World War, so I don't really know much about it. Chris, is it right that
you used to have a guide dog, and it was really bad at doing its job? Yeah,
because I'm obviously blind. I don't just collect bizarre kind of niche animals.
I have an emotional regulation parrot as well. I had quite a boisterous dog,
which I was told was necessary if I ever wanted to go into London with him. But
the boisterousness gave him this massive sense of power and independence. So we
just kind of rarely went where he wanted to go. If he saw something on the floor
he liked to look over, that's where we were heading, which really wasn't what
you want from a guide dog. And he got his licence revoked. Are you blind, Chris?
I am, Miriam, yeah. Oh, God, I am sorry. I didn't know that. That's OK. It
wasn't your fault. No, it really wasn't. I wouldn't want to be responsible for
that. Did I read something that your wife's Brazilian? Yes. Do you speak
Portuguese? No, I've tried. But she told me to stop because she said it was like
talking to a toddler because she'd come on from work and I'd just be like, I've
got a hat. So, Chris, you're also something of an international man of mystery
because you once nearly recruited to MI5. How did that happen? Before I got into
stand-up, I was just applying for all kinds of jobs. People might think that to
be an MI5 you've got to solve a particularly difficult kind of Sudoku puzzle in
the back of a magazine, but they just have a graduate scheme. And I applied and
there was 3,000 applicants and I got down to the last 30 before they came to
their senses. Did they fail you on sniper training? Almost, yeah. It was because
of my eyesight that they said no, which is, I think, a perfectly acceptable form
of discrimination. I've been a spy for a private detective. I had to wear a wire
and pretend to be somebody who was looking for a nurse for my father. This
person I was interviewing had pretended to be qualified as a nurse and my job
was to get her to say that she was qualified as a nurse. Wow. And did you
manage, Miriam? Did you succeed? Of course I did. It is kind of acting, isn't
it? I quite enjoyed it. Amazing. Well, thank you, Chris. You may not have become
a spy, but every time I've seen you perform, it's pretty clear you have a
license to kill. Now, Bill, you're a social networking pioneer, biotech
investor, philanthropic entrepreneur, educator, author and speaker. You're a
Chinese-Australian who serves as a special diplomatic envoy for St Kitts and
Nevis, has planted millions of trees all over the world and lives in Ireland. As
a passionate environmentalist, how do you get around? So I made a stupid promise
not to fly until we planted 100 million trees. So for the best part of 15 years,
I got around with boats and trains and walking. I was representing St Kitts and
Nevis at the COP 15, I think it was, in Denmark. I'd done my carbon calculations
and everything looked very good, living on an organic farm with solar power and
everything. But I had 3 million frequent fire miles, and so I gave up flying.
And my first major trek was to get to Denmark from Ireland. There's quite a lot
of virtue signaling goes on and quite a lot of snobbery goes on in the
environmental area of the COP at the time. And they'd sort of ask you, oh, well,
what's your carbon footprint? And I'd go, well, actually, now it's pretty
neutral. And they say, well, how did you achieve that? Well, I don't fly anymore
until we plant 100 million trees. And that shut them up pretty quick. And we did
plant 100 million trees. We funded the 100 millionth in the pandemic, so now I'm
flying again. Did you enjoy taking sort of presumably very long haul ferry trips
everywhere? Was it quite a meditative thing, having to slow down so much? I
wrote some books on the move. There were some beautiful moments, like the
occasional thing, like in the middle of the Atlantic, in midnight, looking up at
the stars. So tell me, what's the organisation that plants all these trees? It's
called We Forest, because that's literally what we do. And I like names that do
what they say. Stick into spies, you could have at least had special branches.
Don't make me fall off the twinger. Miriam just died a little inside there. We
figured out two important things. One, trees make clouds. So if you plant a lot
of them, you cool the planet faster than just the carbon. And the other thing is
it's better to have a tree worth more alive to local people than dead. We set
things up such that the local people derive income from the food forests that we
help them plant. You want it so that the village women will cut the nuts off any
man who tries to cut their nut trees down. That's great. Well, thank you, Bill.
Changing the world, 100 million trees at a time. And to encourage everyone else
to contribute to your amazing We Forest project, I'd like to remind them of the
old saying, the best time to plant a tree is 20 years ago. The second best time
is now. So, Miriam, your career spans five decades in film, television, theatre
and video games. And radio. Oh, yes. I started in radio, darling, and it looks
as if I get to finish there, I might say. I'll read that again. Why read it
again? Why don't you keep that in? I think it's charming. It's your programme.
Go ahead. No, no, it isn't my programme. I'm just the robot puppet manipulated
by those people you can't see. Keep it in, he says. Right. But anyway, Miriam,
among many standout moments, you were Professor Sprout in Harry Potter, Sister
Mildred in Call the Midwife and most memorably for me personally, the Spanish
Infanta, Lady White Hatter and Queen Victoria in three separate incarnations of
Black Hatter. You've won a BAFTA for Martin Scorsese's The Age of Innocence and
written a hilariously frank autobiography, and I mean that. This much is true.
You've portrayed nurses, midwives and professors. Would you say you have a
naturally nurturing side? No, I don't think I have. I'm an actress, for goodness
sake. I like acting caring, but I'm not a carer. I care about people and I care
that we live in such an awful society and people are so cruel to each other and
particularly to immigrants and people coming from abroad and people who don't
fit in. I care to make things better, but individually, I can't put on a last of
plast and wipe out anuses. I just can't. Do you do jokes? No, I hate jokes.
Actually, I hate comedy. I was quite depressed when I heard that one of our
guests is a comedian. Can't stand acting either. No, well, there you are, you
see. People who make a living out of comedy, that must be so desperate. Well,
you've got one thing right, I am desperate. Me too, darling. So finally, Miriam,
you've also made a documentaries on obesity, death and sexuality. Is there any
subject left you'd like to tackle? Yes, there is. Israel and Palestine. I would
love to be able to do a documentary in Israel and in Palestine, but the BBC
won't let me. Are they worried you'll make the problem worse? I think probably
they think I will be murdered. Well, we wouldn't want that. Absolutely not. Are
you sure? No, definitely not, Miriam. You are a blooming national treasure and
it's lovely to be with you. But thank you, Miriam. We are so pleased to have you
here in the museum with us and thanks for keeping it clean so far. I've done my
best. I've done my best. So, Chris, I was going to ask you something. Personal
question. Yes. Do you know which type of retinitis pigmentosa you have? I've
been told it was inverse cone rod dystrophy. Right. When were you told that? Oh,
so long ago. I was probably a teenager. I would definitely get a specific screen
for P56 and P50. I think it is mutational. Are you able to tell this from
looking at me? No, it's just that they do screens now that are very specific for
the condition. But I doesn't have an immune system the same as the rest of the
body. So if you do a genetic therapy in the eye, it won't get rejected. So if
you can find out your specific mutation, there's actually a whole new ray of
hope that's just happened in the last few years. Wow, Bill. I mean, you've
already made me feel useless. I can't have your cure in my eyesight as well.
Just give it a rest, man. Well, I did my research and I was looking up the
clinical trials and I spent a lot of time with geneticists. I would like to
learn more about this, mate. Well, you mean you come on this programme and you
can cure blindness? My God! He's decided he's never going to use his eyes again
until he cures 100 million blind people. And now, can we open the vault, please,
Anna? Mother's maiden name, please. What? Well, how do I know you're the real
John Lloyd? All right, turn penny. OK, you've just made that up. So let's try a
new tack. Who is a better host of QI, Stephen Fry or Sandy Toxfig? Well, they're
both equally brilliant. Yep, that's the John Lloyd I know. Mother's maiden name,
Bootlicker. OK. I now declare the museum open for donations. So, Chris, what
would you like to donate to the museum? I would like to donate the vinyl record.
Ooh. And why is it that you would like to donate that? I'm such a music fan. I
love music. And I'm also a geek, you know, I love technology and I do depend on
a lot of technology, but I don't like how almost disposable and insignificant
music has become compared to what it was really, when you had to physically own
it and look after it and put it on with your hands and listen to it in the order
it was intended. And I think music should have to take up space. It gives it
more of a value. Well, that is brilliantly explained. I completely agree. I
think that we have such a connection to physical things. It's like reading a
physical book, isn't it? It's such a different experience. About how many
records have you got, Chris? I've no idea, because a lot of them have been
ordered to put in storage until we move somewhere bigger. Thousands, let's say.
Miriam, do you collect anything interesting? I collect political cartoons of the
19th century, especially fat ladies. Do you collect printouts of these things or
do you collect original copies of them from that time? Original copies. Because
that's the lovely thing, isn't it? It's like holding a piece of history in your
hand. Does that thing of having the original pressing of something? Oh, yes,
wonderful. Something about vinyl that I find really interesting is that when it
was first coming about, no one here would have been allowed to own a vinyl in
America except Chris. Do you know about this, Chris? No. It was legal for anyone
except if you were blind to own a vinyl record. And I think it was about 1933 to
1948. And it was because they could listen to audiobooks on them. And so you
didn't listen to music, but they would get free audiobooks. And once you'd
listened, you sent it back and it was sent on to the next person. And they had
to sign a contract with all authors saying they promised that they would never
let people who could see have access to these vinyl records. Wow. And you see, I
am a massive audiobook junkie, but I can't imagine anything more tedious than
having to listen to an unabridged book on vinyl. Well, Chris, do you have a
favourite? Because we have to display this in the museum. So how do you intend
to get this displayed? Is it going to be one vinyl? Well, as you know, it's
impossible to pick a favourite because I mean, the thing with music is it
depends on mood, doesn't it? So what I'm hoping for is I'm hoping for my own
rather substantial room within the museum where I can move my entire vinyl
collection out of storage. That's ideal. Have it displayed around the edges with
a lovely armchair in the middle, preferably a lock on the inside of the door and
a good sound system. And it'll give me somewhere to go, really. This is less of
a museum and just more of a home away from home that we're building for you then
at this stage. I'm a little bit upset that you've seen through my facade. Well,
thank you so much, Chris. We are happy to record your donation vinyl. Right,
Bill, what exhibit would you like to donate to the museum? I am donating a
Drosophila melanogastula. It's a common fruit fly. It's a very uncommon fruit
fly at the same time. And if you think going after blindness was the piece of
resistance, well, sorry to disappoint. These fruit flies have been modified with
the genetic mutations of a young man's appendocycle cancer. The interesting
thing is 90% of the cancer mutations in human cancers are actually conserved
from fruit flies. So it's the exact same mutation in the fruit flies as in
patients' tumor. You know, in cancer, a lot of the time, oncologists are afraid
to give multiple drugs to treat cancer at the same time because a lot of those
drugs are very dangerous. And whenever you get cancer and you get that
chemotherapy treatment, a lot of that time, it's kind of you're a clinical trial
of one because they test the drug on you. They say, OK, you get this drug. And
then they look to see if the cancer responds. What's happened here with this is
that these fruit flies have the cancer and they have been given hundreds of
thousands of different drug combinations. And the ones I'm holding here, the
precise drug combination included a chemotherapy drug, a psoriasis drug,
included one other drug. And so the trial was done on the flies and not on the
patient. And the patient's oncologist was then given a recommendation of the
three drugs that worked not to kill the cancer, but to keep the flies alive.
That combination is actually being given to the patient right now. And I'm very
pleased to say that the tumor in the patient is responding far more effectively
than what was proposed as the standard of care. Astonishing. Well, I'm glad I
got to go first. Glad I didn't have to follow a cure for cancer with the vinyl
record. All part of life's rich pattern. I did apologize ahead of time. Good
luck, Miriam. I'm just thrilled that this is happening, that you're doing
something like this. I've never heard of fruit flies helping in cancer cures. I
mean, this is the result of 15 years of research at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
The amazing thing is that we share so many genes with so many different
organisms. I mean, we are just not that far different from a fruit fly or a
mouse. It's just that with specific cancers, specific mutations, you have to do
a lot of different tests to come up with a specific therapy combination. And
like, this was unfeasible previously. Like if you did it with mice, imagine
trying to keep alive 400,000 different mice. That's not going to work. 400,000
fruit flies, on the other hand, is actually easy to do. And with modern liquid
handling robots, dosing them with the different drugs is actually very
straightforward. So Chris, it seems a bit banal, but do you have a relationship
with the insect world or flies of any kind? No, I mean, I just don't like any of
them. I mean, obviously, I mean, I appreciate their value. I mean, this sounds
amazing, to be honest, doesn't it? But I'm not great with tiny little things. I
think because I imagine them in me head rather than looking at them. And I
imagine them probably a lot worse than what they actually are. One thing that is
a bit frightening about fruit flies is their sperm can be, I think, two inches
long. So their sperm is a thousand times bigger than elephant sperm and 20 times
the length of their own body. Where do they keep it? I think it's rolled up. So
it's like a ball of yarn. Oh, it's more like a party blower. Exactly. Who knew?
Explosive sperm. Precisely. Bill, how would you like to display it? Do you want
it to be one fruit fly alone, drugged up to the eyeballs with 3000 different
types of cancer drug? Lots of fruit flies. How should we do this? So this is fly
427. It's actually a little vial and it's got their food source in it, which is
fruit, obviously. And the fruit is laced with the drugs that are keeping them
alive and they're living very happily and healthily. So we just have to
occasionally top it up with a little bit of the food and they can continue to
live their life cycles. Brilliant. Chris, maybe we could put it in your vinyl
room and you could do the fruit fly feeding. Yeah. I mean, it doesn't sound like
it's going to take up much space, does it? So, I mean, if anything, this gives
me the opportunity to do something slightly more worthy with me. There you go.
Bill, thank you for your really extraordinary donation. I mean, who knew fruit
flies could cure cancer? If we got them 400,000 tiny spades, maybe you could
teach them to plant trees as well. So Miriam, what would you like to give to the
museum? I want to give something that means a lot to me. It's actually a person
and his output and it is Charles Dickens. Talk to us about your love for Charles
Dickens then. When did the love affair begin? The love affair began when I was
11 and I read Oliver Twist when I was at the Oxford High School. I knew straight
away that I had been pulled into an extraordinary world, a world that I knew was
very like the world that we all live in, but somehow charged and different and
brighter and busier. I think he's an extraordinary creature and he is really the
way that we see the 19th century. He was also able to create over 2000
characters and be funny and be wicked at the same time. Absolutely. And for me,
he is the greatest writer, greater than Shakespeare, greater than anybody that
ever lived. And I can't think of a better thing that I could give to the museum.
Well, I can sort of be reminded of him in you a little bit because he was...
Well, first of all, I can see you portraying so many Dickens characters so
brilliantly. Yeah, true. And secondly, you're very good at voices and he liked
to perform his works, didn't he? He would tour the world reading his books
aloud. He thought they should be performed to a mass. Oh, yes. When he was
writing, he used to put down his pen and rush to the mirror and act in front of
the mirror. Well, I found an interesting thing that Dickens saw all his
characters as if they were real and heard them speak all their dialogue. And he
claimed he never actually invented any of them. And I always think that's a very
good thing. It's when you're channeling. Yes, completely. As you said, he's
created over 2000 characters, I think. And I don't know why I'm asking this
because I couldn't possibly choose. But do you have a favourite among them? It's
really difficult to do that. But the two that I love very much, two very
different women. One was Mrs. Gamp from Martin Chuzlewitt, who's a drunken old
midwife. And Miss Havisham. I think Martin Chuzlewitt is one of my favourites.
And I wrote down so many Mrs. Gamp quotes. There's one that goes, The face of
Mrs. Gamp, the nose in particular, was somewhat red and swollen, and it was
difficult to enjoy her society without becoming conscious of a smell of spirits.
But every detail about her is stunning. His names also, I love funny names. And
before plumping for the title, Martin Chuzlewitt, he toyed with Martin Sweetle-
Dew, Martin Sweetleback, Martin Sweetle-Wag and Martin Chuzlew. Well, I mean,
speaking of his excellent imagination for names, names that befit their
characters, Chris, if you were to have a Dickensian name, what sort of traits
would it convey? What would the name be? Well, first of all, I mean, I'd hate
for Miriam to think any lower of me. But I've never read a book by Charles
Dickens. I've learnt a lot in the last five minutes. So I reckon I'd probably go
with something that corresponds to what I tend to be covered in a lot of the
time. So I'd probably go for Chris Pringlecrum. You've got it. You've got the
measure of him. That's absolutely right. Well, he did have a Mr. Chris Sparkle.
Oh, did he? That was one of his names. But, you know, Chris, I don't think less
of you, because you haven't read Dickens, but I would love you to have a go. I
would love you to tell me which one to read and I will get it on audiobook. I
would just go for a Christmas carol. Take it slowly, skip where you get bored,
but you will enjoy it. OK. It's rich. It's delicious and very moving as well. So
I think you're in for a treat. Please, please do that. 100 percent. Give that a
go. Bill, if Charles Dickens were alive today, what kind of issues do you think
he'd be writing about? You know, if he was alive today and he didn't have his
previous body of work, I could imagine him recreating a tale of two cities, but
with almost any of the immigrant stories that are there today. I mean, you know,
as an immigrant myself and having moved across cultures and witnessing that with
my dad moving and my mom moving across cultures, I relate to Charles Darnay. I
think Dickens would find an enormously rich characterisation of the joy and the
misery of the life of the immigrant. I think you're right, Bill. I think he
would write about the immigrant experience. Can I just share another one of my
favourite quotes in his migrant experience, which was largely based in America,
where he travelled. And I think Dickens was appalled at American eating habits
and the fact that they ate quite voraciously. And he depicts one dinner where he
says, the poultry disappeared as rapidly as if every bird had had the use of its
wings and had flown in desperation down a human throat. Yes. No, he wrote like a
king and he didn't like America. It is not the Republic of my imagination. Well,
Miriam, now that we've got our hands on Dickens, how would you like us to
display him? After all that romance, what are you going to do with his corpse?
We can bring him back to life. Think of him as a corpse. He lives. He lives in
all our imaginations, in our memories. Actually, rather like Chris, I'd like him
in his study at his desk with a pen in his hand. And on the page he's writing on
if it could just say, Chris Pringlecrum was a desperate comedian. It's a good
opener. Here it is. Well, Miriam, thank you for your generous donation of
Charles Dickens. Pleasure. Thank you very much. So there we have it. The
museum's collection now includes the crater of Oliver Twist, what Twist and
Shout came out on and some fruit flies to really shout about. Well, thank you,
Chris, Bill and Miriam. My respect to you all as people who've really made
something of your lives. In the immortal words of Charles Dickens himself, this
is a world of action and not for moping and droning in. That's all from the
museum this time. Goodbye. The Museum of Curiosity was curated by John Lloyd and
me, Anna Daczynski. The donors were Bill Yow, Miriam Margulies and Chris
McCausland. The exhibits were cataloged by Mike Turner, Mandy Fenton, Jade
Gebby, Cameron Locksdale and Lydia Mison. The producers were Sam Holmes and
Liying Li. And it was a BBC studio that was designed to create a new museum. It
was a BBC Studios production for Radio 4. And John and Anna will be back with
more curiosities at the same time next week. In a few moments, the food
programme tells the story of how a photojournalist severely injured in a war
zone reinvented himself through cooking. But first, with a look ahead to the
world this weekend, in half an hour, here's Johnny Diamond. Thanks, John. We are
turning to the Middle East, to Israel, to ceaseless turmoil and a new coalition
in place. Violence between the Israelis and the Palestinians is claiming dozens
of lives already this year. We hear from the ground and from both sides. And ask
a former US Special Envoy if Palestinians' statehood is now an empty dream. And
we hear from the brilliant Alan Little on Scotland without sturgeon. All of that
coming up in just under half an hour at one o'clock here on The World This
Weekend. Thanks, Johnny. We look forward to it. But now, as promised on Radio 4,
the food programme, with Dan Saladino. In my work as a photographer documenting
wars and conflicts around the world, I see, in some ways, the worst in humanity.
This is Giles Dooley, whose photography and writing from conflict zones is
unique. My work focuses on families and focuses on individuals. I'm not really a
war photographer in the traditional sense. There's not pictures of tanks and
planes and explosions. You never see a picture of a man with a gun. You'll see
families, you'll see a mother brushing a daughter's hair, a mother feeding a
baby, a father on the floor doing lessons with his kids. And in the last decade
or so, more of what Giles has captured of the people and places around the world
impacted by conflict has featured another important character, food. I realised
that food was so important for these communities. It was a sense of calm, a
sense of history, a sense of connection to the places that they'd had to flee.
And I also realised, for me, being around the horrors of war, food was the
opposite, because war is about destruction. It's about breaking communities
apart. It's about hatred. And food is about bringing people together. It's about
community, and it's how we express love. That may sound a sort of cliched thing
to say food is love, but it really is. This realisation that food could be
powerful in storytelling followed an assignment in Afghanistan that transformed
Giles Dooley's life. During that visit, I was out in patrol with a group of
American soldiers from the 101st Airborne. We were ambushed, and as we were
running for cover, I triggered an IED, an improvised explosive device, which
left me with two legs missing and one left arm. Possibly the worst day at work
you could ever have. Having gone through what I'd gone through, suddenly I had a
different connection with the people that I was documenting. And people often
say, oh, is it because you meet people who have lost limbs? Actually, it's not
to do with the injury. It's to do with the suffering and the resilience that
people see that I've gone through hell in the same way that they have, and that
we both kind of come through it in different ways. And that connection is really
powerful. And again, that's where food's great, because when I turn up
somewhere, my first question would be like, can I come back tomorrow and cook
with you? And there's always a bit of a surprise that I want to do that. But
firstly, it's showing I'm really interested in your culture, in your stories, in
your food. It's a very levelling thing to work in the kitchen with someone and
then share a meal. And then over that meal, often it'd be them asking me
questions like, oh, what happened to you? And that is incredibly important now
in the way that I work. And I feel much more comfortable actually with people
who have gone through very difficult things themselves because the conversation
is much more honest. To understand the role of food in his work today, we need
to go back to the origins of Giles becoming a photographer aged 18. I was such
an angry man. I was not good at school. I'm dyslexic. I'd been held back a year
at school. I had no academic place at university. I hadn't even opened my
A-level results and had no intention of doing so. He did, however, win a sports
scholarship. I was the world's worst boxer. I thought I was great. I remember my
coach saying, Giles, you take a punch really well, because at 18 you take
everything as a compliment, you know. I was full of bravado, but sport was my
life. That potential, however, was brought to an end by a car accident. And it
was while he was recovering in hospital that a relative gave him two gifts. And
one was an Olympus OM-10 camera and another was a book by the war photographer
Don McCullan. Now, I'd never seen photographs like Don's, these black and white
stark images of the wars in Vietnam, troubles in Northern Ireland, famines in
Bangladesh. I was so moved. I was crying. And I didn't realise photographs could
make me feel that deeply. I decided there and then that's what I wanted to do. I
wanted to become a war photographer like Don McCullan. Still in his teens, the
passion for photography took him in a different direction. I was 19. I had a few
friends that were musicians. They took my photograph out of gigs. And suddenly I
was like on the road photographing bands from magazines. What followed was
almost a decade working with bands, including Oasis, The Black Crows, Pulp and
The Prodigy, alongside fashion photography. And then in the early 2000s,
disillusionment set in. And during a photo shoot in central London, Giles
decided to walk away from that world. I got increasingly cynical about celebrity
culture. The rock and roll stories I threw on my cameras out the window of the
Charlotte Street Hotel and I smashed on the street below. Reality is I'm not
that rock and roll. In fact, I'm all Radio 4. And I had a little hissy fit and
threw them on the bed. But I discovered that day that the beds in the Charlotte
Street Hotel are on the bounciest beds in London because it hit the bed and
bounced out the window and smashed in the street below. And I spent the next
two, three years drinking, substance abuse, depression spiraling. I lost my
home. I lost my marriage, everything. And I could see no way forward. And I
remember at the lowest moment, I'm really not sure if I wanted to carry on with
my life or how I would carry on with my life. I wanted a fresh start, but I
didn't know how to get there. And that's when I remembered those two small
gifts. I remembered how I felt when I'd been given that Olympus OM-10 Cameron,
the book by Don McCullough, and how those pictures had inspired me. And I
realised that's where I'd gone wrong. I hadn't followed that path. I started
working as a care worker. I was doing 24-7 care jobs. And I would never take a
day off for maybe six, seven weeks. And then I'd use the money I'd saved to fund
me to go off and do the trips. To capture stories of conflict in places
including Bangladesh, Angola, and Sudan. And at first I'd come back and people
would not be interested in these photographs. But after a couple of years of
learning my trade, learning how to tell stories, those pictures started getting
published. And, yeah, that led on to where I'm now. In a refugee camp in Uganda,
Giles met a South Sudanese mother whose determination and ingenuity with the
little she had gave him new insights into the power of food. I don't think I've
ever seen food down to its most basic in terms of survival, where she was given
beans every day. And when I met her, she was counting them. I had this
photograph of her hand with the beans in it, and there was two pots, and she was
counting out the beans for each member of the family for that day. And you go
like, that is absolute survival. But what was amazing is even in that situation,
she was trading a few of those beans for a type of dried fish, like almost like
a dried entry, that she would add in with the beans. Because it gave it some
flavour. In fact, also turns out it probably balanced the meal in terms of
proteins. I remember thinking that when you just give people survival food, the
dignity of food comes in controlling how it tastes, the flavour, the traditions,
all those things are so important. And I've seen that again and again and again
in places where people are dying of hunger. It was in 2011 that Giles and
members of an American regiment came under fire in Afghanistan. And as they ran,
Giles triggered an explosive device, which turned him from being someone
documenting a war into one of its casualties. I don't remember a sound from
that. I think my ears had been blown out, it was too much. I just remember a
white heat being surrounded in this white heat and I knew I was in the air. I
was weightless and this white heat and then this loud thud as I landed. I could
hear a bird tweeting, I remember hearing that very clearly. I never lost
consciousness when I was injured. You know, I remember landing on my side. I
could see the tree above me, I could see my legs had gone. In fact, I could see
parts of myself in the tree above me. And I really thought this was it. It was
going to be over quite quickly. I always remember the greatest emotion was a
sense of loneliness. It wasn't really a pain, it wasn't fear, just a feeling so
alone. I thought I'm about to die. And there was nobody that I loved or loved me
next to me. I was very aware of just my life slipping away. And I just wanted to
be held by somebody I loved and be close to somebody I loved in that moment. You
know, I'm in a muddy field in Afghanistan. I'm a long way from home. And I just
wanted to be near somebody that I loved and that loved me. And that's the one
thing that haunts me from that moment. The medics were amazing, the soldiers on
the ground were great, the batonnakays on. I remember a sergeant leading the
patrol had a cigarette and he was kind of feeding the cigarette into my mouth
because obviously I couldn't hold it. And it was almost like a scene from a
film, you're watching these helicopters coming into the valley to pick me up. I
very clearly remember all that. I got to Kandahar, which is the military base,
and that's when I was put into an induced coma. And I woke up three days later
in Birmingham, in the Queen Elizabeth Hospital. That was the terrifying moment
because I woke up and I wanted to scream. I was like, where am I? I didn't know
which country I was in. You know, intensive care units, bright lights, people
rushing around, bleeps going off everywhere, no context of time or no windows.
And I realised I couldn't speak because I had tubes in my mouth, into my throat,
in my nose. I couldn't sit up. My one remaining hand was in a plaster cast and I
couldn't move it. Very soon I realised the only bodily function I had was
blinking. And in fact, that would be the same for the next 46 days. And 46 days,
I spent in intensive care. On two occasions, my family was called in to say
their goodbyes and all I could do was blink. And I remember at first it was like
being thrown in the freezing cold ocean. Like, I'm in a panic, I can't think
straight. And I soon realised I was going to have to build a world in my head
and build projects and one was going through food and remembering some of my
favourite meals and then trying to break down what the ingredients was and how
was that made. Because it was the kind of activity that was really good to do in
my mind. And so I'd think of stuff that my mum had cooked but also some of the
best restaurants I've been in, like Tokyo or LA, and I'd think of these dishes
and I'd think, how did they construct that? What was it made of? I needed
projects like that that I could really put my mind into detail, into intricate
detail and think about. And that was what kept my sanity because, as I say, it's
scary in intensive care units. They're rushing around, bleeps going off. And 46
days is a long time to go through that. Giles would spend another year
recovering in hospital. It was only after a further six months Giles moved into
a bedsit to live independently. Psychologically, that was probably the lowest
point I hit in terms of what happened to me. You know, I'd lost my home. You
know, my girlfriend broke up with me. I got no financial payouts when I got
injured. So I was bankrupt pretty much. I had debts. All the magazines, all the
agencies I used to work for, none of them ever called me again to offer me work.
I'm in this bedsit, which was really grim. I mean, it was so small I couldn't
even get my wheelchair in. You know, damp on the walls, it was not a good place
to be. And I could see no way out of it. And I could see myself, this could be
my life. And I'd be sitting there day after day after day. I remember even once
in my wheelchair going to the local shop and some people getting angry because I
was blocking the way and somebody spat at me. And yeah, that was the lowest
moment psychologically because you're like, how do I rebuild a life now? Part of
the answer, Giles realised, was cooking. Food was something that I could spend
the day doing, that it would give me something to focus on and was constantly
surprising people's expectations. So anything I could do that made people go,
wow, wow, you did that? That for me was really self-empowering. From the bedsit
kitchen came increasingly ambitious meals. He would share with friends, family
and neighbours, including the dishes he'd conjured up in his imagination during
the two months in intensive care, including ravioli with crab and cockles.
Because when I was a kid, we used to go to West Bay, in Dorset, we'd stay in the
caravan in the holidays. You'd try and catch crabs off the dock and you never
would catch one, but you might get some crab meat afterwards. And then in the
back of the car, I was always given cockles with vinegar and those little
polystyrene cups with a toothpick. And that was such a taste. And again, this is
what I'd learnt during those 46 days when I'm locked down in my own mind. That's
when I'd gone back through all these tastes and memories to take me back.
Because I think there is nothing stronger in memory than food. You know, I'm a
photographer. Obviously I believe in visual memories, but there was nothing
stronger than the taste of something to take you back to a point in your life. I
started an Instagram, which I called the One Arm Chef. And I would take
photographs of the food that I was cooking at home. Because people always have
an opinion. Oh, he's got one arm. He can't do this. He can't do that. And so the
One Arm Chef started as a kind of way for me to show people, look, actually, I'm
capable of doing things that you wouldn't be capable of doing. It was good and
important for me to rebuild that confidence in myself. Confidence that would
help him return to his life as a photographer. What kept me going was the belief
that if I could find a way to take photographs again, I would have my life back,
my purpose. So even when I was in hospital, I was trying to work out if I could
do it when I was in a wheelchair, could I adapt a camera to go on it? There was
no question for me that I would find a way to return to doing that work. And one
of the early assignments was entering the conflict unfolding in Mosul, Iraq, in
2014. Pushing deeper into Mosul, the Iraqi forces are now entering the city's
residential neighborhoods. People would be very aware of the terrible fighting
that happened between the Iraqi coalition and ISIS. And I was introduced to this
woman. I went to her house, the grandmother came to the door, she was screaming.
The family Giles had been taken to had been living on the front line for weeks.
During that time, most of the adults inside the house had been killed, only one
woman and her four grandchildren had survived. The house itself was like the set
from a sort of Tom Hanks war movie, you know, with black and walls, bullet holes
in the glass. I remember this big fan that was melted. It was really just
horrific, the situation they were living in. And it was just now this
grandmother with four children. The woman wanted to tell her story, but instead
of just taking out his camera to take photos, Giles offered to cook for her. And
you can see this woman kind of did a double take. And she's like, why is this
guy with one arm come to a war zone halfway around the world to cook with me?
And for the first time, she kind of paused and smiled. But we spent the day
cooking. And neighbors started coming around and helping and bringing things and
something maybe they'd grown or something they'd found because obviously there
was a lot of food scarcity. The children were playing, they were getting
involved. And then we all sat down, we ate together. And that's the moment I
really realized food was intrinsic to building a relationship with people in
these traumatic places. It's a sign of respect. It's how you build friendships.
And then added to that, I came back from that trip. And my own trauma from both
my experience and what I document really, really triggered off. It went very
dark and I couldn't sleep. I was having a lot of bad nightmares. I was really in
a bad place. And I didn't want to speak to anyone. And in fact, I hadn't even
told anyone I was home. And out of nowhere, suddenly, it was probably about
three, four o'clock in the morning, I just started cooking. And when I say
cooking, I mean like making bread, hand making pasta, ravioli. And it was an
escape. And I realized that that was my therapy. All I thought about was the
cooking. And I got lost in it. It gave me respite from all the nightmares of my
work. And so really on that one particular trip, two things. Building
relationships when I'm there through food. And secondly, coming back and cooking
and having that as my therapy. Charles will now only take a photo of someone who
he's cooked with or shared a meal. And these families have become friends. Those
families on WhatsApp will send me pictures of food when they're cooking my
favorite thing. And I love that so much because all those families have
something that when I visited, they'd been cooking. I said, oh, I love this so
much. They remember that. And this is like eight, nine years later. And it has
been tears every time I've been cooking. And it has been tears every time
because I'll get this picture of some dish. They've been eating it and they
thought of me because they go like, we know Jaws loves this dish. And when they
send me a picture of that food, that's them saying we love you. It's a really
deep, deep connection for them to be in that moment of that dish. And then you
come into their minds. Yeah. And that means so much to me. And that's again the
power of food. And it strikes me that you are traveling to places that we now,
unfortunately, only know through stories of conflict. It is one dimensional. And
yet you are going in and through food, seeing a completely different side of
that culture and that part of the world. My friend Klobotenko, who's an amazing
Ukrainian chef, one of the great eccentrics genius, I was with him a few weeks
after the war started in Ukraine or the Russian invasion, shall we say. And he
said to me that he felt guilty because he said, when I think of Afghanistan,
when I think of Syria, when I think of Iraq, he said, all I can picture in my
mind is war, because I don't know about their food. I don't know about their
culture. I don't know about their music. And he felt guilty. And he said to me,
I don't want Ukraine to be seen in that same way. Of course, I'm showing the
disaster of war. I need to people be aware of the horrors of what's going on.
But I also show the fact that people are trying to preserve their culture. They
are holding on to food more than anything. That is what is central to culture.
And so when people are displaced by war, being able to cook something from their
homeland is amazing. These are themes Giles has transferred from photography to
moving images in a series for Vice TV called The One Armed Chef, in which he
tells food stories from places of conflict, including Ukraine. Have most people
left the village? I first went to Ukraine in 2005. I've been documenting the
conflict since 2014. And food is so important there. And I've seen actually a
shift in the last 12 months where I think traditional Ukrainian food has become
even more prominent. It's a war of cultural annihilation. You know, what Russia
is trying to do is to take away Ukraine's identity. And so I don't think I've
ever been in a situation where people eat and have dishes almost as an act of
defiance. You know, eating something is to say, this is our identity. And we're
fighting to keep this identity. So food for Ukrainians is incredibly important.
You know, I remember going and meeting this woman who was living right on the
front lines. And it's actually very hard to even think about it now because that
whole area has been obliterated and we haven't been able to contact her. And I
don't know what happened. When we arrived there, we were walking into a house
and actually a shell landed really near us. And it is mainly the elderly, the
ones who have stayed behind in these villages. And she cooked, yeah, some soup
and we sat and we chatted. When you sit with someone and you ask them to teach
you, like, how do you make that? Tell me what's in that. You're really curious,
genuinely wanting to understand it. That relationship is respectful. And I think
that for me is so important. You know, I'm an outsider. I'm somebody that's come
to tell a story. And I have to show respect to whatever community I'm with. And
that starts with that meal. I said that I was an angry man with a camera when I
started. I wanted things to change. And after my injuries, even more so, I
wanted to be an advocate for people. But I got frustrated that some of the
people I documented, nothing was changing for them. In Rwanda, I was there. I
met an amazing woman called Olive. She had gone to give birth to a child on the
day the genocide began. She was in hospital as the news came over the radio what
was happening. She is Stutzi. As Olive was giving birth to her third child, her
village was attacked. Her husband, her two other children, her parents,
everybody was killed. She only survived because she was in the hospital giving
birth. The hospital was then surrounded. It was actually nuns running it. They
managed to keep them out for two days. But eventually she said, we can't keep
them out anymore. The Hutu will come in and take you away. Olive had to escape
and leave her baby behind. By the time Giles met her, she'd survived massacre,
malaria, and years of exploitation. But she had been reunited with her child and
was rebuilding her life, which involved growing and selling potatoes as part of
a cooperative. Giles wanted to help, but knew that just providing charity wasn't
enough. This I probably learned through my injuries. I had amazing support,
amazing family, but nobody empowered me to walk again. I had to do that. What I
realized was that I could not empower Olive and her friends. I had to break down
the barriers that were stopping them empowering themselves. And the two things I
saw that were holding them back was land ownership and the education to use that
land to its full. And so I set up this project called Land for Women, where we
would set up cooperatives for 25 women on each farm. We bought the land. And I
don't even like to say we give it to them. I call it returning. With 3% of the
land in Rwanda is owned by women, but about 90% of the land is worked by women.
So they've always been kept out of the dynamic, which means they can actually
make money. They're now the landowners. So they choose to work with us because
they can tell us to get lost at any moment because the land is in their name. We
have a five-year educational program to teach climate smart farming. So that
means we don't have just mono crops. And so we had a great example. There was a
drought about a year ago. Crops were down across Rwanda. Our farms were
producing 70% of their normal yield because of this climate smart farming. And
they cooked a meal for me. Amazing meal. Every part of that meal had come from
their land. For the first time, there's no malnutrition in that community. They
even give away about 30% of what they grow to people in need within their
community. That's their choice. It was such a beautiful thing. And sitting there
eating that meal, sharing the food that they'd grown on their own land, there'll
be nothing better than that meal. I've had a pretty amazing life. You know, when
I look back on it, from being on tour bus with Oasis to experiencing frontline
combat in Afghanistan, to going through a hugely traumatic injury, to sit with
princes and kings, all sorts of things in my life. Honestly, nothing gives me
more pleasure than cooking a meal for someone. And when I look to my future, I
see myself with a restaurant somewhere simple, just producing food, everything
made by hand. And even if I just had five or six guests, that I think will be my
ultimate happiness. Is that a real ambition? Absolutely. Yeah. That's where I
see things ending up. Simple produce, probably taking a leaf out of the women in
Rwanda and learning from them. Feeding people? Feeding people, yeah. The food
programme was presented by Dan Sanodino. Now, what's on the weather menu? Here's
Sarah Keith-Lucas. Thanks, John. Well, high pressure is set to dominate through
the rest of today and really for much of the week ahead. So, in the forecast,
very little rainfall for many of us this week. Variable amounts of sunshine and
some night-time frostiness as well. But let's look at the rest of today first
off and we'll look at all of southern England, Wales, the Midlands and eastern
England. Some decent spells of sunshine for most of us through the afternoon.
Just one or two isolated showers, particularly for the likes of Kent, perhaps
down towards the Channel R's as well, but most places looking dry. Temperatures
around seven to nine degrees here, but there is quite a noticeable breeze
blowing from the northeast, so making things feel that little bit cooler. And
the clouds should tend to break up more as we head through into the evening
hours. A bit further north, looking all of northern England, northern Ireland,
southwest Scotland and southern and eastern Scotland as well. Now, across this
zone, it is quite cloudy through the rest of the afternoon and that cloud's just
thick enough to import a few showers that are drifting their way in,
particularly for northeast England. Little bit of a wintry flavor, just on the
highest peaks, but many places avoiding them, particularly further west and top
temperatures around about six to eight degrees, limited breaks in that cloud.
For northern Scotland, lastly, for the rest of today, beautiful blue skies
around for most areas here. It was a cold start to the day, in fact, at minus
eight degrees, so feeling pretty chilly, but light winds and sunshine dominating
and highs up to about seven or eight degrees. Overnight tonight then, we'll see
a little bit more cloud in the east, just sweeping southwards and westwards, so
that'll bring the chance of a few showers tonight for some central and eastern
parts of England, I think in particular. Clearer skies and lighter winds further
north, so overnight temperatures across Scotland, again down to about minus
four, minus five degrees. Elsewhere, I think, a degree or two either side of
freezing. Now, through tomorrow, then a fairly cloudy picture again for some
central and eastern parts of England, but best over the sunshine will be found
further west and things looking dry and settled through much of the weekend.
Thank you, Sarah. Pamare's first TV appearance was on Opportunity Knocks in the
70s, but as well as being a performer and prolific writer of poetry over many
decades, her latest TV series focuses on her passion for wildlife and nature.
And this afternoon on Radio 4, we'll hear from Pam about her life and passions
in the company of Simon Armitage in his hideaway in the Pennines. The poet
laureate has gone to his shed, is at 4.30. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms, and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. Player. On FM, on longwave, on BBC Sounds and
on your smart speaker.