TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at three o'clock.
Rescue teams are continuing to search for survivors of a boat carrying migrants
which sank off the southern coast of Italy with a loss of more than 40 lives.
Bodies have been recovered from a nearby beach in Calabria. The government has
hinted that politicians in Northern Ireland could be given new powers as part of
a fresh deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements. The Deputy Prime Minister
Dominic Raab said the UK was on the cusp of securing a new settlement with
Brussels. A former Environment Secretary has warned that shortages of some fruit
and vegetables could last for three to four weeks. George Eustace blamed what he
described as a cocktail of weather events in southern Europe and Morocco and
there was nothing much the government could have done. We're going to have three
or four weeks of this and the supermarkets have got to work to get it right but
longer term there are things we should be doing. We should be committing to
onshore production so glasshouse production of cucumbers and tomatoes we should
be trying to build that here. We should have a more enlightened approach to
labour so that food can get access to labour. Two Israelis have been shot dead
in the occupied West Bank as a high level security meeting between Israeli and
Palestinian officials takes place in Jordan. Both sides are exploring ways of
easing tensions that sparked a wave of violence in recent weeks. President Putin
has again accused Western countries of taking part in the Ukraine conflict by
giving arms to the Ukrainian government. Speaking to state television he also
said NATO member states wanted to break up Russia. NATO and the West deny such
claims. Nigerians are voting at polling stations in some parts of the country
where they were unable to cast their ballots yesterday because of technical
problems. Elsewhere counting is continuing with first results expected tonight.
The Kennel Club says it's recorded the lowest number of births of rough collies
for more than 75 years. The breed, known to many from the TV show Lassie, has
now been classified as at risk. Last year fewer than 500 puppies were born in
the UK. BBC News This is BBC Radio 4. Now we begin our drama. A rediscovered
19th century swashbuckling epic by the master of the genre in a bold new
adaptation by Testament which tackles racism then and now. Georges by Alexandre
Dumas. Episode 1 Have you ever sometimes, during a long, cold, gloomy winter
evening, wind whistling through the hallways, rain whipping against the windows,
been alone with your thoughts? Have you ever sometimes lent your forehead
against the mental beast, staring past the embers' sparks on the fireplace? Have
you ever longed to leave our wet and muddy climate, or some enchanted oasis?
Lying down on lush grass, soothed by crystal waters, intoxicated by the perfumed
exhalations of the China oars. A red jasmine. Come. The paradise you dreamed of
exists, Eden awaits you. Travel south from the Sea of Zonges, the west wind
urges us along, and we have arrived. For this is a land of promise which nature
seems to have eaten at the ends of the earth, the pearl of the Indian Ocean. The
eel of France. In front of us is Port Louis, the capital of the island with its
crowded wooden houses. But the British, with their eternal jealousy of France,
long fixed their eyes here, upon France's beloved daughter. Unable to win her by
their wires, they attempted to carry her off by force, throwing themselves
headlong upon the Creole Princess. Stay close, my sons. Father, who do they
fight for? Those are the regulars from the Republic itself, led by General
Decion. Jack, keep your little brother close by. I'm ready to fight. I don't
need looking after. Alright, that's good. Jack, you're with me. Tell a mark.
Massé. You're to protect this boy at all costs. Understand? Yes, Massé, Mignon.
Who do they fight for? Fired. They can't even march. Oh, sipping god. I will be
joining their battalion, supporting the army. They're led by Malmedy. He's no
leader. He seems more interested in displaying his athletes. With his brat
beside him, bratish with his little sword. Malmedy is a respected gentleman. You
are twice as strong and clever as he is. Son, learn discretion. Come Jack, let's
join them. George, stay with tell them on. What does he want? Yeah, Mounier. And
son, that's Jack Mounier. At your service. Here to join the civic guard. No
blacks. No blacks. Can't you hear? You must be told twice over that you're not
wanted here. No, not wanted. This your Malmedy. Major. Major Malmedy, I run this
volunteer force. I hoped on a day like this, difference of color would
disappear. And what gave you this hope, if you please? The desire to save our
island. Our island? Because these fellows have plantations like us, they fancy
the island belongs to them. Dirty Milata. What did you say? Pardon me, sir. The
island no more belongs to you than to us. The fact remains, we will have no
Milatos with us. So I may not fight, sir. A form of core of colored men or
something and put yourself in the head of that. Yes, enough. I order you to quit
the battalion. I order it. Father, leave these men who are insulting you.
George, I told you to stay with tell them off. But those men were insulting you.
Come, let's go. What would you have me do? You always say stand to your full
height. Yes. The Negroes have gathered down there. They need a leader. While
you're right. Stand to your full height. I am Pierre Munier. You all know me.
You know my reputation. Indeed, some of you have worked for me. The British
fleet are here and now their troops tread on our very shores. It seems the
island now has a black regiment and it would be my honor to lead it. Tell them
off. Look after my sons. General Dacian led the regulars with their customary
position, cutting through the British ranks. But whether carried away by their
courage or that they executed the given order clumsily, the civic guard
commanded by Michel Melmedy, instead of falling upon the left flank and making
an attack parallel to that executed by the regulars, Melmedy attacks the British
head on. Melmedy has attacked the wrong flank, Jack. Now artillery has stopped
its support. The civic guard are outnumbered. Stand your ground. No move. No
move that way. Black regiment, follow the right. Reinforcements, thank God. To
the left. We are to the left. Follow the black. It was the Melat. Pierre Munier,
who after having made this movement with a genius of a general, had carried it
out with the courage of a soldier, standing to his full height, enthusiastic,
daring, sublime. We're safe. We're safe. What are you doing? Forward still.
Forward, take the flag. Father, come back. Munier hurled himself into the midst
of the British column and after an instant reappeared with torn claws and
bleeding forehead, but with a British flag in his hand. The British are in
retreat. We won. We won. You're here, O Papa. But it was thanks to your courage,
Father. You got the British flag. That's right, sir. One of our wounded wants to
see you. George, hold this flag. Give me that. This flag isn't yours, Henri.
It's my father. I want it. You shall not have it. Heartbreak. Give it. Coward.
George, you're bleeding. Get away, Malmadi. Oh, boy, no. Ori, what's going on?
Did you see what happened just now? A mulatto son has dared to touch a white
man's son. Major Malmadi, I humbly offer my apologies. Have that wretch who
struck my son whipped. It's not I who should be whipped. Henri struck my brother
George first with his sword. George, dear child, is it true? It's nothing. Your
forehead is bleeding. Jack spoke the truth. Your son has almost killed mine.
What? Henri? I wanted the flag to give it to you. Then this wretch struck me. He
is lying. Enough. Give me the flag. Sir, it was I who took the flag from the
British. The flag? This is my command. He's not under your command since you
wouldn't have him as your soldier. What did you say? Jack, enough. Here's the
flag. Come, my sons. We will be avenged one day, George. Scarcely 10 minutes
after the scene we have just witnessed, we look out signals in rival of four
fresh British squadrons. 25,000 men surrounded less than 4,000. Put your weapons
down, men. It's no use. Stand down. And so the British finally grasped that
which they had coveted for so long, the pearl of the Indian Ocean and all the
island's residents, which seemed to be a motley sample of all the nations of the
earth, now submitted to British governance from the lazy Creole, who is carried
in a pomegranate if he wants to cross the street. Down to the neigro, bounded by
the whip. To the tall and handsome Cenégarmion, with complexion black as jet,
eyes bright as cupuncles, teeth white as bells. Hang on. The Chinaman, who
nobody understands but with whom everybody deals, the Jew of the colony. No, no,
no, no. The Malays, copper-colored and vinditeed. What the bot? The
Mozambique's, gentle, honest and stupid, valued only for their strength. Oh!
Hello, mate. Hi, James. How are you getting on? Oh, yeah, great. Yeah, all good.
Yep. So what is it? Uh, yeah, oh, James, uh, I've just been reading this Dumas
thing. Fantastic novel, isn't it? Oh, yeah, yeah, fantastic. I was really
enjoying it, like, proper into it, and then it has a few awkward bits. What
bits? Do you, uh, do you maybe think maybe it's a little bit, tiny bit, racist,
kind of, maybe? Oh. You know where we described the inhabitants of the island?
The lazy Creoles, the Chinese being the Jews of the colony, Mozambique's honest
and stupid? Yeah, yeah, terrible, obviously. Just remember the thrust of the
novel is anti-racist through and through. Mm. Thought you liked that. Because
I'm black. Given the themes in your previous work, these adaptations are
prestigious, you know. It's quite hard for us Indies to land one of these. I'm
just a one-man band. It's hand to mouth, pal. I get that. But if you don't think
you're right for this, uh... No, no, no, I'm, I'm all in. We just need to keep
in mind the essence of the novel. Uh, cool, cool. A man of honor fights back
against the races to injure him as a child. Yes, a black romantic hero. The
mixed race. Exactly. Yeah. And written by the great Alexandre Dumas himself. You
know, we could appeal to younger listeners too. Even use a bit of your
background in it. Well, what do you mean? Oh, like a bit of rap. Rap. Rippity
rapping, yo, man. Call me MC James radio producer man. It'd be fun. A rapping
Dumas novel. It'd be novel. Definitely. Kids like rap, don't they? Maybe. Kids
were into sea shanties a few years ago. Rapping sea shanties? Great. I'd prefer
to... Whatever, just make it your own. But not racist. Yeah. You know Dumas was
mixed race, right? Yes, I definitely did. Dumas was descended from slaves. His
father was Tomá Alexandre Dumas. Who? Tomá Alexandre Dumas, the son of a white
plantation owner who married a black slave in Haiti. Right. He was by all
accounts a war hero. Tomá zipped up the ranks then ended up a general. So
Alexandre Dumas was what, a quarter black? But you already knew that. Yeah. You
see, this is an adventure following a person of color who stands up for
themselves and proves their worth. Don't you worry about the odd bits of
anachronistic description here and there. Just take it out. Erase it. Exactly.
Make it palatable for a 21st century audience. Don't you want to swash? Don't
you want to buckle? The island's residents, which seem to be a sample of all the
nations of the earth, now submitted to British governance. From the elegant
Creole on their palanquins, down to the neck, pounded by the whip, to the tall
and handsome scenic ambient, stately in his stride, to the Chinaman, industrious
and fair in all his dealings. The millets, proud and defiant with a sense of
joslyce. To the Mozambique's, gentle and honest, valued for their wisdom. In the
midst of this, the Aughty British officers stood. Now garrisoned the island.
Thus, the Isle of France, home to Pierre Mounier and his sons, became Mauritius,
the newest jewel in Britain's colonial crown. While the Foulon French squadron
left the harbour, by children driven from the paternal roof, Pierre Mounier had
resolved to send his sons to safety. My hope is that your education will settle
your roving propensities, my Jacques, and teach you to subdue your self-willed
character, Georges. The mother will be watching over you. Will you be all right,
father? She is always by my side. What about the Malmedes? They won't bother me.
I've got Delamar, haven't I? I'll climb the board. Goodbye, father. Goodbye.
Will I do the right thing, Talamok? Their school here was founded only for
whites. And they will be far away from the Malmedes' hatred. What will you do
here, master? And you're? We do what every father has to with prodigal sons.
Wait and hope. Tides and time pass until, 14 years later, on a morning in
February 1824, came the arrival of a new British governor. It's an impressive
ship, Monsieur Mounier. You go down to the docks, Talamok. Oh, you don't come.
Disappointment arrives too quickly. At least if I wait up here, being you to
return, my hope lasts a little longer. I shall bring any letter from your son
directly to you. All of Port Louis was assembled in the shadow of the towering
36th Gun, British warship, known as the Lestre. Make way, madam. This you.
Please, please, make way. Oh, there's the governor. Two gentlemen emerged onto
the airway. The first was a middle-aged man with fair hair and light complexion.
So that he showed her was a dark young man of sallow complexion. In three days,
I must give my banquet, a ball for all the authorities of the island. I hope
that you'll do the honor of being one of my guests. My lord. This three-month
journey from Europe has been an arduous one, made all the bearable by the
acquaintance of an intellectual equal such as yourself. I hope to say I have
made a friend. You have, your lordship. William, please. William, please. Let's
see if these people seek to be governed. Who is that man the governor is shaking
hands with? It must be some young aristocrat. Look, he comes this way. And what
a horse. Can I buy it, father? You're rich. I say, that's a pretty horse. I'll
give you a thousand Piaostas for it. He's not for sale. Come on, Andrew. Who
does he think he is? The poor fellow obviously doesn't realize who we are. If
he's not careful, I will teach him. How much is this fan? Five? Ten? Nine? Nine?
Nine? Excuse me, Mademoiselle. But saying you are in difficulty, will you allow
me to interpret? Oh, Monsieur, if you can succeed in finding out the price, you
will have done me a real service. Allow me. May I introduce you to your father?
I'm not a father. I'm a father. How much is it? A Piaostas. Mademoiselle, may I
introduce you to your father? He says the fan is 20 Piaostas. Oh, this is most
surprising. Thank you. My mother died before I was three months old and my
family had a nurse from Formosa. So her language was the first that I'm
prattled. I'm grateful, sir. I'm grateful for your service. I'm grateful for
your service. Good day, Mademoiselle. Good day. Thank you again. Huh. May I sit,
sir? If you wish. So, you took no interest in the arrival of the ship from
Europe? On the contrary. I take a greater interest than anyone in Port Louis.
Why should you? Because for 14 years I had gone to the harbor to see if there
will be any news of my children. But today, where did I sit? I'm sorry to hear
this. You pity me, sir. You do not know then what I am. You are a man. But I am
a mulatto. I am a mulatto. I've taken you for a white. But since you are a man
of color, like myself, we are relations. A relation? A friend and brother. As
I'm sure you would be to my sons. And who are they? George and Jack. Jack is a
privateer. Out on the seas somewhere. George usually rides, but I haven't heard
anything from him for months. It is perhaps because he is reserving for himself
the pleasure of surprising you with his return. Sadly, all have disembarked from
the ship. Besides, it would be impossible for me not to recognize him. And yet
you have not recognized me. What? George! Father! Why didn't I see the scow on
your forehead? Why look at you! You're a man! Indeed, in the 14 years, the hero
of this tale had transformed from child to man. A remarkable physical and mental
transfiguration had taken place. He had achieved all that he had dreamed of and
passed every goal he had decided to reach. An accomplished gentleman, scholar
and swordsman, receiving the cross of the Legion of On Air, and the cross of
Charles III. With nothing more to do in Europe, he traversed three oceans back
to his father and to mock an implantation on which he was raised. I saw honorary
malmody today. You have not forgotten the mark he left upon your head. I have
not. Nor his family's constant insult. Leave them be, son. Providence will bring
justice in time. See, the whole household has awaited your return with joy. I'm
touched by their welcome, but I sensed it was tempered by a nervousness in their
eyes. Maybe they wonder what sort of master you will be. You must do with this
place as you wish. Then I shall start by giving them a holiday. But these blacks
will put themselves on fete. For their primitive nature knows no gradations.
They go straight from toil to pleasure and rest from their exhaustion by
dancing. Well, it's true, but it is my duty, as it is yours, to make happy those
who will obey me, I hope, as dutifully as they obeyed you. Oh, my days. How's
our swashbuckling epic coming on? Uh, yeah, pretty good. So, when am I going to
see a draft? Soon, uh, soon. What can I do for you, mate? I've got a Zoom call
coming up. It's just that I noticed that the hero and his dad are both slave
owners, kind of complicit in the enslavement of Africans. And there's a bit
where Pierre talks about black people's primitive natures and stuff. Edit it
out. I mean, Dumas, I don't know, was a product of his time, wasn't he? You
don't think it's important to sort of recognize that? Complex nuances in the
thinking about the context of... Wouldn't Dumas have been aware of great black
leaders like Toussaint Goveture? I mean, the Haitian Revolution is referenced in
the novel. Maybe smart black leaders are part of that time, too? Swashy, swashy,
buckle, buckle. Pardon? Swashy, swashy, buckle, buckle. That's what people will
tune in for. Yes, a bit about slavery and so on, but it's a romantic adventure.
It's all about action, plot twists and honor. Classic Dumas. And this one is
good because it's got a message. A message? The evils of slavery and racism. I
suppose it is good how the book deals with slavery without focusing on black
pain, endless whipping torture. Yes. And you see, the racists get their just
desserts. Catharsis. But as it stands, the goodies are slave owners. I can't
just edit out the dehumanization of Africans. Look, mate, I don't want to get
hard, but I need that first draft. Okay. Fantastic. Just make sure it pops. Just
remember, what's changed more attitudes? 12 years a slave or Marvel's Black
Panther? Well... Just plug into the spirit of Dumas, okay? Shit. Have you ever
sometimes, during a long, cold, gloomy winter evening, been alone with your
thoughts? Have you ever longed to leave our wet and muddy climate, or some
enchanted oasis? Yes, please. And why may I ask you that? What? It is I, Dumas!
Am I dreaming? Private is the flight of dreams upon the winds of imagination. So
it's my imagination? More like a UI manifestation of mine. So do you, Groobla!
Why would you be imagining me and my PJs? Have you read my ghost stories? I
can't read all your stuff. There's hundreds. So I am still mad? Of course. I
attained immortality then. All these years later, and the world still knows me.
Some deem me less illustrious than the great man of literature. In my time, you
go, Zola, and women too, like Sond. But it is I who live on. So, I am a literary
colossus then. You think Balsak dismissed me as the Negro? Sod Balsak, then.
Your work has been adapted way more than Nemlock. A place? Operators? Yeah, but
I was thinking more like movies and TV shows. And what are these TV shows?
Moving pictures. With sound. Are these things of great acclaim? How do I explain
Dogtannian and the musky hands? Like Shakespeare? Just like that. Steel Red! I
knew it! So, why are you here? Are you here to give me advice on my writing? It
seems I have been called. We shall write it together. I have collaborated with
many writers like Mackay or Malavile. I was grateful for Malavile for his work
on George, but he had something that stopped him from being a true man of
talent. What was that? Talent. Regardless, he would present me with the first
draft, and then the man went to work. So, we shall do great things together.
Yes, dope. You shall be my apprentice. Oh, apprentice. You say you are working
on a manuscript? A radio plane. A plane! But told through only voices and sound.
Sounds dull. It's one of yours. Oh, well, in that case. It's George, actually.
George? It never sold well. Look, work with me. I get that the novel is about
the racism and prejudice that your father faced. And the prejudice I faced also,
negrophobia was rife in Paris. But you could also pass as white. Despite my
success, some still do not see me as fully human. I remember one night in a
salon, some man wanted me to concede the white race was a superior breed. He
said, I must know the subject intimately, because of all that black blood
flowing in my veins. What did you say? I said, but of course. My father was a
mulatto, my grandfather a negro, and my great-grandfather a ape. You see,
monsieur, my family tree commences at the point where yours ends. Hey, bars. But
hang on. You're still kind of implying black people are closer to being apes
than white people. So, like George and Pierre, you're viewing yourself hiring
the system's hierarchy. Plantation owners above the slaves. Ah, but they are
benevolent plantation owners, see? That's why it's supremacy, fam. You still
think black people are livestock. You don't know many black people, do you? I
know many mulatto men and women in Paris. I use the value of the change of
yours, the black Mozart, and inspired mulatto, like myself. Yeah, mixed race.
What about, you know, black black people? Apart from servants, I suppose. Okay.
Nevertheless, my grandmother was a negro, a plantation slave, and I am proud of
that. But I've been taught a certain way since infancy. We all studied their
cards in Voltaire, who argued for such a hierarchy of race. Bonne, Voltaire. I
am a writer of my time. But you've been brought to mind. I have. And what does
that mean, though, of his time? Not many people thought the negro had value. I'm
guessing the millions of slaves would have disagreed with that one. This is why
I wrote George. He says some awful stuff, and you never contradict him. Don't I?
No. Perhaps we must give Pierre an epiphany. Yes, an epiphany. All right, what
if George, who's got a more progressive view on race than his dad, challenges
him on it? He must do with his place as you wish. Then I shall start by giving
them a holiday. But these blacks will put themselves on fett, but they
primitive. I don't know, Father. Think of Toussaint Louverture. A black may
ascend to enlightenment, while we indeed know that whites can be as savage as
dogs. On my travels, I have witnessed civilization is not only in Europe, but
has long lived in Africa. The great libraries of Timbuktu, the ancient cities of
Karma, as the Ethiopian, Zera, Jacob wrote, all men are equal in the presence of
God. A hundred years before Voltaire. Good heavens. Did you really mean that I
can do with this plantation as I wish? I do. Then we will be slave owners no
longer, but employers of free men, giving them their own huts and means with
which to make their own living. But the island will be in uproar. Then we must
keep it secret. But for tonight, let them rejoice. During the next day, as every
Saturday evening, an assembly of negroes drawn from all the plantations on the
island gather around the fire. He's curious how the Muney slaves sing and play
easily tonight. Not so the slave from the Malmedy. Pierre Muney is a man of
honor. They say his son has returned. We are not regarded as human. But as
machines, Antonio. You still intend to leave. Shh. Malmedy will give any one of
these a reward for putting a runaway. Lazer, the lion of Andron is scared. I am
weary. Weary of this wretched life, where these whites will never be humiliated
and made to work 18 hours a day. I'd like to make them pay. Beat them with
sticks. I must go back to Andron or die here. It is too far. I will swim as long
as I have strength. Then, when I can swim no longer, I will take a last look at
the sky where the great spirit is waiting for me. That would be better than
being a slave. Why not wait? We are slaves today, but perhaps in a month, three
months a year, we shall be masters. My hope has been beaten out of me. There is
only one thing that keeps me here. The rose of the Black River. You'll never
marry her. But I will watch her by the river one more time tomorrow. She doesn't
know of your existence. A fantasy. At least I have my roof and my food. This too
is a fantasy if you think you own those things. Come with me, friend. Die, fool.
I head to the ocean tomorrow without you. I'll miss you, Lazer. Hey, mate.
Thanks for the scenes you sent. Not a complete draft, though. You'll be getting
a full draft soon. I just thought you might want to see how it was going. I
really liked it. Yeah. The spirit of Dumas... I got some notes. Oh, okay. I just
think some of it's a little bit OTT. How do you mean? I know it's an anti-racist
thing, but sometimes you go a little bit too far. What, too black? Come on,
mate. This is an adventure, not Speaker's Corner. And what did you do to Lazer?
I didn't want to make them pay and beat them with sticks, and you can't go
around saying these whites. What do you mean? Aren't we going more for Martin
Luther King than Malcolm X? We need the black characters Georges is fighting for
to be sympathetic. It might just end up falling into that magical Negro trope,
though. Magical what? Despite Lee came up with it. Oh, I love Spike. Yeah, it's
where the black sidekick character is morally perfect and inoffensive, so the
white audience thinks all black characters are like Sydney Poitiers. I like that
Lazer is a bit spicy. He's got a bit of seasoning. I thought as a writer of
colour I could actually share some of the breadth of the black experience. You
know, he's an African noble, a warrior. Look, it's Radio Formate. They're on our
side. Just let people into the black experience gently. Like reggae reggae
sauce? No! Get back to the spirit of Dumas. But all that making these whites pay
stuff was straight out of the original novel. Was it? Well, what I'm saying is
make it your own. Just not too controversial. We need to keep people engaged.
Otherwise, they'll just turn over to classic FM or something. People tune in for
something gently stimulating, not to be... Challenged....offended. Bye. Here we
go with the reggae reggae sauce then. Sarah? Sarah, where are you going? I'm
going for a walk, Uncle. You're attached to that fan you bought from the
Chinaman. It is a pretty fan. It had better be for 20 PRsters. A surprise to be
paid for a slave before the British put a stop to it. At least they let us keep
them. Did that stranger mention the Governor when you spoke to him? Lord Murray?
No, sir. I guess he speaks many languages. It's just the type of fellow I'd want
in my office. What? That fop? If anything, his countenance is... suggestive of
melancholy and distinction. All of this we shall know soon. We've been invited
to the Governor's dinner and the ball that follows. And surely the stranger will
be there too. Wonderful, Uncle. What do you mean? That we are going to a ball.
Do not be overly fond of dancing, my dear. You must manage your nature if you
are to be my honoree's wife and not be running to extremes the way you do. Do
not expect me to be in the way of other women, Uncle. And how they steer in
between frankness and concealment by reticence of speech. Cousin Henry, you've
agreed that when we are married, you will allow me my independence and not
oppose me. Oh, of course. Pardon me, sirs. I'm going for a walk down by the
River Noire. You need to marry her soon. Get that child to grow up. She is
spirited, Father, but we know where her loyalty lies. But Sarah had planned
something other than just a walk. She had promised herself to bathe in the
clear, tranquil waters of the River Noire. Nice, beautiful rose. Oh, my days,
this scene. Are you enjoying it? It's a bit fantastical. Oh, fantastic. I mean
more bar-fetched. Look, we're about to have a shark attack in a river on a naked
white woman with a lovelorn black man spying on her nearby. It's brilliant. Not
the word I'd use. Can I ask you something personal? Please, we are both mulatto.
You've got all these amazing dramatic elements, but what were you trying to say?
I suppose you could say I was angry. About racism? In part, liberty, equality,
fraternity. The revolution meant the end of slavery for France. So in 1794,
slavery was abolished. Freedom and equality for all men. Yes, even before your
Britain, so quickly claimed to being the emancipators. But to France's shame,
not two months before I was born, the Republic had reinstated slavery under
Napoleon's reign. Short man syndrome. Maybe white man syndrome. These whites.
Yet we are also white as well as black. Still, my father had nothing good to say
about his time with Napoleon. It seemed he never wanted to see a man of color
outstrip him. Wait. So you're that new Napoleon Napoleon? When my father joined
the Republican army, he was proud of the principles of the revolution. Despite
prejudice, he fought to be seen as an equal, and he succeeded. Until that his
Napoleon became a general also, and seeing my father as a rival, slighted him.
Wow. So this is about your dad? Perhaps when I started writing. But I quickly
realized, in truth, this is about a nation, the world. While I was a talker,
Paris, I learned men of color were still enslaved in the colonies. So you wrote
a novel? Why didn't you try and run for office or something? There are malmedies
in government also. What better to have an advocate upon the page? In a romantic
novel? My work was not read by those who read political journals. George was
written for the little man, one who hears of the average man accomplishing great
things. It does get a bit far-fetched, though. Jump the shark or shoot the
shark. Shouldn't you be more serious if you're trying to illuminate real world
issues? Keep in mind this is an entertainment. It won't help any Negro or
molasses if it is a flop. Swashy, swashy, buckle, buckle. No! Mademoiselle,
Sarah! Get away from here! Look, a shark! A shark! A shark! Aah! Aah! Aah! Aah!
Aah! Aah! Aah! Aah! Aah! It's getting close to you! I can't breathe to you! I
cannot breathe to you! Aah! Just as a shark opens its greater jaws to tear into
the girdle, two shots ring out, two bullets following each other with the
rapidity of lightning. The animal can bounce us in the water. These are fought
with the ferocity of his ancestors. Aneem Just as a shark opens its greater jaws
to tear into the girdle, two shots ring out, two bullets following each other
with the rapidity of lightning. The animal can bounce us in the water. These are
fought with the ferocity of his ancestors. Aneem Aneem Aneem Aneem Aneem Aneem
Aneem Aneem Aneem Aneem Mama Moselle, the shark is dead. You covered it in
blood. You saved my life. It was not I who saved you. It was the man who shot
from behind that tree. Who was it? Who shot? As a bloody laser left to make his
escape from the island, a shaken server made her way back to Zamandi Plantation.
I compliment you that your natural colour has returned. It is as if the incident
had never occurred. You see, Ori? Our cousin displays great fortitude. She will
be a... a sturdy wife. A sturdy wife? Why, thank you. You had one of the Negroes
dive in the water and a mystery rifle fight for you. Have you any idea who it
was? I'm as mystified as you are. Well, we men have to fend for ourselves, I'm
afraid. We were brave on our hunt today, weren't we, gentlemen? We caught a
lion. A lion? And to your bravery, then, my fiance, all of you. Yes, yes, to
bravery. To bravery. Yes, bring in the lion. He's a slave. Funny-looking lion?
What's his name? Laser. Ah, yes, you call yourself the lion of somewhere, don't
you? I am the Lion of Anshuan, son of King Zana, not born to be a slave. That
didn't work out, did it? 150 lashes. 150? The usual punishment, my dear. We
caught him rounding the Cape in a canoe two miles out to sea. Why don't you
bring him now? It's time for pudding. A curious thing. He had been one of our
best workers, and then the one who sings for us tells me that... Antonio? Yes,
and he tells me that this one has been making a canoe and he is plotting to use
it. Shretcherie. Uncle. Sarah. I ask you, please, let him be released. What?
This man here dived in the water to save me this morning. He risked his life for
me. He shouldn't be punished on the same day. If I show mercy, our whole
plantation would try to escape. We must set an example, you see. And they'll
lose value. No-one wants a negro that's trying to escape. I might have got 400
Piaosters for this one, but today he wouldn't fetch 300. I will pay a thousand.
There's a box. It's out. It's my honor to save the life of the ladies and to
serve her will again. How the devil did you get in here? Ah! From the harbour,
Monsieur. Except in the first place, my thanks. My niece says she owes her life
to you. Mademoiselle. My uncle is right, sir. It is a service that cannot be
repaid. I hardly think two bullets and some charges of gun power to warrant such
thanks. I will consider myself fortunate if Monsieur Malmedy might accept the
offer I have made for this slave. I have much need of him. I see. Henri, he
slighted me over the horse. We can replace a negro easily in a day or two. Her
slavership is due soon. Must we? Yes. Take him with our thanks. I would spare
him work for a few days, have him punished tonight if you... Monsieur is my
business now. I will send a thousand Piaostas to you this very evening. Ah,
wait, Monsieur. I think you have misunderstood my meaning. I wish to give you
this slave as a gift. We can at least offer you something you say you need in
return for saving my niece. That was not our agreement. Please, take him for the
sake of someone whose life you saved. Then I insist no longer. It is now I who
am in your debt. You settle them. Take the wretch. Now, pudding. Untain this
man. He belongs to me now. Listen, you're free. Go where you will. What? What
are you doing, sir? The honourable thing. Thank you, sir. Take these purses of
gold also. Master? Not master. You have freedom. Your freedom. Go. This is an
outrage. Good evening. I must excuse myself, sirs. Mademoiselle Sarah.
Gentlemen. Who does this man think he is? Or more to the point, who in damnation
is he? Ah, good evening. The next day, all of Portland was abuzz with
anticipation for the dinner and all at the government house. Even one accustomed
to the elegance of the European capitals would be impressed by the dazzling
effect given by such an assembly in Mauritius. It is impressive, isn't it? They
say Lord Murray has redecorated the residents in three days. Astonishing. And he
has the manner of a true English gentleman. They say he was once a captain of a
mighty warship. Hmm. He'd been waiting ten minutes. Everyone of any rank or
standing is here. What other guest is he waiting for? At that moment, the
mysterious rifleman, liberator of the Lyon of and our story's hero arrived. Why,
it's him. Son of Pierre Munier. So that's who he is. Yes. Georges Munier, the
shame of it. And the latter in such company. It's suspicious of him from the
start. The dinner progressed pleasantly. Georges, with an impressive combination
of intelligence, modesty and wit, answered every question from the governor.
What do you think of this vagrancy bill in parliament, Munier? To me, it is more
puzzling that they would propose such a punitive bill to a more vagabonds inside
parliament than out. Well said, well said. He answered in a way that not only
showed an awareness of the world of politics, but also the world of commerce.
What do you say, Monsieur Munier, about the price of sugar? The current boom in
the sugar industry may indeed be followed by a slump, resulting in bankruptcies
and difficulty, yes, but you must also be mindful of the welfare of the slaves.
We know all your feelings about that. And he showed the breadth of his military
experience to all the officers in attendance. Perhaps if the British army failed
at anything, it was underestimating the Ashanti Kingdom. Do that again, and it
may not only be a general who loses his head. In all this, he revealed a sham
learned in the salons of Paris. Munier? We can only speak of the benefits of
free trade if it does not impede the freedom of man. And you ladies too, of
course. A sham appreciated by the many bells seated at the table, including one
Sarah Malvidey, who sat within nonchalance and unconstrained grace. Yet, hiding
behind this reserve, one could detect the merest flush of scarlet on her cheeks,
that of the keen observer betrays that her eyes and thoughts were indeed focused
on Georges Munier alone. Ah! Well, my dear, what do you think of the dinner?
Lord Murray did the honours of his table admirably. Hmm, and I am therefore
greatly astonished that he should have run the risk of compromising us all. In
what way? By inviting Monsieur Georges Munier to dine with us at the same table.
That is unkind, cousin. If I alone am forbidden to make this remark, then you
should be forbidden for staring at him also. I did not. That is not what I
perceived. If not for Georges Munier and his rifle, you would now be in mourning
and tears. I acknowledge all that. We gave him that slave, didn't we? Thank you,
cousin, for valuing my life at the sum of a thousand piaestors. Good heavens, my
dear Sarah, how strangely you twist things tonight. I have only come and spoken
to you now simply to point out what a false position Lord Murray has put any
lady in if she were invited to dance by Monsieur Georges. Then, in your opinion,
my dear Henri, that lady should decline? Undoubtedly. Without reflecting that by
declining she offers a man who has rendered a great service an insult, an insult
for which he may demand satisfaction. Then he should have the wisdom to suppose
that a white man would not condescend to measure swords with a mulatto. And if
he doesn't share your wisdom? Then he may share the fate of any unruly negro. He
approaches with the governor. Now, think on the risks of exposing either my
father or myself to the disrespect of Monsieur Georges and the imprudence if you
were to dance with him should he have the effrontery to ask you. Then I shall
dance with no one, sir. Ah, Lord Murray. Monsieur Malmedy, Mademoiselle. Here is
a fellow traveller of mine who is perhaps a too scrupulous observer of European
customs and therefore does not venture to ask you to dance before being
introduced to you. So allow me then to introduce one of the most distinguished
men of my acquaintance, Monsieur Georges Munier. Ah, myself and Monsieur Munier
are old acquaintances. It is due to his coolness and bravery that I, with the
pleasure of being present at your delightful evening. Ah-ha, the shark.
Evidently so. Then I leave you with my protege. I hope his request will stand on
his own merits. Mademoiselle Sarah, would you grant me the honour of a dance?
Ah, um... Sarah? I hope he will forgive me. I am not dancing tonight. I have
just refused my cousin, so tonight I dance with no one. Is that so? Excuse me.
The quadrille begins and I must find someone a little more......disposed to
dance. Ah. I see. Yes. This is a great pity that you do not dance. In fact, I
feel so unwell because of my alarm yesterday that I fear I must ask my uncle to
take me home. You are resolved to leave us. Alas. I thank you. Miss you? I think
I understand what has transpired. You have a good heart. Miss your Monier?
Mademoiselle, when I left Europe, my one hope was to meet a heart like yours. I
did not expect to do so. I mean, since the day of my arrival, I cherished a
dream and should that dream be realized, I should be the happiest of men. Sir.
Have I offended you? No. I am simply taken by surprise. As am I. I see the two
of you have not danced. Mademoiselle, Sarah is leaving us. I must ask my uncle
to... Ah. Let your uncle and cousin stay and enjoy the ball. I will inform them
and give orders for my own courage to be put to your use immediately. They
should provide such a beautiful flower as you, a most pleasant journey home.
Thank you, my lord. This way. Good night, Miss your Monier. I am sorry we did
not dance. We must simply wait our turn. Why the love story? And both the
mulatto hero and the negro want the white woman. I mean, how does that relate
to... As we have said, the reason we discuss history is to understand our
present predicament. The frame. At the time of writing, I was in love with my
Ida. Right. Ida Fourier, a great activist. More than any woman, all my mistress
is. She was the one I truly loved. This love story, though, is a bit, you know,
she barely knows him and falls in love. A few words, really, and... Like myself
and Ida. Right. But why a white woman as the love interest in an anti-slavery
novel? A marriage of equals. Therefore, it proves a colored man is worthy and
capable of the most divine virtue, love. What about a black woman? True love
always makes a man better, no matter the woman that inspires it. Nah, I hear
that, of course. Love is love. It's funny, but there are one too many resonances
across time. I mean, where I am, we've got this myth of being in a post-racist
society, but it's still here. Even in the literary circles, where we think we're
all right on, people of color are still marginalised. The names may have
changed. But we are offered the same injury. Mm. I mean, your ashes were only
put in a pantheon of Paris in 2002. Pardon? On a bicentenary of your birth. So
long? When was Ugo put in there? I think that was... 1885. Now, there. 1885.
What about Emile Zola? I don't know. Probably a few years after he died,
actually. 1908. Why so long for me? 200 years? They didn't see me as worthy.
Racism. Partly, I think. You're still in the pantheon, though, bro. Maybe this
adaptation is turning into a pretty mulatto adaptation. Can't be too much this
or that. Nothing too controversial. Nothing too foreign. All I'm really worried
about is that it turns into a soppy life. Have you no soul? Romeo and Juliet
brought down two houses. George and Sarah will bring down slavery. He didn't
know, did he? Then we will change it. This is why I am here. It shall be
revolutionary for my time and yours. We shall astonish your patron with literary
ambition. To the pantheon! I thought 14 years of British rule might have killed
the prejudice. I thought 14 years of British rule might have killed the
prejudice which I came back to refute. I was mistaken. Nothing remains but that
the boxer should wrap his knuckles and step into the arena. Will you not be
encountering windmills rather than giants, my dear Don Cajote? I leave you to
judge. Yesterday I saved Mademoiselle's life. Do you know how her cousin Henry
thanked me for it tonight? By forbidding her to dance with me. Why did he do
this? Because I am a mulatto. What do you intend to do? I have decided this very
evening. No longer will I wait and hope. In three months I will be Mademoiselle
Sarah's husband. Dear friend, take care in your actions. I have only been here
this three days, but I have already perceived this island has many hidden
dangers. Thank you, my lord. I know the island well. And despite changing its
name from the Isle of France, the Mauritius, it still offers me the same injury.
Providence has brought me back for a purpose I could not have foreseen. My mind
is set not merely for the satisfaction of my pride. But now for love. Hya!
George and the writer were played by Jamail Westman. Dumand Pierre by Peter
Landy. Sarah by Kimberley Cochran. And James, Telemak and Antonio by Aditomio
Eddle. Malmody was played by David Acton. Honoree by Samuel James. Lord Murray
by Ewan Bailey. And Mika Mika by Chaik Chan. Lazer and Young Jacques were played
by Dara Hand. Young Georges by Ryan Sheeher. And Young Honoree by Zach Barker.
Georges was written by Alexandra Dumas and dramatized by Testament. It was a BBC
Audio-Drama North production directed by Gary Brown. George concludes next week.
This is BBC Radio 4. Explore the world of arts and culture on front row. The
atmosphere changes, the hair stuff... We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. No. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on
Radio 4 at 7.15.