TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 That's one hell of a build up. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Nick
Robinson and Amol Rajan. It's eight o'clock on Thursday the 2nd of March, the
headlines this morning. Newly released government WhatsApp messages show Matt
Hancock fought to get schools closed in England as Covid cases rose at the end
of 2020, putting him at odds with the Education Secretary Gavin Williamson.
Isabel Oakeshott, the journalist who obtained the messages, has said Matt
Hancock sent her a menacing message after they were published and he has denied
this. Police are continuing to question a couple after the discovery of a baby's
body near Brighton. The Manchester Arena bombing inquiry will publish its final
report today, focusing on the role of the security services. The BBC News is
read by Jane Steel. Newly released WhatsApp messages involving the former Health
Secretary Matt Hancock suggest he sought to have schools in England closed as
the number of Covid cases rose towards the end of 2020. In the latest messages
published by the Daily Telegraph, Mr Hancock told an aide they needed to fight a
rearguard action to change the government's mind. But the Education Secretary
Sir Gavin Williamson wanted to keep them open. Here's our chief political
correspondent Nick Hurdley. The latest revelations lay bare the bitter row over
whether to keep schools in England open in early 2021. Matt Hancock accused
Gavin Williamson of going gangbusters, fighting tooth and nail to stop closures.
Mr Hancock's aide said Mr Williamson had been freaking out and wasn't being
rational. After the government decided not to close schools, Mr Hancock pledged
to fight a rearguard action to change the policy to prevent what he described as
a policy car crash. As the rows played out in government, many parents and
pupils were left in a confusing situation. The government's public position
changed almost daily at the time before a national lockdown was eventually
announced. In a piece for the Telegraph, Gavin Williamson said the decision to
close schools at the time was taken for the wrong reasons. He questions whether
he should have resigned. Mr Hancock's spokesman described the accounts as
partial and agenda driven and said a public inquiry was the right place for a
full assessment. The latest messages also contain an exchange between Matt
Hancock and Sir Gavin Williamson in which they criticised teaching unions. The
messages were sent in May 2020 when schools in England were preparing to reopen
following the first Covid lockdown. More details from our education editor,
Bramwen Jeffries. The leak of an apparent exchange from May 2020 between the
then Health Secretary and Education Secretary is emerging at a highly sensitive
time. In it, Matt Hancock is reported as describing the teaching unions as
absolute arses, with Sir Gavin Williamson replying saying they just hate work.
The Telegraph says this followed a discussion about whether PPE could be
supplied to schools. Sir Gavin has responded to the publication by saying the
messages were about some unions, not teachers, for whom he says he has the
utmost respect. Jeff Barton from the head teachers' union, Askell, described the
messages as snide insults at the heart of an utter shambles. The top team in
government has changed, but these leaks are emerging in the middle of a dispute
over teachers' pay and workload. There is currently a stand-off with strikes in
England due to continue until mid-March. Isabel Oakshott, the journalist who
provided the Daily Telegraph with the cache of WhatsApp messages told this
programme that even though she'd signed a non-disclosure agreement, not one
journalist worth their salt would have sat on material with such a huge public
interest. And she described how Matt Hancock contacted her after the first
Telegraph story appeared yesterday. I'm saying that he sent me a message at 1.20
in the morning. It wasn't a pleasant message. Well, is that a surprise? I'm not
complaining about it. I'm not complaining about it. I think the use of the word
threatening or menacing is damaging to his reputation. Oh, look. And people are
entitled to know. I have so much more that I could say. Mr Hancock has denied
sending Miss Oakshott a menacing message. A post-mortem examination is to be
carried out on the body of a baby found by police searching for the missing
child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The remains were discovered in an
area of woodland near Brighton, close to where the couple were detained on
Monday. Frankie McHamly reports from Brighton. The development was announced at
an urgent news conference yesterday evening, shortly after police said there had
been a significant update. Officers confirmed a baby's remains had been found in
woodland in Brighton, close to where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were
arrested on Monday. Local residents have left candles next to a police cordon
where searches were carried out earlier in the week. In the woodland nearby, a
police tent has been erected as the investigation continues to find out exactly
what happened to the infant. Miss Martin and Mr Gordon remain in police custody
after being arrested on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The final
report from the public inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing will be
published this afternoon and will concentrate on the role of the security
services. 22 people were killed in the blast which happened after a concert by
the singer Ariana Grande in 2017. From Manchester, Nick Garnett reports. The
first two reports into the bombing almost six years ago concentrated on the
events immediately surrounding the terrorist attack, the planning, policing and
preparation for the concert, and the response of the emergency services
immediately afterwards. This third and final report by the inquiry chairman Sir
John Saunders will focus on what the intelligence and counterterrorism services
knew about the attacker Salman Abedi. Much of the evidence was heard behind
closed doors, only the chairman and his legal team were allowed to hear what was
said by MI5 officers who were called to give evidence. The key question is
straightforward. Could the bombing have been prevented? Those injured, and the
relatives of the men, women and children who were killed, hope the report will
go some way to answering that. 43 people are now confirmed to have died in
Greece's worst rail crash. A passenger train collided head on with one carrying
freight near the city of Larissa. Our Europe correspondent Nick Beek is there.
Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has angered many Greeks with his swift
assessment given at the scene of the country's worst ever rail disaster that it
can be blamed on tragic human error. A 59-year-old station master has been
charged with manslaughter by negligence, but there were repeated warnings over
many years about the safety of the rail network. Outside one of the hospitals
where the bodies of victims have been brought hangs a banner claiming that any
systemic failings will be covered up in the official investigation now underway.
Inside the wards, families have been arriving to give DNA samples so that their
missing loved ones may be identified. The government plans to build additional
special free schools in England for children and young people with special
educational needs and disabilities. There will be an extra 33 of the schools on
top of the 49 already approved. Ministers are also boosting numbers of special
needs coordinators and educational psychologists. Charities say the system is in
crisis, with children who need support facing long delays before receiving it.
The Education Secretary Gillian Keegan said the extra resources would make a
difference. They need extra support. That support should be available. You
shouldn't need to get an EHCP plan to make sure that that support is available.
So that's one of the things we're also doing with mainstream schools. This is
for everybody, just to improve how we deal with special educational needs. Now
it will take time because it is complex. New research suggests thousands of
households which have their benefits capped to encourage people back into
employment can't work because of caring or health reasons. The charity, the
Child Poverty Action Group, says they're being unfairly penalised. The
government says the cap balances fairness for taxpayers with providing a vital
safety net and that many of the most vulnerable claimants are exempt. Here's our
social affairs correspondent, Michael Buchanan. The benefit cap was introduced
in 2013 and limits the amount of money that a working age household can receive
in welfare payments to £20,000 per annum or £23,000 in Greater London. Part of
its rationale is to encourage those whose benefits are capped to find work or a
better paying job. But data from a Freedom of Information request by the Child
Poverty Action Group shows that 34% of households, around 38,000 families, are
not required to work by the Department for Work and Pensions due to being unwell
or having caring responsibilities for someone, including children under three.
The charity is calling on the cap to be removed, arguing it doesn't incentivise
work and leaves children hungry. Leading universities and health charities are
calling for increased science collaboration between the UK and the EU after a
breakthrough on post-Brexit trading arrangements in Northern Ireland. The group
said there had been a damaging impasse in co-operation, which saw Britain being
blocked from a major European science scheme. Our Brussels correspondent,
Jessica Parker, reports. Britain negotiated associate membership to the EU's
multi-billion pound Horizon research programme for after Brexit, but it was
never ratified by Brussels as the dispute about arrangements for Northern
Ireland rumbled on. Now a fresh deal there has been agreed in principle, hopes
are rising for a resolution on Horizon. While the European Commission has been
giving positive signals, it's also suggested full admission will depend on the
new deal for Northern Ireland actually being implemented. The British Heart
Foundation, Cancer Research UK and the Russell Group of Research-Intensive
Universities are among signatories of a joint statement today calling for rapid
progress on Horizon, saying that the UK and EU face the same challenges from
fighting cancer to climate change. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed
they've been asked to vacate their home in the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the
grounds of Windsor Castle was given to the couple by the Queen in 2019. Thanks
very much indeed, Jane. The time now is ten past eight. Did ministers make the
right decisions and for the right reasons when trying to protect our children
from COVID-19? At the time, the then Children's Commissioner Anne Longfield
supported the first lockdown, but subsequently and repeatedly made the case that
schools should have been, and I quote, last to close and first to open. On the
5th of August 2020, she published a paper with 10 points aimed essentially at
getting schools to open faster, so long as it was safe. I quote again,
education, she said, should be prioritised over other sectors. Four days later,
she expressed dismay that schools were staying closed while businesses such as
theme parks reopened. In a moment, Nick will speak to the schools minister, Nick
Gibb. But before that, Anne Longfield, who is now chair of the Commission on
Young Lives, joins us again. Anne, good morning. Good morning. Good morning.
We'll dive into the detail and there is a lot of detail, such as we have it in a
moment. Just before we do that, what do you make, I just want your general
impressions, what do you make of what you've seen in the Telegraph overnight?
Well, I think what we've seen is an extraordinary look behind the scenes of how
decisions were made or seem to be made. And what it shows is what so many of us
thought was happening at the time, that children were at best being forgotten
often in decision making, but at worst, potentially overlooked. There was always
another game in town in terms of decisions. There's always another priority and
the priorities always come first. And as you say, that moment where schools
remain closed in June, but pubs, shops, theme parks, and even zoos opened, but
children stayed at home. And of course, that went on. It was the largest
disruption in education and children's lives since World War One. And children
are living with those consequences now. But it all goes to the level of priority
children's well-being gets at the top of government. And that fell short at the
time and what we can see now. I'm so sorry to interrupt, but can we just make
explicit what I think you made implicit there, which is you say there's always
another game in town. There are always other priorities. So forgive me, what are
you talking about there? What was the other game in town that led to the
decisions that you suggest were wrong? Yeah. So of course, in June when pubs
opened, shops opened, there were strong lobbies in terms of the economy. Of
course, that was very important. There was strong lobbies in terms of other
aspects of society. Children didn't get that understanding. There wasn't an
understanding of the well-being and the impact of what staying at home would be.
So they're always down in the pecking order of decision making, which didn't
happen in other countries. In other countries, some other countries, children
were at the forefront. Governments tried from the start to make sure that
children's lives were disrupted as lesser amount as possible. In that case, let
me ask you about some specific, I was discussing this with Nick before we came
on air. The Telegraph reports this morning that Chris Whitty was asked at one
point whether there is any reason to advocate the wearing of face masks to make
them mandatory basically. And Chris Whitty seems ambivalent. Hancock, it seems
according to what we read, seems to have pressed ahead with recommending
mandating face masks. And the suggestion is that it seems partly motivated by
the need to stand up to Nicola Sturgeon, who is doing similar in Scotland. What
do you make of that? So I was given the same advice by scientists that actually
it wouldn't be necessary to improve resilience to the infection. But actually,
some said it might make it worse because kids would be touching the face masks.
I felt that if face masks, if it took face masks to get children into school,
especially for those that needed it, then absolutely fine. What I think is so
disappointing here is that it was political expediency that won the argument.
One other specific issue. In Scotland and Wales, they had more to say on the
rule of six than in England. Why was that significant in your view? Yeah, and
that goes to the heart of the lack of understanding around children's lives. We
had the rule of six was how many people could get together. But in Scotland,
they realised that big families with several children would struggle with that
to meet others, to meet grandparents. And they exempted the children under 12
from that rule so they could. We didn't do that here. We needed a national
effort for children, but we got a series of kind of pinball decisions that were
just made, often on the hoof, but often in quite contradictory ways. I must ask
you, Anne, what you make of the disparaging comments that Hancock and Williamson
seem to be texting each other about the teaching unions? Well, I felt at the
time, I mean, they're beyond unhelpful and inexcusable, really, given the
seriousness of the situation. At the time, I felt that it had descended into
squabbling at that point, and the focus on children had been lost. That clear
focus was needed all the time by all of those in a position of power. And from
what we can see there, that wasn't the case through these messages. Anne
Longfield, Chair of the Commission on Young Lives. Thank you very much indeed
for joining us. Well, listening to that at quarter past eight is the Schools
Minister, Nick Gibb, who joins us on the line from Westminster. Good morning to
you, Mr Gibb. Good morning, Nick. You've got important announcements on special
educational needs. We've been discussing them throughout the programme, and
we'll come to those in a moment if we could. Can I ask you first though to
address what it seems to me is the most important thing underlying the
revelations that we just heard from the former Children's Commissioner there.
Children in this country were at best being forgotten, at worst overlooked
during the pandemic. And she said this did not happen in other countries. No,
that's not true. We always took decisions based on what was in the best
interests of children. We also had to deal with what was a very new pandemic, a
virus against which humans did not have any immunity. We were always reliant on
and followed the advice of the Chief Medical Officer and the evidence that was
emerging. Day by day, new evidence was emerging as the scientists were learning
about this virus. And from that new experience and those lessons, we were then
taking decisions about what to do in schools where, you know, eight million
children were in very close quarters. But we did always want to do everything we
could to keep schools open. But you didn't keep them open. So in a sense, we're
entitled to explore this, aren't we? Because they weren't kept open in this
country. They were kept open in other countries. And isn't the reality that, of
course, you had to listen to the scientific advice, but politicians are paid to
make judgments. They're elected to make judgments. And in this case, do you
agree with Gavin Williamson that you may have taken the wrong one, that you
should have kept the schools open? Well, that's the kind of issue that the Covid
inquiry will look at in great detail. We had to take decisions. They were taken
on an hourly basis, a daily basis. And they were very difficult decisions
because this whole virus was very new and we were learning about it. So
decisions were taken. Did you argue for them to stay open in the way that he
did? Did you think of resigning when the argument went against the Education
Department? No, no, we listened very carefully to the evidence and we discussed
those issues very carefully about whether schools should remain open. But
ultimately, the decision was taken right across government that schools should
close. And then we had to make sure that we were doing everything we could to
make sure that children could continue their education at home, which is why we
were procuring millions of laptops and computers for children. But did you
argue, just so I'm clear for the history books, did you argue that they should
stay open? Well, look, I was on the more cautious side of this issue in terms of
how we dealt with how we deal with the pandemic. But all those issues...
Cautious meaning, you know, you should keep them closed? No, I wanted to make
sure we did everything that was right for children. Of course, we want to keep
schools open. Of course, we didn't want to cancel exams. We wanted children to
continue to learn. But once that decision was taken on the grounds of health,
then, of course, we had to do what was in the best interest of tackling the
pandemic. Well, you see, you say on the grounds of health and you've used the
phrase led by science and you did each time you came on the programme. And we
understand these are really, really difficult judgments in a fast moving
situation with very little history to draw on. But when it comes to masks, what
we learn from the messages that have been released today is the decision was
about politics, not about science. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, was
asked for his opinion and he said there are no very strong reasons for wearing
masks in schools. But the decision was taken that masks would be worn in English
schools because it would be embarrassing otherwise because Scotland had taken
the different view. Well, I don't recognise that or recall that. I do recall
some very long discussions about the efficacy of children wearing masks in
schools. I visited a school early on in the pandemic before there were schools
closed where children were, you know, the school had decided that children would
wear masks. And I looked to see how comfortable those children were and they
seemed very content to be wearing them throughout the school day. There was a
discussion about how important it was to protect teachers who are facing a class
of 30 children from, you know, from spray to make sure that they were protected.
There was a discussion about the virus spreading on school transport and so on.
Understood. But we know what happened now. We don't need to sort of guess. The
Cabinet Secretary Simon Case wrote a message that has now been revealed. Unless
Chris Patrick, he says, in other words, the scientific adviser and the medical
adviser, are willing to go out and say that the Scots are wrong, I think some
nervous parents will freak out about this happening in Scotland, but not in
England. So in other words, even though there was not scientific evidence for
wearing masks in schools having a benefit, ministers in England chose to order
them to be worn in schools. And there are people who think that that was very
damaging to those children and their education. Well, I don't recall the
decision being made on that basis. I recall discussions about the medical
evidence for whether, for example, would children just touch the mask? Would
they go through the hygiene process in terms of handling a used mask and so on?
Those are the discussions that I recall. But again, all this will come out in
this very important Covid inquiry. So we learn what to do if this ever happens
again. One last one before we turn to special educational needs. Do you agree
with Matt Hancock, who describes the teaching unions in a message as, quote, a
bunch of absolute arses? Or do you agree with the then education secretary or
boss, Gavin Williamson, who described them in this way? They really do just hate
work. Or do you agree with them both? No, of course, I don't agree with those
phrases. And I don't think those ministers either really believe that. People
say things in the heat of an argument that they then regret. But actually, I
know... They're not in an argument. They're talking to each other. They weren't
in an argument. They were talking to each other about what they thought about
the education union. In the heat of the dispute with the unions, for example.
But actually, I know that Gavin has the highest regard for the teaching
profession. His wife is a primary school teacher. And I know how hard teachers
work, not just during the pandemic, but particularly during the pandemic,
keeping schools open for vulnerable children, the children of critical workers,
providing remote education for children at home. And also when schools are open,
enforcing all the Covid security rules within the school. So they worked
tremendously hard during that period. Now, Mr Gibb, as I promised, I promise
you, I promise the listeners we'll get to special educational needs. So sorry to
interrupt you, but I want to give you the chance to do that. I know you're
announcing new special schools. I know you're announcing new national standards.
Can you address the concerns we've heard on the programme from charities and
parents who say yes to all that, we welcome it, but we're worried there simply
isn't the resource needed? Look, we want to make sure that children with special
educational needs have the best possible education to help them overcome their
needs. And we want to make sure that that acrimony that exists between families
and the local authority is a thing of the past. I know from my own constituency,
the real problems families face in having their child assessed and getting an
EHCP plan so that they get the right provision. So what this school improved,
what this SEND AP improvement plan seeks to do, and it's groundbreaking work,
frankly, Nick, is to make sure that the provision in mainstream schools where
many children with moderate special educational needs have their education is
the right provision of high quality. So we're setting very high national
standards. We're training 5000 early years special educational needs teachers,
and we're opening 33 new schools in addition to the 49 that are in the pipeline.
Let me just pick up one of the things you said. You mentioned, it's a bit of
jargon, ECHP plans, it's what used to be called statementing, the idea that
there's a kind of legal agreement between the parent of a child with special
needs and the local authority about what they are entitled to. Now, lots of
parents hated them, they involved very expensive and painful legal processes,
but they did give them some sort of legal guarantee if they got one, that they
get the provision needed. The worry many parents have who are listening to this
programme is without that, they are the subject of the financial pressures that
any government is under and they might not get the money and resource they need.
Now the entitlement to an EHCP plan remains, but what we're trying to do is to
make them less necessary for children that are in mainstream schools. We want to
make sure that mainstream schools ordinarily have the right provision to support
those children. That's what this is all about, making sure that every local
school has the right provision for children with moderate special educational
needs and disabilities. It's a groundbreaking plan to achieve that. But we're
also spending £10 billion a year now on special educational needs and that has
risen by 50% just over the last four years. So it's a staggering amount of money
that we're putting into special educational needs because we recognise that
these are the most vulnerable children and they need to have the right
provision. And opening more special schools for children with more significant
special educational needs as well means that those children will get the right
provision to help them to cope with adult life after their education. Nick Gibb,
Schools Minister, thank you for joining us from Westminster. You may have heard
a little over an hour ago we had Isabel Oakeshott, the journalist who handed the
Matt Hancock messages to the Daily Telegraph and writes about it passionately.
She repeated on the programme that she'd been sent a threatening message from
Matt Hancock in response. We've had a statement in the last half hour or so from
Matt Hancock. Last night he says, I was accused of sending menacing messages to
Isabel. This is wrong. When I heard confused rumours of a publication late on
Tuesday night, I called and messaged Isabel to ask her if she had any clues
about it and got no response. When I then saw what she'd done, I messaged to say
it was a big mistake. Nothing more. And Mr Hancock goes on to say he won't be
commenting further on these stories. 25 past eight. Let's stay with the issue of
children, but in a very different context. We've tried to do our bit in recent
weeks to judiciously promote children's literature, reading generally by young
people. Our efforts are, of course, mere addendums to the efforts of countless
others, including those behind 500 Words, this country's most successful
children's writing competition. It was launched in 2011. It's relaunching this
September and it comes from BBC Teach and also our friends at BBC Breakfast. And
the brains behind it want your help. They're looking for teachers and librarians
across the country to register their interest or join judging panels to choose
the best entries. One of those who's going to be a judge is Charlie Higson, the
actor, comedian and author. He's a judge alongside the likes of Frank Cottrell-
Boyce and Sir Lenny Henry. And he joins us now. Charlie, good morning. Good
morning. Just tell us the basic idea behind this competition, would you please,
for those who don't know it? Well, it's very simple. It's for kids. And this
year it's going to be just primary school kids to write a story of no more than
500 words, which when you first look at it, you think, oh, that's rather short
to get anything in. But it's amazing what the kids managed to get into those 500
words and the huge diversity of the stories that they tell are absolutely
fabulous. How can people get involved? It will be very easy. It's being sort of
run through BBC Breakfast, but there'll be a lot of lot of information in
schools. And in terms of becoming a judge, there's a website. It's easy to find
the information if you go to any of the sort of BBC portals. 500 words, portals,
websites, portals. That's a nice 20 year old way of putting it. So there are a
couple of, I mean, promoting reading amongst kids is not obviously a
particularly controversial subject, but there are some really important issues
here. And I just want to get your perspective on a couple of them. One of them
is the closure of libraries. There are lots of people that we've heard speaking
on this programme who say that, you know, in recent years we have seen a lot of
libraries close and that is having an impact on access to books, which is
particularly a problem for kids from poorer communities. How worried are you
about that? Well, you know, it's particularly school libraries is a really
difficult thing. Getting funding for the libraries to have the books in the
schools and really importantly to try to get the librarians as well, because
they really know what's going on in the world of books and they get to know the
kids. They get to know the sort of books they might want to read. And you know,
the government is always tinkering with education and the best way to increase
kids literacy and stuff. And, you know, access to books and an excitement and
interest in books has got to be the core to that. And yet, you know, they are
happy to stand by to see school libraries diminish and public libraries, you
know, almost dying out now. Well, I think there's a pretty strong campaign to
stop that happening. And I guess in a way, 500 words is a part of it. Charlie
Higson, it's really good to talk to you and best of luck with the competition.
All right. Cheers. 28 minutes past eight. Gary's back with the sports news.
Morning, Gary. Morning. After last night's four FA Cup ties, this is how they
will line up in the quarter finals. Manchester City against Burnley. Manchester
United play Fulham. Sheffield United take on Blackburn. And Brighton will play
Grimsby. Grimsby sprung the night's big upset, winning 2-1 at Southampton. And
Sheffield United knocked out Spurs. We'll have more on the Grimsby story in
about 10 minutes. Arsenal are five points clear at the top of the Premier League
after the 4-0 win over Everton. Well, this time tomorrow, we'll have live
cricket as England play Bangladesh in the second one-day international. England
won the opening match by three wickets with eight balls to spare. What a
performance from David Millan, who scored 114 not out. I spoke to him
afterwards. Yeah, brilliant performance for us as a team to come out here and
win in these conditions. It's not easy. Bangladesh have a bit of a fortress out
here. They are exceptional in their own conditions. So for us to come away with
a win there, it's unbelievable, especially that first game of the series to come
over and get the win is fantastic. And when you saw they posted a score of 209,
what did you think? Did you think we'll be OK here? Yeah, initially I thought it
was OK. And then when I actually started batting, I thought, oh, my gosh, there
might be a few too many. But it is what it is. You know, they're fantastic in
their own conditions. I thought we bowled really well in the end to restrict
them to that total. I thought they were going to probably get a bit more with
the way they started and created some partnerships. And then at one point, I
thought, you know, it doesn't look like it's turning that much. It could be an
easy chase for us with that few runs. But credit to Bangladesh, they bowled
exceptionally well and kept taking wickets at the right time and put us under
pressure. It was a good game quicker in the end. And you mentioned the bowlers.
Good to see Mark Wood back doing what he does well, two for 34. Yeah, it's great
to see Joffer and Woody bowling together. It's far and few in between when we
get those two together. It's a fantastic asset for the team when you have both
of them fit and to see Woody back after having a bit of a break in the winter
with a test, to have him back bowling in the ODIs in the middle, bowling quick,
makes a massive difference to the team. So it's great to see him back. Now let's
get on to the star of the show, if I can call you that. 114 not out. What are
you feeling about that? Extremely satisfied to come here and score runs and not
only runs in general, but runs to win a game and be there at the end is
extremely satisfying. You know, I try and pride myself on winning games over
other things, you know, so to be there at the end and hit the winning runs, you
know, extremely satisfying. Yes. I mean, when you score a century like that,
does the feeling just get better and better? Yeah, it does. I think it depends
what situation of the game, you know, where we were at. You know, I felt we sort
of just got the game back to where we needed to be, where I thought, you know,
it's our game to lose. So you don't want to celebrate too much. You don't want
to get too excited and get your emotions too high in that situation. But, you
know, maybe if we needed four or five to win, it would have been different. But,
you know, it's just fantastic to contribute to winning games. The really
interesting thing is that with this little series seen as a bit of a warm up for
the World Cup, when you look at the way England batsmen are performing recently,
Harry Brooke, Joe Root, yourself, Jonny Bairstow when he's back, I mean, my
goodness, the selectors are going to have a real problem, aren't they? Yeah, I
guess that's the problem when their schedules overlap is you start giving guys
more opportunities than they probably would get if all the guys were fit and
available. You know, but you have Bairstow and Rooty who are guaranteed when
they come back. And so they should be with their records that they've had. And
then you've got Joss and Moeen as well, who are probably guaranteed starters.
And then Stokes, if he comes out of retirement and does a KP and comes out of
retirement and ODI cricket, then you've got another one. So we've got quite a
lot of batters fighting for two or three spots, you know, which I guess is great
for English cricket to have that competition, you know, and gives the selectors
a headache. Well done on what you've done so far. Congratulations. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Finally, some sad news to bring you. Bob Burrows, former
head of BBC Radio Sports Department here at Broadcasting House, has died. He was
head of the department between 1966 and 1980. And he was one of the great
producers on Sport Report, guiding the careers brilliantly of some of its young
presenters and producers. Bob Burrows was 83. Here are the racing selections.
Ludlow, three o'clock, number two, Java Point. Then we're off to Taunton, four
o'clock, number two, Camulus. Thanks Gary. Let's take a quick look at the
weather. Today we'll see bright spells for North West Scotland, Wales and
Southern England. Cloudy elsewhere. And then coming up at nine o'clock, Melvin
Bragg is going to be here in our time. Good morning. We'll be talking about
megaliths, stone monuments that have been built for thousands of years and are a
worldwide phenomenon. Often they have a spectacular appearance and can be seen
for miles around. In the British Isles, some of them are 6,000 years old and
studying them can give us a glimpse into the lives, beliefs and burial practices
of Neolithic people. That's Megaliths with Vicki Cummings, Susan Greeney and
Julian Thomas on In Our Time on BBC Sounds and Radio 4 this morning, just after
nine o'clock. Now back to today. Is it a monument or is it a megalith? Can't ask
questions like that, Melvin. Goodness me. Well, you can actually, and you
particularly can on Radio 4. You're listening to Today on Radio 4 with Nick
Robinson and Amol Rajan. It is 27 minutes to nine and here is a summary of the
news from Jane Steel. WhatsApp messages published by the Daily Telegraph suggest
the former Health Secretary Matt Hancock fought to have schools in England
closed in late 2020 as Covid cases rose, against the wishes of the then
Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson. Mr Hancock said the messages had been
released to give a biased account to suit an anti-lockdown agenda. The schools
minister Nick Gibb told us the government had wanted to keep schools open, but
that decisions during the pandemic had always been based on what was best for
children. Matt Hancock has said he is hugely disappointed by what he said was a
massive betrayal and breach of trust by the journalist Isabel Oakeshott, who
gave the WhatsApp messages to the Daily Telegraph. She has claimed he sent her a
menacing or threatening text when they were first published. He has denied this,
but said he told her it was a big mistake. A post-mortem examination will be
carried out on the body of a baby found near Brighton during the search for the
missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The final report from the
inquiry into the Manchester Arena bombing which killed 22 people in 2017 will be
published today. It will focus on the role of the security services. Jane thank
you very much indeed. It's 26 minutes to nine. Here's a story about a young boy
whose dream came true against all odds. In his early years he was diagnosed with
autism and global development delay. At the age of 11 he couldn't speak. At the
age of 18 he couldn't read or write. Yet today, aged 37, he's about to become
the youngest black person ever appointed to a professorship at Cambridge
University. From Clapham in South London and a schoolteacher before his academic
career really took off, his name is Jason Arday, Professor Jason Arday, and I
spoke to him just a few moments ago to reflect on his journey. I began by asking
him if when he was growing up in South London he ever imagined this would be his
future. To be quite honest to you young Joel, no, not at all. This is really
beyond my wildest expectations given that my only ambition was that I wanted to
be able to have enough money to buy McDonald's and that is God's honest truth. I
read that you also had a few sporting ambitions. You had certain ambitions in
the direction of football and snooker too, when it comes to careers. Yeah, when
it comes to careers. You're from Tooting so you'll know some really good snooker
clubs around there, famously frequented by Jimmy White. I played football to
quite a good level and really wanted to be a snooker player and got to a good
standard. But when you start playing national junior level you realise that
there's a big difference between being a very, very good club player and
actually having the potential and ability to become a professional snooker
player. Jimmy White's snooker club was at the bottom of my old road, Lessingham
Avenue in Tooting. Just describe if you would some of the challenges that you
face educationally. We read the headlines about your global development delay
and autism which we'll come on to. But as you went through primary and secondary
education, what sort of practical challenges did you face? That's great. I guess
the practical challenges in many respects were around when I arrived at
secondary school, I'd only just learned to speak. So, you know, that paralysis
of speech in some respects is a beautiful thing. I think sometimes people may
think of it as a deficit, but it's actually an amazing thing to be able to
observe the world happening around you and not being able to respond to that in
some ways. It's quite a powerful thing. Or you recognise that when you do then
have the ability to speak. The thing that becomes probably more difficult is
being able to articulate these words on the page. And the beauty of being able
to read and write or being literate is that it brings those words that kind of
resonate in the brain to life. And without that, there's kind of a disconnect in
terms of bringing together thoughts, feelings, patterns of emotion. And I guess
I didn't experience that until I was 18. It's so interesting you mentioned the
word brain, of course, because I wonder to what extent you think we have made
strides in recent years in understanding the benefits of neurodiversity,
including autism. I mean, we certainly talk about it more these days. We've got
the likes of Elon Musk and Greta Thunberg openly discussing their Asperger's.
Yeah. And I mean, and that's fantastic. I guess what's been really interesting
is seeing the kind of gradual emergence of that as a discourse and seeing people
in those positions discuss this. And I guess one of the things that's kind of
really important, at least from my perspective, is decided actually it's
becoming more and more prevalent for people to be diagnosed as neurodivergent in
their adult age. So one of the things that I'm kind of thinking about is what's
happening for these people to slip through certain nets within our education
systems globally for people to then be diagnosed, because there is a
disadvantage to being diagnosed as an adult, you know, because you kind of think
of all those educational opportunities and the positive outcomes that could have
had with an early diagnosis. So while I wouldn't advocate for someone to have a
diagnosis at three years old like I did, I do think there's some merit in having
a diagnosis at a useful age, you know, where you can still gain from the benefit
of that. Let's be frank about it. Your story is absolutely inspirational. How
did you challenge the narratives, the story, the stereotype that says, here's a
guy, he's not from a rich family, he's not from an academic family, he's got
autism, he can't speak until he's 11, he's got global development delay. And
here you are at the age of 37, you're about to become the youngest ever black
professor at Cambridge. How did you take that on? Did you have an innate
confidence? You had fantastic mentors, which we'll come to, but did you, how did
you challenge that? So I must admit the modesty of ambition didn't really arrive
until I was fortunate enough to meet, you know, some really important people who
really shaped my adult life from the age of 18. Obviously my mum was
instrumental in instilling some sort of belief, but I think given what the
experts in inverted commas had said in terms of educational and behavioural
psychologists, the horizon was pretty grim, to be quite honest. And one of the
things that I kind of sat with is this idea that I might actually not achieve
anything in life. And what's really interesting is that you develop a
comfortability with that. You kind of accept that that might be my lot, actually
maybe learning to speak was as good as it might get, and then cue the amazing
people I met, and then you end up on this kind of crazy ride. And the last kind
of 20 years has been quite surreal, to be quite honest. Do you mind me asking if
your mum, is she still around? She is, yeah. Gifty Arday. She's very much still
around. What's she going to make of next week when her son's a Cambridge
professor? I would imagine it would be surreal. I mean, she always tells this
particular story, and it's quite an interesting story. She said, the midwife
that delivered me, she said that the midwife said to her that in her culture,
babes with long fingers are destined to do something great. And my mum was like,
well, you know, I've been in labour for the longest time with this kid, so that
better be right. And she said, I've always known you were destined to do
something great. What that might be, I couldn't have professed, but the fact
that you've gone on and done this is really testament to what the midwife
mentioned some 38, nearly 38 years ago. Professor Arday, you're an inspiration.
Best of luck in the new job. Thank you so much. 19 minutes to nine. It's 12
years since the war in Syria began. And one of the consequences of it is that
when another tragedy strikes, it gets less attention than elsewhere. It is
harder for Syrians to receive aid. So it was with the earthquakes which hit
Turkey and Syria. The head of the World Health Organisation says he is
heartbroken at the devastation he's seen on a visit to northern Syria. Tedros
Adhanom Ghebreyesus said more funds were needed in a country that was already in
dire need of help. He was speaking after visiting a hospital in the area where
more than 4,000 people are known to have died. The depths of suffering of the
Syrian people is difficult to convey. I have already been so disturbed and
heartbroken. The earthquake that struck more than three weeks ago adds an
imaginable suffering to people who have already suffered so much over 12 years
of war, economic collapse, the COVID-19 pandemic and an ongoing cholera
outbreak. I offer my deepest sorrow to those who have lost their loved ones. On
the morning of the quake, we spoke to Ismail al-Abdullah, a volunteer with the
White Helmets Rescuers in north-western Syria, the region that is being visited
by the head of the WHO. And I'm delighted to say he joins us back on the line.
Good morning to you. How does it look now, almost a month on? Good morning.
After almost a month after the deadly earthquake that hit north-west Syria, the
situation is still horrible for people and very difficult for those who were
affected by the earthquake. We're talking about the injured people who until now
haven't received the proper treatment. We're talking about 40,000 families now
are homeless. They are living or staying in the streets and in the tents and
those who are now in the evacuation centres after the earthquake that hit the
region. Are you now getting more aid than you were? Because when we spoke there
had just been an agreement to open those border posts between Turkey and Syria.
Is it beginning to arrive? Yeah, the assistance arrived to north-west Syria. It
was late, but it's arrived. But not enough to meet the need of the people. Here
we're talking about something like long-term assistance. It's not enough to
receive convoys for some time and then we will leave those behind who were
affected by the earthquake. The injured people need long-term medical care.
Those who were injured and people who lost their homes, they need shelter, they
need everything, everything actually. And what they really need to rehabilitate
their homes so they can return to their houses and their homes. Tell us the good
news though, because there's been a lot of grim, a lot of deeply sad news, but
your volunteers with the white helmets have rescued a lot of people from under
that wreckage. The good news for us and for everyone that we were able to
receive, to rescue more than 2,950. The big news for us was after the
earthquake. But this is, you know, we couldn't reach everyone. We couldn't reach
everyone. And on the other side, the international community or the United
Nations in specific started to deliver aid for those who were affected. Actually
we need and we hope that this need will be unlinked long-term in the coming
months. And we hope that they will be of efforts to rebuild their houses and
rehabilitate the public facilities for all people so they can get back to their
normal lives. I imagine your message to people listening is don't forget us,
don't forget Syria. Yeah, because I think it's like something like just for one
time, if we need to deal with this situation and if we really need to help those
who are affected, they need long-term help on all areas, medical area,
psychological area, their homes, their food security. You know, they need
action. They need this to survive after the earthquake. You know, there are
injured people still now haven't received the treatment. You know, the hospital
in northwest Syria, in normal situation, are not enough to receive people.
Imagine after the bombings and destroying hospitals and the earthquake that
resulted in more than 10,000 people were injured. So it's complicated and it
needs long-term assistance. Urgent needs as well as long-term needs. Ismail al-
Abdullah of the White Helmet Rescues in northwest Syria, thank you very much
indeed for joining us. Your time now is 13 minutes to nine. Now, imagine if your
team hadn't got in the FA Cup quarterfinal for 84 years. You might just get a
little bit excited. It'll go forward off his right boot. The referee puts the
whistle to his lips and Grimsby Town, despite this, are in the quarterfinals of
the FA Cup. It's a seismic, generation-spanning victory for the Mariners.
Seismic generation-spanning? A man who surely will agree with that is the
journalist, the Grimsby Town fan, Nigel Lowther, who is no mere fan. He is the
creator of Harry Haddock, the inflatable fish, waved by fans at the game. And in
case people don't see the Haddock here because they're not local, just describe
Harry the Haddock for us, would you, Nigel? Oh, he's about morning, Nick, I
should say. About three foot long and, you know, completely inoffensive. Got a
little smile on his face. Even bigger this morning, Nick. So, there are
hundreds, are there, of Harry Haddocks being waved from the stands? Yes, there
was about a thousand there last night. Among the four and a half thousand
fantastic fans who had made that long trek to the south coast. It was quite a
sight and a great tribute to Paul Hurst, his players and the football club.
There was probably some factory in China that has got rich off your column,
suggesting people that might want to wave a Haddock. But just get a sense for
us, give us a sense, Nigel, we got it from the commentary of just what it means
for a town like Grimsby that has had some pretty rough times in the last few
decades. Yes, it has. And the football club is pivotal to the town. And the new
owners, Jason Stockwood and Andrew Pettit, have been in charge for about 18
months now. Wonderful people who have really galvanised the football club.
Promotion from non-league, the first time of asking last season and now in the
quarter-finals of the FA Cup. And they are really trying to use the football
club as a vehicle to regenerate the town and to create that positive vibe that
there should be around Grimsby. There is a lot of positive things going on up
there. And it's one of those moments, isn't it, where the presumably relatively
low thousands who actually pay for a ticket normally, suddenly everyone in the
town is supporting the club and wants to get involved. Yes, isn't that
wonderful? And season ticket sales, I think there was about 2,000 up on last
year. Obviously, there's 4,500 there last night. Brighton next. Well, how many
tickets can you give us, Brighton? Because we'll be there that weekend with our
Haddocks by the sea. So it's going to be a wonderful occasion. It's a bit
Colston, Newcastle taking Haddocks to the south coast, isn't it? Well, yes.
Well, I can't believe, Nick, that I created Harry Haddock 34 years ago and I'm
still talking about an inflatable fish to you today. But there we go. Nigel, you
have given me the excuse I've long been looking for to share my family's holiday
pursuit, which is to come up with the names of comedy football teams. We did a
Fish 11, which was managed by Sam and Allardyce with Bert Troutman in goal and
Eric Cantuna up front. See if you can beat that. Oh, Nick, after the night I've
had, there's no way my brain is going to... I'll only give you one more. Paul
Scholes is in midfield. Oh, excellent. I'm just trying to think of somebody that
we can fit into Haddock, but it will come to me later on. If you have
suggestions, I do have a Twitter account. I'd love to have some more. Some
people read Latin on holidays. We make up football teams. Between you and Gary
Richardson, it's been quite a morning for fish puns. Anyway, here's 10 to 9.
Here's another absolutely wonderful story. You may remember hearing about a
house in Birkenhead, a sort of flat that had been lived in for 33 years by a
slightly reclusive man known in the community, but also slightly mysterious,
called Ron Gittins. And Ron Gittins, who sadly died in 2019, spent 33 years
painting the walls, floors, and ceilings of this rented flat and turned it into
the most extraordinary cultural institution. It's got incredible... I'm just
looking at some pictures now. Forgive me. It's got incredible artwork, amazing
colors in there, lots and lots of sculptures. There's a fearsome three-meter
lion's head fireplace, which he painstakingly molded. It's this extraordinary
thing which no one knew about for decades and decades and decades. And then the
owners of the property, Smith & Son property consultants, had listed the
buildings being up for rent. It was described as a substantial double-fronted
property that was going to be turned into four flats. Anyway, a big campaign was
underway. Lots and lots of people got behind it, including some famous people
like Jarvis Cocker and Grayson Perry. We did a report on it, and guess what's
happened? It's been saved. It's been saved. Ron's place in Birkenhead has been
saved. An anonymous donor has swooped in and put the cash up. And I'm thrilled
to say that Jan Williams, Ron's niece, is on the line now. Jan, good morning.
Morning. Wow. I'm just in a state of shock. Can't believe what's happened in the
last few hours. We got an email yesterday. Well, we got an email yesterday
morning at 8.58 from a wonderful person who runs the Tamsin Wimhurst Foundation,
saying, I would just heard it's up for auction. I'd like to loan you the money
needed to buy the house. Please call me. And so between 8.58 and 12.40
yesterday, we suddenly managed to find ourselves owning the house. Absolutely
amazing. You got 335 grand from this anonymous donor. You have any idea what her
or his plans are for this incredible cultural icon? Well, basically, we've set
up a community, Rural Arts and Culture Community Land Trust. So the wonderful
people who have gifted the money actually when we set up a charitable
foundation. They've been able to save it, so we'll be able to fulfill all our
dreams of opening it up to people. And yes, these people founded the David Parr
House in Cambridge, which was an artisan's cottage that was under threat of
being lost. And so they totally understood our predicament. So yeah, the work's
just beginning now. There's quite a lot of work ahead, conserving it, and then
three flats above to refurbish. But wow, so thrilling. It's amazing. We never
gave up believing. Yeah, and Ron Gittins is going to have a really lasting
legacy in the north of England. It's wonderful. Jan, do you know what? I hope
you take this in the spirit intended. I can hear the shock in your voice, and
it's wonderful to hear. Listen, congratulations. Thank you very much, and thank
you for your support on Radio 4. Ah, we're just reporting it impartially as
ever. Jan Williams, all the best. Thanks so much, Jan. Six minutes tonight. Now,
one thing that was said again and again after the Iraq war was that what was
known as sofa government wasn't the right way to make decisions. It was a
criticism of the way Tony Blair was said to make decisions with close allies,
perhaps not on, but at least near the sofa in his den in Downing Street. Has the
release of Matt Hancock's messages now revealed that we're in an era of WhatsApp
government? And if so, does that matter for all of us? We're joined by Dr.
Hannah White of the Institute for Government and the author of Partier, Held in
Contempt, What's Wrong with the House of Commons. Good morning to you. Good
morning. And joining us too is Salma Shah, partner, senior advisor at the
Communications and Public Affairs Company. Portland, who used to advise in the
Home Office. So let's begin with you, Hannah, if we could. Should we, if we are
interested in good government, worry about WhatsApp? Well, in some ways, no. In
some ways, WhatsApp has just replaced, as a new technology, the informal
conversations that ministers, advisors, civil servants have always had in
government. The conversations that would have taken place in the back of the
car, in a corridor or whatever. There's nothing inherently wrong with WhatsApp.
But what we need to think about is how it is being used and whether there are
really consistent guidelines and expectations across government for ministers,
for special advisors and civil servants in when they're using it, because it
does have some risks. There's a risk that you don't always have everybody in the
WhatsApp group who you think is there, who's participating in your conversation.
Sometimes there's a risk there's someone in there that you didn't know, and
sometimes there's a risk there's someone in there that you didn't expect. And
there's also a question about transparency and record keeping. Yeah, that was
the key to the SOFA government criticism, wasn't it? The suggestion there was
not formality, there was not process, there was not a record. Exactly. And, you
know, government has got very used to record keeping now around email and what
needs to be archived and what needs to be recorded. And the question is, if
discussions are happening on WhatsApp, you know, and most decisions are still
being made in formal meetings, but during the pandemic, sometimes that also
wasn't possible with social distancing and so on. Are we sure that decisions
that are made in that way, discussions that are being had are being recorded
with an appropriate degree of formality so that processes like the COVID
inquiry, which is underway, can get access to them and get a full picture of
what went on? Let me turn now to Salma Shari, who sometimes I imagine Salma
sending those WhatsApp, quite often receiving those WhatsApps from ministers and
so on. Do you think the actual process has problems as well as that, what we had
described there by Hannah White, about the need to record keep? I think part of
the issue around record keeping is that, you know, when you've got functions on
WhatsApp, like disappearing messages, which lots of people will start using,
there is that sort of unevenness and uncertainty about how we're capturing that
information. I think my issue with sort of government by WhatsApp, and as Hannah
says, you know, there are still formal processes that exist, but increasingly
we're sort of becoming informal and we're relying on these methods of
communication, which don't necessarily lend themselves to good decision making.
You know, if we just use this particular cache that have been released as an
example, it is this kind of immediacy that's required with decisions. And
there's almost dopamine hit like a sugar rush that people are getting from being
able to respond to these things. But everything that's coming in and all that
inward traffic is not necessarily equal. Some things are going to require a lot
more attention and it doesn't feel like actually this is the process of decision
making is being done thoroughly and properly as a consequence of WhatsApp.
Wouldn't it be possible for a minister, a senior civil servant, the prime
minister perhaps to say, no phones in this meeting, put them away, we're not
having them. Well, there's quite often a rule around no phones in certain
meetings, especially if it's secure. I mean, you probably know this already when
you go into Downing Street, if you're not a pass holder, you give up your phone
at the door. But what's striking, forgive me, about one of the rude comments
that are made about the education unions and about each other are being made
while there's a government Zoom call. So they're doing one thing as it were,
sort of semi publicly with their colleagues online while messaging each other to
basically insult the other person. The other person who's on the call. Yes, and
I think this is the consequence of the social distancing during the pandemic. I
mean, you wouldn't really do that if you were in person. Sorry, I was just going
to say to that point, you know, the informality of language is also interesting
because you would never dream of saying anything like that or, you know,
insulting people if you were in an official document. And when things are marked
urgent or official sensitive, it gives a different credibility to the discussion
that you're having. Last thought then to you, Dr White, does it actually, as
Salma seems to be suggesting there, diminish the quality of decision making by
introducing informality, rudeness, gossip instead of proper considered decision
making? I think there could be a concern around that. It's certainly not the
same as sitting in a meeting with all the facts laid out for you in a briefing
paper, but receiving little bits of advice and so on by WhatsApp, which may or
may not come in at the appropriate time. The other thing that we've argued at
the Institute for Government is that ministers ought not to conduct government
business on their personal phones. Other countries require ministers to have a
government phone, which ensures that all the sorts of communications that
they're engaging in are available to the government and can be used in inquiry
processes. I've got to leave it there, I'm afraid. Salma Shah, thank you. My
phone tells me we're running out of time. All right, this is.