TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It's 1 o'clock GMT, hello I'm Roger Hearing, and this is Business Matters on
the BBC World Service. Today we're live in Wellington and New Jersey. Coming up
on the programme, whatever happened to the freezing homes and winter blackouts,
Europe was threatened with as the Ukraine war led to the reduction of supplies
of Russian gas and oil. Russia can't black me any particular country anymore and
that's definitely helped a lot to go through the crisis. We've got a special
look at the effect of the last 12 months of conflict on energy. We'll hear how
it looks for businesses, for Russian and American exporters, and for Ukrainians
struggling to heat and light their homes. Also, the effects of crazy weather on
the US and New Zealand, and crafted or crafty, the surge in demand for things
actually made by hand. All coming up on Business Matters after the news. I'm
Stuart McIntosh with the BBC News. Hello. Russia is facing another round of
Western sanctions a year after launching its invasion of Ukraine. The European
Union announced a tenth set of measures targeting those spreading propaganda in
support of Moscow or delivering drones. The agreement was announced by Sweden,
which currently holds the presidency of the EU Council. Ulf Kristosan is the
Swedish Prime Minister. Russia has reminded us of a barbarism of war. There's a
path to freedom and democracy, but there's also a path away from freedom and
democracy, and faced with that choice, neutrality is no option. Therefore,
Sweden and the European Union will act with determination to support Ukraine and
for a Ukrainian victory. Earlier, the United States, Canada and Britain imposed
further restrictions. Canada's Prime Minister Justin Trudeau detailed his
country's measures. We're announcing new sanctions on 129 individuals and 63
entities, including Russian Deputy Prime Ministers, ministers, other members of
the Office of the President of Russia, members of the Russian military, and
those involved in the production of artillery and weapons used in Ukraine.
Restrictions on the movement of vehicles have come into force in Nigeria, where
elections begin in a few hours. And borders are shut, soldiers have been
patrolling key areas, and voting materials have been delivered to some polling
stations under armed guard. The legislative and presidential elections come at a
time of heightened insecurity in Nigeria, with insurgency in the northeast,
rising crime, and shortages of cash and fuel. More than a hundred of Israel's
elite military reservists have threatened to abandon their posts if the
government goes ahead with controversial plans to overhaul the judiciary.
Officers and soldiers of the country's Military Intelligence Special Operations
Division issued the warning. Here's Mike Thompson. And as if thousands of
protesters have already voiced their anger against a judicial overhaul on
Israel's streets, now the country's elite military reservists are pitching in
too. The legal reforms, currently going through Parliament, would give Benjamin
Netanyahu's government total control of appointing judges. They would also end
the power of the Supreme Court to stop legislation it considers
unconstitutional. Signatories to the Open Letter, who include sergeants to
brigadier generals, say the plans would destroy democracy, along with all they
have fought for. The number of people killed in the catastrophic earthquakes
that hit Turkey and northern Syria this month has passed 50,000. In Turkey,
rescue workers from the White Helmets Group in rebel-held northwest Syria have
called for more international help to save children injured in the disaster.
World news from the BBC. A first group of suspected gang members in El Salvador
have been moved to a huge new prison that's the centrepiece of President Naeib
Bakalie's self-declared war on crime. Video tweeted by the President showed the
first 2,000 inmates tattooed and barefoot left sitting on the floor with their
hands behind their shaven heads. The jail will eventually hold more than 40,000
people. Firefighters in Cuba are using aircraft and helicopters to try to
control a large forest fire which has been raging in the east of the country for
a week. The blaze has destroyed coffee shops and forests in the mountains of
Holguin Province, some 800 kilometres from the capital Havana. Local authorities
have tried to prevent the fire from spreading to the neighbouring province of
Santiago de Cuba. President Biden has defended his administration's response to
a train derailment in the state of Ohio which caused a major chemical spill and
a political row. The crash three weeks ago prompted the evacuation of the town
of East Palestine. Mr Biden has been criticised for not visiting the site while
finding time to go to Ukraine, but the President told reporters that members of
his team were there promptly. I had a long meeting with my team and what they
were doing. We were there two hours after the train went down. Two hours. I've
spoken with every single major figure in both Pennsylvania and Ohio. I'm keeping
very close tabs on it. We're doing all we can. It's snowing in Southern
California with the Los Angeles area braced for its first blizzard since 1989.
Max and Sleet swirled around the Hollywood sign in the mountains behind Los
Angeles. The main north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed through the
Tejon Pass or Grapevine. Forecasters have warned that there could be flash
flooding and landslides on the coast. And that is the latest BBC News. Hello and
welcome to Business Matters. I'm Roger Hearing. Coming up on the programme
today, we've got an in-depth look at one of the major concerns for the world
about the consequences of the Ukraine war, energy. Russia's dominance of the
market for oil and gas in Europe raised a nightmare of shivering and blackouts
across the continent, but it didn't actually happen. So we'll hear what happened
to Russia's energy profits, the effect on a German bus company of hikes in fuel
costs and the experience of Ukrainians facing power cuts and lack of heating.
Plus, we've also got the highly unusual weather that's rocking the US and New
Zealand, and why we seem to want to buy things that are handmade by human hands.
Now artisans are making a comeback in the US. Australia, where the buy from the
bush campaign has breathed new life into the handmade economy, and also in the
UK, where makers markets are becoming a weekend fixture. We'll delve into all
that later in the programme and I'll be joined throughout the programme by two
guests on opposite sides of the world, Lorraine Larocco, senior editor of Guests
for CNBC, who's joining us from New Jersey. Lorraine, welcome to the programme.
Thank you for having me. Good to have you there. And across the other side of
the world, Colin Peacock, producer and presenter of Media Watch on Radio New
Zealand, who's joining us from Wellington. Colin, a very... Well, I should say,
good afternoon to you. Is it afternoon already? Indeed, it is. It's 2pm here, so
I've had lunch and I'm all ready to go for the next hour. Excellent. Good news
and good to hear that. Right, let's talk about Ukraine's year of war, which has
brought about huge challenges, of course, for the country itself, but also for
much of the rest of the world. In this part of Business Matters, we're going to
look at one key issue, energy. Now Russia's dominance of Europe in this area
meant big headaches for countries trying to wean themselves off Russia's oil and
gas, fears of power cuts and freezing homes in Germany, Poland and elsewhere.
But they didn't really happen. Now, Andres Peebaugs is professor at the European
University Institute. He's a Latvian politician and former European commissioner
for energy. And I put it to him that all things considered, Europe had actually
coped pretty well. Europe passed it better than anybody expected. And I think
better than Europeans themselves expected. Europe was helped also by mild
temperatures. That definitely helped a lot. But the basic strategy was going in
three directions. And that's definitely correct. One is diversify supply. So
that's well done. Also storage has been very full and followed regulations that
have been adopted. Where I believe there is less of success, it is about demand
reduction. In my opinion, it was not structural. So it was very much depending
on temperatures and also on prices. So that is still very much needed. And also
for 2023, Europe need to keep this reduction level 15% below five year overage.
So it is the main area where I believe governments should put attention. The
interesting question about demand reduction is it's something that is actually
very hard to engineer even structurally. In the end, isn't the replacement of
what Europe had before from Russia more important, the diversification, if you
like, and the storage issues, aren't those the areas that we've got to push more
into? Well, you could get a bit more from North Africa, from pipes, and a bit
more from Azerbaijan. That's all you can get. So the main bulk should come from
LNG market. But on LNG market, we have been quite lucky that the Chinese economy
was not driving very well. So they usually buy roughly 30% to 40% of spot LNG.
And for last year, it was only 10%. So it was huge opportunity for us to get LNG
carbose for the next two years. The market will be very tight. Is there an
element that perhaps might say, well, the diversification, perhaps, you know,
moving to other forms, non-fossil energy, these kind of things, we've heard a
lot about it. Is there any replacement in that sort of area that we can look to
expand as we move towards next winter? Yeah, I think heat pumps is definitely a
huge answer. Because you can use them based on the renewable power. So I think
it is one very fundamental area, then also energy efficiency measures. It
depends on the country. It's true in some countries, it's more difficult, but in
a lot of countries, it's rather easy. And what about Russian gas that still
exists? There is some coming into Europe. Just to refresh us, how much Russian
gas proportionally is still coming in? It would be 10% of what we got normally.
So it comes via Ukraine and via Turk stream. It's not substantial anymore, but
still, when it's market is tight, it's good that we have this gas, but they
can't play with it. Even if they cut it, well, as market will not react too much
on it. It's quite remarkable, in a way, given what we were saying six months ago
about the potential for disaster, people freezing in their homes in Germany and
elsewhere, that we have got through it. Europe has got through it in a way that
I don't think many people really expected. What we could expect that countries
like Poland, like Czech Republic, like Slovakia would suffer immensely, that it
was not the case. So even Bulgaria is now connected to Greece. So Russia can't
blackmail any particular country anymore. That's definitely helped a lot to go
through the crisis. Andres Pibarg is there, the former European Commissioner for
Energy. L'Oreal, it's very interesting, is it, because we did really expect that
it was the stranglehold that Russia had over, particularly in Europe, oil and
gas, that was going to be such a major factor. And it really hasn't been. I
mean, as we come out to the end of the first year of this war, that's a very
significant thing. It really is. It's, thankfully, Europe did not have a
brutally cold winter, which helped. But also too, this backfired on Putin
because the United States, the U.S. provided 50% of Europe's LNG supplies in
2022 and 12% of its oil. And so, thankfully, you've had other countries come in
and able to export that energy out. But on the flip side, though, Russia really
has made a lot of money with its energy going particularly to India and China.
They were able to sell their crude. So on the flip side, Russia really has not
been stung as hard as many would have hoped in terms of the boycotts. That is,
obviously, as you say, the flip side of it. The evidence seems to suggest,
Colin, that the Russian economy has not been as damaged as perhaps people had
hoped when sanctions were being put in by many Western countries. And part of
that is to do with the fact they can still sell oil and gas. Yes. I mean, from
this distance in the South Pacific, we looked at that situation and it did
appear to us a year ago that Europe could effectively be blackmailed, the German
reliance on Russian gas supplies and so on. We looked at that. We didn't know
about this really until the situation cropped up. And the prospect of a winter
with escalating energy bills was something that was much reported upon here. It
even caused us here in New Zealand, we don't have Russian fuel oil supplies or
anything like that. Our oil and petrol comes from the Middle East and Asian
sources. But we closed our only major national refinery just before that because
it wasn't really economic and figured, look, it's not really a security or
supply issue. We've just built up some reserves and we'll be fine. But it did
cause people to think things that you couldn't foresee you have to take into
account for your nation's infrastructure and energy supply. So interesting to
hear that it hasn't been such an issue for Europe as it indeed appeared to be a
year ago. Yeah, a very significant analysis theory of where we are with it. But
of course, we shouldn't forget that although perhaps many Europeans have not had
all the problems that might have been expected, there is one place, of course,
that has suffered tremendously in terms of power shortages and power cuts and
very cold weather. And that, of course, has been Ukraine itself. Even if
Europeans managed to avoid the worst of it, they've had to endure their power
system in Ukraine, being attacked, bombed on a fairly regular basis and breaking
down. Well, let me talk to bring you in contact with someone we've been speaking
to here on World on Business Matters because we've been speaking to Lyubov
Velichko. She's a journalist based just outside the Ukrainian capital Kyiv. Now,
first of all, this was her prediction when we spoke to her last year for the
winter ahead. I think this winter will look like we live in 19th century,
unfortunately. I can't believe that I'm saying this, but yes, right now I'm
talking to you in totally black room with no light. Thank God with the fire
because we have wood. But I understand that many of my friends live in big
houses in flats. They don't have fireplaces and they are really cold rooms with
no light. Even today when I was working in cafes, there was no light in the
cafe. Well, that was Lyubov before, but I caught up with her in the last few
hours to find out how things have changed since she last spoke to us. Actually
right now, we don't have such big problems with electricity. During last few
weeks, we have electricity 24 hours for a day. And this is a big happiness for
us. Our children even ask me, Mommy, why doesn't the electricity go out? Because
they used to sit in the evening with a lamp on solar batteries. But right now we
don't use it. So life goes better. Yeah, because of course you had a long time
when that didn't happen. You had big problems getting heat and light, I guess.
Yes, actually we live in a private sector. So we have our own house and we could
cook our dinner using wood because we have this very, very ancient thing, I
mean, stove. And we just took wood and made fire and made our dish like in
ancient times. Now you've got electricity, which is great. Yeah. But does it, I
guess it costs a lot of money, doesn't it? And you have prices gone up, your
bills, are you paying more? Yes, our bills grow in like four times. For example,
right now we pay 2,500 grimness before we paid like 500 grimness for a month.
Because everything we have in our house, I mean, when we cook, when we turn on
our battery, it's all on electricity. Right now when everything works, our bills
went high, of course. Is that okay? You can manage with that or is it causing
problems? No, the price is okay. I can say that it's very, very high, especially
if to compare these bills with bills in European Union, it's less than $70 for a
month. And now I guess we've come to the, or coming to the end of the winter, so
maybe you won't need so much energy in the next few months. Yes, because we use
energy mostly for heating. This is the highest price. When we will turn off our
electricity batteries, our bills will be much smaller, of course. But I have to
admit that for Ukrainians, the end of the winter is a big happiness because for
us, it's like to be winners that we survived. This winter was the hardest for
all our time during like 30 years, but we still are positive and we are happy
that we go to the end and soon it will be much warmer. And the crisis with
electricity went to winter and in spring we have much better situation. All
Ukrainians are happy now because a few days ago we had the lightnings on the
streets already came back because during few months in the evening when you are
driving a car, you don't have lightning. And it was very difficult in big cities
to drive in the evening. But right now we even have lightnings on the street. It
sounds very strange for people who didn't live in such circumstances, but for us
it's a big happiness that we have lightnings on the streets. Robov Velichko
there speaking to me from Kyiv. Now, Colin, it's interesting, one of the things
she mentioned there, of course, was the huge rise in costs, perhaps
understandably, for trying to get power into Ukraine. But globally that has been
one of the biggest effects for New Zealand from the Ukraine war, the global rise
in gas and oil prices. Yes, that's absolutely right. As I mentioned earlier, we
don't get our fuel and petrol and oil from that part of the world. But we were
completely at the mercy of supply chains and effectively on the end of them in
this part of the world. So it really did cause havoc in our markets. And it's
hard for people here to understand why the price of food and public transport
even might be affected by something where we don't have a direct connection to
that market and something that's going on well outside our sphere of influence.
But yes, certainly it's one of those things that's made New Zealanders aware
that we're part of a world economy as a trading nation and we have to pay
attention even to things that appear to us to be remote and no immediate
strategic danger or anything like that. Laurie, one of the interesting things,
of course, about the US in all this was that you are a net energy exporter, LNG
being exported, in fact, now once again from Texas in a way. It hasn't been
recently because of a problem down there, but it is. You are a net exporter. So
therefore, you in a way stand outside the major problems, but your costs have
still gone up, haven't they? Oh, well, and most definitely because we're tied to
the global energy market. So the future, no matter where you are in the world,
be it LNG, be it oil or even your grain, even wheat, it's all been impacted for
all of us around the world because we are tied globally to the markets. And so
because of the war and what's been going on with the transport of grain and even
energy, that puts pressure on that one origin, right, the price of the commodity
and everybody pays for it regardless. Yeah, it's one of those things that can't
really be avoided. There's knock on effects all around. And actually, of course,
a lot of businesses have been affected by this around the world as well,
including ones in Europe, not just those necessarily relying on power for
heating or lighting, but those who need it just to keep their business going.
Now, one of those is a German bus company called Fixbus. It operates routes
across Europe. Michal Lehmann is managing director of Fixbus for Poland, Ukraine
and the Baltic States. Now, I spoke to him earlier. I asked him how his company
had reacted once the war had started and their fuel prices shot up. We are
definitely behind the peak as we speak today. You know, I mean, if we talk now,
it's very difficult to predict anything, I would say, right, because nobody
expected war after COVID. But also the COVID matters here because after COVID,
the demand for travel and mobility bounced back and we had a year where all of
that was combined. So we had, of course, migrants escaping from Ukraine. But we
also had much more travelers who were waiting for the moment where the
government will say, okay, guys, it's safe. You can now go. COVID is gone or
you're fascinated. It's quite safe. And so we had a lot of effects here that
kind of gives us a shield towards those raising costs. In fact, over this
period, you haven't had a major problem in terms of profits or things like that.
I would say we had like short term. So, you know, always the moment when the
change happens and you have rapid change of the circumstances of the market. So
in this particular case, the growth of fuel price. And what about the supply of
your diesel? I mean, where does it actually come from? I would say it comes from
everywhere because our bus partners who own the buses, they are refueling
wherever their plan or wherever is their depot. So it could be Ukraine, it could
be Poland, it could be Germany, UK, Scotland, Portugal, wherever. Important to
mention Ukraine, you asked about the war. Ukraine before the war had the fuel of
30% cheaper than we had in European Union. And they also faced some limitation
of how many liters you can just tank because of lack of supply. So for them, it
was a bit of a change. And we had to react to compensate those bus partners
because they were refueling in Poland, Czechia, Hungary, not in Ukraine. And
that was Michal Lehmann of Flixbus, the German bus company. It's an interesting
sidelight on this, L'Oreal. I suppose that the whole push towards inflation, not
just in energy terms, but much more widely than that, which we saw coming in
after the end of the pandemic, it really has been pushed further ahead, I think,
by what happened with the Ukraine war and the knock on effects in different
markets and supply chains. As we move into the second year of the war, which is
a grim thing in itself, do you think we're going to see those pressures continue
in terms of inflation? Because that's obviously the major concern of Western
economies. Yeah, I mean, I really do believe that we're going to continue to see
inflationary pressures. I mean, here in the United States, I just recently
reported about consumers have pulled back in spending. And so warehouses are
full. And so when you look at the supply chain, any type of extra cost via
charges that companies are paying for their containers or their warehousing,
that is passed on to the consumer. And so rates on warehouses, and there are
certain price points within the supply chain outside of the commodities that the
companies are paying for, that is being passed on to the consumer. And that has
a knock on effect from two to three months. And so we're continuing to see this,
and a lot of logistics managers tell me that these are continued pressures. And
they've got products in stores for well over a year. And so people are grappling
with what to do. Yeah, it's an interesting dilemma, isn't it? Because trying to
work out what it is exactly that drives inflation, well, it's something that
central banks struggle with, who knows? But Colin, let me come to you on this. I
mean, what is the inflation situation in New Zealand at the moment? Well, our
inflation is running a bit over 7% currently, but rising. And our central bank
governor before Christmas announced effectively that he wanted to tip the
country into recession, almost engineer one to stop people spending, borrowing
so much. And that was of tremendous concern to the government, which has to
fight an election this year. So they went ahead and made a cut of 50 basis
points, sorry, increased the cash rate by 50 basis points this week in that
direction. But as we might end up talking about later, we were struck with a
vicious cyclone a fortnight ago, which is absolutely redid. We are indeed coming
to that in a bit. But yes, it has a knock on economic effect, of course, as
well. It does. And some people were urging the Reserve Bank not to go ahead with
this, because the economy will be in turmoil. And we really can't predict that
even in the next couple of months, let alone the track that the bank was
concerned about. So they went ahead and did it. So we'll have to see. But their
determination is that inflation must be brought under control, because we're not
a high wage country. A lot of people have a lot of borrowings and household
debt, and that this is inflation really is a scourge that we have to get under
control. Now, Lorianne, I mean, the Fed in the US obviously is put in position
to try and deal with this by raising interest rates with some suspicion the next
hike will be perhaps 25 basis points. Who knows? There's a speculation about it,
of course. But is there a sense that the public have much confidence in the way
it's being handled? Because so many factors in the US economy actually are
pointing up at the moment, for example, a very tight labor market, which is good
news for people looking for jobs, obviously. But every time that happens, it
seems the markets now say, no, no, no, because it's going to mean greater rises
in interest rates. It's a very odd thing. But is there much confidence that this
whole problem is being handled? I think we may have lost Lorianne. Lorianne, can
you hear me? No, I fear we've got to reestablish contact there. Well, Colin, let
me raise the same issue with you. Is there much confidence in New Zealand about
the ability to deal with inflation? Well, that was the great hope that worldwide
inflation pressures seem to be easing in the bigger countries of the world that
determine how our economy goes that we respond to in time. And so we were
greatly pleased to see those signals from the Fed. But again, as we've
mentioned, our economy has been jolted by these unexpected things. And I mean,
fascinating that previous discussion about the energy and how it feeds through.
I mean, our government took petrol excise off to reduce the cost of petrol
because of our cost of living crisis. Now we find we need that money to rebuild
our infrastructure. So it's all in a balance. Yeah, very difficult to handle.
Colin, interesting discussion on that. And we are going to talk about the
cyclone you've been mentioning and indeed the slightly weird weather also that's
happening in the US at the moment. Blizzard's a forecast for Los Angeles. Now
that hasn't happened for a very long time. We'll talk about what it all means
when we come back in just a moment here on Business Matters. This is the BBC
World Service, where Misha Glenny is telling the story of Russia. The country's
history goes some way to explaining the way it behaves today. You could accept
the culture, how wonderful the ballet is, the literature and how charming
individual Russians are. But yet you can still see it as a potential threat. In
episode three of the series, Catherine the Great, the German who became Empress
of Russia when her husband was murdered. She was very involved in the coup, but
not necessarily overtly for one thing she was pregnant at the time by another
man. It was her military successes that earned her the great title. She took
Crimea, Western Ukraine and a big chunk of Poland. There was something about the
18th century that does from this distance look like a kind of golden age that
didn't stick. The invention of Russia, Wednesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. You're
listening to Business Matters from the BBC World Service with me, Roger Hearing.
Coming up in the next half hour, we're live in Asia with a roundup of news and
business headlines from across the world. And comment from our guests, Colin
Peacock and Laurie Ann Larocco. Fans in Los Angeles mass flooding in New
Zealand. We'll look at weird weather, plus a surge in demand for stuff actually
made by human hands. Well, coming up after the news. BBC News with David Harper.
Western governments have imposed another round of sanctions on Russia a year
after President Putin launched the invasion of Ukraine. The European Union
announced a 10th set of measures shortly after the United States imposed further
restrictions. Poland had delayed the latest EU sanctions for several days,
complaining that they were too weak. Controls on the movement of vehicles have
come into force in Nigeria, where elections begin in a few hours time. Land
borders are shut and soldiers have been patrolling key areas. The legislative
and presidential elections are being held at a time of heightened insecurity in
Nigeria. A number of people killed by this month's catastrophic earthquakes in
Turkey and northern Syria has risen above 50,000. Civil defence workers in Syria
have called for more international help to save children injured in the
disaster. Members of Israel's elite military reservists have threatened to
abandon their posts if the government goes ahead with a planned overhaul of the
legal system. Those who signed an open letter said the changes would destroy
democracy. Suspected gang members in El Salvador have been moved to a huge new
prison as part of what President Bukele calls a war on crime. Large numbers of
people have been rounded up under a state of emergency. Emergency teams in
south-eastern Brazil are searching for survivors of floods and landslides which
has killed more than 50 people, most were in and around a coastal town in Sao
Paulo state. President Biden has defended his administration's response to a
train derailment in Ohio, which caused a chemical spill and a political row. The
crash three weeks ago prompted the evacuation of the town of East Palestine. Mr
Biden has been criticised for not visiting the site. Los Angeles is braced for
its first blizzard in more than 30 years. Snow is already falling in some areas.
The main north-south highway, Interstate 5, was closed through the Tejon Pass.
That's the latest BBC News. Welcome back to Business Matters. I'm Roger Hearing
and my guest today, Colin Peacock and Larianne Lorocco. Now let's reflect on
something that's been happening in Colin's backyard. And it was a bit of a
shock. Good evening. Cyclone Gabrielle has whipped up huge swells in the Upper
North Island today. And high winds have forced trees onto power lines, leaving
around 50,000 homes without electricity. Severe weather warnings remain in place
for the north, Coromandel, the east coast, all the way to Hawkes Bay and
Taranaki. Well, that was the arrival in New Zealand of Cyclone Gabrielle two
weeks ago, which caused the death of 11 people and some 10,000 people, also
estimated to be displaced. Farming regions in the north affected most of those
regions. But a lot of those regions are popular tourist destinations in normal
times. So some difficult issues there. But it's not just New Zealand. This
believe it or not, was happening in California the last few hours. Historic and
hazardous. California is dealing with blizzards in some areas for the first time
ever. Near Los Angeles, this knows bringing back memories of 1989. Today
snarling traffic and closing a major interstate. Things of blizzards in Los
Angeles of all places in the first time in 30 years. Well, let's dissect some of
this because I mean, they're not related, but they do suggest that as many
people feel our weather in general is perhaps getting more unpredictable and
more severe, whether that is related to climate change. A lot of people or
scientists think it may well be. So let me come to you first. First of all, just
give us some context on this cyclone and what it did. Well, it came down from
the Coral Sea. It struck the northern part of the country. As you heard in that
news report. But the other unusual thing about it is just a fortnight before
that Auckland, our biggest city, was flooded with an absolutely torrential
downfall. Almost the normal summer's worth of rain fell in just a few hours and
overwhelmed the central city. So that was only beginning to dry out after that
flood. And then this happened and this took in a much wider area. Auckland City
itself spared from the worst of Cyclone Gabriel. But it has really destroyed
huge areas of some of our best food and fruit production land in the Hawkes Bay,
in the northeast of the country. And yes, you mentioned tourism. I mean, the
country is just opening up again after a couple of years with closed borders. So
the first summer tourists from overseas for two to three years are here. And
honestly, I wouldn't blame many of them if they didn't come back. It's very
strange. I mean, here in Wellington, where I am, we're not affected. And there's
a test match against the England cricket team playing out just a couple of miles
away in an open air ground. And you wouldn't believe it. But looking at the
pictures coming in from the north of the country, this is going to take years
and years and billions to recover from. And Colin, the point we should make is
something to say, oh, well, that part of the world, you know, you get extreme
weather. But I mean, it's pretty unusual to get something like this, isn't it?
Well, it is. I mean, hearing about those blizzards in California seems
extraordinary. But this sort of thing does happen. We have unpredictable weather
in this country. One of our most successful bands, Crowded House, you know, had
that song about four seasons in one day. But they didn't warn us about, you
know, a season's worth of rain in a couple of hours, I have to say. But I mean,
this does happen in the summer. Tourists and visitors will know you can have
unpredictable weather and heavy downpours. We've attributed it in the past to
the El Nino and La Nino weather patterns that make the weather unseasonable and
unpredictable sometimes. But I mean, this is extraordinary because, yes,
February, normally the driest month in the country and just epic amounts of
rain. And it's really shining a light on our preparedness, our infrastructure,
the whole lot. Yeah. And as you say, and definitely on the much older end of the
cycle. And that has to be said, Lorianne, about what's happening. Well, I'm
saying your neck of the woods, you're in New Jersey, of course, an awful long
way from California. But I mean, the idea of blizzards in Los Angeles is
extraordinary, isn't it? It really is. The problem is with these areas, their
infrastructure is not prepared for the weather. Like we have snowplows here in
New Jersey. I live in the mountains. In Los Angeles, they don't have snowplows.
They don't have ice, like the de-icers for the road. So when it comes to even
like a little bit of snow, when I used to live in Houston and we used to get
like a half inch, it would shut down the entire city because the roads would
freeze. And so in these certain parts of the country where you don't normally
get a lot of snow, they don't have the backup like we have here. And on the East
Coast, yesterday or the day before in Washington, DC, it was 81 degrees. So it's
really crazy. We haven't even gotten a lot of snow where we are this year. We've
gotten more rain. But it really is a very weird winter, I think, for many folks
around the world. Yeah. And I mean, just in recent memory, that do seem to me
just from observing in the news cycle, many more mega events of this kind in the
US, moments where you have big storms. Yes, but they've been actually much, much
bigger than normal or much at the wrong time of year or in the wrong place. That
just seems to be an impression. I don't have any scientific backup for that. But
does it feel like that? It really does. And it's like the severity of the storm.
Not only is it weird like any snow, in areas that don't get snow, it's the
amount of snow that they get. Like Portland, Oregon, they had record snowfall,
which around this time of year, they don't normally get. But you're dead on. I
mean, it's interesting where, I don't know what your meteorologists are like in
England, but here sometimes they'll say, oh, the sky's falling. You're going to
get so much snow. And we get maybe like a half an inch. So it's just interesting
to see how things are going. But this winter weather, especially this year,
you've had more of these once in a generation type of events. And then I suppose
we have to think about resilience, Colin. I mean, in the kind of things that has
happened in where you are in New Zealand, the extent to which if these things
are going to become more common, the extent to which we can prepare for them,
because in order for commerce and business and the economics, let alone normal
life to carry on, you've got to be able to absorb it, haven't you? Absolutely.
That's the big debate we're now having as we sort of move into the recovery
phase and get over the shock of what's happened. Our meteorologists and our
planners even used to talk in terms of one in 100 year floods and things like
that. No one is using that terminology now. And the interesting thing is that
particularly the news media are now saying flat out, this is climate change. We
have to get real planners, economists, and now talking about it. Christians
who've been reluctant to say so in the past are now accepting it. One member of
the opposition, the main opposition party, was told, reporters, she still had to
see evidence of anthropogenic climate change to believe it. And well, she
reversed her position within three hours with one of the party's spin doctors
standing at her shoulder. So it's now a very sensitive issue. And people are
told, we have to get real. We have to acknowledge that this is climate change.
These things will happen, and we're just going to have to spend money to make
those resilient systems. But it's going to take generations, I think, to really
build an infrastructure that can withstand it. And a lot of money, as you say,
along the way. And Lorianne, I mean, I guess the same debate is there in the US
because you certainly have plenty of climate change deniers there in various
parts of the political spectrum. I mean, do you get a sense that people are now
thinking, hang on a second, something has changed? I think it depends on the
person. I mean, as you know, the deniers are going to continue to deny. I think
what's interesting now are the business moves where if you have homes,
particularly in Florida, if they get wiped out, we had a regular rainstorm from
a hurricane, and it literally wiped out so many miles of beach that people
weren't expecting. So you have people now asking if your home gets destroyed off
of the coast, do you rebuild? Or do you not have flood insurance and you build
at your own risk? So that's a lot of talk that we hear here in the United States
where if you have a home in a certain part of the country that is vulnerable to
being wiped out, should you rebuild after you're, God forbid, you lose your
home. Yeah, and you've mentioned the I word, insurance there, which is really
the next thing I was going to come on to. And let me pick that up with you,
because that's the point, isn't it? People, insurers will now say, well, there
are risks are greater, therefore the premiums have to be greater and it begins
to make the whole system much more difficult. Indeed. And what Gloria was
talking about there is called in this country managed retreat. And we had our
finance minister who's now trying to work out a plan for what we can do to
recover from this in the short, medium and long term. And he said two words, New
Zealanders are going to have to get used to hearing is managed retreat. So
coastal properties, floodplains, the places where people love to have their
homes and farms. Some of these are going to have to move or be abandoned and
roads that have been wiped out. They're going to have to consider very
seriously, how many times are we going to build and rebuild these roads if this
is just going to happen again? So all these all these things are up in the air
and the bill for it, people just can't estimate. Whereas our finance minister
has been telling us we're actually good in shape, in good shape as a nation. If
we need to borrow money to finance this into the future, that's only because we
haven't been spending money in the past. So yes, now the time has come for
difficult decisions. And that that term managed retreat. That's the first time I
think I've heard that. Laurie, and is that the kind of maybe they don't use that
term, but is is that the concept that people are working with also in the
States? Well, it's been talked about. It's just that it's not enforced. So it
sounds like a New Zealand column that that they're that they it's like almost
like an imminent domain where they force you to leave because in the United
States, you know, you've got people fighting for their land or people fighting
to rebuild. Yes, there's I think there's a part of that. So what they're talking
about is future policy being set so that you don't further develop areas that
are already at risk and that sort of thing. And then ones that are hit by
disaster, you might have to plan to buy people out. In fact, some people have
been hit in the last couple of disasters. Some of them are on television just
this morning in New Zealand saying, government, buy us out. We're ready to go.
Whereas in the past, it's been, you know, what what do we do next and asking for
assistance from insurers or from the government and asking for the region to be
bolstered. But now the government has signaled there's going to be some
difficult calls made in some areas will be another piece of terminology yet red
zone. Once they decide it's a red zone, no more development. Well, there we are
managed retreat and red zone. I mean, Laurie, and the point there, I guess, I
mean, it's perhaps harder to imagine many state governments in the US buying
people out in that sort of way. But I think the point of heaven knows the
infrastructure has been a massive problem right across the US anyway for a long
time. We know that. And under this sort of pressure, you can see it breaking
even further. That's what's so scary one storm where people thought like over in
the Daytona area, which is on the East Coast, you know, facing the Atlantic
Ocean, you know, folks thought they were fine with this storm that was coming
in. And they were finding themselves, you know, they had to flee their homes
like they lost like 50, you know, 50, 100 feet of land, you know, from from a
rainstorm. And so you can't even predict any of this anymore. And there really
is scary because, you know, people live there most of their lives or you know,
you've lived in these planes and you've never had a problem. But now because of
the severity of the weather, things have changed. And honestly, like insurance
companies are indeed looking at these maps, right, when and redefining these
hundred hundred year floods or whatever, you know, they want to call it. So
that's going to be really, really difficult. And what happens to those? I've
often wondered with these things, particularly in the states where the social
services perhaps aren't the level they would be maybe in New Zealand or the UK.
But when people lose their homes like that, what do they do? Where do they go?
How do they pick up the pieces? You know, honestly, I really don't know. I mean,
we've done some stories where even like what super storm Sandy, as you know, I
mean, my goodness, how many years ago was that that there are homes still being
fixed? Things are not I mean, as we all know, things move very slowly when it
comes to recovery, right? Things to natural disasters and things like that. A
lot of times people are put in temporary housing or, you know, they have to go
rent somewhere else. But that's all, you know, that's all costs that are
incurred by the homeowner. Yeah. You know, because then you have to wait for
what reimbursement you're going to get from the insurance company. Yeah. I mean,
Colin, I imagine the people who are struck by this latest cycling at least have
have government support of some kind, don't they? Well, they do in some
emergency measures have already been introduced. But it's just this morning on
television media crews getting to areas that so far no one has visited still
without power. And there's a lot of volunteers there, people working, digging
out, in some cases, two meters of silt that are poured through the hills, wiping
out farms and vineyards and orchards. And the owners of the houses, which are
half buried are standing and saying we literally have no idea where to start. Is
it even worth trying to dig out our house from from all this sludge? They need a
plan and they need one fairly rapidly. There we are. A very difficult issue.
It's going to increase, I think. And perhaps a lot of thinking needs to be done
about, as you say, manage retreat, red zones, all these various issues and
indeed dealing with the insurance industry. The subject, I think, of future
business matters, I think very likely. But now let's talk about something
completely different. The market for real handmade products is reported to have
surged in recent years. Initiatives such as Australia's Seasons of New England
Expo and Maker's Markets here in the UK have led to a revival in small artisanal
businesses. Business Daily's David Reid has heard from sellers here in
Manchester making things as diverse as balloon animals and mushroom growing
kits. And what colour should we do the snake's tongue? Red. Red. There's
definitely something mesmerising about watching someone with a practice skill.
Today at Maker's Market in West Didsbury, a Manchester suburb, cartoon shapes
are being conjured out of thin air. The kids are wide eyed. Shall we think of a
great name for your snake? A sausage. What, a sausage? Yeah! A sausage snake. My
name's Jim. I've been doing balloons at Maker's Markets for a few years. But
yeah, it's just great fun. The atmosphere is fantastic. Everything but the rain
is good for me, you know. I do this on weekends. In a week I work driving a
minibus. So yeah, I just have a couple of different jobs in life. You know, I
just tend to find overall it balances me out. You're incredibly good at it.
Thank you very much. It helps having a bit of a range of things on a good
display that you know the kids are going to be interested in. So there's a
little bit of careful marketing around it. But yeah, the kids are usually happy.
The Maker's Market is full of people like Jim, stretched out in front of us are
rows of stalls selling products made exclusively by the stall owners themselves.
Under flapping canvas awnings there's a ginger cordial, brilliant pottery
caricatures and a fascinating stall selling exotic mushrooms. It's even
equipping people to grow their own. How does that work? So you give people the
spores and... That's it. Well yeah, we give them the bag. So we inoculate the
bag. It's all ready to go. It's for the bag, it's fully colonised. Yeah, it's
ready to pot basically. You just kind of cut a hole out and the mushrooms they
pour out. My name is Gareth Griffith Swain and I'm the owner of Fungi Foods
Exotic Mushroom Company. How did you get into this? Are you a botanist or... I
mean it's not really botany is it? No. It's mycology. Yeah, mycology. Yeah, no.
I mean I've always been really really interested. I've been growing oyster
mushrooms for a long time as a hobbyist. I mean I used to work down in London,
worked in kind of restaurant supply chains. I've been Covid here and I kind of
just started growing mushrooms a little bit more professionally. The pandemic
here and you know did this sort of result in a sort of reevaluation of where you
were or was it just something that you fell back on because... I just think...
Because restaurants were closed. Yeah, it was the tipping point really for me. I
worked in my companies for quite a while and never really found my feet and it
was always just like, got to do something for myself and yeah that was just the
tipping point really. Artisan markets are proving an effective way to revive
local businesses, especially in countries where early industrialisation
suppressed traditional crafts. Now artisans are making a comeback in the US,
Australia where the buy from the bush campaign has breathed new life into the
handmade economy and also in the UK where makers markets are becoming a weekend
fixture. Hello, I'm Victoria Crane and I'm the event manager of the West It's
Remakers Market. It's really important that the markets are just once a month
because it really encourages the whole of the local community to come out and
support the event. I originally set up a market for my local town and it was a
way to try and increase footfall. And obviously it's fantastic that storeholders
can earn a living from it. Can they? I mean is this just hobbyists who have just
sort of got a side hustle or have you got people who are earning a living? There
are people that are doing it as a side hustle but there are a lot of people
doing it as a main living. If you're good at what you do and it's what people
want then it can be a good living. A good earner. A good earner, yes. Is there a
sort of rebellious element to this because is this anti-corporatism that people
are getting sort of disgruntled with just feeling a cog in the machine and they
really want to feel more engaged and grounded? A hundred percent. This is an
opportunity to be the decision maker all the way through. This is people's
passions and they thrive on being the main person in what they're doing. And
that report from Business Daily's David Reed. Luria, is this just a fado? The
idea of wanting to have something that someone has actually made with their
hands as opposed to something made on a production line. Is that something that
you feel yourself? You'd rather have something made by somebody? Oh, absolutely.
Oh, I love anything that I find that it's more personable. I use Etsy. I don't
know if that's a website that you guys have over there. It's very well known. Oh
yes, no, very big. Everywhere. I think. I get pottery from France. I get stuff
from all over the world like, you know, scarves that are made from free trade.
You know, it enables you to empower women. Like I tried to. My niece is very big
into empowering women. So I got some free trade items for the holidays for her
from some women that made some items from Africa. And so you could really
personalize that purchase. It packs a punch. And for me, I'd rather have
something even if it's an antique. But I know that it was made from a forge or a
pottery person. I just think it's to me, it has a great life. Well, I was just
going to pry into that because I mean, what is it about that? Because to be
honest, something that's made on a production line, it's probably at least as
efficient to do the job you want, whatever the object is. What on earth is it
that really matters about something that's been made by someone else's hands?
What's the magic? I think it's made better. I mean, in all honesty, I mean, like
if it like like take pottery, for example, if you get pottery on a machine, it's
good. It may look perfect. But I find I'd rather go to my local pottery woman in
town and pick up some even like my berry bowl. I just think that it's actually
made better for whatever reason. That's just my personal opinion. But the
imperfections and the lack of perfection, right, speaks volumes because it's one
of a kind. And so that's one way it's almost like a luxury, if you will, that
you have this piece of pottery stitching, whatever it may be, clothing, it's one
of a kind. And that's what I think going to a maker's market is just such an
amazing experience. Yeah, I think I think that's where you fit the nail on the
head, actually. And I don't know you'd agree, Colin, but the fact that something
is is unique, I mean, because it's made by one person on one day or one moment.
And as Laurie says, has imperfections, but that's part of the charm. Indeed, and
my partner is a maker of handmade ceramics. So I'm going to have to say that.
And you know, I've got a few online links I can send to Laurie and she seems to
be a potential customer, but I'm not going to do business on the... No, I think
we probably aren't allowed to do here, but I'm fascinated. So tell me about this
business, your partner, Colin, what is created? What are the kind of things and
what goes into them? Well, it's basically she can source clay locally, if
possible, recycle clay, make it as sustainably as possible and sell through
websites and online and promote it via her own social media pages or all of that
sort of thing. And one interesting variable, it's not a case in her business
really, but here in New Zealand, we don't have eBay. eBay has been... We had its
lunch eaten, effectively, by a local version. It's called Trade Me. Almost
everyone in the country who wants to buy and sell things, either new or second
hand is now on it. So I get my used bike parts and stuff on there and other
people with businesses can sell. So those people, like we heard in David Reed's
report there, who have a skill, maybe do something as a bit of a side hustle,
then can put it out into the market, maybe test it at those face-to-face
farmer's market type of places. And then if it takes off, produce a bit more at
scale, sell them online to a bigger audience. And that's more or less how it
develops. But I would say you do have to pay more for it. So it is a certain
class of person with a certain means who tends to be able to make use of this.
And some people who need to buy the cheapest possible stuff are going to be less
picky. I think, again, you've actually hit the nail. I also encountered what
Laurie-Ann was saying, because Laurie-Ann, let me come back to you. That is the
point, isn't it? It costs more. And that may be necessary, but it is part of it.
And that immediately cuts out, I guess, a fair chunk of people who might
otherwise buy those sort of things. Yeah, no, most definitely. If you're going
to buy something that's handmade, you have to go into it that it's going to cost
more because of the labor that goes behind it. And so even when you buy antique
linen, it's going to be a little bit more. Why? Because it was on a loom. And
the amount of hours and the craft, it really is artistry. When you really go
right down to it, it's a work of art in just different forms. Yeah. And Colin,
coming back to what your partner makes, those things that you, she charges more
for them, I guess, as you say, than you would find in other places. But is there
a big audience that wants them? I mean, in somewhere like New Zealand, are there
enough people to justify that kind of thing by paying that kind of money?
Probably not. So we're not going to get rich from it. I haven't noticed. Don't
give up the day job. Don't give up the day job. I've noticed the giant sums of
money flooding into our joint bank account just yet. But no, it's a small, I
guess, niche kind of clientele that is interested in it. But Laurieann is right.
It's the fact that these things will last and these ceramic products could
literally last 10,000 years, so long as you take care of them. And as we know,
that's not always the case with the stuff that you can buy, which may do the
job, whatever it is, albeit less aesthetically pleasing and for a cheaper price
at some sort of corporate outlet. Now there was a word that Laurieann used,
which I picked up, I wrote down, in fact, on my notebook, empowering. Now,
Colin, your partner, I mean, she feels empowered, I guess, because she's not
answerable to anybody and she produces things she enjoys producing. I'm putting
those assumptions, but I guess that's true. Yes, absolutely. So she's basically
in charge of everything herself and getting the supplies in and she can choose
the supply and make choices like, for example, getting it from sustainable
sources, from local sources, reusing stuff even from other potters just to make
sure it's as low waste as possible. So that's one of her selling points, if we
put it that way. Yeah, and Laurieann, that is the point, isn't it? The
empowering is actually part of what you're buying in a way, you're approving of
what goes on. Most definitely. And depending on the artists that you're buying
from, you can look at their backstory. And when it comes to putting some dollars
to, putting your dollars to work, you could really make a difference for that
artist. Well, there we are. Interesting insights into the reason we like, we
really do like buying things that are made by someone else's hand. Well, let me
tell you, this is Business Matters that was entirely handmade here at the BBC.
And we all enjoyed doing it. We felt quite empowered. I hope you did too. I hope
you enjoyed it. We'll be back. Well, where are we on Monday at the same time?
But thanks for being with us here on Business Matters. And bye bye. This is the
BBC World Service exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull
Project. My name is Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and
frivolity to children around the world. Children in refugee camps, in orphanages
and care homes. Give him something to wake up excited about. Give him something
to go to bed giggling about. Otherwise, what is the point? Flying Seagulls,
Child's Play, Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Stumped is in 30 minutes. Here is
Alison Mitchell. We'll discuss Australia's collapse in India with the host
winning the first two tests inside three days. And they've retained the border
Gavasca trophy in the process. First we'll hear the details of the sting
operation which has caused India's chief selector.