TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-06-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is John Hammond. Refugee organisations have
criticised as unworkable the government's plans to stop people claiming asylum
when they arrive in small boats. Campaigners say that an international treaty to
protect large parts of the world's oceans is a historic breakthrough. Prince
Harry and Meghan say King Charles has been in touch about attending his
coronation, but they won't say yet whether they'll be going. In sport, Liverpool
have put seven goals past Manchester United, inflicting their heaviest defeat
since 1931. Charities have criticised government plans aimed at tackling illegal
migration, describing them as flawed and vindictive. The Home Secretary, Suella
Braverman, is expected to publish legislation on Tuesday designed to stop small
boats crossings in the Channel. The Refugee Council says the plans would leave
more than 45,000 people at risk of destitution and homelessness each year,
facing long periods locked up in detention. Our political correspondent Helen
Cutt reports. The exact detail of what will be in the new legislation is being
kept under wraps, but there is an expectation that it will include measures such
as stopping people who arrive on small boats from applying for asylum and
banning them from returning once they've been removed from the country. It's
also expected to place a duty on the Home Secretary to remove people who arrive
in this way as soon as is reasonably practicable, either to Rwanda or to a safe
third country. The Northern Ireland Secretary, Chris Heaton-Harris, indicated
that he believed the government would expand other safe and legal routes for
people to claim asylum in the UK. But he told the BBC's Sunday with Laura
Kunzberg the law also had to be toughened. We do need to tighten the law
actually because the law has been challenged and equally when we announced the
Rwanda scheme, it was challenged immediately and that was found in the UK High
Court to be a legal scheme. A deal with Rwanda was struck last year, but nobody
seeking asylum has yet been sent there due to ongoing legal challenges. Some
refugee organisations have said the new plans are unworkable. Christina Marriott
from the Red Cross is among the critics. We work with 30,000 refugees and asylum
seekers every year and what we know, what we hear time and time again, is that
people don't know about the asylum system before they get here. And in fact the
Home Office's own research has shown this. So just making the asylum system
harsher, making it more punitive, won't work. Rishi Sunak is due to meet the
French President Emmanuel Macron on Friday where they are expected to discuss
the small boats issue. The Prime Minister has taken personal responsibility for
stopping the boats. This week is likely to be pivotal in determining whether or
not he succeeds. After ten years of negotiations, an international agreement to
protect the world's oceans has been hailed by environmental campaigners as an
historic breakthrough. At the United Nations headquarters in New York, more than
100 countries signed up to the first global deal to safeguard the high seas. If
adopted and implemented, the treaty will mean that by 2030, 30% of international
waters will be governed by rules aimed at preserving marine life, slowing
climate change and sharing resources found in the deep sea. Esme Stallard
reports on the talks in New York. Countries negotiated for 36 hours straight,
but finally broke a 10-year deadlock. The ship has reached the shore. We will
formally adopt the text. They have pledged to put 30% of the world's oceans into
marine protected areas, share any benefits derived from the deep ocean, and also
carry out environmental assessments on any activities in the high seas. These
are the international waters not controlled by any nation that until now have
been unprotected from fishing, shipping and mining. Jessica Battle from the WWF
Conservation Group explains why this was so significant. What's new with this
agreement is that they are forced to collaborate. Never before have we been able
to have a mechanism that makes shippers, fishers, biodiversity protectors and
others work together to formally adopt and establish protected areas on the high
seas. The main stumbling block was over how genetic material from plants and
animals found in the high seas should be shared between nations. Several
important drugs, including treatments for Covid, HIV and cancer, have already
been developed for marine life. Will McMullan is from Greenpeace. Marine genetic
resources are the genetic resources of things like deep sea sponges that you
might find out there on the seabed in the high seas. And this treaty was going
to be our first attempt, is our first attempt to actually work out what happens
if you discover that those genetic resources are very valuable. For example, is
it the new aspirin, the new drug on the market? The next step is to get the
treaty ratified. This will require 60 countries to legally adopt it, which could
take several years. The Unite union has called off ambulance strikes in England
in the morning and on Wednesday to enter pay talks with the government. Unison
and GMB announced last week that they were pausing industrial action by
ambulance staff after what they called a huge shift in the government's
position. Unite is the smallest of the three ambulance unions, representing
about 3,000 workers. A statement from the Duke and Duchess of Sussex suggests
that the couple will be invited to the coronation of King Charles in May, but it
remains unclear whether they will accept. Here's our Royal Correspondent, Sean
Cochran. A spokesperson for Prince Harry and Meghan said the couple had been
officially contacted about the coronation. An email sent on behalf of Harry's
father, the King. It seems that the Duke and Duchess, based in California, are
going to be invited to the coronation. But the couple's spokesperson would not
confirm whether they had decided to attend the ceremony to be held in two
months. Prince Harry's recent memoir revealed tensions and grievances with other
members of the royal family and he has previously said he was unsure whether he
would go to the coronation. It's understood that some of the expected 2,000
guests are being sent emails in advance asking them to save the date, with
official invitations to be sent closer to the time. Buckingham Palace has
declined comment on who is going to be on the guest list. The Greek Prime
Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has asked for forgiveness from the families of 57
people who died in a rail crash last Tuesday. The authorities have detained a
station master who has been charged with disrupting transport and putting lives
at risk. Thousands of protesters, including striking rail workers, have again
clashed with police, blaming government neglect for the collision near Larissa.
Europe correspondent Nick Beek is monitoring developments. The most violent
episodes in today's protest in Athens were brief and isolated. But anger is
pulsing across Greece at the negligence and systemic failings that allowed this
disaster to happen. In the capital, where the police estimate more than 10,000
gathered, black balloons were released to remember the dozens of people, mainly
students, who were killed. The crash has brought into sharp focus years of
underinvestment in the railway network, as well as antiquated systems.
Apologising to the bereaved families on Facebook, the centre-right Prime
Minister Mitsotakis promised a fast investigation to determine who was at fault.
There have now been three consecutive days of protest in different parts of the
country, and rail workers continue to stage rotating walkouts. A Greek
government minister has told the BBC a lack of funding was the direct result of
the strict terms of international bailouts imposed after the 2010 Greek debt
crisis. But it feels this is becoming a defining issue in the next general
election, which could be just weeks away. Pakistan's media regulator has barred
television channels from broadcasting speeches and comments by the former Prime
Minister Imran Khan. It's accused him of making false allegations against state
institutions and spreading hate speech. The move came after Mr Khan accused the
government of dragging him to the courts by pursuing politically motivated cases
against him. Twitter insiders have told BBC's Panorama that the company is no
longer able to protect users from online abuse, state-coordinated disinformation
and child sexual exploitation. They blame mass sackings and changes made under
Twitter's new owner, the billionaire Elon Musk. Our social media and
disinformation correspondent, Marianna Spring, reports. Since Elon Musk took
over Twitter last October, staff firings and new priorities have thrown the
company into chaos. Now insiders have told BBC Panorama that features intended
to protect users from trolling and harassment are proving difficult to maintain.
Lisa Jennings-Young, a former senior designer, says her entire team, which had
worked to keep users safe, has been sacked. An engineer working for Twitter who
wanted to remain anonymous told me nobody was taking care of this type of work
now. His words are voiced by an actor. It's like a building where all the pieces
are on fire. When you look at it from the outside, the facade looks fine, but I
can see that nothing is working. Data analysed by the anti-extremism think tank
ISD and seen exclusively by us, plus testimony from Twitter users, backs up
claims that hate is thriving under Elon Musk's leadership, with a spike in new
accounts following misogynistic and abusive profiles. Twitter and Elon Musk have
not responded to Panorama's investigation. The social media site says defending
and respecting the user's voice remains one of its core values. Elon Musk's
Twitter storm is on BBC1 at 8pm. Arctic air is bringing cold winds and icy
conditions to parts of the UK. The Met Office says snow is likely to cause some
disruption to travel in areas of north-east Scotland where a yellow warning is
in force, and that warning will extend into north-east England during the day.
In sport, Liverpool have thrashed Manchester United in the Premier League.
Arsenal came from behind to win the Women's League Cup, and Max Verstappen has
started the Formula One season with a win. Shojo Saka rounds up the day's
action. Liverpool have climbed to fifth place in the Premier League with a
record-breaking 7-0 win against Manchester United at Anfield. Mo Salah scored
twice to become the Reds' all-time leading goal scorer in the Premier League.
The Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, is delighted with such a dominant
performance. We were flying, obviously, and it was really difficult. So we know
the result is a freak. But the performance was outstanding, and that's what I
take. Earlier on Sunday, Nottingham Forest salvaged a point at home to Everton,
coming from behind twice to draw 2-2. In the Scottish Premiership, leaders
Celtic thrashed St Mirren 5-1. Arsenal's women have won their first trophy in
four years after beating Chelsea 3-1 in the Women's League Cup final. Great
Britain's Keely Hodgkinson defended her 800 metres title on the final day of the
European Indoor Athletics Championships in Istanbul. The Olympic and World
silver medalist celebrated her 21st birthday on Friday. The easiest and the
smoothest way was to just run hard from the front. That's what I wanted to do. I
wanted to make the others work hard for it if they were going to be anywhere
near me. So, yeah, I'm really happy defending my title. I couldn't ask for
anything more, really. Red Bull's Max Verstappen picked up where he left off
last year with a comfortable victory at Formula One's season-opening Bahrain
Grand Prix. It was the Dutchman's 36th career victory, and he fully expects to
compete for the title again this season. I think we have a good race package. I
mean, of course it will depend a bit race to race, but we can definitely fight
with this. And, yeah, also a big thank you to the team over the winter what
they've done again to give us such a quick race car again. In rugby union's
premiership, Sal Sharks came from behind to beat the league leader Saracen's
35-24, and Kurt Kitayama earned his first PGA Tour win in golf's Arnold Palmer
Invitational at Bay Hill in Florida. The American has nearly doubled his career
earnings after beating Rory McIlroy in Harry Singlish by one shot. Show Joe
soccer. And now a look at the morning papers, many of which examine the
government's proposed migrant measures. The Daily Mail reports that the new laws
will include a lifetime ban on people re-entering the UK if they come here via
illegal means. The Daily Express believes the measures could help the Tories win
the next election by putting clear distance between the government and Labour
policy. The Independent says senior Tories believe Mr Sunak may have over-
promised on the issue. The Times suggests the plans could be in breach of the
European Convention on Human Rights. It says senior Tories are urging the Prime
Minister to pull out of the convention. The Daily Telegraph reports in more
leaked WhatsApp messages that the former health secretary, Matt Hancock,
rejected advice from England's chief medical officer in late 2020 to replace two
weeks of Covid quarantine with five days of testing. Mr Hancock is quoted as
saying that the change would imply the government had got it wrong. And the
Daily Mirror says there's an NHS dentist crisis. It claims 11 million people are
unable to access care. Switzerland's Toblerone chocolate is to lose its famous
labelling, featuring the Matterhorn mountain peak. The company's owner confirmed
the change after announcing that some of the chocolate would now be produced in
Slovakia, hundreds of miles to the east. Since its founding in 1908, Toblerone
has always been produced in Switzerland's capital, Bern, from where Imogen
Fowkes reports. It's the most famous Swiss chocolate and for 50 years its
branding has been that most iconic Swiss mountain, the Matterhorn. But producing
Toblerone in Slovakia means the Matterhorn label falls foul of a Swissness law
which bans the use of national symbols on products not made in Switzerland.
Switzerland's owner, the American food giant Mondele, which also owns Cadbury,
says it will replace the Matterhorn with a more modern, streamlined mountain.
Many Swiss who were already uncomfortable with the move to Slovakia are dismayed
at the change. All in all, it's not been a good week for Swiss products. On
Friday, a US court ruled that American cheese makers could also use the name
Gruyere, one of Switzerland's most famous cheeses. The headlines again. Refugee
organisations have criticised as unworkable the government's plans to stop
people claiming asylum when they arrive in small boats. Campaigners say an
international treaty to protect large parts of the world's oceans is an historic
breakthrough. Prince Harry and Meghan say King Charles has been in touch about
attending his coronation, but they won't say yet whether they'll be going. BBC
News. Read tonight by John Hammond. Now for a look at the weather, here's Matt
Taylor. Good morning. Well, the Arctic air, which will dominate our weather as
we go through into Tuesday for all of us, which is showing its hand already
across the north of Scotland. Frequent snow showers now setting in here. There
could be some issues, particularly across parts of Shetland and the northeast of
the mainland by the time we start Monday morning. Away from that, a lot of
cloud, further rain showers. Where there are any breaks in the cloud, though,
there is a chance of frost to start your Monday. But we'll start the details for
Monday across Scotland, where that really cold air will be setting its way in
gradually through the day. Dividing line will be a weather front across southern
Scotland to begin with, with some outbreaks of rain, tending to sleet and snow,
followed by some sunny conditions into the afternoon and just the odd wintry
flurry. The bulk of the snow showers, though, will be across the north of
Scotland throughout the day, blown around by some strong winds. Snow will be
mounting up and that could cause some travel disruption later. For Northern
Ireland, the weather front will be working across you mainly during the morning
and early part of the afternoon. Lots of cloud, outbreaks of rain around across
many areas, some drizzled too, but then that will turn to sleet and snow
initially over the higher ground. But by the end of the day, as sunshine
develops, we'll see some sleet and snow on the north coast. For Northern
England, we may start off with some sunshine and a touch of frost, but clouding
over mid-morning to mid-afternoon, we'll see outbreaks of rain, followed by some
sleet and snow, push the way southwards. Not too much in the way of wintry
weather at this stage, and we could see the day out with a little bit of
sunshine. As for Wales, the Midlands, East Anglia, all of Southern England and
the Channel Islands, here it's basically as you were, plenty of cloud around, a
scattering of rain showers. There will be some brighter breaks into the
afternoon, but overall a fairly cloudy day. Temperatures for many around 4 to 9
degrees during the afternoon, but from north of England into Scotland, only 2 to
4 Celsius as we see the day out. As we go through Monday night and into Tuesday,
the cloud, outbreaks of rain, sleet and snow will push southwards and become
confined to southernmost counties of England and the English Channel. Icy
conditions then to take us through the night and into Tuesday, but for Tuesday,
frequent snow showers in northern Scotland and eastern parts of northern
England, the odd isolated one elsewhere, and a chilly day with a marked wind
chill too. Now Radio 4, Matthew Syed hears from a woman disgusted by fruits and
vegetables, until a bag of salad begins to change everything. It's January the
3rd 2020 and Lydia Harris is on her lunch break. I'm in the supermarket, I buy a
mini quiche and wondering what to have with it. On a whim I buy a bag of rocket.
Lydia returns to the office and warms up her quiche in the microwave. Then she
takes a small bowl from the communal crockery cupboard. I put a very small
handful in a bowl with a bit of olive oil and some salt. Lydia's colleagues are
looking on in shock. They're trying to be subtle but they can't quite believe
what they're seeing. And that's when it happens. I brace myself, take a forkful
of it and it was done. I had eaten it. Yeah, it's changed things forever for me.
I'm Matthew Syed and this is Sideways, my show about the ideas that shape our
lives with stories of seeing the world differently. In this episode we hear from
a woman on a delicious journey. Taste is a sense that is deeply personal. In
today's episode I'll be thinking about how our individual likes and dislikes
form and how we can find greater joy in what we eat. Eating has never been
simple for Lydia. When I started to move to sort of proper solids, my mum and
dad started to notice that maybe something was not quite right. Something that
had a sort of interesting texture, something that combined a few different
textures I would be very upset about. Now I have to say like all parents I know
that getting children to try new foods can be a struggle. The taste buds are
brand new and it's sometimes easy to forget that each mouthful can be like a
flavour explosion and somewhat overwhelming. But for Lydia the problem went
beyond taste. One of my strongest negative memories of being really little,
really sobbing about trying and failing to eat an apple. Nobody really knew kind
of what was going on and what to do with me. Fruits and vegetables were off the
table. So were things like eggs and baked beans. People began to intervene,
trying to offer Lydia's mum advice. People would say if you don't give her
another option, she'll eat it. And that simply was not true. It wasn't a choice.
It wasn't me putting my foot down. I would rather have starved than eat
something that I was worried about eating. Over time, one word came to define
her diet. Beige. That would be the kind of shorthand for explaining what I could
eat. Bread and potatoes, pasta but really only in a cheese sauce which is quite
a homogenous texture, it's smooth unless you've made a terrible mistake
somewhere along the way. Lydia wasn't being fussy, that label we often apply to
children's eating habits. She was experiencing something different, a hard-line
aversion. She found it really hard to get people to understand. There was one
particular reality TV show in the noughties that made things worse. Andrew seems
to have it all but his life is far from normal because for 26 years the only
thing Andrew Forster has ever eaten is biscuits. There was a programme on when I
was a teenager called Freaky Eaters. It was a kind of freak show. Look at this
person's diet, how are they still alive? Never tried to eat out of us. I'd
rather bring her back up, I'd rather vomit, wrench her and come back up somehow.
When they heard about my diet, people would say, oh like Freaky Eaters. It's
like, oh no, that's how people see me. I'm in that camp with the person who only
eats biscuits. The framing of people's eating habits as freaky can feel a little
pejorative, but the popularity of this BBC3 show and others points at an
uncomfortable truth. We are fascinated by the diets of other people. Think of
the furtive glances that we occasionally give at somebody else's shopping
trolley or lunch box. There's no getting around the fact that you have a body.
You're not a disembodied soul. You are something with a mouth and you need
substance to survive. This is the food writer Ruby Tando. Ruby thinks that much
of our food fascination comes from an angst about what we should be eating and
it goes back a long way. A lot of this anxiety kind of stretches back in this
evolutionary sense. It is beneficial for us to be gravitating towards sweetness,
which is a pretty clear sign of calories, whereas bitterness for the most part
is a sign of toxins. But I think if we look and try to find really clear answers
about the kinds of foods we should be eating, and sometimes we want that, don't
we? We want the security of knowing there's a right or a wrong food. We're being
led astray because I think the thing that is drilled into us through evolution
is not a choice of a specific food, it's the fact of choice itself. As
omnivores, when much of the Earth's buffet is available to us, it's perhaps no
surprise that food choices can sometimes feel overwhelming. Food is a point at
which our body blurs with the world, where the outside comes inside. It's a
philosophical and vulnerable boundary. For our ancestors, who were learning what
was safe to eat through trial and error, it paid to be cautious about food. But
food has been a source of angst at plenty of other times throughout history.
Pope Gregory I, what he said about gluttony wasn't just that it was a sin to eat
more than you want or more than you need. He actually shuts down the possibility
of taking any pleasure in food. So he said that it was a vice to eat to satisfy
the vile sense of taste. This shame, the sense that you are a lusty, physical
beast instead of being an enlightened human, I think that comes through even
now. Gosh, I almost feel sinful anticipating my dinner tonight. But I suppose
working out what to eat is complicated and very personal. Our food choices are
freighted with evolutionary, historical and cultural baggage. They depend on
what's available and desirable where we live, but also the resources we have to
purchase them. And of course, figuring out what we actually enjoy. But for
Lydia, working out what to eat was in a certain sense simple. There were some
foods that made her skin crawl. I did a brownie batch. We had to eat a vegetable
every day. My real absolute nightmare. And one day I ate a single pea, just
swallowed it down with a glass of water. But that was the only successful day.
My mum had to sort of go into brownies the next week and just say, we can't do
this batch. It's not happening. As she got older, Lydia started to feel more and
more embarrassed by her diet. One Christmas, Lydia had to navigate a meal at a
work party in a chic restaurant. She felt like she was on display. We were
served venison and red cabbage. They had been together on one platter. And so I
just simply could not eat it. The amount of interest was really off-putting. I
just felt like I didn't fit in. And actually that could change the way I'm
thought of at work, which is a really scary prospect. Lydia wanted to try new
things. My parents liked to go to a couple of really, really good Chinese
restaurants. The smell was just amazing. This kind of spicy and slightly savoury
and a bit sweet. But Lydia simply couldn't overcome her aversion. I could smell
it and I could want it, but I could not get over that textural barrier to be
able to experience it for myself. It was a real visceral reaction I would have
to food. I would gag on stuff, just be almost physically unable to eat things.
And yeah, I could only kind of pick around the edges. But I had enough flavour
from those to really feel what it was that I was missing. Most people, I think,
have at least one food that makes their skin crawl. Although, I have to confess,
I'm not one of them. I eat almost anything. Thinking of my wife, though, she
cannot stand lamb and she actually struggles if I order it in the restaurant,
which is why I don't have it very much. It's something about the smell and
texture that elicits that visceral reaction. To me, it's delicious. To her,
disgusting. And it turns out that the feeling of disgust may be a critical
aspect of our evolutionary history. The things that prompt our disgust reaction
may have partly evolved in order to protect us from things that will infect or
poison or otherwise remind one of mortality, of death and decay. This is Carolyn
Korsmeier, Professor of Philosophy at the University of Buffalo in New York.
Carolyn has spent a lot of time thinking about disgusting things. Disgust is
thought to be a basic emotion. The expression of disgust is a sort of ugh, with
a downturned mouth and a sort of scrunched up nose and clenched eyes. There's a
huge range of things that elicit disgust. The smell of excretion, the slimy feel
of rotten fruit, the sight of decaying roadkill. We do our best to stay away
from these things. When it comes to food, we often don't hesitate to yuck
someone else's yum. I had a guest at American Thanksgiving from what was at the
time East Germany and we served the traditional pumpkin pie and she was just
appalled. How can you eat a pumpkin? It's pig food. But taste is malleable.
Sometimes we're tentatively willing to try foods that we have previously found
disgusting. Disgusting food prompts our curiosity. What's going on there? How
close can I get to it? How much can I tolerate? Strangely enough, Carolyn points
out that with food, many of the things which initially disgust us are later
cultivated into gourmet delights. For the most part, we're disgusted by rotting,
decaying food, but in some instances, it's a delicacy. To have meat that has
turned slightly strengthens the meat flavor. I have read fascinating examples of
times when people have prescribed that you wait until the pheasant is ready to
drop to the floor. It's been hung by his feet for several days, maybe weeks.
Remove both the feathers and the maggots, then your pheasant is ready to eat.
It's fascinating that at many points in history, these so-called high meats have
become the zenith of culinary fashion. In the 16th century, seeking perhaps to
emphasize their similarity to the cultures of ancient Greece and Rome, French
scholars altered their perceptions of what parts of animals were good to eat, as
well as how they were prepared. The English soon followed suit, cultivating a
taste for these newfangled preparations, and they rose to the status of the
delicious. To enjoy decaying food might sound bizarre, but I'm sure many of us
have trodden this path. Cheese, gorgonzolas, stiltons, and so forth. Some are so
stinky you have to keep them away from your other food, or it will become very
unpalatable. People need to train themselves to eat something that they are told
is the height of flavor, and with practice you can learn to like them. It's
almost as if the very process of overcoming initial disgust makes the food more
delicious. These are sometimes called hard-won tastes, and I can see this
journey in my love affair with Roquefort, a sheep's milk blue cheese from
southern France. I remember the first time I saw and smelled it when it was
served at a friend's house. I looked on in a state of disbelief. Is this family
voluntarily eating this stuff? Have I arrived in an alien civilization? Then the
next time I saw it on a cheese board I had a tiny nibble. And so by a process of
stealth and increment, and via the malleable nature of taste, it became a firm
favorite. There's very little better in life than watching television in the
evening with a decent slice of Roquefort, a few white grapes, and some buttered
water biscuits. As the years passed, Lydia tried to move beyond the disgust that
she felt towards certain foods, to come a little closer to the pleasure that
others seem to take in a fruit salad or a vegetable lasagna. I had moments of
really wanting to try stuff, but basically it was just not something that I
could get over. I couldn't rationalize my way out of it. In 2016, something
happened to Lydia that amplified her struggle. I was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, which is a type of blood cancer. Obviously it's this devastating
diagnosis, everything becomes really uncertain, and I had this real nagging
fear. You know, if I'm going through all of this treatment, if I want to be
healthy again, do I need to be eating fruit and vegetables? Lydia was comforted
when she reached out to her consultant for advice. She just said, I don't care
what you eat as long as you keep eating. That's the main thing, you have to keep
eating. She really lifted a lot of the pressure that I felt during that time.
Lydia started a slow, grueling course of treatment. The procedures were brutal.
I was really worried about the bone marrow biopsy. It's an extremely invasive
and incredibly painful procedure that they do while you're awake with a huge
needle. I did faint, but actually that was a blessing to be honest. My body was
all of a sudden a real site of horror, basically. It suddenly felt like kind of
unknown territory. But finally, thankfully, it was over and the experience was
life-changing. I'd always had this thought if I had a very serious illness,
rather than go through lots of horrible treatment and procedures, maybe I'd just
not do anything about it. Like that's how squeamish I was about things. But when
I actually became ill, that wasn't an option. Anything about that changed my
relationship with my body and my health forever. Before long, Lydia started to
notice changes in areas that were off-limits to her before. Those weird hairs
that were growing out of your back, I had them analysed. They were definitely
not human. I'm a big film fan and horror had always been the genre that I could
not really dip my tone to. In the last couple of years, I have gone down the
rabbit hole of body horror. David Cronenberg has sort of shot up the ranks for
me in terms of my favourite directors. Movies like the 1986 film The Fly from
Brooks Films and 20th Century Fox Studios were now Saturday night viewing at
Lydia's house. But her tolerance for horror films wasn't the only thing that had
changed. At a Boxing Day buffet, Lydia did something unthinkable. The Christmas
spirit just compelled me and I had a tiny slice of this cheese and ham quiche
and it was delicious. Lydia had been through something huge and it was altering
her sense of taste. A food she had spent nearly three decades avoiding with
monumental amounts of effort because of its wobbly texture now appeared
tolerable. It turns out that very small changes in our perception of food can
have a huge impact on how much we enjoy it. If you've got something that's kind
of angular, say like a slice of cake, it's better to have it so that the point
is pointing away from the diner, the same cake pointing towards you and your
brain's fear circuits light up for a moment because it looks like it could be
something dangerous. This is Charles Spence, a brilliant experimental
psychologist at Oxford University. His speciality? Gastrophysics. For too long
there's been so much of a focus on the chemical make-up of food and drinks.
There have been hundreds if not thousands of studies of coffee, roasting
process, how does that affect the taste of the coffee. But no one has ever
studied scientifically the coffee cup. So how does that affect the experience?
Experiments have steadily revealed that a huge array of sensory inputs can
impact on how much we enjoy the food we eat. We find coffee more intense when we
sip it from a white cup. We prefer the taste of food that is beautifully plated.
Heavier cutlery makes meals taste better and so does eating with our hands. How
can these factors have such a large impact? When we think about taste, our
thoughts turn immediately to the mouth. After all, it's where we put our food.
One of the great tricks our minds play on us is to convince us all that that
drink we taste in our mouth is really coming from our mouth. I can taste the
flavour right there on my tongue and yet all the other senses are also playing a
role in taste perception. In other words, all of our other senses are working
collaboratively to impact our eating experience. Even sound has an influence on
how food tastes. We had 20 hungry undergraduates, each with two tubes of
Pringles. We had a microphone that picked up the sound of their crunching. Then
we could make your crunch louder or quieter. And what we were able to show is
that we can make those potato chips about 15% fresher, more liked, simply by
boosting the sound of the crunch. Charles came up with a hypothesis to answer
the much-pondered question, why do so many people drink tomato juice when they
fly? We thought maybe people are choosing a drink that is high in umami because
that must stand out well to the noise in the aeroplane. In 2015, researchers at
Cornell University put this theory to the test. They were able to show that yes,
those loud sounds does indeed suppress people's ability to taste sweetness in
food and to taste salt in food. But at the same time, umami, that mysterious
fifth taste, was actually accentuated. Charles helped a major airline create a
menu paired with sonic seasoning to combat the impact of engine noise on
flavour. When people chose what to eat from the menu, then they could have
matching music designed to bring out the taste of those dishes on the menu that
they might have chosen. The Proclaimers for a bit of a Scottish salmon.
Pavarotti, good for bringing out the bitter notes in the chocolate dessert.
Spencer's found that tinkling music can enhance sweetness. So how about a lemon
drizzle cake with a bit of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells playing in the
background? Having said that, gastrophysics isn't just about making airline food
more palatable. Charles has also worked to improve the experience of eating for
older people who might be losing their interest in food. My mother who died of
Alzheimer's in the last year or so in the care home she was in, ice cream was
the only thing we could get her to eat. But I sort of was thinking how could we
make ice cream a functional food, one that delivered nutrients and benefits. And
so together with Chef Joseph Yousef from Kitchen Theory, we made this range of
ice creams. We had a cream of tomato, soup ice cream, prawn cocktail ice cream,
the flavours that we thought would be familiar from their youth. Charles and his
team were concerned about perceptions. Test subjects might see pink ice cream
and expect the taste of raspberry. The tomato flavour might be a bit shocking.
We had tomato soup labels on the screen, or we had Vera Lynn singing in the
background, trying to correct the atmosphere to signal the right flavour. I love
Charles' appetite to bring science and experimentation to food, to look beyond
taste as a one-dimensional linear sense and tease out the multifaceted sensorial
nature of our relationship with what we eat. Lydia's success on Boxing Day with
the slice of cheese and ham quiche made her wonder whether she ought to prod at
her perceptions a little more. A week later, Lydia bought a miniature quiche at
the supermarket and on a whim, some rocket leaves to go with it. Even at that
point I thought, I'm not going to eat this. And I surprised myself by making it
all the way through. I didn't love it. I'm not sure that I even really liked it,
but I had eaten it. Lydia had actually eaten a vegetable and it felt like a time
to take more chances, to step even further beyond her comfort zone. Bit by bit,
Lydia began to experiment. Roasted carrots, baby corn, crispy kale. I didn't
want to overthink it and so I made a really concerted effort to try new things
as often as possible. One by one, she was taking on the world of vegetables. It
didn't take long for Lydia to compile a new list of likes. Spinach and feta filo
pie, courgette leek and goat's cheese soup. Lasagna was the kind of big,
exciting moment for me. It was at that point the most delicious thing I had ever
eaten. And I did a little dance in my chair at the table. I just could not
believe that I could eat this and that everybody else was just merrily going
about their lives eating lasagna and they must be taking it for granted. The
doors to the world's pantry had finally been thrown wide open and Lydia could
enter. Lydia found inspiration from two particular cookery writers. I don't
believe it's possible to live well without eating well. Nigella was a constant
in my mum's house. She's one of my mum's absolute favourite cooks. Whatever the
day, I want food that makes me feel good, not just when I'm eating it, but when
I'm cooking it too. Just her philosophy about food, being about pleasure. Ruby
Tando, her book Cook As You Are, gives you lots of options with the recipes. If
you don't have this or you can't afford that, this is what you can do instead,
which I think is such a generous way to write about food. Ruby also proposes
leaving some room for curiosity when it comes to appetite. We can use our
appetite as this wonderful tool for learning something new, even if we don't end
up enjoying the things that we're trying. If we can just say, do you know what,
I'm curious. You might say, I've not liked parmesan when I've had it shaved in
big flat pieces, but I wonder, would I like it if I had it really finely grated,
mixed into this sauce? It's just about asking a tiny, tiny question today and
seeing if that can take you somewhere new. When it comes to food, as with so
much else in life, it pays to keep an open mind. Trying new things,
experimenting from time to time, it helps us to explore new frontiers. And for
Lydia, this gentle, coaxing encouragement of her appetite has led to a wonderful
change in her day-to-day life. I have access to something that's pleasurable
every day. Even if everything else has gone badly that day, I know I'm going to
come home and eat something delicious. After a few months of radical changes to
her diet, Lydia went home to share a meal with her mum. She had really thought
hard about what we were going to eat together. One of the things was a lamb bake
with lots of vegetables in and tahini and a tomato sauce. It was absolutely
delicious. And it wasn't long until Lydia was able to cook for her mum in
return. Mapo tofu, which is now my ultimate comfort food. She hadn't eaten it
before, so it was really exciting for me to introduce something new to my mum.
She loves to eat, and it had been something that we couldn't share together. We
have so much else in common. Finally, we'd kind of moved that much closer
together. It was really exciting. I'd often felt during this journey that I'd
been missing out for a long time. Coming to it late, it's something that I will
never take for granted. Taste is one of the most wonderful aspects of human
experience. And that's why it's been a joy to hear about Lydia. By overcoming a
lifelong aversion, she entered a kaleidoscopic world full of colour and flavour.
She started to approach mealtimes with curiosity and that spirit of adventure.
As creatures of habit, whose likes and dislikes are often forged early, this is
an attitude that can be easy to lose. You might assume that taste preferences
are set in stone when they are in fact endlessly malleable. I'm definitely not
going to take broccoli for granted ever again. And what's certain is on the way
home tonight, I'm going to stop off at the supermarket, buy some Rockfor, some
white grapes and some water biscuits and eat them. Thanks to the producer of
this episode, Nadia Mehdi. The series editor is Catherine Godfrey. Sideways is
produced by Novel for BBC Radio 4. And Matthew Side will be back at the same
time next week. On Radio 4, Bells on Sunday, which this week comes from St
Peter's Church in Henley in Suffolk. The church is a Grade 1 listed building,
the main body of which dates from the 13th century. The tower houses a ring of
eight bells by various founders, the oldest of which were cast by the Bury St
Edmunds Foundry sometime in the late 15th century. The tenor bell weighs 800
weight and is tuned to the note of Ab. We now hear the bells ringing Bristol
Surprise Major by members of the Suffolk Guild of Bell Ringers, who celebrate
their 100th anniversary this year. Those are the bells of St Peter's Church in
Henley in Suffolk. And now, the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on
behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Monday 6th March. There
are warnings of gales in Forties, Cromarty, Forth, Dogger, Fisher, German Byte,
Hebrides, Fair Isle, Faroes and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at
1800. Low Faroes, 1011. Expected Fisher, 980 by 1800 Monday. The area forecast
for the next 24 hours. Viking North at Cera. Northerly 2 to 4, veering
Northeasterly 4 to 6, occasionally 7 in Viking. Squally snow showers, good,
occasionally very poor. South at Cera. Northwesterly 3 to 5, becoming Cyclonic 5
to 7, perhaps gale 8 later. Occasional sleet or snow, good, occasionally very
poor. Forties Cromarty. Variable 2 to 4, becoming Cyclonic, then northerly 6 to
gale 8, occasionally severe gale 9 later in Forties. Rain or sleet, then squally
snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Forth Tyne. Variable 2, becoming
Southwesterly 3 to 5, then veering Northwesterly 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 in
North East Forth. Rain, then snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Dogger
Fisher, German Bight. North or North West 3 to 5, becoming Cyclonic 4 to 6,
increasing 7 to severe gale 9 later. Occasional rain or snow, good, occasionally
very poor. Humber Thames. North West 2 to 4, backing South West 4 to 6, veering
North West again later. Showers, wintry later, good, occasionally poor. Dover
White, Portland Plymouth. North West 2 to 4, backing West 3 to 5, occasionally 6
later. Showers, good. Biscay, Variable 2 to 4, becoming Southeasterly 5 later in
South West. Fair, good. Trafalgar West or South West 3 to 5, rain or drizzle,
good, occasionally poor. South Fitzroy. Cyclonic 4 to 6, occasional rain, good,
occasionally poor. North Fitzroy Sol, Southeasterly 4 to 6 in West, Variable 2
to 4 in East. Showers, rain later, good, occasionally poor later. Lundy Fasnet.
North West 2 to 4, backing West 4 to 6. Showers, good, occasionally moderate.
Irish Sea. North Westerly 3 to 5, occasionally 6 in North. Showers, becoming
wintry, good, occasionally poor. Shannon. Variable 2 to 4, becoming
Northeasterly 5 or 6 later in North. Showers, rain later, good, occasionally
poor later. Rockall Mallin. North West 3 to 5, veering North or North East 5 to
7. Showers, turning to snow, good, occasionally very poor. Hebrides Bailey, Fair
Isle, Faroes, South East Iceland. Cyclonic at first in Fair Isle, otherwise
Northerly or Northeasterly 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 except in Bailey. Squally
sleet or snow showers, good, occasionally very poor. Light icing in South East
Iceland. Now the weather reports from Coastal Stations for 2300. Tyree
Automatic. North West by North 4, 22 miles, 1011, falling. Stornoway. North West
by North 4, recent rain, 30 miles, 1008, falling. Lowick. South West by West 4,
heavy rain, 3 miles, 1005, falling more slowly. Wick Automatic. South by West 3,
slight drizzle and rain, 4 miles, 1007, falling. Aberdeen. South by East 3,
slight rain, 4 miles, 1008, falling. Lucas. West South West 1, recent rain, 19
miles, 1009, falling. Boomer. West by South 2, 10010, falling. Bridlington. West
North West 2, 10010, falling. Sandetti Light Vessel Automatic. North West by
West 3, 5 miles, 10010, falling. St Catharines Point Automatic. North West by
West 3, 10012, falling. Jersey. North West by West 3, slight drizzle, 12 miles,
10013, falling. Channel Light Vessel Automatic. North West 4, 10014, falling.
Scilly Automatic. North 3, 22 miles, 10016, falling slowly. Milford Haven. North
West by West 2, more than 38 miles, 10014, falling slowly. Aberporth. West 4, 19
miles, 10013, falling. Valley. West by North 3, 14 miles, 10011, falling.
Liverpool Crosby. West by South 3, recent rain, 5 miles, 10011, falling.
Valencia. Calm. 16 miles, 10017, falling. Ronalds Way. West 2, 10011, falling.
Mallinhead. North West 4, 22 miles, 10012, falling. Macro Hanisch Automatic.
North West by West 3, 30 miles, 10010, falling. Now the weather forecast for the
inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland valid for the following 24
hours. The general situation. A deepening area of low pressure currently centred
near Northern Scotland will move east-south eastwards across the North Sea
during Monday, bringing gales for a time to the far north. As the low moves away
eastwards, it will allow a very cold and unstable northerly airflow to sink
southwards across the British Isles, with squally snow showers affecting many
areas. Cape Wrath to Rattray Head, including Orkney. Cyclonic 3 to 5, becoming
North 5 to 7, increasing gale 8 for a time at first. Rain or sleep, then squally
snow showers. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Rattray Head to Berwick-
upon-Tweed. Southwesterly 3 to 5, veering northerly or northwesterly 5 to 7,
occasionally gale 8 at first in north and 4 in south. Rain or sleet, then
squally snow showers. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Berwick-upon-
Tweed to Whitby. Variable 3 or less, becoming west or south-west 4 or 5, then
veering north-west 5 to 7. Rain for a time at first, then sleet or snow showers,
squally later. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor later. Whitby to
Gibraltar Point. West or north-west 2 or 3, backing west or south-west 4 or 5,
veering north-west 4 to 6 later. Rain for a time at first, wintry showers later.
Moderate or good, occasionally poor later. Gibraltar Point to North Forland.
Westerly or north-westerly 2 to 4, backing south-westerly 4 or 5, veering north-
westerly 3 to 5 later. Showers becoming wintry later in north. Good,
occasionally moderate. North Forland to Celseybill. North-westerly 2 to 4,
backing westerly or south-westerly 4 to 6. Showers good, occasionally moderate.
Celseybill to Lime Regis. North-west 3 or 4, backing west 4 to 6. Showers good.
Lime Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly. North-west 2 to 4,
backing west or south-west 4 or 5. Showers good. Land's End to St David's Head,
including the Bristol Channel. West or north-west 3 to 5, backing west or south-
west 4 or 5 later. Showers then rain later. Good, occasionally moderate. St
David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's Channel. Northerly 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 in far north, decreasing 3 at times elsewhere, veering northerly
or north-easterly 3 to 5 later. Rain or showers becoming wintry later in north.
Moderate or good, occasionally poor later in north. Great Ormhead to the Mull of
Galloway. West or north-west 2 or 3, increasing 4 to 6, veering north 3 to 5
later. Rain or showers, then sleet or snow showers later. Good, occasionally
moderate at first and poor later. Isle of Man. North-west 3 or 4, increasing 5
or 6, veering north 3 to 5 later. Showers becoming wintry later. Good,
occasionally moderate at first and poor later. Loch Foyle to Carlingford Loch.
North-westerly, veering northerly later, 4 or 5, occasionally 6 except in south-
east. Showers turning to snow later, good, occasionally moderate at first and
very poor later. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the Firth of
Clyde and North Channel. North-westerly, veering northerly later, 3 to 5,
increasing 6 for a time in North Channel. Showers turning to snow, good,
occasionally moderate at first and very poor later. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenham
Erken Point. 3 to 5, veering north 4 to 6. Showers turning to snow, good,
occasionally very poor. Ardenham Erken Point to Cape Wrath. North-west, veering
north 5 to 7, occasionally gale 8 at first. Showers becoming squally and turning
to snow. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Shetland Isles. North-east,
backing north later, 5 to 7. Showers becoming squally, occasionally very poor.
And that completes the Shipping Bulletin and brings us to the end of our day
here on Radio 4. Thank you for listening with me tonight. I'm Amanda Litherland.
I'm here at Broadcasting House in London and I hope that the rest of your night
is a very peaceful one wherever you are. That's about it from me for now. Evie,
good night.