TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 by James E. Phelan and abridged and produced by Mary Ward Lowry. BBC News at 11
o'clock. Police in Lancashire say they have formally identified the body they
found yesterday in the River Wire as Nicola Bully. The death will now be
investigated by the coroner. The 45-year-old was last seen walking her dog more
than three weeks ago. In a statement, her family thanked the community for their
support but criticised some recent media coverage as absolutely appalling. Steve
Wilkins is a former Detective Chief Superintendent who's investigated some high-
profile murders. It is a very difficult balance between meeting the needs of
everybody and sometimes that scrutiny can be very distracting for the force
because the resources that they're using are the same resources that days after
will be patrolling the streets. They don't have a group of specialists who are
sitting waiting for incidents such as we have seen. Junior doctors in England
are to go on a three-day strike next month after voting overwhelmingly for
industrial action. Their main union, the British Medical Association, said
almost every one of the 37,000 doctors who cast a ballot voted yes. The health
secretary, Steve Barkley, said the move was deeply disappointing. Seismologists
have recorded another earthquake near the city of Antakya in southeastern Turkey
with a magnitude of 6.4. Three people have died and more than 200 have been
wounded. More than 46,000 people died after a stronger quake struck Turkey and
Syria two weeks ago. President Biden has paid a surprise visit to Kiev days
before the first anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. He met President
Zelensky and, during a news conference, promised to stand with Ukraine for as
long as it takes. And a vast collection of precious artefacts stolen from
Cambodia decades ago have been returned to the country after surfacing in
London. The crowns, necklaces, amulets and other jewels from the Angkor period
are many centuries old. Thousands of antiques were smuggled out of the country
in the 1970s when Cambodia was ravaged by civil wars and a genocide carried out
by the Khmer Rouge regime. The collection was handed to Cambodian authorities in
a car park in north London. BBC News. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC radio drama. The huntsman now purposefully directed his
footsteps. Analyzing the most ground-breaking plays from the vast drama archive.
It's intensely physical. It's visceral. You just took your wallet. You can go to
different places and tell the stories from different points of view. Dramatic
beats with me, Michael Simmons Roberts. Everything in British storytelling from
television owes so much to radio drama. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. On Saturday
night at 8. Colleagues at Westminster are just putting the finishing touches to
today in Parliament. You can hear their efforts in half an hour. And although
word of mouth with Michael Rosen. My father was partly brought up by his
grandfather Joe. Joe had been born in Poland. One story that my father used to
like telling us was how as a boy he used to sit with his grandfather helping him
read an English newspaper. When my father told us the story he would imitate his
grandfather's accent and tell us how he would explain to his grandfather what
the words in the newspaper meant. I know this has to be a memory of when my
father was a boy because his grandfather died in 1932 when my father was 13. I
often think about this moment. My father as a boy acting as a bridge between the
generations, between cultures, between languages. Since then I've sat in the
waiting room at the doctors or in hospital and seen children with their parents
or grandparents doing just the same. A doctor or nurse talks to the adult and
the child, sometimes as young as 8 or 9 or 10, interpreting for them. I've often
wondered about the responsibility of this. What if the doctor is wanting to tell
the adult about a life-threatening illness or something very complicated and
technical? I had one glimpse of this myself, albeit when I was an adult. My
father had a heart attack in France and he was rushed to hospital. I got on the
plane and went straight there. Rather arrogantly I thought I could handle any
language problems. The doctor explained to me that my father had had an
anfartus. I thought, what's that? Didn't my stepmother say that he had had a
heart attack? Am I going to have to tell him he's had an anfartus? Instead, the
doctor looked at my puzzled face. An anfartus et une crease cartiac? he
explained. An anfartus is a heart attack, a coronary thrombosis. Yes, so much
for my skills as a medical interpreter. Now they're not easy these moments, far
from it, and someone who's had to negotiate them many times is my guest on the
programme today, Sanmeet Kaur. Welcome to the programme Sanmeet. Thank you
Michael. Now let's go back to the beginning. Where's your family from? So my
family's from Afghanistan. My dad is from Kabul and my mum is from Jalalabad,
which is not too far from the border in Pakistan. And when did your family come
to England? My family came to England in 2000, so just before the war on terror
and following the rise of the Taliban in the 1990s. So how old was everybody?
How old were your parents at the time? My parents, I think, were in their late
20s. I was five and my older sister was around seven and a half at the time.
Right. And what was the family language or perhaps several family languages? So
my parents both can speak Farsi, which is spoken in Afghanistan, but at home we
spoke Punjabi because we're Afghan Sikhs and Sikhs speak Punjabi, which is from
India. So we spoke a mixture. The dialect we spoke was actually a mixture of
Farsi and Punjabi. Has that got a name or does it just say it's a mixture? Yeah,
it's called Gabli. So it kind of goes from like, Kabul, which is the place where
a lot of the Afghan Sikhs live. I get you right. And when your parents came,
could they speak any English? No, none of us could speak English, all four of
us. We had no grasp of the English language. Not at all. Not a word. No. Not at
all. No. Right. So you were five, then straight into school? Yep. So when we got
here, because we were asylum seekers, the only housing they could find for us at
the time was in Newcastle, which didn't have a huge Sikh community. And in
London, there was a Sikh community, so we'd hope to be in London. But instead we
moved to Newcastle where we were completely isolated. And yeah, me and my sister
went to school not speaking a word of English. Was it frightening? Yeah, I was
terrified. I couldn't understand what the teachers were saying to me. And I was
also in a completely new environment. And I was a little brown girl and I was
surrounded by majority white kids who weren't very nice, especially in the
aftermath of the war on terror. There was a lot of racism happening that I
witnessed that my parents were going through. And then that obviously feeds down
to kids and how they behave and the vocabulary they use in school. I remember I
was five years old and I could understand what they were saying when they were
like, go back home. I seemed to pick that up very quickly, which was pretty
horrible, which was really horrible. And how long were you there in a Newcastle
school? So I was there for about a year. In that year, do you think you were
fairly fluent at English by the end of it? I'm just guessing. Yeah, I think it
took about six months to like grasp the language because I went to school every
day. So I was having intensive sessions in English and how to learn it, I guess.
And were they teaching you English or did you just pick it up in the playground,
pick it up in lessons just as it unfolded? It was a bit of both. I remember I
had a teaching assistant who was assigned to me to help me in school, which was
really nice. It was really funny because I think she was Muslim and they thought
because I came from Afghanistan, she'd be able to speak to me in Farsi. I
couldn't understand Farsi. I only knew the Punjabi dialect that we spoke. So
bless her, she was really helpful, but the school would assume that we could
speak the same language and that that wasn't the case. Right. So at this moment,
while you're still in Newcastle, mum and dad are either of them going out to
work? Yeah, so my dad was working because he had to work to help us survive as a
family. So my dad was picking up bits of the language. I think the job he got
was with someone else who was from the community. So I think he went to the
Gurdwara, found his contacts and then found someone who could speak Hindi and
got a job. That's the temple, is it the Gurdwara? Yeah, the Gurdwara is a Sikh
temple. Right, I see. So then that year comes to an end and you go to London.
Yeah. And is that different for you linguistically? Yeah, a little bit. There
was more of a community. So my parents wouldn't always need me to support them.
They had other family members to support them if they needed. But in a lot of
ways, it was quite similar because I was me and my sister with the primary
contact for my parents for the outside world, especially my mum. And now at this
moment, you're bilingual then, aren't you? Because you're speaking one or
possibly two languages at home and English at school. Yeah, yeah, yeah,
definitely. So are you immediately thrown into situations with either your mum
or your dad where you're acting as an interpreter? So let's say doctor
surgeries. Yeah, definitely. That was one of my first interactions where I
remember being terrified that I had this role where I was that bridge that you
mentioned earlier between my mum and the outside world. So my mum became
pregnant when we got to the UK. So my little sister, who's now 21. Yeah, she was
born in 2001 and in the lead up to her birth, my mum had obviously lots of
medical appointments. And it was very tricky for her to get an interpreter. I
don't think there was like funding available or like the appointments would take
much longer if we'd waited for the council to provide an interpreter. So it
would often be me and my sister, because we'd picked up English much quicker by
being in school, we would be that bridge. So I would sit with my mum in the
doctor's office and try and translate what was going on for her, whether she was
cramping or anything else. And a lot of like, kind of logical stuff that as an
adult, I'm having, I struggle with understanding, but as a five year old, so
many technical words that I just didn't obviously, I couldn't grasp. I mean, how
did you do that? I mean, just take the word contraction. So this is being thrown
at a five year old. Did the doctor then say, well, it's a kind of squeezy thing?
And then you thought squeeze. Yes, I can say that. I think it was, yeah, working
together with the doctor to try and figure out what exactly we were getting. I
think I probably said pain in this area. And like, it was a bit of a work in
progress between me and the doctor to try and figure out exactly what we were
getting at. And it was guesswork for both of us, I guess. And was it funny? I
mean, or was it usually a bit more tense than that? I think it was quite
stressful because I think we both could feel my mum's frustration and not being
able to advocate for herself. So it was, it was quite tricky, I think, for the
doctor, for myself and my mum because she was in pain. So that that was quite
tricky, I think. I suppose the one thing going forward was that she had had two
babies before. Yeah. So she did sort of know, know the ropes, as it were. Yeah,
yeah, exactly. I think the thing that was really stressful to her, she was in a
whole new country. And that was really, really stressful about how to navigate,
you know, the mental strain of coming to a new country as a refugee alongside
being pregnant. I think it was the mental and physical strains at that time that
really got her down. But what about you? I mean, I'm just imagining, you know,
most five, six year olds, the idea of mummy having a baby, it's amazing. It's
incredible. How can it be? It's sort of, it's a bit, it's amazing mystery and
also very exciting. And then, you know, you get a cot ready for this baby, but
you, you, you're almost kind of vicariously pregnant yourself as a five year
old. I mean, just to put it very bluntly. Yeah, it was, it was quite strange
thinking back now, actually, I don't, I don't remember being excited for it at
all. I was very nervous. I took in a lot of my mum's anxiety around the whole
pregnancy, I guess, because I was interpreting it for her, so I felt very
closely linked to it myself. And did anybody seem embarrassed by you being
there, the midwives or the doctors or indeed your mum? Did your mum sort of
think, well, I wouldn't normally be explaining this to a five year old? I think
everyone was. I think everyone realised what an unfortunate and unfair situation
it was for all of us to be in. And I think my mum would have really liked to
learn the language herself, but we came to the UK at a time where, I mean, there
still is a lot of hostility towards refugees and she was terrified to go
outside. She was really, really scared. And it was also at a time when ESOL
funding, you know, English as an additional language funding was being slashed.
So she didn't really have a chance to get out there and learn the language for
herself. I'm sure she would have absolutely loved to be able to advocate for
herself and speak for herself. And we didn't have Zoom in those days, did we? We
did not, no. Yes, other remote systems are available. Yes. So let's move on now
to matters to do with immigration, citizenship and the like. Were you drawn into
those as well? Because obviously you're seeking asylum, so you're looking for
leave to remain. I'm just coming up with phrases that presumably as a six, seven
year old, you're learning how to hop between the languages with. Yes, that
right? Yeah, definitely. So when we were initially in Newcastle, I don't
remember much of having to like regale the story, I guess, because it was sort
of like written down. These are people being placed in this housing because X, Y
and Z has happened to them. But then when we came to London, because we were
looking for housing at that point, we were essentially homeless for a little bit
because the council hadn't found us housing. So we'd be going from different
councils explaining why we needed housing. And I just remember being sat in
like, you know, a certain council's office and as a five year old having to
describe what my parents had been through growing up in Afghanistan and why we
had to leave and why we as Afghan Sikhs had to flee because as a religious
minority, we were persecuted. And yeah, I was describing trauma that even as an
adult, I'm just beginning to process. But as a five year old, it was so it was
seared into my mind, that narrative. And was your the way that worked, was it
that your mum would tell the story, your mum or dad would tell the story and
then you would relay it? Or did you already kind of have it off by heart? And so
they would turn to you and say, well, how did you get here? It was definitely my
mum and dad asking me to translate for them. But yeah, and it did change for
like different people that we were speaking to as well. So if it was often it
might just be just my mum that they wanted to speak to or just my dad that they
wanted to speak to. And their narratives would obviously be different. For
example, one of the biggest threats that my mum faced was as a woman in
Afghanistan, it was very tricky for her to leave the house by herself on
chaperoned. For her interaction with the outside world was different to my dad
who my dad was a merchant and he would go out and work and my dad has traveled
to Russia, for example, that's where he would go from Afghanistan and he could
speak Russia. So like the different stories I my dad came out with. Yeah, they
were they were quite different to what my mum would talk about. And also,
presumably, when you were encountering officials or indeed legal officers on
your behalf, there's a verification issue, they're trying to find out whether
you're telling the truth or not. And so they're trying to see whether the
stories match up. And I mean, whether you knew it or not, you were being tested
in effect. Yeah, yeah, definitely. And I do remember my parents relaying that to
me, telling me how serious that was, like telling me this role that I had was
really serious because I was the voice for the family. So you know, before we'd
go into this meeting, my parents would say, this is this is what's happening
here. This is what we're trying to get across, as in our citizenship for this
country is dependent on your translating skills, essentially, or what you're
able to get across, which was really scary as a child. It was a lot of pressure
to be under. I'm just picturing that, you know, two adults with sound parents
who I know of the kind of conversations I've had with five year olds, you know,
about programs are watching on the telly and, you know, what game are we going
to play later? And here is something that is a matter of family survival with
incredibly important consequences. And I can see them somehow, you know, adults
up here, you down there. Small and you're watching them staring at their faces
and trying to remember this and think about it. It seems such a huge burden. I
mean, it's nobody's fault, but it's just that's the way it was. Yeah,
definitely. And it's something I've like covered a lot in therapy over the last
few years, that parent child role reversal, because that's essentially what it
was. Instead of me looking to my parents for guidance, it was sort of the other
way around where my parents were looking to me. And I had this great
responsibility. Yeah, it's been quite a lot to try and process that level of
responsibility. And did you ever say to your parents, oh, well, actually, no, I
shouldn't say that. I would say this. I can see, say, a six, seven year old
moving on from when you're five that you might have said, well, no, let's not
talk about that story. Let's mention this or something like that. Did you, as it
were, intervene in what it was they were giving you that you were going to then
give to authorities? Yeah, definitely. I think as I grew up, I became a bit more
wiser about how the UK works, the bureaucratic system works and was able to
advise them essentially and become an adviser at a certain point, being like, I
think this is the route we should go down or this is the route we shouldn't go
down. Incredible. And were your parents proud of you? Did they say you're doing
wonderfully Sandmead or was it just part of everyday life or maybe they're not
like that? I think it was pretty much expected. We all work together as a
family. It's like having a resource and it's just to be expected. So, yeah,
yeah, I think they are proud now that, you know, I've gone on to university and
like did my education and stuff. So I think they know that having the language
in English has really helped me to like make, you know, a place for myself in
this country, which is quite nice. And whatever metaphor one uses for
bilingualism, sometimes people say it's like living in two houses or that you
have two heads. I only get a little glimpse of it because of the way I speak
French, though, as you can see from my story at the beginning, it's a bit
imperfect. That you've been somebody who's had the benefit of having these two
heads, two houses. Yeah, yeah, definitely. And I think that's made my world so
much bigger in so many ways. But also, in a way, it has meant that I feel much
further away from my parents than I initially did because the more English I
learned, the further away I got from them because my way of understanding the
world was different, which has been quite sad to see to see that happen as well,
that distance grow between the family because when my two younger sisters were
born, so one was born pretty soon after we came to the UK. And then I had
another sister who is now 16 and they have grown up learning English and
speaking English much more frequently than they would speak Punjabi. So at home,
when it's all four sisters of us were all speaking in English and my parents
were very shut out of that. My dad can sort of catch on to what we're saying
because he's picked up bits and bobs, but my mum still can't speak the language.
So I think she feels quite far away from all of us, which is quite sad to see, I
think. Yes. Did teachers at school know, so between the age of, say, five and
18, you know, before you go off to uni, did teachers know you were acting as
this interpreter? I think initially they probably wouldn't have, but then when
it came around to parents' evening, they would absolutely pick up on it because
my mum would come along and I would have to sit and interpret for my mum. And
that worked out quite well in my favour, I think. I was quite a chatty little,
little person and... Did you fib? Of course I did. Of course I was going to use
it to my advantage at that point. So when a teacher said, really, Sandmeet has
been chatting away at the back of the class and not really doing it very well.
And you then turned to your mum and said, the teacher says, I've been doing
absolutely brilliantly. Yeah, I'd be like, I'm such a hard worker, mum. And did
teachers ever, in a sense, praise you for this? I'm just interested to see the
status of these acts of interpreting and being bilingual. Did you ever get a
sense of yourself as a child and as a teenager? You know, I'm actually doing
something quite special here. Yeah, I think so. I had a look back at all my
school reports recently and the word that keeps cropping up is mature. Sandmeet
is very mature for her age. And I think that it did require me to grow up very
quickly and learn to advocate for my family and myself as well. So when I was in
school, I figured out which tools I would need to use to get ahead, essentially.
And I remember I got to 16 and I'd seen a private school that I was offering a
scholarship. And I sat there and applied for all myself and I filled out why we
needed financial, why I needed it to be funded and to get the scholarship. I got
my dad's HMRC forms and filled out all myself. And I got a scholarship placed at
this private school for two years before I went off to uni. And that was amazing
that I was able to advocate for myself. And I think my parents were really proud
of me at that point for learning how to navigate a system that is sort of rigged
against people from my background and use it to my advantage, I guess. So that's
all on the positive side. Were there times, say, when you were a teen, you were
resentful? You were annoyed, maybe even envious of your friends that didn't have
to do this sort of thing? I mean, I'm going to imagine a situation in which you
might want to go out dancing, having a great time, and you've got to fill in
some forms instead. Yeah, of course. I had a lot of responsibility. So with my
two younger sisters arriving, of course, then it meant their doctor's
appointments that I would have to go to with my mum. And I had to make sure I
got home on time for X, Y and Z appointment that we had to attend. I couldn't
misbehave in school because I couldn't afford to get a detention because then it
would have implications for my family and all the admin that needed to be done.
And I remember at one point- That's a real restriction of freedoms, not being
able to misbehave in school. I know, right? I remember when my younger sister
was born, I had to miss a few lessons in school to go to the doctor's
appointment with her and my mum, because she was quite- my little sister was
quite ill and I had her on my lap and I was explaining to the doctor, this is
what's wrong with Ria at this point. And the doctor referred to me as mum. And I
was 12 years old at that point and my mum was sat next to me and I was like, oh
no, and she was referring to my mum as grandma. I was so embarrassed. I was
really, really resentful at that point because I was like, why can my mum not do
this herself? Why am I being put in this awkward situation? Especially as a 12
year old, everything is embarrassing, let alone someone thinking you're your
little sister's mum. And I think that did create a bit of frustration between me
and my mum where like doctor's appointments would come up and I'd be like, I'm
not going. And she would- because I was just so tired of it all, I guess. And
also I was in a phase of teenage rebellion where everything my parents said, I'd
be like, no. And I think that was quite tricky and upsetting for my mum. I look
back now and I'm like, that was not very nice of teenage me. And my dad would
then have to take time off work to go with her. But that would also be hard
because my dad can speak English, but he thinks that his accent or the fact that
it's broken English, people don't really respect what he has to say. So often,
even now he'll call me and say, can you call this person because they're much
likely to listen to you given your accent and your voice rather than me. So I
think he found it quite frustrating if he had to go with my mum to doctor's
appointments just because it was almost the same in terms of how much they'd be
believed or understood. And I'm thinking here now of writing. I mean, your dad
speaks English a bit. Sounds like he's doing okay. But presumably writing is
pretty difficult for him. Yeah. I'm only guessing. Yeah, yeah. He's just about
learning actually. WhatsApp has been very interesting in this because through
WhatsApp, my parents have been able to copy and post certain words and also
emojis are so helpful. So when we're talking now, this morning I met my dad and
I was like, hello, good morning. How are you? And he replied with a smiley
emoji. So that's nice. And voice notes are also helpful. And just today I've got
completely lost with a form. Let's not say who from, okay, from a utility firm.
Let me say I got completely lost with it. I couldn't understand it. I mean, are
you the interpreter for the forms that come in from utilities? They're pretty
difficult to understand. Yeah, my dad will send me a photo on WhatsApp and then
I'll give him a call and run through it. And it is quite hard because when I do
go home, there's a stack of letters waiting for me to sort of sit through with
him and work them through. And it also means like we can often get behind on
bills because he hasn't understood the urgency of it in an X, Y and Z letter.
And that's always quite hard to see because obviously, you know, with the cost
of living crisis going on, people getting behind on things, people like my
family who might not be able to understand it, it would be a massive struggle.
Yeah. So you're intervening on that front as well. Perhaps you could do it for
me too. Yes, I see. So look, let's come to now. Are you as bilingual as you ever
were or have you lost some of your particular form of Punjabi because you're
chatting to your sisters and you're out here in an English speaking world? I've
definitely lost bits of my Punjabi. The only time I now speak it is when talking
to my mum, because to my dad, I would speak in English and he'll respond to
Punjabi. But because I know you can understand what I'm saying. I'm so lazy. I
just speak in English and I think I realised it when I was at school that the
voice in my head was English and initially it used to be Punjabi. And that's
when I realised that English has very much become my first language in many
ways. So you think your mum is actually inching towards a bit of English? I
think so, yeah. I think like through the years, listening to all of us talk, she
has caught on to certain phrases and stuff, which is quite nice. And just to be
sexist about it, shopping maybe? Does she handle shopping? No, you're laughing
at me. My mum is actually quite worried about going outside by herself. Still.
Still, because she's really worried that someone will talk to her in English and
she wouldn't be able to reply, so she doesn't really go shopping by herself.
It'll either be with my dad or with me and my sisters. And because I've got
three other sisters, there's a lot of people there to help her out if she needs.
So I wave the magic wand and I provide the help and assistance that we can give
your mother to learn English. What is that magic wand? What is it? Are you
spending a day a week teaching her or is it a special teacher who comes into the
home or is it a remote call to a teacher? What's the magic wand that I can wave?
Oh, the magic wand. Probably not me, I'm a bit tired. Maybe someone else coming
in and teaching her. That would be nice. Just because I would love for her to
have the independence. I think she feels quite restricted. So the magic wand
would be someone coming in, teaching her. The idea of your mother being afraid
to go to the shops. This is bugging me. Yeah, I think she's gotten to the point
where she's had so much support. She's kind of like, I've passed my age of
learning. We're just kind of sad to see. She's in her fifties. Well, I'm
learning a language, so it's not impossible. Yeah, I need to get that across to
her, don't I? Yes. It's like Michael Rosen's doing it. Yeah, I'm learning a
language and remotely. So it is possible. My teacher's in New York. Oh, amazing.
It's incredible. The world has changed for language learners. Yeah, definitely.
And I think it'll also be important. My partner, he doesn't speak Punjabi. He's
Scottish. He's white. So my partner is actually trying to learn Punjabi at the
moment because he wants in the future to be able to converse with my mum. That
would be quite nice. Lovely. So yeah, it'd be nice for her to do the other way
around as well. Yes, yeah. So looking back on yourself now, how can I put it?
When you were a teenager, you got annoyed. Sometimes you had rouse with your mum
about it. Are you more sort of understanding about that situation now? I mean,
you don't want to have rouse with her, presumably. I mean, you're a different
relationship as you are when you become an adult. I think I look back at it now
with a lot of sympathy for my parents because they were put in a really horrible
situation. They arrived in the UK as refugees, essentially. And they really
struggled. And the fact that I was able to help out is fine in my book if I was
able to do that. And you don't blame your parents for employing their five-year-
old anymore. I mean, obviously, you know, needs must. You have to work with
what's possible. You were one of the family's resources. I think that's more or
less the way you put it. Do you feel somehow if you were in that situation, do
you think you would turn to a five-year-old? That's very tricky. I don't think I
would, but that's because I haven't come from a war-torn country in the same way
my parents have. I wasn't traumatised in the way that they were. So I can
totally imagine why they went down the easy, simplest route, I suppose, because
they have a lot more trauma that they were grappling with at that time. But it
does make me think about kids today who are having to do that. We should be
putting more resources into supporting those families, whether it's mental
health support or support with translation as well, because I don't think it was
something unique that happened to me. I think it was something that happened
before me and continues to happen now as well. And why isn't there this support?
Because sometimes I've heard politicians say, our world, the trouble with some
migrant families is they speak to each other in their home language and it isn't
English and this is holding them back. Learning a new language means sitting
there, opening your brain up and being open to new possibilities. How can you do
that when you are feeling so horrible on the inside if you've come from, you
know, a war-torn country? Your mental state is not going to be open to learning
lots of new stuff. So I think that goes hand in hand with mental health support.
So that's your plea? That is my plea. Sanric Cor, thanks very much for coming on
the programme. Thank you for having me, Michael. Word of mouth was presented by
Michael Rosen and produced in Bristol by Sally Heaven. Nearly a year on, how can
peace be restored in Europe? This will end when there is enough progress on the
battlefield by Ukraine. A war that has to be won or a broken peace. This is
James Nokti and in Europe and the United States I've been talking to negotiators
about the lessons from the past. You've had a 70 year armistice in Korea, but
what you've not had is 70 years of a quiet, calm border. Every war is different.
So how might understanding old conflicts help Ukraine where both sides speak of
nothing but victory? How wars end on BBC Radio 4, available now on BBC Science.
Now on Radio 4 to Westminster, there's two former Prime Ministers joined forces,
today in Parliament. Order! Order. Good evening, this is Susan Humet-
Westminster, where two former Prime Ministers piled pressure on Rishi Sunak to
provide Ukraine with fighter planes. I can't wait to see the tanks and I can't
wait to see the fighter jets in Ukraine to help those brave Ukrainians. We
should give them what they need, not next month, not next year, but now. And
following violent demonstrations against asylum seekers in Nolesli, Labour
accuses Suella Breverman of using inflammatory words. Some of the Home
Secretary's language has also appeared on some of the placards and I say on all
sides we need to have a calm debate. But first, MPs including Boris Johnson and
Liz Truss have urged the government to equip Ukraine with fighter jets as the
first anniversary of Russia's invasion approaches. Earlier this month, Ukraine's
President Zelensky addressed both houses of parliament with a plea for the West
to send planes as well as tanks and other weaponry already being supplied. Liz
Truss added her voice to the call for military jets in what was her first speech
in the Commons since resigning as Prime Minister. The debate was opened by the
Foreign Secretary James Cleverley, who made no promise of aircraft, but said
that one year on from President Putin's invasion, countries must not hold back
in helping Ukraine. This is exactly the right moment for Ukraine to seize the
advantages. That is why we and our allies must step up our effort to ensure that
Ukraine wins this war and secures a lasting peace. The Conservative former
Cabinet Minister Simon Clark interrupted. He wondered whether we actually had
the weaponry to send. Can he commit that we are reassessing as a matter of
urgency our defence stocks, which must be severely depleted at this juncture, to
make sure we can sustain the effort however long it takes? The Foreign Secretary
said this was precisely the conflict for which the UK had these weapons. We were
fortunate it was Ukrainian and not British troops who were having to use them.
If anyone in the international community or amongst our allies was thinking of
holding back their stocks for a rainy day, this is the rainy day. But another
Conservative, Sir Edward Lee, asked. How resolute are we? Are we going to give
them aeroplanes? The Foreign Secretary didn't answer that directly. But he said
that this year. We shall at very least match the £2.3 billion of military aid we
gave last year and we shall add more advanced capabilities across land, across
sea and across air. But the Conservative former Prime Minister Liz Truss, who
was Foreign Secretary when Russia invaded Ukraine, was clear that the UK did
need to do more. She said Britain had done all it could to get weapons to
Ukraine as fast as possible and now she couldn't wait to see tanks and fighter
jets helping Ukraine. We need to do all we can to make sure Ukraine wins this
war as soon as possible. Every extra day, a lives lost, women violated, towns
destroyed. We need to do all we can as fast as we can. My view is that does
include fighter jets. The government has been prepared to train Ukrainian
fighter pilots but Liz Truss's predecessor in Downing Street, Boris Johnson,
felt that was half-hearted. It's admirable that we're proposing to train
Ukrainian fighters to fly NATO fast jets. I hear the caution of my honourable
friend. But it's curious that we're doing this before we've even taken the
decision in principle to give them the planes. Let's cut to the chase and give
them the planes too. The shadow Foreign Secretary David Lamy was determined to
show that the opposition was in the face of Russian aggression on the
government's side. Britain stands united behind Ukraine and in that spirit I
want to pay tribute to the Foreign Secretary and the Defence Secretary and to
our two former Prime Ministers who deserve credit for the roles that they have
played. And he wanted to see an end to the piecemeal announcements of more
military aid. If Ukraine is going to prevail over what Putin will throw at it,
the UK and our allies should set aside individual announcements and instead lay
out a long-term strategy to provide the support that Ukraine needs, whether it
be ammunition, additional air defence capabilities or NATO standard weaponry. A
former Labour Minister Liam Byrne hoped the government was listening to what he
said was a clear call from two former Prime Ministers. Otherwise, there would be
more loss of life from a grinding ground war with strikes on civilian targets.
There is this extended time period between the saying no and then the saying
yes. So on air defence we said no to Patriot missiles until it was that we said
yes. On tanks we said no until months and months later we said yes. Now can we
please just short circuit the process of sending in the F-16s as fast as
possible with trained pilots. Speaking for the SNP, Dave Duggan wondered if the
UK really had the capacity even to train Ukrainian pilots. I am pleased up to a
certain extent that the United Kingdom is training combat air pilots for
Ukraine, but I am left wondering to what end. And I am also wondering what is
happening to the combat air pilots in training with the Royal Air Force, some of
whom, I'm not making this up Mr Deputy Speaker, some of whom are having to wait
eight or even nine years to become qualified. And for the Lib Dems, Richard Ford
said Ukraine should not always have to ask for equipment. We should not be
answering each and every request on this reactive basis. There are times when we
should be supplying equipment proactively. Although he said it would be a
symbolic gesture if the UK were to send fast jets to Kiev because he understood
that it was Swedish Gripen jets that the country really needed. Perhaps it was a
sign of the unity of the Commons over Ukraine, but the debate was relatively
thinly attended and finished early with almost two hours to spare. Now
opposition MPs have accused the government of stoking up community tensions
through inflammatory language and by housing large groups of asylum seekers in
hotels. It follows the violent scenes at a protest outside a hotel in
Merseyside. Christina Cooper reports. Ten days ago at a demonstration outside a
hotel in Nozli housing asylum seekers, three people were injured and a police
vehicle was set on fire. The Commons was on a week's break at the time, but on
the first day back, events in Merseyside were raised by the MP for Nozli, Labour
Sir George Haworth. He said the demonstration was attended by a substantial
number of residents. Many of whom conducted themselves peacefully and lawfully.
Unfortunately, some did not, as the number of arrests made regrettably
illustrates. This is not, however, typical of the people of Nozli or Kirby, who
are not bigoted, racist or unwelcoming. He said far-right groups from outside
the area had tried to stir up racial hatred and he asked the government to
consider banning them. The immigration minister, Robert Jenrick, told him that
the Home Office had been monitoring these groups very closely and would take
further action if needed. The behaviour of those groups is at times disgraceful,
vile and should be stamped out. He said no one wanted to see hotels used as
accommodation for asylum seekers. This is an emergency temporary solution to a
serious national emergency. The number of individuals crossing the channel
illegally in recent years has been on such a scale that the Home Office had to
resort to options which are clearly undesirable. The government has promised
laws to stop people arriving in the UK in small boats. A conservative, Sir Bill
Wiggin, felt ministers were doing everything they could and turned his fire on
the most senior civil servant in the Home Office. Can my right hon's legal
friend explain why the permanent secretary is still in post and no small boats
bill has appeared before the House? The minister replied that it was important
to take time to ensure the legislation was as effective as possible. It is an
area where I'm afraid human rights lawyers do abuse and exploit our laws at
times and where the courts have taken an expansive approach in the past.
Labour's Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper linked what happened in Nozli to
events in Dover last October when a man threw petrol bombs at a centre for
processing migrants. So-called migrant hunts organised by far-right groups have
doubled in last year and an increase has been an increase in far-right groups,
organising protests and intimidation and attempting to increase and inflame
community tensions. All of us have a responsibility to take this seriously. And
she said everyone had a responsibility to talk about the issues in a way that
didn't inflame tensions. I know that he will regret the fact that some of the
Home Secretary's language has also appeared on some of the placards and I'd say
on all sides we need to have a calm debate. Last November Suela Braverman
referred to the arrival of asylum seekers in small boats as an invasion on the
southern coast. The minister said the Home Secretary had condemned the violence
unequivocally. That does not mean that we should not seek to understand the
level of public frustration that lies behind wider concerns about our asylum and
immigration system. A conservative Matt Worman was worried about a planned
protest in Skegnes in his constituency at the weekend. Will he join with me in
appealing to the people of Skegnes to focus rightly on those issues but not to
join hands with far-right groups? The minister said his constituents were
frustrated by the use of hotels in Skegnes but he knew they wouldn't want to
join with far-right groups to stoke disorder. Speaking for the SNP, Alison Thule
said the use of hotels had allowed right-wing extremist groups to target
vulnerable people. It's Home Office policy therefore that's putting people at
risk, not just those vulnerable asylum seekers that are there but also our
police who have then got to go and protect everybody in that situation. An
accusation rejected by the minister. That is both wrong and deeply offensive.
The issue here are the number of people crossing the channel illegally. Those
are, it is not the backlog. The honourable lady says from a sedentary position
it is the backlog. That is a fantasy. At the end of last year there was a
backlog of 117,000 asylum cases. The minister insisted that processing claims
faster wouldn't solve the problem. He said the UK needed a more robust approach
to illegal migration, including removing people who arrived illegally to a safe
third country. A reference to the government's ambition to transfer people to
Rwanda to have their claims processed. Christina Cooper reporting. The minister
has asked if funding to improve housing in England will be blocked by the
chancellor. Concerns about value for money means that the treasury has tightened
controls on spending by the Department of Leveling Up Housing and Communities,
headed by Michael Gove. In the comments his Labour shadow Lisa Nandy wondered
what the effect would be. The Secretary of State no longer has the power to sign
off on a park bench. And there are now reports of significant underspends in his
department that are about to be clawed back by the treasury. So can he guarantee
that the town's crying out for investment in town centres, in high streets and
in affordable housing that the full allocation of the towns fund, the future
high streets fund and the affordable homes programme will be spent. Michael Gove
insisted the money was being spent. It is absolutely the case that this
department is responsible for the disbursement successfully of funds to the
front line which are helping to transform communities which have been overlooked
and undervalued by the last government. No one is going to get in the way of
this department spending the money that we need on the communities that need it.
But many MPs were disgruntled at where money was being spent. Last month there
was controversy over the latest allocation of levelling up funding. Labour's
Judith Cummins noted that the Prime Minister's local authority of Richmondshire
in Yorkshire was the 67th least deprived. Whilst Bradford is the 21st most
deprived, Sir Minister was levelling up at the heart of the government's
decision to approve roughly £20 million of funding to Richmondshire and no
funding for my constituency of Bradford South. That money went to ensure that
service families get the accommodation and the support that they deserve. If
Labour want to be taken seriously as a patriotic party they should stop talking
down our armed forces and make sure they receive the money they deserve. That
failed to persuade the SNP's Peter Grant, the MP for Glenrothys. Can the
Secretary of State identify a single measure of need or deprivation by which the
Prime Minister's constituency is as needy and deprived as the Levenmouth Area
and my constituency and is more deprived than the entire city of Glasgow?
Michael Gove said levelling up money had gone to both Glasgow and Glenrothys. A
Conservative, Mark Pritchard, had a question about planning rules, in particular
solar farms. Solar is an important part of the UK's energy mix and as the
Secretary of State will know the sun always shines in Shropshire. But does he
agree with me that having these solar farms often at a huge scale need to be in
the right place, not the wrong place and so often a lot of good agricultural
land is being lost? Michael Gove fondly remembered the pastoral scenes in a
Shropshire lad. Shropshire, home to the blue remembered hills of A.E. Houseman,
is one of our most beautiful counties and it is vitally important that even as
we pursue renewable energy across the United Kingdom that we also recognise that
our environment is just as much about natural beauty as it is towards driving
towards net zero. The Community Secretary, Michael Gove. You're listening to
Today in Parliament with me, Susan Hume. Still to come, a challenge for the
sports minister. Instead of constantly passing it back, can he just put the ball
into the back of the net? At first, the Iranian regime has been roundly
condemned in the comments after threats against UK-based journalists forced a TV
news channel to relocate to the United States. Iran International said it had
received warnings from Scotland Yard that there were grave concerns about
hostile intentions of foreign states. Alicia McCarthy has the details. Making a
statement in the comments, the security minister, Tom Tugenhatt, told MPs that
in recent months the Iranian regime had publicly called for the capture or
killing of those holding it to account, including those working in the UK for
Iran International, a Persian language news channel. The Home Secretary and I
absolutely condemn this outrageous violation of our sovereignty and the
attempted violation of the human rights of those journalists. The channel had
stopped broadcasting from the UK, switching instead to its offices in the United
States, but Tom Tugenhatt was determined that would only be a temporary move,
insisting freedom of the press was at the heart of our freedoms. Tehran's
efforts to silence Iran International are a direct attack on our freedoms and an
attempt to undermine our sovereignty. They will fail. The minister said since
the start of 2022, the UK had responded to what he called 15 credible threats by
the Iranian regime to kill or kidnap British and UK-based people. He said the
Foreign Secretary James Cleverley had already summoned the deputy ambassador for
a meeting and the UK would be looking at further sanctions on those linked to
the Iranian regime. For Labour, Holly Lynch wanted the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps, the IRGC, a branch of the Iranian armed forces, added to a list of
terrorist groups. The UK must always be a safe place for journalists to speak
truth to power. The rest of the world is watching. We cannot ever allow for
authoritarian tyranny to be exported to the UK and conducted on behalf of other
hostile states within our own borders. Holly Lynch also called for tougher
sanctions. Tom Tugenhatt said the UK and its international partners had just
imposed further measures on eight senior Iranian figures. And from the dispatch
box, he addressed the Iranian regime directly. We will hold you to account for
your blatant violation of our laws and our values. We will expose your crimes
against the British people and against the Iranian people. We will expose your
actions around the world. We will work with our allies to hold you to account
personally. And we will act to keep our country safe. Looking for the SNP,
Alison Thewlis said her party was alarmed and deeply disturbed by the serious
threats to UK-based journalists by the Iranian regime. We owe a great debt of
gratitude to the brave, independent Iranian journalists, particularly those from
Iran International who have shown a light in the recent protest movements and
shown the world the continuous and shocking human rights abuses of the Iranian
security forces and the Iranian regime. She too urged the minister to prescribe
the IRGC, saying it was a source of great uncertainty and fear for many Iranians
living in the UK. They don't know where they are safe and that should not be the
situation for anybody who has come to live on these islands. They should be able
to go about their lives in Glasgow or anywhere else without feeding who might be
coming to get them without having to look over their shoulder. Iran
International was broadcasting from a business park in the West London
constituency of Labour MP Ruth Cadbury. She said the channel was grateful for
what the Metropolitan Police had done to keep its journalists and the wider
public safe. But she asked, What is the government doing to ensure that
journalists are never again forced to leave their workplace in my constituency
and across the country in order to protect the rest of the public? The minister
said attempts were being made to find a new site for Iran International in the
UK. As to her question, The reality is we need to do more to protect journalists
in this country. It's absolutely clear that we have more to do and that is why
the Prime Minister asked me to set up the defending democracy task force. We'll
be coming out with suggestions very soon. A Conservative MP and former soldier
Bob Stewart asked about comments the minister had made earlier, accusing the
Iranian intelligence services of working with organised crime gangs. Mindful of
the fact that Colonel Gaddafi's terrorists used to work quite closely with the
Provisional IRA, is my honourable friend able to say anything about whether
there are indications that such links are happening between Iranian terrorists
and actually home-grown terrorists? Tom Tugenhatt said there were many different
connections between criminals, terrorists and hostile states, but he'd rather
not say any more in public about those links. Alicia McCarthy. Now, adult social
care is an issue that's said to affect around 10 million people in England. It's
also one Boris Johnson said his government would fix once and for all. But more
than three years on, there's impatience about the rate of progress. Lord Leaming
is an independent peer who sits on a Lord's committee on adult social care and
he wanted to highlight the situation of friends and family members who provide
care for free. Unpaid carers feel that they carry a huge burden but are largely
unappreciated and ignored. Indeed one wrote only last week saying that after
years and years of nursing experience, I now feel completely worn out and very
lonely. The health and care minister Lord Markham shared his own experience. As
an unpaid carer for a number of years myself, I'm personally familiar with the
circumstances and familiar with the fact that they are the backbone of the
social care sector. He thought ministers were moving in the right direction on
plans for England. We have made up to 7.5 billion available over two years to
put the sector on a stronger financial footing, improve access to social care
and address workforce pressures. We will publish further details this spring
setting out how we intend to make improvements to the system. A Lib Dem, Lady
Barker, recalled Sajid Javits time as health secretary. He stated publicly what
some of us had long suspected, which is that we have a health and social care
system which is predicated on the assumption that people will primarily be
looked after by their families. A million people are ageing without children.
They don't have close family to look after them. Why not his department
acknowledge the existence of this group of people? Lord Markham thought the
increased spending was an acknowledgement that more and more people would be
facing that situation. A Conservative former Cabinet Minister Lord Forsyth asked
a pointed question. Given that the government promised that we will fix social
care and given the answer to his question that there are 10 million people
affected, is it wise to go into a general election without having done so? As
ever I thank my noble friend for his friendly questions. We know that this is an
area that needs to be addressed and I think it is an area that we are
addressing. The health and care minister, Lord Markham. The sports minister has
said he'll publish the government's proposals to change the rules on the way
football in England is run later this week. But MPs complained that the process
had already taken too long and some clubs were on the brink of collapse. Here's
Mandy Baker. A review commissioned by ministers and led by fans into how
football is governed was completed in November 2021. It made 10 recommendations
including establishing an independent regulator and imposing stricter tests for
prospective owners. The news that the government's proposals in response to that
were about to be published didn't impress Labour's shadow sports secretary Lucy
Powell. She said they were promised five months ago. So will the government take
responsibility for the clubs that go bust, spiral into decline or which are
bought by unsuitable new owners in the years they've wasted bringing the
regulator in? A metaphor was on its way. Parliament fully supports these
proposals. Labour is fully committed to them. The minister is facing an open
goal. So instead of constantly passing it back, can he just put the ball into
the back of the net? The sports minister, Stuart Andrews, said he wasn't going
to apologise for making sure the government's proposals actually addressed what
were complex issues. The opposition may think that they could just simply
publish a report like in just a week but I have taken a considerable amount of
time, I have taken a considerable amount of time and I'm glad that I have, a
considerable amount of time to meet with all of the stakeholders involved in
this and listen to their varying views. The conservative, Damian Green, is the
acting chair of the Commons committee that covers the report. Promising not to
deploy any football puns, he welcomed the publication of the government's
proposals. But a change in the law would be needed to implement the measures. So
can my right hon. friend tell me, is it the government's intention to legislate
in this session and if not, is it the government's intention to legislate in
this parliament to introduce these much needed reforms? Stuart Andrews said
allocating parliamentary time wasn't in his gift but a conservative former
minister, Simon Clarke, chipped in with a suggestion. I would gently point out
to the government that we're not overburdened with legislation on Thursdays for
example and I think that is the scope within the course of the next year to
bring forward legislation which would mean that we can deliver a great outcome
for the game that we all love. But the minister wouldn't be drawn. Labour's Dan
Jarvis wondered what the government's plan, the white paper, would propose
regarding club ownership. Over the years we've seen some owners treat football
clubs more like cash cows than the community assets we all want them to be. So
pending the publication of the white paper later this week I wonder if the
minister could say whether he thinks that there is merit in ensuring that any
new owner seeking to take a control in an English club is subject to a more
stringent fit and proper person's test. Yes. The Lib Dem former leader Tim
Farron was worried on two fronts. Labour's Clive Betts was annoyed by a
suggestion Stuart Andrew had made that football could have got on with reforming
itself. Well the minister just stopped trying to deflect attention away by
saying if only football would sort itself out. The problems we've got now, the
mess the game is in, is because football hasn't sorted itself out and that's why
we need government to come in with a clear statement in the white paper and a
commitment to speedily legislate. Newcastle United are heading to Wembley at the
weekend to face Manchester United in the League Cup final. The MP for Newcastle
Central, Labour's Chion Wora, wished her team luck. But he must know that even
that success will not erase the years of anger and frustration at unsuitable,
unaccountable and downright times downright dodgy ownership within a Premier
League which is out of touch and doesn't seem to care about fans. And it was all
about the fans. This government is just messing with the heart and soul of fans.
So we commit now that the white paper will institute an independent regulator,
that fans will have real power in the beautiful game and that this will be in
place for the next, start of the next season. Stuart Andrews said he could
assure her that throughout the process he had listened to the fans. And by the
way he would be at the match at Wembley on Sunday and he said he had a list as
long as his arm of people who wanted to go with him. Mandy Baker reporting.
Westminster's newest MP has taken her seat in the Commons. Manchester's Ashley
Dalton, winner of the West Lancashire by-election, swore the oath of allegiance
at the start of business. Before we go our main news... We are making changes to
the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms
and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023.
If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message,
please contact the manufacturer. If you are listening on web or mobile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.