TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at six o'clock. This is Caroline Nichols. Good evening. Gary Lineker
has said he'll continue to express his views despite being criticised by Downing
Street and some Conservative MPs for making derogatory comments about the
government's asylum policy. I'm disappointed. I think it's unhelpful to compare
our measures which are lawful, proportionate and indeed compassionate to 1930s
Germany. The BBC has said it puts the highest value on impartiality and expects
to have a frank conversation with the Match of the Day host. Others have
defended his decision to speak out. I think he's absolutely within his rights.
Totally different if he was presenting the Today programme or he was doing a job
covering politics. The Prime Minister has insisted that stopping small boats
crossing the Channel is a priority of the British people. The Labour leader has
accused the government of offering more gimmicks and empty promises. The UN
Secretary General has said extending a deal to allow Ukraine to export grain is
critical to global food security. A teenage boy has been sentenced after a woman
he knocked down on his e-scooter died. Gary Lineker has said he'll continue to
speak out, despite criticism by some Conservative MPs of comments he made on
social media about the government's new asylum policy. The proposed legislation
would ban people who arrive in the country on small boats from claiming asylum,
returning to the UK or seeking British citizenship. The Match of the Day host
described a statement made by the Home Secretary yesterday as beyond awful, and
said the language was not dissimilar to that used by Germany in the 1930s. The
BBC has said that Gary Lineker will be spoken to about his remarks. Our media
correspondent David Silito reports. A very frank conversation was the phrase
being used today. The concern at the BBC is about a series of comments on
Twitter in which Gary Lineker described a statement by the Home Secretary as
beyond awful. However, as he arrived at work this morning, the Director General,
Tim Davie, wasn't going to be drawn on what exactly he would be saying. I
wouldn't reveal anything in terms of, I think it's totally appropriate that we
speak privately to members of the team. The BBC absolutely puts the highest
value on impartiality and that's clearly important to us. Meanwhile, Downing
Street said Gary Lineker's comments were unacceptable opinions echoed by the
Home Secretary, Suella Braverman. I'm disappointed, obviously. I think it's
unhelpful to compare our measures, which are lawful, proportionate and indeed
compassionate to 1930s Germany. I also think that we're on the side of the
British people here. And it's far from the first time that Gary Lineker's
opinions on Twitter have made headlines. In 2016, there were comments about
child migrants. In 2018, Brexit and the Conservative government. But at the
time, the BBC said Gary Lineker was a freelance sports presenter, it was a
personal account and he was not bound by the strict rules forbidding any public
expression of political opinions that apply to people involved in making BBC
content, especially those who cover news and current affairs. There's also the
phrase, due impartiality, which allows for a degree of judgement. On-air
comments about, say, Qatar's record on human rights might be judged less
controversial than directly criticising the UK government on a policy that has
proved to be highly contentious. However, the BBC has declared impartiality its
absolute guiding principle. Rules have been tightened. When Gary Lineker was
found to have broken guidelines with a comment about the Conservative Party and
Russian donors in October of last year, the BBC referred to a clause which said
some presenters now had an additional responsibility because of their profile.
However, while many have been critical, Gary Lineker does have supporters, among
them Labour's former head of communications, Alistair Campbell, who also
presents a podcast owned by Gary Lineker's production company. I think he's
absolutely within his rights. Totally different if he was presenting the Today
programme or he was doing a job covering politics. The idea that a sports
presenter isn't entitled to say what he thinks on Twitter, wasn't even a live
broadcast, he does a tweet and there's this synthetic outrage by Tory MPs. And
there's little sign that Gary Lineker is going to stop. He tweeted today that
he'd never known such love and support and said he would continue to try and
speak up for those who have no voice. The latest remarks by Gary Lineker have
once again raised questions about how the BBC implements its policy of
impartiality. Our culture and media editor Katie Razzle has this analysis of
what's next for the corporation and the presenter himself. Gary Lineker's recent
tweets have put the BBC under pressure. The Director General, Tim Davie, has
made impartiality one of the cornerstones of his strategy. And the corporation
is already embroiled in a row about whether the BBC chairman and former
Conservative donor Richard Sharp can remain in his role, after claims about his
involvement in facilitating a loan guarantee agreement for the then Prime
Minister Boris Johnson. The BBC impartiality is under threat, said the critics
about Richard Sharp. Now, some Conservative MPs are saying the same about Gary
Lineker, demanding the Director General sack the Match of the Day presenter.
Politics, of course, comes into that and hostility to the BBC. But the claims
that a frank conversation is being had with the BBC's highest paid presenter
suggests the corporation is aware of a problem. When it comes to the rules
around impartiality, the former BBC executive Richard Sandbrook said he believed
there are two fudges that need to be cleared up. One is whether the BBC's
impartiality responsibilities apply only to news and current affairs staff. I
think the second fudge is over the responsibility or the relationship between
the BBC and freelancers. Because it does seem a bit odd that you say to a
freelance they have to carry their BBC responsibilities and BBC guidelines into
every other aspect of their lives. Gary Lineker has made clear he doesn't plan
to stop making his views and support for refugees known, which puts the ball
very firmly in the BBC's court. Either it must accept that or choose to censor
him. Rishi Sunak defended the government's asylum plan at Prime Minister's
Questions, calling the issue the people's priority. The Labour leader, Sakir
Starmer, called the proposed legislation a gimmick and accused Mr Sunak of being
absolutely deluded. Our political correspondent Damian Grammaticus followed the
exchange. The Commons was rowdy as back and forth Rishi Sunak and Sakir Starmer
traded accusations and attacks. The Prime Minister said his plan to detain and
deport anyone arriving in the UK by small boat was a priority. To the cheers of
his MPs, Mr Sunak claimed his party was, on this issue, on the side of the
British people. Stopping the boats is not just my priority, it is the people's
priority. But his position on this is clear. He wanted to, in his words, scrap
the Rwanda deal. He voted against measures to deport foreign criminals, Mr
Speaker, and he even argued against deportation flights. Well, and we know why,
because on this matter he talked about his legal background. He's just another
lefty lawyer standing in our way. Mr Sunak clearly believes being seen to be
tough on asylum seekers can attract voters he needs to win the next general
election. Sakir does not want to cede those votes easily. Every one of the
Labour leader's questions was about the issue, and he said he would tackle the
problem which successive Conservative governments had failed to deal with. After
13 years, small boat crossings higher than ever, claims unprocessed, the
taxpayer paying for hotel rooms, criminal gangs running all the way, laughing to
the bang, and an asylum sister utterly broken on his watch. This is their fifth
Prime Minister, their sixth immigration plan, their seventh Home Secretary, and
after all this time, all they offer is the same old gimmicks and empty promises.
Mr Sunak refused to give a time frame for stopping the boats. Meanwhile, the
Home Secretary has been embroiled in a row with civil service unions. They're
demanding an apology after an email signed by Suella Braverman was sent to Tory
supporters yesterday, saying civil servants had helped block earlier government
efforts to deal with asylum seekers. The government, said Ms Braverman, did not
see or sanction the email before it was sent by Conservative headquarters. The
United Nations Secretary General, António Guterres, says it's critically
important that a deal allowing grain to be exported from Ukraine's Black Sea
ports is renewed. The agreement is due to expire in 10 days' time. Mr Guterres
was speaking after talks with President Zelensky in Kiev. Our diplomatic
correspondent, James Landale, reports from the city. The ability of Ukraine to
export its grain matters, not just for the country itself, so it can earn hard
currency and employ its farmers, but it matters also for the world, for without
Ukrainian wheat and maize, global food prices would soar and millions would face
food insecurity. Last July, the United Nations and Turkey brokered a deal with
Russia that allowed Ukraine to export some food through the Black Sea. But that
agreement comes up for renewal on March 18, and the United Nations is keen for
the extension to go ahead without a hitch. It doesn't want either Ukraine or
Russia to complicate the agreement by linking it to other issues. So, after
meeting President Zelensky, António Guterres emphasised the deal had allowed
Ukraine to export 23 million tonnes of grain. That, he said, had helped lower
the global cost of food and had offered critical relief to people who are paying
a high price for the war. I want to underscore the critical importance of the
rollover of the Black Sea Grain Initiative on 18 March, and of working to create
the conditions to enable the greatest possible use of export infrastructures
through the Black Sea, in line with the objectives of the initiative. President
Zelensky agreed the deal was critically necessary. But Russia has signalled it
might oppose an extension if it doesn't see curbs on its own food exports
lifted. It claims Western sanctions on banking and insurance sectors hamper its
ability to export its grain. Turkish sources said Russia's concerns had not yet
been overcome. Diplomats have, until the end of next week, to find a solution
and the pressure is on, for without a deal, food prices would rise, adding to
global inflation and hunger. German investigators say they've searched a ship
suspected of transporting explosives used in attacks on Russia's two Nord Stream
gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea last September. US media have quoted anonymous
intelligence officials suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group carried out the
sabotage. But investigators say they've found no evidence a state was involved.
Kiev has denied any role in the attack. Here's our security correspondent, Frank
Gardner. This story continues to be as murky as the waters of the Baltic Sea.
Six months after mysterious explosions ripped gaping holes in two underwater
pipelines from Russia, there is still no definitive explanation as to who was
behind it. Reports in the US media cite unnamed intelligence officials as
believing it was an attack carried out by pro-Ukrainian activists. But Western
intelligence analysts say the way it was conducted, successfully crippling a
strategic pipeline to Western Europe, implied the attackers must have had state
backing. Ukraine has emphatically denied any involvement. Meanwhile, German
investigators said today they had recovered a ship in January that's believed to
have transported the explosives involved. German media says it was a Polish ship
owned by Ukrainians that set off from a German port. Russia has responded by
demanding a full and transparent investigation, and it wants to take part. That
may not be welcomed by NATO countries, many of whom still suspect a Russian hand
in this ongoing underwater mystery. The RMT union has said it will not advise
members how to vote on an amended pay offer from Network Rail. The union has
called off industrial action set for next week, but other strikes are expected
to go ahead at 14 train operating companies. Our transport correspondent Katie
Austin reports. When the RMT put a previous version of Network Rail's offer to a
vote in December, it recommended members rejected the proposals. This time, the
union's general secretary, Mick Lynch, said members would decide whether to
accept what the RMT views as an improved offer. The referendum will close on
Monday 20th March. While the government has not put more money on the table,
under these proposals, Network Rail employees would get this year's pay increase
backdated by three months, ending up with a bigger lump sum. Network Rail's
chief executive, Andrew Haynes, described the development as a constructive step
forward. However, strikes by RMT members who work for train companies are still
set to go ahead on the 16th, 18th and 30th of March and the 1st of April. A
14-year-old boy has been given a 12-month referral order and a five-year driving
ban for causing the death of a woman while illegally riding an electric scooter.
Linda Davis, who was 71, died in hospital after she was knocked to the ground on
a pavement in Nottinghamshire last June. Our Midlands correspondent Phil Mackie
reports from the Nottingham Justice Centre. Linda Davis, who was known as Lou,
was shopping with her husband in the village of Rainworth near Mansfield when
she was hit by the boy, who we can't name because of his age, as she stepped
onto the pavement. The teenager dialled 999 and stayed until the emergency
services arrived. Mrs Davis suffered severe head injuries and died six days
later in hospital. She's believed to be the first pedestrian to die in an
accident involving electric scooters in the UK. The boy told the authorities he
thought he'd been travelling at about 20mph. Currently there isn't a specific
law for this type of vehicle. In this case, prosecutors said they'd applied the
law in the same way as if the teenager had been riding a moped, underage and
without insurance. Private e-scooters like his can't be used on pavements,
footpaths or cycle lanes. To be driven on public roads, the owner must insure
and tax it, which is a process the Department for Transport said most riders
would find difficult to complete. People can also use e-scooters on public roads
if they are rented as part of government-backed trials. In a statement, Mrs
Davis' daughter Rebecca Williams said, What happened to my mum should never
happen again. You're listening to the 6 o'clock news on BBC Radio 4. The main
news so far. Gary Lineker has said he'll continue to express his views despite
being criticised by Downing Street for making negative comments about the
government's new asylum policy. The BBC has said it will have a frank
conversation with him. Rishi Sunak and Sakeer Starmer have clashed in the
Commons over the plan to detain and deport people crossing the Channel in small
boats. Still to come? A scientific development that raises the prospect of male
couples having children that are genetically related to both of them. Tens of
thousands of people in Georgia are staging a fresh wave of protests against a
controversial draft law which would label many media outlets and rights groups
as foreign agents. Yesterday, riot police used water cannon and pepper spray to
disperse the crowds. From the capital, Tbilisi, Rehan Dimitri sent this report.
No to the Russian law, chants the demonstrators outside the Parliament building
in the capital Tbilisi. They're protesting against a draft law which they
believe will steer Georgia away from its stated goal of becoming part of the
European family and back into Russia's orbit. They're mainly young people waving
EU and Georgian flags, like Lizi, a student of international relations. The
governing Georgian Dream Party approved the first reading of the controversial
foreign agents bill yesterday. It would require non-governmental organizations
and independent media that receive more than 20% of their funding from abroad to
label themselves as foreign agents. The government says it wants to ensure
transparency. But the country's opposition and protesters say it's a Russian-
style law that would stigmatize, discredit and eventually silence Georgia's
vibrant civil society and free media. Luka Kimiridze is one of the protesters.
We will show them that our will is just as equal as theirs and we love our
freedom just as much as they love money and Russia. Georgia's opposition is
powerless to influence what happens inside Parliament because the government
holds such a big majority. But it doesn't mean that the people of Georgia are
ready to give up the fight for their country to have a future in Europe. The
trial of the nurse Lucy Letby has heard that the parents of a newborn triplet
begged for him to be transferred to a different hospital after his two brothers
died in her care within 24 hours of each other. Ms Letby, who's 33, is accused
of murdering both boys by injecting them with air in June 2016 while working at
the Countess of Chester Hospital. From Manchester Crown Court, here's our North
of England correspondent Judith Moritz. The jury's been hearing evidence from
the parents of the triplets. The boys who are alleged to have been murdered are
known as babies O and P. In a statement read to the court, their mother said
that when they were two days old, baby O's body suddenly became swollen. His
father said the baby's stomach looked like the film character E.T. He cried as
he recalled that his son's veins were all visibly bright blue. Baby O died that
evening. 24 hours later, baby P also died. The triplets' parents begged for
their third triplet to be taken to another hospital. They said that Lucy Letby
had brought the bodies of the two deceased babies to them after their deaths.
Their mother said, Lucy was almost as upset as we were. She was in floods of
tears. Lucy Letby denies murdering seven babies and attempting to murder another
10 between June 2015 and June 2016. Her trial continues. The government is to
review how sex and relationships education is taught in schools in England,
after MPs raised concerns about what they say are inappropriate lessons. The
Prime Minister has asked for the Department of Education to ensure schools are
teaching acceptable content. Our political correspondent Jonathan Blake reports.
When running for the Conservative Party leadership last summer, Rishi Sunak
promised to strengthen guidance on sex and relationship education in schools.
Now he is under pressure from some Conservative MPs to deliver on that. More
than 50 have written to the Prime Minister claiming children are being subjected
to inaccurate, graphic and age-inappropriate lessons and calling for an
independent inquiry. One, Miriam Cates, who has compiled a report on what she
describes as indoctrination and age-inappropriate teaching, asked Mr Sunak to
honour his commitment. Across the country, children are being subjected to
lessons that are age-inappropriate, extreme, sexualising and inaccurate, often
using resources from unregulated organisations that are actively campaigning to
undermine parents. The Prime Minister said he shared her concerns and had asked
the Department for Education to ensure schools weren't teaching inappropriate or
contested content and that a review of sex and relationship education would
begin as soon as possible. Current guidance states schools should consult
parents when developing their policy and ensure resources are age-appropriate.
The school leaders' union, NAHT, said it had seen no evidence of a widespread
problem and was concerned that the government's review was politically
motivated. The reward for information about the shooting of a senior Northern
Ireland detective has been increased from £20,000 to £150,000. John Caldwell
remains in hospital after being attacked in Oma almost two weeks ago. Here's our
Ireland correspondent Chris Page. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
suffered life-changing injuries when he was shot at a sports complex. He was
loading footballs into the back of his car after he'd finished coaching an
under-15s team. His son was close by when two gunmen opened fire. The senior
police officer remains in a critical but stable condition in hospital. Police
believe the new IRA was responsible. It's thought to be the largest and most
active of the dissident Republican paramilitary groups which are opposed to the
peace process. So far police have arrested eight people but all have been
released without charge. A psychologist has told a parole board hearing that
Charles Bronson, one of the UK's most notorious prisoners, has developed post-
traumatic stress disorder, partly because of his brutal and unacceptable
treatment while in jail. Bronson was sentenced to seven years in 1974 for armed
robbery. He's since carried out a succession of violent attacks and kidnappings,
which has meant he's rarely been out of prison in the last 50 years. Here's our
Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford. The psychologist has not been named
and was giving evidence from the end of a polished wooden table in the boardroom
at Woodhill Prison. Bronson himself was sitting a couple of metres away, facing
the parole board panel that's been asked to decide if he should be released.
Journalists and the public were watching the hearing on a video link at the
Royal Courts of Justice in London. As the hearing broke for lunch, Bronson said
it was like being on The Apprentice with Lord Sugar. The psychologist said that
Bronson's PTSD might have been to a degree self-inflicted because of his own
crimes, such as hostage taking, but she added that his violent tendencies had
been exacerbated whilst in the prison system because of what she called brutal
and unacceptable treatment. She concluded that the perfect environment for him
now would be an open prison, but that he'd need a stepped process through other
prison regimes to get there. Bronson is currently in the close supervision
centre at Woodhill Prison and only has contact with three other inmates. He was
first jailed in 1974 and has been in prison almost continuously since then, so
long that he's never even used a cash machine. His probation officer has told
the parole board that nobody on the multi-agency public protection arrangements
panel that regularly discusses his case thinks he's ready for release. A
Japanese scientist says he's created eggs from the cells of male mice. The
development could have implications for human fertility treatment and open the
door to the prospect of male couples having children which are genetically
related to both of them. Professor Katsuko Hayashi from Osaka University made
the announcement at the Human Genome Editing Summit at the Crick Institute in
London. Our science correspondent Pallab Ghosh was there. Professor Hayashi told
delegates that he'd successfully taken the skin cells of a male mouse and turned
them into eggs. The technique involves first transforming the skin into a stem
cell which can then turn into other types of cells. Because they're male they
have X and Y chromosomes, so Professor Hayashi's team deleted the Y chromosome,
duplicated the X and stuck the two Xs together. This adjustment allows the stem
cell to be programmed to become an egg. He said that the work was at a very
early stage, but Professor Hayashi told BBC News if it could be proved to be
safe for humans, he'd like to see it available as a fertility treatment for both
male and female and same-sex couples. If the society, my personal opinion, if
the society accepts such a technology, yes, I follow it. Professor Hayashi is
developing the technique to help in fertile couples where women are not able to
produce their own eggs. He stressed though it was a long way off from being
available in hospitals because even in the mice experiments the eggs were of low
quality and could not be used for reproduction. Human physiology is quite
different and so much more research is needed. The man who led the main US
public health agency during the Covid pandemic has been giving evidence to a
congressional committee investigating the origins of the outbreak. Dr Robert
Redfield said he believed the virus had come from a laboratory leak in China,
but he'd been sidelined as his views had not been in line with other scientists.
From Washington, Gary O'Donoghue. Almost three and a half years after Covid-19
first appeared in the world, there's still no answer to the question, how did it
come about? There are two principal and competing theories. Some believe it
escaped from a laboratory in Wuhan in southern China. Others say the virus first
transferred to people from animals at a wet market in the same city. Dr Robert
Redfield, the former head of the Centers for Disease Control, says he's inclined
to believe the former theory, but was silenced in 2020 because other government
scientists didn't want to blame the Chinese laboratory. Do you think they kept
you out of the conversations because you believe Covid-19 may have come from a
lab? I didn't know there was a February 1st conference call until the Freedom of
Information came out with the emails and I was quite upset as the CDC director
that I was excluded from those discussions. Why would they do this? Because I
had a different point of view and I was told they made a decision that they
would keep this confidential until they came up with a single narrative.
Democrats on the committee took the opportunity to attack Donald Trump's
handling of the pandemic, with one, Jamie Raskin, saying the former president
had taken a fawning and sycophantic approach to China's leader, Xi Jinping.
Whether it was bats or leaks or bureaucrats who caused it, Donald Trump was the
biggest apologist in the United States of America for President Xi and the
Chinese Communist Party. The origins of Covid have now become highly
politicised, with little agreement, even within the Biden administration, about
the most likely cause, and still no sign of any appetite for an overarching
independent commission to look into the facts. The Met Office has issued an
amber weather warning of heavy snow in parts of the Midlands and northern
England until Friday. It says freezing conditions originating in the Arctic are
likely to worsen, causing power cuts and poor mobile phone coverage.
Temperatures are expected to fall below zero across the UK again overnight.
National highways have warned drivers in the West Midlands and the east of
England not to travel unless their journeys are essential. In the city, the 100
share index ended the day up 10 points at 7,930. On Wall Street a short time
ago, the Dow Jones was down 189 points at 32,668. On the currency markets, the
pound is trading at $1.184. Against the euro, sterling is at 1 euro 12.2. That
makes a euro worth 89.1 pence. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have christened
their daughter and have indicated that she'll be known as Princess Lilibet
Diana. The ceremony took place at the couple's home in California last Friday.
Buckingham Palace said the royal family's website, which currently lists Lilibet
and her brother Archie as Miss and Master, would be updated in due course.
Here's our royal correspondent, Nicholas Witchell. The Duke and Duchess of
Sussex have stepped back from royal life and Harry has been frank in his
criticisms of the royal family. But it would appear that the couple want their
children to bear royal rank. And that is their birthright. Under protocols
dating back more than a century, the children of the sons of the sovereign are
entitled to the rank of prince or princess. So the Sussexes issued a statement
today disclosing that their daughter, described as Princess Lilibet Diana, had
been christened in California last Friday. It's understood that members of the
royal family, which thought Harry's father and brother were invited, but did not
attend. It must be assumed that the Sussexes' son will now be known as Prince
Archie. The use of such royal rank is not obligatory. Prince Edward, the Earl of
Wessex, and his wife chose not to style their children prince and princess. They
believe the titles would be an encumbrance. The headlines again. Gary Lineker
has responded defiantly after the BBC said it would have a frank conversation
with him about impartiality. He's been criticised by some Conservative MPs for
making negative comments about the government's asylum plan. Rishi Sunak has
called the issue of migrants crossing the Channel in small boats the people's
priority. The Labour leader, Sikir Starmer, said the Prime Minister's plan was a
gimmick. The UN Secretary General has said it's vital to extend the deal that
allowed the resumption of grain exports from Ukraine to ensure global food
security. The RMT union says it will allow rail workers to decide whether to
accept an amended pay deal from Network Rail. Large protests have been held in
Georgia against controversial government plans to clamp down on media outlets
and rights groups. BBC News. And the news was read by Caroline Nichols. Are you
a lover of prawns? Have you ever wondered where the prawns in your takeaway
curry or pad thai come from? Costing the Earth travels to South East Asia to
investigate the environmental impact of prawn farming tonight at 9 o'clock. In a
moment though, comedy in conversations from a long marriage. On BBC Radio 4,
you're different. Of course I am. I like that about you. The iconic novel,
Porgy, updated. He's coming, Porgy. He's coming for me. You'll have to kill me
first. A musical love story featuring new music by the acclaimed producer,
Swindle. Yeah, it's on now. Performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra. Best Loves
Porgy on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, beginning on Saturday afternoon at three. And
talking about people in love, our comedy now on Radio 4, where everything is
making Roger grumpy. Conversations from a long marriage. By Jan Etherington. And
Joanna Lumley. And Roger Allen. Episode 4, Every Little Thing. Ooh, lovely fire.
Thank you. I'm burning final demands and clothes catalogues. Cheaper than
turning on the radiators. Do you think I should get up and poke it? No, it's
fine. Just relax. I love evenings like this. No plans, doing nothing, just us.
Easy. Easy like Sunday morning. Exactly. No need to talk. Just being warm and
comfortable together. Ow! The spring's finally gone on this chair. Why don't you
join me on the sofa then? I thought we were doing nothing. We are. And you're
the only person I can do nothing with. They should be here soon. Who? Jeez,
we're not expecting anyone, are we? The new chairs. They'll be arriving shortly.
You ordered the new chairs? Yes. The ones we've talked about for pittishing
months. Talked, yes, but that's not the same as making a joint decision. No
joint decision was in sight. And in my experience, endless consultations slow
down almost every purchase in this house so that sometimes it doesn't happen at
all. And I'm tired of sitting on a wonky spring. The wonky spring is only on
your chair. And my comfort is of no consequence. You didn't tell me you were
actually going to order them. Of course I didn't, because that would have meant
another month of faffing about and comparing colour swatches. Oh, so what colour
are these chairs that you ordered independently? The colour you liked. Which
was? A sort of sludgy terracotta. There were two sludgy terracottas. Which one?
Your first preference. What was it called? Sludgy terracotta number one. God, I
don't know. It'll be fine. You better hope so. Oh, I do. Very much. So, do you
want to watch the Galapagos dock? No thanks. I don't want to do anything. Just
gaze at the fire. And you, darling, we could maybe have a little doze. I don't
want a doze. I think I'll watch it. No, don't. I want to watch it. So let's
watch it now. No, I don't want to watch it now. Why not? Because I want to do
nothing now with you. Right. OK. So when do you want to watch it? Sometime.
Sometime when? Just sometime, OK? All right. How about a game of poker? Texas
Hold'em. I'll get the cards. Forget what I said. What did you say? I was wrong.
You're the only person who can't ever just do nothing. Ah, that must be the bell
for the end of round one. It's my new ringtone. Oh, it's Penny. Haven't heard
from her for ages. Hi, Penn. How are you? Hang on two secs. We're just having a
fight. No, you're right. Nothing's changed. I'm just going to have a quick chat
with Penny. Oh, you don't do those. You'll be gone for an hour at least, leaving
me under instructions to do nothing, staring at the fire, silent, lonely,
abandoned. OK. So while I'm talking to her, why don't you watch something
appallingly blokey? Great idea. Hadn't thought of that. Good walk. Did Amy meet
that lovely Spaniel she played with yesterday? Nigel has put his bin out early.
Again. It's Monday, and the collection day is Thursday. I know that. So does he.
But it doesn't stop him putting his bins out years before he should, every
bloody time. He works all week in London at the moment. No excuse. Well, yes it
is. He's not here on Thursday, so he can't put them out, can he? He could get
someone else to put them out on the right day. Who? Karen, next door. She
doesn't like him because he's shouted at her children. Someone else, then. Well,
you could offer to do it. I don't like him either. Nobody likes him. Because he
leaves his bins in the street. Have you spoken to him about it? He's always in a
hurry. Must have a drink soon, he smarms, before jumping into his Porsche and
gumming it down the avenue. Leave a note. He won't do anything about it. It's
worth a try. I am not going to leave a note, because it gives him an excuse to
ignore it and feel superior. That's a very extreme analysis of a simple
neighbourly exchange. It isn't simple, because he makes it complicated. Maybe
it's you that's doing that. It's not me that started this. Well, he didn't start
anything. He doesn't even know he's upset you. Most of the chaos in this world
is caused by people who don't think about the effect their carelessness has on
others. Calm down. I feel a rant coming on. You've just had one. Well, here's
another. Brian's car alarm went off at 2am. I didn't hear it. Perhaps you need a
hearing test. Oh, don't take your bad temper out on me. Did you get the bacon?
They don't sell streaky bacon any more, because there's no call for it. I said
I'm calling for it. Oh, God. I hope you weren't rude to Katie in the shop. I
wasn't rude. I just told her the truth. There is a nationwide demand for streaky
bacon. It's happened. You're now officially a grumpy old git. I've always been
grumpy. Bin gate? Oh, good grief. It's unsightly, bins in the street. Stop it.
They've been nothing but trouble from the start. What's wrong with black bags?
Foxes tear them apart in five minutes and there's rubbish everywhere. They're
like bloody daleks. They even sound like them, trundling along. And they're
multiplying. Nigel's got four now. So have we. They're almost certainly
mustering, and one day they'll take over and exterminate us. You're talking
rubbish. Literally. Right. I'm going to put his bin back inside the gate. No,
don't. That's provocative. I feel provocative. If it's inside the gate, the bin
men won't empty it. Yeah. Let him see how that feels. Coming home to a full bin.
Revenge is mine. Jeez, who are you? Bindiana Jones. The agony. Not just for you.
You've been thrashing around for hours. Oh, you finally noticed. You're putting
on quite a performance. Something Duggan agree with me. That would be me most of
the time. I'm in some discomfort. Well, so am I. You're kicking me with your
restless legs. I'm quite achy all over, but mostly down below. You're not
poorly. You just sat in a broken spring. Get a sleep. I can't sleep. It still
hurts. I said... I heard you. Look, go and lie in the spare room then. Right.
I'm going. You don't need to worry about me anymore. I won't. Out of sight, out
of mind. That's the idea. The bed isn't made up in there. Make a wish. We've
already said goodbye. Said she gotta go. Oh, you better go now. I thought you
were in the spare room. Good morning. And how are you today? Better in health
than in temper, I'm guessing. Did you sleep downstairs? Yes. I heard Amy
whimpering, so I came to let her out. What's the matter with her? She was
obviously in some discomfort, like me. But unlike me, she had a kind person to
look after her. I'll ignore the acid reflex, but what happened? She rushed out,
ate lots of grass, threw up, had a pee, came back in and went to sleep. Perhaps
you should have tried that instead of moaning half the night. Maybe I will next
time. I'm sure the neighbours would enjoy the performance. Might sell tickets.
And you've let her sleep on the sofa with you, which she's not allowed to do.
She needed a bit of comforting, remember that? Amy's all better now. And what
about you? She's got a bit of heartburn. Heartburn? You mean chest pains? No, I
mean heartburn. Do you know the difference? Yes. You should take your blood
pressure. I have. And? It's raised a smidgen. What do you mean a smidgen? You
know what a smidgen is. A soup saw, a hint, a dash, barely at all. Tell me
you're systolic and diastolic. I know about blood pressure, it's just a smidgen.
But if you're still in pain, you should phone the doctor. No need, I've got an
appointment for a check-up soon. When? In three weeks, first available. Oh,
jeez. And in the meantime? In the meantime, I'm having a coffee. Want one?
That's not good for you if you've got heartburn. You should have peppermint tea.
He married a woman to stop her getting away. Now she's there all day. What did
you say? I didn't say it, Philip Larkin did. Oh, him. Won't you tell me, where
have all the good times gone? Where have all the good times gone? Have you had
another nap? I just closed my eyes for a bit. You're sleeping rather a lot. I
need to recover from all the arguments. I'm concerned, that's all. I'm being
nice. Are you feeling better, sweetheart? Yeah, I'm OK, thank you, darling.
Good, because tonight we've got Yvonne and Trevor coming to supper. Who? You
don't know them. Phrase that instantly ignites an overwhelming mood of pissed-
offness. Well, no surprises there. Everything pisses you off at the moment.
Bins, bacon, car alarms. I think in the tetchy steaks you are feather-spitting
miles ahead of me. What's the matter with us? We can't seem to agree on
anything. That's not true. See? Sally says Peter's being really lovely at the
moment and Al's taking Di to Croatia on a sailing holiday. I can take you
somewhere if you like. I don't want to be taken somewhere. I'm not that needy or
pathetic. I can take myself off somewhere if I want to. Why don't you do that
soon? I'm just saying they're getting on as couples, but we're not. Hang on, I
thought we had a very good time upstairs last night. Yes, well, that was all
right. All right? But then you left the bathroom light on. And you kicked off. I
did not kick off. I just pointed out, quite reasonably, it was still blazing.
You were clenched. I definitely was not clenched. I know your clenched voice,
and here it is again. It's true. I'm a bit fed up at the moment. It's just one
thing after another. I've just had to pay extra for the new chairs. Why? Oh,
they're coming from France and they won't deliver them because the duty's not
being paid. It's all to do with Brexit, apparently. Have you paid it? Of course.
I was doing the accounts while you were teaching Amy to choose the hand with the
biscuit in it this morning. Why didn't you tell me about it? Well, why would I?
It's just an annoying bit of bureaucracy. Let me have a look at the paperwork.
It's not paperwork. It's just a text message from Customs and Excise. Did it
mention what's in this delivery? I don't think so, but I know it's the chairs.
How? Well, because we're expecting them. Show me. Oh, God. Look, I've done it
now. It doesn't matter. Let me see. OK. I clicked on this link. It doesn't
mention what's in the delivery. And look. Spelling mistake. Customs and
Exercise. What are you saying? It's a scam. Rubbish. I'm afraid it is. It can't
be. How much did you send them? £51.40. Of course. Odd amount. Looks more
plausible than a round number. I'll call the bank. We'll need to cancel your
cards. Oh, no. That's a nightmare. Are you sure about this? Absolutely certain.
But I'm not stupid, am I? I can't believe I fell for it. I'm always telling
other people what to look out for. Smart people get scammed, too. How do they
know about the chairs? They don't. But at any one time, millions of people in
this online world are waiting for a delivery. They're just chances. Chances with
very good odds. You won't tell anyone I was scammed, will you? Of course not.
I'm totally embarrassed and furious with myself. Don't be, darling. After all,
it was me that ordered the chairs in the first place. Yes, it was. So it's kind
of my fault you got scammed. No kind about it. It is your fault. Feel better.
Much. So, Trevor is an eco-gardener. What the hell's that? He creates gardens
that are kind to the environment. You mean he just lets the weeds grow? And
Yvonne has spent 20 years in local government. She's an expert on town planning.
Kill me now. Look, I was sorry for them. I kind of got trapped into asking them
over. They're having major work done. Their house is being remodelled on carbon
neutral lines. Of course it is. So, they've got no kitchen. And then they found
a cesspit under the basement floor. She was tearful at Pilates. I'm filling up
myself. Oh, and they're allergic to dogs. So we'll have to put Amy in the
garden. I'll sit out there with her. I'm allergic to local government officers
and eco-landscapers. Oh, come on. It's only one evening. Which will feel like a
year. I've been struggling to find something they can eat. They have so many
dietary requests. Demands is the word. I've done our favourite standby, the
otolenghi salad, but left out the pistachios. Best bit. Because of Yvonne's nut
allergy. Oh, no, just put out water tumblers. We don't need wine glasses because
they don't drink. But we do. Well, not tonight, huh? What? They're our guests.
We want them to feel at ease. Works both ways. As far as I can see, they're not
making any concessions for us, just assuming that we'll lock up the dog and
completely change our diet. Can you get out the blue and white side plates? No
chipped ones. Why don't we have a drink before they come? I don't think I can
get through this evening without a glass of wine. No, because this is one of our
non-drinking days anyway, as you know. I thought we'd forgotten about all that.
Absolutely not. There's an exemption, surely, if we're having people round. Not
a chance. Monday to Wednesday, alcohol free. But we had a drink last night and
that was Tuesday. Well, yes, but it had been a stressful day. And look what
happened. You had heartburn. Just shows. Just shows what? You think Bacchus's
weasely brother, the purse-lipped god of 0% came down to spite me for drinking
on a Tuesday do you? Very likely. No it isn't. There's no logic or consistency
in your relentless mission to reduce my weekly units. There doesn't have to be
logic, you just have to do what I say. And put an extra plate out for Trevor,
he's bringing his own hemp tofu. Hemp? What's it made of, string? Hemp seeds,
apparently. Ooh, hope he brings enough for us all to try some. Sarcasm is the
lowest form of wit. But the highest form of intelligence is the end of that
quote. Well you can save the quips because they have no sense of humour. I told
them my helium joke and it fell completely flat. Flat? That's very funny. It is,
isn't it? On the plus side, I don't think they'll stay late. I'll make sure of
that. I'll come down in pyjamas with a toothbrush. You haven't got any pyjamas.
I'll ask what time they want breakfast which is what your dad used to do to us
when we were snogging on the sofa. He could be quite scary, even in his pyjamas.
They had an RAF logo on the pocket, that was pretty intimidating. You certainly
scuttled off sharpish. I was quite glad to leave, you'd worn me out. And so it
has continued through the years. What's the hug for? We're happy sharing a
moment, being nice to each other. Why does that sound ominous? Right, it's ten
past eight, that's just fashionably late enough to be acceptable. Open the
elderflower and start smiling. What's up, heartburn again? No, I'm just
anticipating the horrors of the night ahead. Eight fifty three. Now they're
really late. I wonder where they've got to? Maybe they've fallen into the
cesspit. What do you think we should do? I think we should crack open the
curbsalve and put the pistachios back in the otterlenghi. But this is weird,
Yvonne is always the first to arrive at Pilates, stretching on her mat before
anyone else appears. Maybe they've forgotten. Yvonne never forgets things, she
never makes mistakes. She'd never get caught by a stupid scam. Oh darling,
you're not still beating yourself up about that, are you? Nobody's immune,
there's always a first time. She'll never get caught out. Something must have
happened. Perhaps Trevor's been rushed into A&E with a hemp tofu overdose. I'm
going to phone her because they could still be on their way. You know, traffic,
puncture. Yep, it's ringing. Yvonne, hi. Yes, it's me. I just wondered how long
you'd be. You're on your way, aren't you? To us? For supper, of course? No, no,
it's not tomorrow, it's definitely today. You saw me write it down at Pilates.
We're waiting for you both with a lovely supper. Why don't you just jump in the
car and... you've eaten already. Oh shame, well, what a pity we can't get
together. Um, no, I'm terribly sorry, you can't come to us tomorrow. We have
other plans. Oh yes, I'm heartbroken too. Let's see your Pilates on Tuesday. No,
no, I was just kidding. Of course I remember it's half term. Yeah. Yes, the week
after. Yeah. Bye. We don't have plans for tomorrow, do we? Of course not.
Hallelujah. Is there anything better than having an evening cancelled that you
weren't looking forward to but you didn't cancel yourself and realising you are
never going to reschedule it in a million years. So you got the date wrong? I
did not get the date wrong, she did. I thought you said she never gets anything
wrong. There's always a first time. I said that. Let's put the lights out and go
to bed. I'll get the cab, Sav. No, bring the elderflower, it's still Wednesday.
Aha, but it's Thursday in Australia. Ow, you poked me. Sorry, I'm trying to turn
over quietly. And not succeeding. What's the matter? I was just thinking about
things that might improve your sleep. A little less conversation. Have you heard
about breathwork exercises? You mean like Barbara Windsor in Carry On Camping?
Breathwork, not breastwork. Take your earplugs out. I haven't got them in. Well
in that case you need to get them syringed or maybe have a hearing aid fitted.
What? So I can hear you haranguing me more clearly, no thanks. And if that's the
end of tonight's heated exchange, I think I'll just go back to sleep. Goodnight.
No, that's the problem. Right there, I woke up thinking nice things about you
and snuggling up and now we're back in Grouch City. You accused me of being
deaf. You just overreact to everything. Look, I'm sorry I'm not singing in the
shower and dancing in the street, but we all get fed up from time to time. Are
you fed up? Sometimes. So are you. It's not normal for humans to be in a state
of ecstatic happiness continually. I'm not asking for ecstatic, just civil.
Something's wrong and I want to know what it is. We don't necessarily know why
we have low periods and we can't always be jollied out of it. Okay, but it's
taking a while and I'm just missing the laughter. You and Barbara Streisand?
Yes, I know you better than anyone and you should listen to me and not be sarky.
This is not normal for you. The mass of men live lives of quiet desperation. Do
they? According to Thoreau. So I'm normal. If you wanted a chirpy chappy you
should have married Timmy Mallett. I don't want to be married to Timmy Mallett,
although I did meet him once at a book launch and he was charming. I want to be
married to you most of the time. But not now. You're quite on edge at the
moment. You need to calm down. Why don't you come with me to Pilates? Because
it's top of my never going to happen list. Pity. And I couldn't manage it
because it seems I'm practically immobile. What? I heard you talking to Penny on
the phone. When? When I came out to get a beer. That was last week. I know. I
told you she called to say she and Mark were doing the coast to coast walk again
ten years after we'd all done it together. Yes, but what you didn't tell me was
what you said to her. What did I say? That you didn't think I'd be able to do it
because my knee wasn't strong enough. I had to overhear it myself. Hello? Yes,
OK, I did say that. And then you told her how you missed those trekking holidays
we all used to do down the Amalfi Coast and through the high atlas in Morocco
and how sad you were that we, I, couldn't do them anymore. And you've been
brooding about that for a week. Are you surprised? Well, it serves you right for
eavesdropping. OK, leave me alone. I'll get over it. Oh, darling, stop it. Of
course I'm sad because I want to do everything with you. But in fact, I used you
as an excuse. This better be good. I don't really want to walk the coast to
coast again. I love Penny and Mark and I'd much rather spend the weekend with
them, enjoying lots of good food and wine than schlepping through mud, wind and
rain. But I didn't want to say I didn't fancy it. So you told them I'd never
make it. Well, we both know you have to go easy now. We know, but I'd prefer it
if you didn't imply to our friends I'm inches from being clamped to a zimmer
when I'm perfectly capable of walking a few miles unaided. OK, you're right. I'm
sorry. I'm really, really sorry that this has been worrying you for a week.
Mostly because it's true. No, it's not. And we'll find other things to do
together. In fact, we can do nothing together and I'm happy. Oh, not that again.
Oh, please don't bottle up things like that. It's bad for you. Look, Sally was
telling me about box breathing. She got very stressed when Peter went off the
rails. She actually did a breath work. I think I've managed to breathe without
lessons for three score and more. What's wrong with just in and out? It's how
you do it. Hang on. I'll just download this. Oh, for goodness sake. Why not?
What's the matter? It won't let me install the app. Oh, my card has been
declined. Can you believe that? It's ridiculous. Well, what's funny? Two things.
Firstly, it's ironic but hilarious that you're getting stressed about loading a
relaxation podcast. And secondly, of course your card's been declined. We had to
cancel it after the scam, remember? Oh, hell. That stupid mistake keeps coming
back to haunt me. I wish it had never happened. I'm quite glad it did. What? I
like it when you're vulnerable. It gives me a chance to be a protector, a
comforter. I'm supposed to be comforting you at the moment. We can comfort each
other. Oh, who needs a podcast? Let's have a go at it. And I'm talking about
breathing. So, lie completely flat. Now, breathe in through your nose for a
count of four. Done it. Keep your mouth shut. This is not helping me relax.
Start again. Breathe in for four and then out for four. And don't speak. Ready?
Ready? Are you ready? You told me to keep my mouth shut. Go. Well, what do you
think? I'm breathing. I don't think it requires serious analysis. If you keep
doing it, you'll gradually notice the difference. In what? You'll be less of a
grumpy old git. I think breathing deeply, lying beside each other, is very
sensual. Quite a turn on, a kind of passive cerebral foreplay. OK. Let's try it.
OK. Synchronised breathing. And through the nose for four. What the hell is
that? It's the bin men, of course, and possibly bin women. Ignore them. At this
time? This is the time bin folk come. You usually sleep through it. It's not
thirst day already, is it? Obviously. Where's the bin lorries here? Jeez. I
forgot to put Nigel's bin out. I have to go and catch them. They'll throw you in
the back if you run out in those shorts. Can't risk Nigel finding out I moved
the bin. Too late. He's got a doorstep camera car and says. What? Why didn't you
tell me? I don't know. Just enjoying your discomfort. That's it then. No point
in bothering if he's seen me already on the door cam. Oh, I doubt he scrolls
through his CCTV when he comes home unless there's something wrong with the
house. Or his bin hasn't been emptied. It will be because I put his bin back out
when I took Amy for a walk last night because I knew you'd forget. Really?
Honestly? Truly, madly, deeply and the rest. You didn't tell me. We weren't
speaking after the bathroom light, Barney, and so I took Amy out so late. But
you still dragged Nigel's bin onto the street to get me out of trouble. I did it
because I knew you wouldn't remember and that would mean you'd be cross when you
missed the dustman and I've had enough of bloody cross. Thank you. You're
welcome. Sometimes I'm very, very glad I married you. Okay, that'll do for now.
And breathe. Conversations from a Long Marriage was written by Jan Etherington.
It starred Joanna Lumley and Roger Allen. It was produced and directed by Clare
Jones and was a BBC Studios production. And you can join Joanna and Roger at the
same time next week when they get an unexpected call from an elderly relative.
And tomorrow night at 6.30 there's humour and wit as we delve into the life of
David Sedaris reciting Pussy Toes, David's response to the death of his father
Lou. A reimagining of Carol Churchill's groundbreaking and celebrated play Top
Girls opens this week at the Liverpool Everyman, which sets the play about
female ambition and success across centuries and cultures in Merseyside. Front
Row discusses the play's themes and its continuing impact 40 years after its
premiere. That's at 7.20 this evening. And before that, we're off to Ambridge
after the news where Noletando goes on an intriguing tour in the archers. On BBC
iPlayer. Step right in. Perfect timing. The East End is ever changing. What is
this? Scooter! The order has entered the 1960s. Barely eight years late. But the
midwives of Nonata's house are forever constant. You've a home here now and
purpose and people who love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every
step of the way.