TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 And you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. BBC News at nine o'clock.
The leader of the Democratic Unionists, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, has met the
Brexiteer group of Conservative MPs known as the ERG to discuss the new trade
agreement for Northern Ireland. The deal needs the backing of the Democratic
Unionists to revive the Stormont Assembly in Northern Ireland. The chairman of
the ERG, Marc Francois, said it could take two weeks or longer for the DUP to
analyse the deal. The parents of a missing two-month-old baby have been arrested
on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. Constance Martin and her
boyfriend, Mark Gordon, a convicted sex offender, were detained by police last
night in Brighton. They'd been in hiding since the child was born earlier last
month. Detective Superintendent Lewis Basford says an extensive search operation
to find the baby is continuing. Whilst we still have hope that the baby can be
found safe and well, we must retain that hope. However, as time progresses, as
the weather is closing tonight, as it was last night in terms of the cold and
the coldness and the impact that would have on a baby, clearly the risk is
getting higher. The UN's nuclear watchdog has asked Iran to explain the origin
of highly enriched uranium particles discovered at the country's Fordeaux plant.
The agency said the particles were enriched up to 83.7% purity, short of the 90%
needed for weapons. The European Parliament has become the latest body to ban
its staff from having the Chinese video-sharing app TikTok on their phones.
Similar action has been taken by the US and Canada because of fears that the
Chinese government could use the app to harvest users' data. The owners and
managers of 12,500 high-rise buildings in England have been given six months to
register with a new safety regulator or risk prosecution. The rule has been
introduced as a result of the Grenfell Tower fire in 2017. It will make a named
person responsible for the safety of each building. BBC News. On the Life
Scientific in half an hour, Jim Al-Khalili will be talking to Professor Danny
Altman. He's an expert in how our immune systems respond to viruses. And since
the pandemic, he's turned his attention to trying to understand long COVID.
Before that, on Radio 4, James Gallaher presents an Inside Health special where
he finds out the answers to your questions on back pain. So the first thing is
breathe in and a breath out. Take your hands onto the edge of a table. So it's a
very unusual way to use a table. And then just gently take your elbows forwards
and put your elbows onto the table. Go right forwards. That's it. And then rest
your forehead on your arms. I am very comfortable. Can I just go to sleep? I'll
be honest, I think I look like I've just got home from a really bad day at work
and just collapsed on the table. It is a good pose for stress. Walk back with
your hands, walk forwards with your feet. Use your hands, breath out to move and
then just stand upright. So what we should have is an afterglow. Well, I hope
you're glowing too. I'm in a yoga studio near Stockbridge in the depths of the
Hampshire countryside, because it's time for our Inside Health special on back
pain and particularly lower back pain. We've been promising it for weeks. You've
been sending in your questions. I've got dozens of questions after doing my back
in. So let's answer as many as we can with our crew of back pain supremos. My
name's Richard Hussleby and I'm a physiotherapist working in a large community
trust in the Midlands. I'm Emma Goldfrey and I'm a health psychologist working
at King's College London. And I'm Alison Traweeler from Cornwall and I'm a yoga
teacher, yoga therapist and then I became a yoga researcher. So we have this
yoga evidence-based programme. My name is David Elliott. I'm a chiropractor
working with a multidisciplinary clinic in Essex. Well, it's a motley crew in
this yoga studio in Stockbridge. And I'll be honest, I feel like I've walked
into a joke. It's kind of like what happens when you put a physiotherapist, a
psychologist, a chiropractor and a yoga instructor, kind of like what happens if
they all walk into a bar? I don't know what the punchline to this joke is, but
I'm sure if anyone wants to write in with it, then I'd love to hear it. Back
pain's obviously a big thing. Lots of people getting in touch, including
listener Richard. My name is Richard and I live in North Devon. I've had low
back pain for 50 years, having injured my back while playing football. I had
unsuccessful back surgery in 1992 and have had chiropractic treatment for many
years, but I'm still hopeful of finding a long lasting solution. Richard, can I
start with you just to tackle that? I mean, like how common are back problems in
general and then something lasting 50 years a bit? I mean, like, is that an
extreme case or is that something you would see? So back problems are common.
60% of the population will experience back pain within their lifetime. And I
think 50% of the population will experience some form of back pain within the
previous year. So we see a lot of back pain in musculoskeletal services. 35% of
our 35,000 referrals a year are low back pain. Crikey. And many will be in the
age group 40 through 60 and will describe decades worth of back pain. So that
does sound familiar to me. Emma, it must take a toll on people. Yeah, it really
does. And unfortunately, people do have anxiety and depression and stress as a
result of having back pain. But also unfortunately, if you have a common mental
health problem like that, you're more likely also to experience chronic pain. If
somebody's had back pain for 50 years, I mean, like if you start having back
problems, Richard, are you doomed to having it forever? Yeah, I mean, absolutely
not. After 50 years, there's gonna be lots of things wrapped up in that, but
that can be unpicked. Well, hopefully by the end of today, we'll have an idea of
what does work and what helps and where people need to go. Absolutely. But
Richard, I'm interested in the anatomy of back pain. What is it? What's going on
that causes back pain? Back pain is multifactorial. It's always a combination of
your thoughts, your feelings, societal factors, and the structures at play. What
we're good at is picking up the serious and the sinister. We can exclude those
and rule those out well. But then the 95% of people that are coming in with a
variety of pain experienced in their back, we can't be so specific. And efforts
to do so generally take us down rabbit holes. What is it about our backs that
make it so vulnerable? Nature and evolution rarely gets things wrong. So to talk
about the back as being a vulnerable structure is probably more vulnerable in
the current age that we're living in. The back is a rich structure. It's got
lots of things going on. So if we're not using and engaging these evolved
postural muscles, these anti-gravity muscles that hold our joints up and animate
us, if most of the day we're sitting about in cars or in offices, these
structures are compressing, they're loading, they're fatiguing, and they're
causing pain. So when I had my back pain problems, one of the things that I was
recommended to do was to sign up to either a yoga or a Pilates course. And
Alison, perfect person to speak to, was that sound advice? I think there is a
bit of a problem that yoga has grown exponentially throughout the UK. And there
are so many yoga teachers and so many kinds of yoga that that's not necessarily
the most helpful advice that anyone could be given. So University of York in
2011 had published papers saying yoga works for back pain. And that's great, but
actually it's then, well, where do you go? So we do have a specific program,
ours is, but if somebody went to a class and they were doing jumping around
things or they were sat meditating in cross-leg position for hours at a time in
a cold room, they could end up with worse back pain or they could be asked to do
lots of strenuous poses that are overly stretchy. So that could be an issue,
yes. So don't do any old yoga class is the point. How do you find the right one
then? Because I can go onto the internet and just search yoga for back pain and
I will have my choice of videos and online programs to follow. Are they sound or
are they a mixed bag? Definitely a mixed bag. There will be some people who have
that as a career and they are professionals and they can put their YouTube
videos up soundly knowing that they will be insured. But from the yoga point of
view, even me with the strongest, most robust, rigorous piece of yoga research,
not just in the UK, but perhaps internationally, I have been advised that it
wouldn't be a good thing for me to put YouTube videos out there. So that then
makes you think, well, who is doing that? So be wary of that and find a good
teacher to start with. Richard, physiotherapy, for the more serious cases,
you're gonna be one of the first people the NHS turns to. So what works once you
have somebody who already has back pain? Exercise can work. Manual therapy,
massage therapy, manipulation can work. Talking therapy can work. What we think
is it's possibly more to do with the person in front of you than it often is to
do with the condition they have. What does good look like to that individual if
they've had successful manipulation, whether that's soft tissue or joint in the
past? There's an expectation that that is required. And if you deviate too much
from that, then you're not meeting that expectation. You're likely to have a
poor outcome. Can I just, while we're here, David, Richard, just spare any
confusion for me, because many people will see a physiotherapist for back pain.
Many people will choose to see a chiropractor for back pain. What's the
difference? Hopefully, not very much. Traditionally, there have been some
differences in treatment approaches, but as research continues and education
gets better and better, the Venn diagram of what we both do crosses closer and
closer. Long-term, the hope is that that mimics each other. There shouldn't be a
disparity in treatment styles or expected outcomes, whether you're seeing a
physio, a chiropractor, or an osteopath even. Richard, if I was having therapy
from you and David, would we just be able to play snap or? Hopefully. I think
David articulated well there. There's a sort of dovetailing of these professions
as the years have gone on. And I've witnessed that personally in the last 20
years since being in physio. Well, let's hear from Rolf, who's one of the many
people that got in touch asking questions about chiropractic therapy. Hi, my
name is Rolf. In my early 30s, I developed, for no apparent reason, severe lower
back pain. I was recommended a chiropractor in Leeds who x-rayed me, said that
although he couldn't help everyone he could help me, and so it turned out. I
should add that I once visited a self-taught, somewhat elderly chiropractor who
really made things very, very much worse. How can one be sure that the
chiropractor is properly trained? And why are backs apparently so poorly
understood? Serious and interesting question there from Rolf about how do you
know that you're seeing the right person and the right chiropractor? Because
it's a very big and broad discipline, isn't it? It's one that the NHS has an
interesting dynamic with, one where it largely sees it as a alternative or
complementary medicine, but at the same time, there are some guidelines where it
can be appropriate, particularly around back pain. So guide us through it,
David. So the evidence for spinal manipulation is quite strong. This is not
limited to chiropractors, however. Physiotherapists and osteopaths do very
similar techniques. Chiropractic itself is not just the manipulation of the
spine but also soft tissue techniques, so massage and the application and usage
of exercise therapy, of rehabilitative movements. To find a chiropractor that
works for you and is adequately qualified, I would suggest searching the British
Chiropractic Association, the BCA website. As a short note, I would advise that
you check that they are properly qualified, definitely not self-taught. It's not
a thing that one can self-learn, much like physiotherapy or osteopathy. I just
want to deal with now, though, a question from Fran. My name is Fran and I'm
from Keswick, which is in the Lake District. I've had back pain since I was
about 15 due to a combination of osteoarthritis, vascular joint degeneration,
and slipped discs. It took until I was 27 for a diagnosis to be made and to
receive treatment. My question is, why does it take so long to get a diagnosis
and treatment? Who wants to take that one on? Richard? It's amazing, isn't it,
the value for that individual of getting a diagnosis. We want a diagnosis. It
shines a light in the dark. And the treatment, invariably, for her problem will
have looked much like the treatment had she not received a diagnosis, I'd guess,
exercise, and eventually getting better. But that drive to get clinical
certainty has probably fueled some of her problem, has fed into the anxiety of
not having the diagnosis, and shows us what challenges we're really facing when
we're dealing with people and people's expectations and unresolved problems.
Emma? Yeah, I was gonna say people's expectations and people's beliefs are so
important. But some people are in serious pain. Yes, and some people, because
the pain is so intense, might need to go to a physio and get some exercises or
some other things that can help. And I think one of the issues with back pain is
that you can have a scan and you can see something on the scan, but that might
have no relation whatsoever to how much pain you have, because there are people
who have things on scans, but no pain, and people who have pain and nothing will
show up on a scan. While we're thinking about treatments, we have a question
from Sarah. Hello, this is Sarah from Oxford. My dad was urgently referred to
A&E with back pain and fitted with a brace. My questions are, what evidence is
there that braces are effective for protecting the spinal cord and reducing or
preventing back pain? And would simple advice on moving be just as useful? Thank
you. David? The research into how a brace may help to physically stabilize the
spine is pretty poor, to be quite frank. What it will mostly do is provide an
awareness around the trunk, an idea, a proprioceptive feedback of how he is
standing, sitting, hopefully preventing him getting into a posture or position
that may re-aggravate the back. Unfortunately, it really depends on what he
presented to A&E with. If there was a fracture, I doubt he'd be walking out the
door with a simple brace. However, long-term, if we continue to wear such braces
or supports, it's actually been shown to prolong or worsen pain. What we end up
doing is not working or moving said painful area, and that will actually worsen
over time. Perhaps better may have been some advice over reducing some movement
over a short period of time to avoid aggravation, then engaging and gradually
building some resilience back through the spine. We've had quite a lot of other
suggestions of things that people think have worked for them. Hello, my name's
Wendy. I'm a 68-year-old retired social worker. I've had back aches since my
early 20s. I find the best form of treatment is regular Iyengar yoga and Pilates
lessons, together with work at home, including morning exercises, swimming and
walking on a daily basis. I wonder if there is any evidence for the work that I
do that helps back ache. Thanks. Easy one for you. Yoga and Pilates, Alison.
Yoga for healthy lower backs has a lot of strong evidence. And when we went to
NICE guidelines in 2016, we were a stakeholder in there. The yoga evidence
showed for itself it would be cost-effective and effective for back pain. Little
bit of research for Pilates as well. David, what about swimming? Absolutely.
Good non-weight-bearing activity. Most importantly, it's an activity. It's
something to do. If you're comfortable swimming, do swimming. If swimming hurts
your back, don't do swimming. I think the point is that we're all trying to get
people engaged in life again, doing the things that they want to do. And there
are lots of different routes to that, but the end goal is very similar. And I
think believing that they can. Alison, shall we get an idea of what good yoga
for back pain looks like? Shall we have a little breakout session? I think we
better. Draw the kneecaps up. Draw the whole of your legs, suctioning them up
into your hips. Put wingnuts on on your hips, so tap your hips. So you're doing
them up. Tailbone in and up. Tummy in and up. Breastbone forwards and up. Take
your arms down, stretch them. Smile as well. I concentrate on too many things.
And breathe. And then relax. This would be perhaps going a little bit further.
So we're putting our hands here, and then you're going to just step back. Yeah,
so you're going to step back. Take your feet back underneath your hips. Stretch
through your fingers, stretch through your arms, stretch through your armpits.
Take the outer hips into the middle of the room. And then let your head go out
like a tortoise into the middle. Sorry, I'm a bad people. That's okay. And then
gently walk forwards with your feet. This particular yoga for healthy lower
backs was 30% better than usual care. It also showed that people had 70% less
time off work in the year that we analysed them. Nine months later, people were
still practising yoga twice a week, and improvements were maintained 12 months
after starting the three months yoga course. Well, as tempting as it is to keep
going with the yoga poses, we probably should get back to answering your
questions about back pain with psychologist Emma Godfrey, chiropractor David
Elliott, physiotherapist Richard Hussleby, and of course, yoga instructor Alison
Treywheeler. Now listen to Stuart emailed insidehealth.bbc.co.uk with his back
pain remedy. And I'll be honest, sounds like a lot of fun. Hi, my name's Stuart
from Weymouth. I've had on and off lower back pain for most of my life. Having
tried various remedies like hot mug packs, prescription pain medication, and
sleeping on the floor, I found a couple of frames of snooker is the best remedy.
Emma, what do you think? I think that's absolutely great. Whatever works for you
is what you should do. And I think as long as it's something you enjoy, you're
gonna keep doing it, which is really, really important. And it will get you
active, it will get you engaged, it'll get you socially connected with other
people. And that's really what we want. Richard, this really interesting
turnaround, isn't it? Because if you were to go back, not actually that long
ago, bed rest was often a recommendation for back pain. That's completely you
turned. Yes, that's right. We're moving more towards activity. So in the past as
caring souls, in the treatment of pain, we'd want to do something that avoided
that person experiencing pain and rest felt like a good idea. And now the idea
has changed. Pain is an output of the brain. It's a combination of a potential
injury, our hopes, our fears, our anxieties, our worries, and the social context
it's in. So it's a challenge. But that example with snooker is great. For that
chap, it got him moving better. He's bending across the table. We could talk
about that on a structural level. He was moving his nerves, moving his muscles,
moving his joints, and it worked for him. For another person with potentially a
really sort of nasty acute sciatica, that wouldn't have worked. So we can't just
say, everybody do snooker. Snooker is better than yoga or whatever. It's what's
of best value to that individual. If it's not that painful, do it. If it's a bit
painful, have a little bit of a go at it. But that's great that it worked for
him. But I think what's really coming out of this is that you have to have time.
And that's where talking therapies come in. And I think that's one of the issues
that we have in the NHS quite often, that there isn't enough time to do it.
Emma, I'm really glad you're here because I do want to chat about the connection
between back pain and our minds and the brain. Hi there, I'm Charlie and I'm
from London. When I was 21, I was debilitated by back and hip pain for about
three years. After learning about the mind-body connection and our nervous
system, I was able to heal from my pain using those techniques. Can you explain
why our mind impacts our physical health so much? Yeah, well, obviously our
beliefs, our expectations and our emotions affect everything in our body. For
example, with your beliefs, if you start to be afraid of moving and think that
moving is going to cause damage, then you're not going to move and then you're
not going to get any better. You're going to get deconditioned. And in fact, you
may get worse. When we're working with people who've got chronic pain, what
we're trying to do is to really explore that with them and move away from this
struggling with the pain and trying to get rid of the pain and move towards sort
of trying to live life in a way that's fulfilling for that person. And do we
know that that works as an approach in back pain? We do know that it works
alongside, I think physiotherapy is the best bet. And actually Richard and I
have done some interesting work on that. We did a trial at King's called the
PACT trial, which was published in 2020 in the Journal of Pain. And what we
found was this combined psychologically informed physiotherapy actually helped
people to function better in the short term. And that was really, really
important. And this was a very small intervention, only three sessions, because
we wanted to do something that was similar to what people would get in the NHS.
We realised that how you talk to people and how you make that rapport and that
relationship with the patient is so, so important if you want to get any kind of
good results and really help that person. Instead of just pushing and prodding
and manipulating X, Y, and Z, we're now setting some realistic goals about
getting back to functional activity that might be walking the kids to school. We
shift the focus back to the function and hopefully over a course of several
sessions, we've moved people back to meaningful living. Funny enough, the pain
takes care of itself. Alison, does that mind-body thing chime for you as a yoga
teacher? Definitely, I often get people come along to the 12 week courses and
they'll start off saying, I'm in constant pain. And then when you actually
question them and query and say, what do you mean constant? Is that in the
morning, in the lunchtime, in the evening, when you're in sleep, when you're
walking, when you're in the car? And they'll say, no, it's just here, it's just
there. So then you get them to do a yoga pose and you say, what's the pain
level, nought to 10, before it, what's it like after? It's very empowering for
them to realise they've turned the volume of the pain down. Maybe I might say,
what's your pain at the beginning of a yoga session? What's it at the end? And
again, they've gone from a 10, a lot of pain, I'm in constant pain, they think
they are, they think they're on a 10. You make them notice they've gone down to
a one or a none and it's a goal, they suddenly, it's transformational because
they realise they can affect their pain levels. Emma, can you pay close
attention to our next question from Jane? I'd say all of you pay close attention
to our next question from Jane. Hi, my name is Jane Coggle and I live in
Herefordshire. I suffered with chronic back pain for a number of years, but a
couple of years ago, I was able to consciously switch off somewhat from worrying
about things out of my control, particularly family members, and my pain did
improve considerably. I mean, I think that stress can exacerbate pain. On its
own, it probably isn't a completely causal factor, but it's certainly in the mix
there. If you're stressed, your breathing is gonna change, but also if you start
thinking about pain a lot, that's gonna make you aware of the pain more and it's
going to get worse. But I think what was interesting about what Jane said was
thinking about things differently is really, really important. And I think
that's the key to actually making a difference here. Popular painkillers like
aspirin and ibuprofen, they don't actually generally relieve back pain,
unfortunately. For example, a recent study found that only one in six patients
who were treated with these non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pills like aspirin
and ibuprofen had any significant reduction in pain. And that the people who
were taking this medication were 2.5 times more likely to suffer from
gastrointestinal problems like stomach ulcers and bleeding. But that's at the
very low end, Emma, isn't it? Kind of like the pain relief you get, there are
much stronger painkillers out there that some people will have. Yeah, there are
opioids and there's a huge risk with those of becoming addicted and they are not
recommended for the kind of non-specific low back pain that we've been talking
about. If you're the bus driver of your life, you've got a passenger on your
bus, which is your pain. You don't want to let that passenger take over the
driving and tell you where to go because you're still in charge of your bus and
you've got to decide where you want to go with your life. I've had a lovely time
sat here with all of you thinking about back pain and the treatment of it. But I
have this nagging question in the back of my mind about whether almost actually
the whole approach here is wrong. And we need to be thinking a lot more about
preventing people having back pain in the first place rather than treating
people afterwards. You were saying at the beginning, physio Richard, that it's
like 60% of people in modern lifestyles are a major contributing factor. So are
we just dealing with it way too late? Yes, we are. And there's some really
exciting programmes underway right now, which is the good news story. But really
we're talking about societal level change and that's massive. We've talked about
the challenges of just changing some people here and people's beliefs, let alone
the therapists. But if we're talking about societal level, that's a whole nother
conversation, but absolutely change has to come earlier if we're going to
address this. Julie emailed insidehealth.bbc.co.uk and she had back strain a few
years ago and she's really concerned about how does she ensure it doesn't happen
again. So David, what are the kinds of things if we're thinking about preventing
back pain that can be done? So for Julie, of course it depends on how that
original irritation occurred. Unfortunately, we can't promise to prevent or
completely guard against any future back pain, but the tenants are regular
movement, some sort of strength work and some mobility work. So whether it's
Pilates, yoga, or just getting out into nature, walking, something that will
provide some resilience for her back and some enjoyment, hopefully, crikey,
imagine that, some enjoyment out of her therapy. That's what I suggest. Does a
lot of this come down to like the idea, the concept that people have of
strengthening the core. If I have a stronger core, then I'm not going to have
back pain. Richard? We did a piece of work and it was titled The Myth of Core
Stability, because we found that we were probably over-egging the custard with
this one. And what we had the danger of doing is pulling all our eggs in one
basket and say, you know, it's all about the core. You've got to strengthen this
core. And if you're going to do it, you've got to do it right. Tense this muscle
first and squeeze that muscle after. And, you know, you'd be watching these
rigid movements in clinic being reenacted out with, I think I've got it right.
Is this perfect? And we realized we were creating a monster. We were becoming
part of the problem. So yes, there's a myth there, but is a good functioning set
of core muscles good for your body? Absolutely. But it can be engaged with a
whole host of stuff of which yoga is one, I'm sure. Pilates is another, swimming
is another, weightlifting is another, et cetera, et cetera. Is there anything on
the horizon that is going to transform back pain? Is there anything kind of like
exciting that people are thinking, right? This is the thing that we can kind of
like eliminate back pain as a problem. Or is it always going to be something
that we're going to have to live with and work through? Depends if we stay
sedentary or whether we all get moving a bit more. We need to learn how to be
relaxed and deal with stress. I think that's a huge issue in this day and age
that we're all too stressed. I think chasing a pain-free life is like chasing an
ever distant horizon. The more you want it, the further away it's going to get.
And I would agree there with Alison. And I think all of our sentiments today, we
just need to be out there getting more active, sitting less, less sedentary.
Yeah, and I think accepting a bit of pain if we have it, not catastrophizing
about it and seeing it as something really serious or worrying. More programs
like this, hopefully more mediums of getting this message out to people,
creating an overall empowerment with people with back pain. Once they have that
knowledge, they can go out and hopefully feel better. I think the main message
is you can do something to help yourself. Well, thank you all for coming. I
remember right at the beginning, I said it felt like it was a joke, all of us
coming into here, a chiropractor, a physiotherapist, a psychologist and a yoga
teacher. It feels like actually it's not a joke. We're all saying the same
thing. I think if you've been 20 years ago, it would have been more of a bun
fight, but it certainly seems that we're all singing from the same hymn sheet.
Well, thank you everyone for taking part in our special on back pain today. To
Emma Godfrey, Psychological Researcher at King's College London. David Elliott,
a chiropractor. Richard Hossaby, a physiotherapist working in the West Midlands.
And Alison Freywheeler, a yoga instructor. Thank you so much for having us all
in. I feel it would be appropriate for you to finish the session with something
nice and calm and relaxing for us. Can you do that? And this is the end of every
class on the Yoga for Healthy Lower Backs Program. And it's something that we
would recommend that people would do if they had a flare up of back pain, try to
get down to the floor to do a 10 minute relaxation, but then keep moving after
they've done that. So, everyone to the floor. You're going to start to lie down
on your back and then just gently bring your knees in towards your chest. Hold
your knees with a breath out. Relax your feet and then your ankles. Think about
your lower legs. Relax your ankles. Relax your knees. And then go into your
thighs, the front thighs, the back thighs, outer thighs, inner thighs. Relaxing
the hips. Relax the sides of the head. Out here. Inside Health was presented by
James Gallaher. The producer was Julia Ravy. We'll be hearing from an expert on
the body's immune system next in the Life Scientific. But before that, Julian
Warriker has details of the world tonight coming up at 10 o'clock. Hi, Julian.
Hi, Ron. Thank you. Relations between the US and China take another dip as
federal employees in America are told to get rid of the Chinese owned app TikTok
from their government owned devices in 30 days from now amid security concerns.
Children born as a result of sperm or egg donations currently must wait until
they're 18 to find out about their biological parents. We'll examine a proposal
that they could know at a much younger age in the future. And the scientists who
are recommending that it's time for us to know the time on the moon. That's all
coming up at 10 o'clock. Julian, thanks very much. Now on Radio 4, it's time for
the Life Scientific. Here's Jemal Khalili. My guest today is a man whose area of
expertise has been in exceptionally high demand in recent years. How do our
immune systems defeat viruses? In particular, how do those killer T cells, a
type of white blood cell that searches for and destroys infected cells, know
when to launch an attack? Danny Altman became interested in immunology when he
was at university and has spent most of his career trying to answer one
question. How do our killer T cells know if a cell has been infected? He studies
the genetic basis of our immune response to a vast range of pathogens, from
anthrax to the Zika virus. And yes, when Covid hit, he turned his attention to
SARS-CoV-2. His lab at Imperial College London remained open throughout the
pandemic, and Danny was a regular on radio, TV and social media, helping us all
to understand the workings of our immune systems a little better. He's one of
many scientists who've helped us to understand how our immune systems were
responding to the threat posed by Covid, and is also one of a much smaller group
of scientists who've been studying long Covid. Why do some people suffer
debilitating consequences for so long after they've been infected? Professor
Danny Altman, welcome to the Life Scientific. Thank you very much. Now, as I
just mentioned, your expertise has been in exceptionally high demand recently.
You know, we all like to be useful, if we can, particularly as scientists. But
has it felt like a huge responsibility for you these past few years? I think the
build up to it was very strange because, you know, as scientists, we exist in
our own silos. And really, we've spent decades building up this knowledge and
thinking and thinking and thinking about how T cells recognise things and how
one could design vaccines. And when the heat is on and all that knowledge got
stress tested, it kind of paid off and meant something. And that does feel
meaningful and good. And looking back of your career today, we do know so much
more about T cells now and how they work than we did back in the 80s. Do you
think research in this area can continue to progress at such a rapid rate?
Totally, totally. I think, you know, immunology, the field I'm in, has delivered
and delivered over the last few decades. And I see that continuing. You know,
there are plenty of autoimmune diseases that we don't deal with well enough,
plenty of infectious diseases that we don't vaccinate against well enough,
plenty of cancers that are still too inaccessible. And all of those things are
up for grabs. OK, Danny Altman, before we delve into the intricacies of the
immune system, I'd like to get to know you a little bit more. You grew up in
North London in the 60s and had quite a sheltered childhood, I believe. Yeah,
you know, I guess, you know, we all have strange childhoods, don't we? But I
mean, mine was, my parents were Holocaust survivors in North West London. So,
you know, a very kind of sheltered house where everybody we knew came from
similar kind of backgrounds, you know, very much the kind of family where, you
know, you ate Wiener schnitzel and apple strudel, not roast beef. Because say
your parents came over when they were young, your father came over on the
Kindertransport. He was on the Kindertransport as a nine year old, having lost
his parents, and my mother on liberation from Auschwitz. So, you know, quite an
unusual family. In a way. Yeah. I mean, and how aware were you about that
traumatic past that your parents had experienced? In some ways, you know, it was
everywhere because, you know, it was their past and their story and our family
story and these photos and paintings on the wall of relatives who I'd never
known who had this kind of sort of mythical property because I didn't know any
of my grandparents. And on the other hand, you know, we just kind of got on with
it, didn't we? Yes, that's the life, you know. But did you feel any sense of
maybe of pressure to make the most, for example, of educational opportunities
that maybe had been denied your parents? Yes, in some ways. First of all, you
know, I think lurking in the background, there was a certain sort of element of
bitterness, is probably too strong a word, but some kind of loss in my parents
that my mother had wanted to study. My father had wanted to study. Years later,
when I went through his papers after he died a few years back, I found a sad
little note from his social worker saying the British taxpayer has invested
quite enough money in Hans's education and I suggest he not be allowed to stay
at school beyond 16. And he was a very bright man and that was very hard for
him. So, yes, a little bit that, you know, when I think about all those, you
know, lives that were ended and dreams that were crushed, I did sort of feel
like you've got to kind of go out there and, you know, just do something. And
how about your mother? I mean, you say she survived Auschwitz. Well, you know,
again, you know, a very bright lady who'd missed her entire education. Of
course. None whatsoever. Yeah. I think for them it was kind of double-edged,
yes? So on the one hand, obviously that kind of Jewish pride and on the other
hand, slight kind of befuddled bemusement, like what is it he does? What's his
job? So academically you were successful. What did you study at university? So
initially I studied basic science. I became a biochemist and, but very early on
loved immunology. So the turning point for me was, you know, probably I was
aged, God, 19. And a friend said, this chap, Rolf Zinkenagel is coming to speak
in London. And he'd gone to win the Nobel prize 10 years later for describing
these things called T-cells and how they recognise infection. And so we decided
to go and hear him. And really from that moment on, I was kind of on team
T-cells. T-cells, this is the type of white blood cell that swings into action
when we get infected, circulating our bloodstream, seeking out and destroying
infected cells. I mean, how much was known back then when you attended that
lecture? Rolf Zinkenagel was starting to unravel it, but it was kind of a
mystery. So I guess after the pandemic, I think lots of people became expert in
antibodies and have it on board that antibodies float around in your blood and
recognise proteins like spike, which shouldn't be there. And T-cells are the
other half of the immune system. And to my mind, much kind of cleverer. And in
those days, it was complete mystery what they recognised or how they did it. And
that was the kind of steep learning curve of those years. And was it the
mystery, the fact that we didn't understand them that really excited you? Yes,
totally. You know, this was a fast moving field and people would stand up at
conferences and have big rows about it, about their different models and
different understanding. And it was before the days that molecular biology had
really kicked in. So we had the ideas, but we didn't really have the toolkit to
address them. So, you know, a lot of outrage, a lot of hand-waving, a lot of
disputes, a lot of philosophising until the tools came on board. Well, on
graduating in 1980, you went off to Bristol University to do a PhD precisely on
how T-cells control a particular disease, the herpes virus, after which you were
awarded a fellowship to work at the Weizmann Institute in Israel. This was in
the mid 80s when papers on T-cells were coming out thick and fast. Did it feel
exciting to be working in such a fast moving field? It felt terribly exciting.
It was great stuff. And by the mid 1980s, I'd come back to London to what was
then Imperial Cancer Research Fund. And that's the time when immunology really
entered a new age because molecular biology came in. So we could stop hand-
waving and drawing bubble diagrams and cartoons and actually clone things and
sequence things and be serious scientists like everybody else and work out what
our pathways were. So from the time that I was a postdoc, a big driver was to
understand these things called HLA molecules. So to rewind a little bit, the HLA
molecules are the genes that we have. They're terribly variable between people,
but we're all different in our HLA molecules. And the way that I was thought
about them historically is there are immune response genes. And this
communication between these HLA molecules and the T cells telling them, this is
the real focus of your research, isn't it? It's the focus of my research has
been very boringly for my entire life. I feel like school friends of mine and
college friends pursued exciting careers where they went here, there and
everywhere and changed directions. I've kind of worked on the same molecules for
my entire life and adored it and had great fun. But also, thank goodness, right?
For the rest of us. So I mean, basically, so the T cells are these killer drones
floating around, seeking out and destroying these infected cells. The HLA
molecules encoded by these genes, they are the military intelligence. They tell
the T cells what to do. Exactly that. They're sitting on the surface of your
white blood cells. They're sampling the environment all the time, binding little
bits of protein into their groove. And based on the intelligence of what's in
that groove, they're saying, oh, you're okay. You're just a normal bit of skin
sequence. You're a normal bit of muscle sequence. You're not okay. You're a bit
of an Ebola virus sequence. So let me get this straight. All the cells that make
up our body tissue, so skin, muscle, organs, and so on, have this molecule on
the outer surface that raises a flag, sort of tells the T cells who are ready to
attack, yep, come and get my cell, it's infected. Yeah, good way of putting it,
yeah. So they're sampling the environment all the time. Most of the stuff, quite
innocuous, don't respond to it. Don't say we're infected, don't raise the alarm.
And then suddenly there's a bit of COVID spike or something there, and they're
saying, come and get this. Right, and they're also telling them what the cell is
infected with. They're saying what the cell's infected with, and lots of
intelligent information going into the T cell. What kind of response do we need?
How angry do you need to be? What kind of chemicals do you need to make? Really
intelligent communication. It's, yeah, it's military communication. We sort of
endowed these cells and molecules with some sort of sentient intelligence, but
it is just really so clever. It's glorious. I mean, let me try you on a metaphor
that comes from my colleague, Benny, where he describes it like this to
students. He says, imagine that the government have decided that they're going
to monitor all the cars coming into London because they know that the baddies
tend to drive the red minis. The red cars are the viruses. The red cars, in this
analogy, it's the red cars are the viruses, yeah. And the baddies are quite
sneaky, so sometimes they'll put a spoiler on the mini or change its color or
put different wing mirrors on, and then it's harder to catch them. So that's why
you need your other bit of the immune system, the other half, which are the T
cells, which to me are even more intelligent, because instead of just
photographing the overall shape of the minis, they're saying, well, if they try
and sneak some different version of it in, what we'll do is we'll crunch the
minis down to its bare components and look at its spark plugs and its door
handles and its wing mirrors, and that way we'll never be conned because we'll
always know whether it was the part of a red mini or not. And that's the T cells
recognizing bits of viruses and bacteria. So even the most altered and souped up
and pimped up red mini will still have components that the T cells will
recognize. Totally, totally, it's gorgeous, yeah. You can't hide from us.
Totally. I mean, it is incredible when you think about it, just how many
different viruses and bacteria the T cells are able to recognize and destroy. I
think the point I try and get across is that to be a mammal living on planet
Earth is a really dangerous business. Yeah, the chances of survival are really,
really poor. There are so many scary things around us. You know, the ones you
know, and the millions that you don't know, where as genomics gets better and
better, we're sequencing new viruses and fungi and bacteria all the time. And to
be a species living on planet Earth, you need a good immune system that can deal
with all of those. So, you know, the immune system is a really fantastically
complex beast and, you know, genetically very highly programmed to get us
through that. You know, many of us think quite a lot about our immune system and
how to boost it, you know, through lifestyle changes or diets or taking
supplements. But perhaps we don't probably quite appreciate just how different
we all are in our ability to fight specific diseases. Yeah, so I think, so
obviously among the many, many questions I'd get asked by journalists during the
pandemic were certainly questions about lifestyle and diet and supplements and
things. And I guess at the end of the day, if I was asked, you know, how to have
a really good protective immune system, it would be pick the right parents,
ideally, you know, genetically diverse parents and, you know, be moderately well
nourished and that's the best you can do. And then hope you got the right genes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So my ability to fight a particular disease is not gonna be
the same as yours. Totally different. Right, right, right. Yeah, totally
different. So, you know, one of the things that I do when I teach students is
I'll introduce the subject by saying, hands up if you know your star sign and
everybody will put their hands up and shout out, you know, Capricorn, Gemini,
whatever. And then I'll say hands up if you know your HLA type and, you know,
nobody except for me in the room will put their hands up. And it seems bonkers
to me that you would think it was valuable in life to know whether you were
Virgo or Gemini and not know whether you were gonna be, you know, more prone to
making a good or a bad response to your COVID vaccine or more likely or less
likely to get MS. I mean, you know, surely that's quite important to know. Okay,
so how then do I find out about mine? I know, for example, I've got a blood
condition beta thalassemia from one of my parents, Middle Eastern background.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, which is down to a defective gene. How do I find out
what other diseases I may or may not be susceptible to? Well, obviously what you
need to do is get your DNA sequenced. A kind of sneaky and kind of communally
useful way to do that would be to register as a bone marrow donor, which is, you
know, quite a sort of selfless, useful thing to do. And you get to know your HLA
type. Right, I'm on it. So, Danny, maybe you can explain what you do all day in
the lab. Well, nowadays I probably don't do very much in the lab that's useful.
But I think one of the things that sometimes makes me feel very old when I speak
to PhD students today is that today their lives are very technology driven and
computer driven, and they will do an experiment that maybe cost 20,000 pounds
worth of reagents and equipments. It generated 100,000 lines of data, and they
could essentially sit at home for the next month, analyzing it and decoding it
and working out the big data. And then we could write a paper about it together.
When I was their age, we were manual laborers. It was all about how many hours
you could spend in the lab, pouring your gels, culturing your cells, pouring
your sequencing plates. And it was very common to work a 70, 80, 100 hour week
because it was labor intensive, manual labor. Yes, yeah. And the hours spent
looking down microscopes. Looking down microscopes, it was one of my most common
expressions in those days was you've got to kind of get your eye in. What did
get your eye in mean? It meant get to know and love your cells. How do they
look? Are they happy? Are they unhappy? Are they activated? Are they not
activated? Are they responding? You know, it was your life. So you could
actually look under the microscope and see T cells interacting with infected
cells? I can still, you know, close my eyes and see an angry activated T cell,
yes. It's a kind of sort of bulging teardrop and it's sitting there ready to do
all its stuff. So it's battleground, it's warfare. You know, it's great stuff.
And you know, when you use words like, you know, it's warfare, it really is down
at the molecular scale. It's really exciting stuff. Yeah, yeah. A lot of people
think of us as scientists all need to be good at maths and good at problem
solving. But being good with words is also very important, isn't it? I think
there are many different kinds of scientists, yeah. And partly that's beautiful
because it means you can all bring different things to the party. And partly
it's kind of threatening because it means you can never overcome your imposter
syndrome because there's always somebody out there who's got a far bigger skill
set than you have in something or other. So in my case, it's the fact that I'm
barely numerate and the others in the room, you know, are sort of doing
crunching lines and lines of coding. Well, you say you're barely numerate, but
my producer tells me you're into 19th century classics. So, yeah, you know, so
whatever I lack in numbers, I possibly make up for in words. So for my entire
adult life, my mindfulness, if you like, has been to read 19th century classics
in the bath from five to 6 a.m. And every single day of my life. So, you know,
apart from being good on HLANT cells, I'm pretty good on Tolstoy and Dostoevsky
and Dickens and Hardy and Trollope and things like that. And one of the things I
do like about words and narratives and things is, oh, you know, the idea that
sometimes I think you just have to ask a good question, do a good experiment and
tell a good story about what you found that's new. Yeah. I think that applies to
all science. And even, you know, you're solving difficult mathematical problems.
If you can't explain it, if you can't add the narrative that makes other people
understand it, then, you know, what's the point? I hope so. You know, I think
it's important. So it was drummed into me when I was at the Weizmann with Irene
Cohen, who would sit with me writing papers over a bottle of malt whiskey, and
we'd fight over every adjective. And, you know, nowadays I sort of fight with
people over coding and pathways and computer algorithms and things. And in those
days we'd fight with a copy of Rogers' Thesaurus about, you know, which
adjective or adverb to use. And the idea was to try and write something
beautiful and compelling and interesting. And that still seems kind of fair to
me. Yeah. You know, I have my favourite scientists and it's not just for their
discoveries, it's because I love the way they write. Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Now, Danny, during this time in the 80s when you're working full-time in the
lab, 12-hour days and so on, you wrote a very important paper in Nature in 1989.
How big a moment was that for you? Well, I think for any scientist, the first
Nature paper moment is a big moment, yeah? It's like whatever it is, you know,
getting your first BAFTA or Oscar or Booker Prize or whatever it is, it suddenly
means that you've done something right and people have noticed you. And in that
particular case, it was decoding some of the use of these HLA molecules by being
able to clone the genes and put them into cells and show what they did and be a
bit reductionist about it. And the telephone in the lab starts ringing and
people from other countries and other continents are saying, you know, do you
want to come and be interviewed for a tenure track position or come and speak to
us? And suddenly the job feels a bit exciting. Yes, and you've made it. Yeah, a
little bit. You've made a big splash. A little bit, for a few years, yeah, yeah,
yeah. And of course that paper, the 1989 paper, you say the phone was ringing
and, you know, suddenly you were in demand. That then meant that you were
travelling the world, talking to scientists. Yeah, you know, I think the joy of
the job we do is that you're part of this international community and I can pick
up the phone or the email or go on a plane to friends and colleagues in
countries in every continent of the world and we share a world. And that's a
wonderful thing about the job, it really is. And that's what's interesting about
your work, isn't it, Danny? That because you work on our immune response to all
sorts of diseases, you're not like, you know, there's a lot of scientists who
will, you know, specialise in Ebola or Zika or whatever. For you, or any
infectious disease where a pathogen enters the body and our immune system has to
develop a response to it, that's your area. I think it's, you know, my focus
obviously is these HLA and T cell interactions. So that's been my drive all
through my career. And yet I've applied it to many, many different autoimmune
diseases, cancers, infectious diseases. And over the years, that's been
something that's quite confusing to my colleagues who thought perhaps I was a
bit dilettante. You know, why is it, you know, Altman one year, he was really
keen on anthrax. And then a few years later, he was really keen on MS. And then
a few years after that, he was keen on Zika virus. What's the matter with him?
And the answer is I was always kind of thinking about the same thing, you know,
how the T cells get turned on and what turns them on and what they recognise. I
was just applying it in different contexts, often in different countries. Yeah,
presumably if you're trying to understand a military intelligence system, you
need to test it out in all sorts of different battle environments. Totally,
totally. Yeah, yeah. OK, so there you were travelling the world, studying our
immune response to all sorts of infectious diseases, when bang, a totally new
virus arrives on the scene, SARS-CoV-2. Did you immediately drop what you were
doing to get to work on this? Or did you, like most of the rest of us, just have
this moment of confusion about just not knowing what to do next? Yeah, well, you
know, our lab, like all the labs at Imperial College, we were closed down when
lockdown happened. But you were allowed to gradually reopen your labs if you
worked on COVID. So I run a lab with my wife, Rosemary, who's also an
immunologist and respiratory doctor. So it was very natural territory for us
that we would start to apply our toolkit to COVID and start to build up some
collaborations and start to do stuff on it. So we really became a kind of seven
days a week COVID lab, both working within the UK and collaborating with lots of
other countries that were having a very bad COVID experience. Well, you've been
working on COVID, and in particular, long COVID, ever since. When did you first
realise that long COVID might be a thing? Yeah, so I do feel that long COVID is
really important. And the idea that there's a kind of persistent trail of
disability that comes after your acute COVID infection. For perhaps 10% of
everybody on planet Earth who's ever had COVID, which is hundreds of millions of
people, yeah? And so it does feel like a big deal to me. And it kind of came
upon me quite early on. So if you think back to, what, March and April 2020,
when people who had friends in England were seeing their first ever cases or
their first ever friends who were affected. And I had friends talking to me, one
of my best friends, saying there's something weird here because I can hardly
walk around the block anymore. And I used to kind of go out on my bicycle, and I
can't anymore. What's going on? And it did sound to me like a thing and a real
thing. And it was immediately slightly familiar to me in terms of consequences
of viral infection because part of the day job immediately before COVID had been
traveling to Brazil, where we were rather keen on another virus called
chikungunya. And so chikungunya is one of the viruses you catch when mosquitoes
nip you, a bit like dengue or Zika or one of those things. But in the case of
chikungunya, you get your rash and your malaise and your fever. But then for
quite a high proportion of people, they won't recover. And for months or years
afterwards, they have a kind of almost autoimmune-like arthritis. So it felt to
me almost like one of those kind of cases. Right. So I mean, clearly, certain
viruses can have that sort of long-term effect. But when we think about long
COVID, you say you really believe there's something here. But are there medical
colleagues of yours that are still not convinced by long COVID that maybe they
think your time is better spent doing something else? Oh, totally. So I think
there are people who think that I'm sort of way off-piste worrying about long
COVID and spending a lot of my research time working on long COVID and perhaps
wonder, oh, you know, whether it's psychological and whether people are having
us on. And those kind of attitudes worry me and make me angry, because I do
think this is an enormous health care challenge. If it's as big as most of us
think it is, then we've created a medical problem for ourselves and a medical
caseload as large, again, as the whole of rheumatology or the whole of heart
disease. That's going to have enormous consequences for people's lives, for the
workforce, for NHS spending, doctor numbers, you know, you name it. So we're
kind of obligated, I feel, to take it seriously. Well, certainly, if there are
millions of people who are ill for months and months and months after being
infected, we have to. So you are probably best placed to be able to answer this.
What do you think is going on? So the picture that I'd paint at the moment, it's
like a lot of COVID, isn't it? We've worked so fast and discovered so much at
pace that you feel you know a lot, and yet it's kind of scattergun of sort of,
you know, facts here or there. So if you asked me to draw the textbook pathway,
I'd be hard placed to do it. So I recently wrote a book on long COVID with a
patient called Jez Medinger, and he's got a very good analogy for describing it.
He says the state of knowledge at the moment is you've got one of those thousand
piece jigsaws, and you feel like you've done very well, but actually you've put
in place the easy pieces around the edge. And you know, you're bluffing about
whether it's going to look like a horse or a steam train, so you don't really
know yet. So we've got the pieces around the edge. And at this stage, long
COVID, it's sort of a catch-all for what could be many different. It's an
umbrella, almost certainly for more than one thing, which includes clotting
abnormalities and inflammatory abnormalities and possibly autoimmunity and
possibly viral persistence, the idea that people might not quite clear their
COVID. There's lots of ideas in there, but hard to put them all together. So all
similar-ish symptoms, but maybe different causes. Yeah, yeah. And which of the
causes do you think might be the most likely that's leading to this persistence?
Oh, well, I mean, to stick my neck out before we've finished the research and
say which is most likely, is trying to guess the jigsaw puzzle before we build
it. So, you know, all hypotheses are on the table. Well, so the jigsaw puzzle
still is far from complete. And I know this is an impossible question to answer
because scientific discoveries don't follow a predictable path. They always
surprise us. But is it ridiculous to think that there might be some effective
treatment that that jigsaw puzzle will start to take form, say, in the next
five, 10 years? Or at least there may be a diagnostic test of some sort. Yeah,
totally. So the people with long COVID are a very engaged and desperate and
vocal group. And when I meet up with them, I've been real life on social media,
they feel that we're taking our time and dragging our feet and where are the
treatments? And you must know what they are, why are you withholding them? And
at that stage, I come across as a professor, slow and boring and say, you know,
we've got to have a hypothesis and we've got to test things out and randomize
control trials and work out what works. Otherwise we're wasting our time and
energy and maybe doing dangerous things. You know, and yet, if I look at all the
dreams we've had during the length of my career to deliver on immunology and all
the crazy things we used to write in grant applications in the 80s and 90s,
they've all come true and they've all delivered. And there are amazing therapies
for autoimmune diseases and for cancers and things. So if you ask me, you know,
do I have faith that we'll deliver on this one as well? And by we, I don't mean
me, I mean all of us as a group. You know, totally, absolutely. Professor Danny
Altman, thank you very much for sharing your Life Scientific. Pleasure. The Life
Scientific was presented by Jim Al-Khalili and produced by Anna Buckley. Jim's
guest was Professor Danny Altman. And of course, you'll find an extensive back
catalogue of programmes on BBC Sounds. The world tonight is next. That's after a
look at the weather, starting with tonight. And much of the UK will be cloudy
and breezy with a scattering of light showers, but with a few clear spells too.
North West Scotland and the far south-east of England will see the best of any
clear breaks, allowing a frost to develop. Tomorrow will continue rather cloudy,
breezy and chilly. Sunny intervals and just the odd light shower. And that's how
the forecast's looking.