TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 And in episode 6, I find her, the unwitting human face behind the con. Now we
can finally hear from Janessa Brazil. The Newsroom is next. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. It's 4 hours GMT, this is The
Newsroom, and I'm Charlotte Gallagher. Coming up... Organised crime activity,
including gun battles, murder, armed robbery, carjacking, kidnapping, forced
disappearance, extortion and sexual assault is common. As two kidnapped US
citizens are found dead in Mexico, our correspondent tells us about the dangers
of cartel-controlled territories. Do we finally have an answer to one of the
most mysterious events linked to the invasion of Ukraine? Denmark, Poland and
Sweden say they believe leaks in two major Russian gas pipelines to Europe are
the result of sabotage. The romance scams destroying lives and making gangs
millions. Also... How does it feel to treat me like you do? One of the songs
that defined the 1980s celebrates its birthday. First, the news. BBC News,
hello. I'm Gareth Barlow. Protests in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, continued
late into the night against proposed legislation requiring organisations that
receive funding from abroad to register as foreign agents. Police used water
cannon and tear gas to try to disperse protesters and later move them from the
front of the building. The Georgian President, Salome Zorishvili, gave her
support to the protesters. I am by your side. Today, you represent a free
Georgia. Georgia, which sees its future in Europe, will not allow anyone to take
that away. That future belongs to our next generation and no one has the right
to take that away. No one needed this law. It does not come from anywhere if not
at the behest of Moscow. It should be revoked. From the very first day, I said
that I would use my veto against it and I will. The UN Refugee Agency has called
on lawmakers in Britain to reconsider draft laws that would detain and deport
people arriving by boat to claim asylum. The UNHCR said the measures violated
both the letter and the spirit of the Refugees Convention by punishing asylum
seekers who don't enter a country at an official border point. Vicki Tennant is
the agency's representative to the United Kingdom. We are very concerned as the
UN Refugee Agency. This is effectively closing off access to asylum in the UK
for people arriving irregularly. We believe it's a clear breach of the Refugee
Convention and remember, even people with very compelling claims will simply not
have the opportunity to put these forward. The British Prime Minister insists
that the legislation is the only way to deter people making the journey by sea.
The White House says it supports a bipartisan bill in Congress that will give
President Biden new powers to ban the Chinese-owned app TikTok and other foreign
technologies that could pose security threats. The White House National Security
Advisor said the bill would help protect American sensitive data from certain
foreign governments. The Democratic Senator Mark Warner is among those
supporting the legislation. Over the past several years, foreign technology
products from adversarial nations, and when I say adversarial nations, I'm
specifically citing China, Russia, North Korea, Iran, Cuba and Venezuela, have
really tried to establish a foothold in American markets. Today, everybody's
talking about TikTok and the ability of that platform to be used by the
Communist Party both to take on data, but also potentially as a malign influence
and propaganda tool. Five women have sued the American state of Texas, saying
they were denied abortions even though their lives were in danger. The lawsuit
follows a US Supreme Court ruling last year that removed constitutional
protection for abortion rights. The women want the state to clarify that doctors
can provide abortions in cases where continuing the pregnancy is unsafe. World
news from the BBC. Data from Myanmar shows that the number of students taking
university entrance exams has plunged 80% since the military coup in 2021.
Almost one million students sat the test in 2020, but fewer than 200,000 pupils
took the exam this year. The continuing civil war between the military and rebel
groups is being largely blamed for the drop, with thousands displaced, making
school difficult. Cyclone Freddy is expected to make landfall again in
Mozambique later this week after it struck Madagascar for a second time on
Monday, bringing strong winds and torrential rain. Madagascar's government said
eight people were killed. A BBC World Service investigation has revealed how
criminal gangs across Southeast Asia are trafficking migrants and forcing them
to carry out online romance scams, targeting victims around the world. Jake
Tacky reports. People around the world have lost hundreds of millions of dollars
to this sophisticated scam in recent years, but we have found that many of those
involved are victims themselves. One former scammer told the BBC that he was
lured with the promise of a good job before being trafficked and held in a
casino compound in Cambodia, where he was forced to scam. He said he had to
approach 100 potential scam victims in Europe and the US every day. In video
diaries, secretly recorded inside his compound, he said that those who disobeyed
the gangs or failed to hit their targets were subjected to severe beatings. The
chief executive of Twitter, Elon Musk, has apologised over an exchange he had on
the platform with an employee. Ali Thalassan spent more than a week trying to
work out whether he'd been sacked. It now appears Twitter's owner has offered
him his job back. Mr Musk said he'd had a video call to establish the facts of
the case and he wanted to apologise for his misunderstanding of Mr Thalassan's
situation. Correspondents say that the bizarre exchange online speaks to the
chaotic way that Mr Musk has handled redundancies at the company. Live from
London, that's the latest BBC news. Hello, you're listening to the Newsroom from
the BBC World Service with me, Charlotte Gallagher. The kidnapping of four US
citizens in Mexico has been dominating headlines on both sides of the border for
the past 24 hours. It's believed they travelled for cosmetic surgery before
being taken by armed men in the city of Matamoros. Video showed them being
forced into a pickup truck after a shootout. A Mexican woman standing nearby was
shot dead. On Tuesday, the group were found but two had been killed. Karine
Jean-Pierre is the White House spokeswoman. We will continue to work closely
with the Mexican government to ensure justice is done in this case. Since day
one of this administration, we have been focused on disrupting transnational
criminal organisations, including Mexican drug cartels, and we have imposed
powerful new sanctions against cartel organisations in recent weeks. Our
correspondent in Mexico, Will Grant, has been giving me the latest. Well, it
does appear that what happened to these US citizens is that they decided to
enter Mexico, to go to the city of Matamoros, for what's being described as a
cosmetic health procedure for one of them. And it seemed that as a group of
friends, they went down to accompany her ahead of that cosmetic surgery. The
person who was going to have that was a 33-year-old woman called Lativia Tae
McGee, and she was accompanied by three friends, Shahid Woodard, Zindel Brown
and Eric Williams. And then all four of them, travelling in a minivan, found
themselves caught in the sort of worst possible circumstances of the Mexican
drug war, a firefight between warring factions of the Gulf cartel. We're not
sure entirely if any were killed on the scene or died later from their injuries,
but certainly there is unconfirmed video of all four of them being taken away.
Now it's been confirmed that two were killed, two survived, one of them was
injured and all four, both dead and alive, are back in the United States now.
And how were they found? Well, I believe that the level of intensity that came
down on this group that kidnapped them must have either brought tip-offs or
simply created the conditions that they knew it wasn't going to be very wise to
hold on to them for much longer, once it was clear that these were in fact US
citizens. We saw that there was a coordinated effort between the FBI and federal
agencies from Mexico, the Mexican intelligence services and of course the state
forces as well. And with that level of intensity, I think that the cartel, if it
was indeed cartel gunmen who took them, probably considered quite simply that it
wasn't good for business to be holding American citizens and they were, I'm not
sure if released is the word, but the authorities located them. And you
mentioned yesterday that Matamoros is not a place that tourists would be
recommended to go. It's very dangerous and there's a cartel war going on there.
Yeah, I mean we can take a look at the US State Department's travel warning for
Tamaulipas. It essentially warns US citizens against travel to the state where,
as it puts it, organised crime activity including gun battles, murder, armed
robbery, carjacking, kidnapping, forced disappearance, extortion and sexual
assault is common along the northern border. So that gives you a sense of just
how dangerous the state of Tamaulipas is. Matamoros itself as a city is
incredibly dangerous and the fact that this sort of gunfight could unfold in
broad daylight shows just how dangerous things are. Lest we forget, there was a
Mexican bystander who was killed too. She was a woman who was simply in the
wrong place at the wrong time. There were 35,000 murders a year in Mexico last
year. That compares to about 20,000 in 2015, which critics of the president say
that it shows the country's on the wrong path. Will Grant in Mexico. Last
September, one of the most mysterious events linked to the invasion of Ukraine
took place. Not on the battlefield, not in Ukraine, but deep beneath the Baltic
when explosions ripped through the Nord Stream gas pipelines, linking Russia to
the West. Denmark, Poland and Sweden say they believe leaks in two major Russian
gas pipelines to Europe are the result of sabotage. Seismologists reported
underwater blasts before the leaks emerged and Ukraine has accused Russia of
causing the leaks. Many were quick to blame the Russians, but why would Moscow
want to sabotage its own pipelines at an estimated cost of $500 million when it
had other, simpler ways of controlling the gas flow to Europe? On Tuesday
evening, US officials told the New York Times there was evidence suggesting a
pro-Ukrainian group was behind the attack. Separately, German media is reporting
that investigators there believe they've identified the boat used to plant the
explosives. The Ukrainian authorities have denied any involvement. Julian Barnes
is the New York Times' national security reporter. We've had officials tell us
that this sabotage act was done by an independent group, not by a government,
but a group that is aligned with Ukraine, a group that is opposed to Vladimir
Putin of Russia. And the information that the intelligence that the US has right
now indicates that the Ukraine government didn't know about this. President
Zelensky had no knowledge of this. Now, of course, one could learn something
different later on, but for now, the US does not think that the Ukrainian
government had anything to do with it. It's an independent group. Officials
wouldn't discuss the nature of the intelligence, who collected it, how they got
it. You know, US officials, like any intelligence professional, try to keep
their sources and methods very close to the vest. We do know that the group of
people here likely included Ukrainians. It might have included Russians. The
exact mix is not clear. They also used divers, according to the intelligence
they have. I think it's very important to note that the reporters of the New
York Times, and I presume my colleagues in Germany, have been working on this
story since September, since the pipeline blew up. And this is, you know, a lot
of times we've seen in this war sort of controlled leaks, right? Information
that is declassified and then released to the public, a government wanting to
have an effect. That's not what's going on here. This is investigative reporting
that people are sort of digging out. We have not been able to confirm the German
reporting yet, but it is very much in alignment with what we were reporting. And
so I think that this is journalists working hard, doing their job. Julian
Barnes. The British government has set out plans to stop people crossing the
English Channel in small boats from France. Last year, more than 45,000 migrants
made the journey. Under these new proposals, anyone who enters on a boat will
not be able to claim asylum. Instead, they'll be detained and removed to what is
deemed a safe country, as well as being barred from re-entry. The British Prime
Minister, Rishi Sunak, said the proposals were tough, but necessary and fair.
Now, I understand there will be debate about the toughness of these measures.
All I can say is we have tried it every other way and it has not worked. So I
say again, my policy is very simple. It is this country and your government who
should decide who comes here, not criminal gangs. The UN Refugee Agency says
it's profoundly concerned by the plans and says the new bill will deny
protection to many asylum seekers and breach the UN Refugee Convention. Matt
Salmarsh is from the UNHCR. It looks very much like an asylum ban. We're
concerned about the impact that that will have on refugees and asylum seekers.
We're also concerned about the impact that that will have as a signal to the
rest of the world in terms of the UK's role and its responsibilities and also, I
suppose, its tradition as a country that has generously welcomed refugees,
asylum seekers, those fleeing war and persecution in the past. Critics also say
that with no legal safe routes, it won't have an impact on the numbers coming.
Our correspondent, Lucy Williamson, went to the migrant camps near Calais in
France to find out. A policy designed for impact had little impact in the camps
of northern France. Those that were aware of the new UK policy said it made as
little difference to their plans as the policies that came before it. So nothing
here. UK, whatever they do, we are going there. Omar was sitting with friends
around a small fire in the Sudanese camp in Calais. I never stop. I never stop.
I never give up. On the outskirts of the camp, Salah watched his friends play
football. I will go to England. He told me he'd prefer prison in the UK to
freedom here in France. If they send people to Rwanda, will you still try and go
to the UK? Yes, I will go to the UK. That's my ambition, my dream. I will not
return to Rwanda if that is happening. I can kill myself in England, but I am
not returning to Africa, Rwanda. Aid workers say they've seen a rise in suicides
among migrants here over the past few years as immigration policies have
tightened and conditions in the camps have worsened. But for many people here,
policy announcements alone won't dim the appeal of British shores. Lucy
Williamson. Last year, the US Supreme Court overturned the constitutional right
for women to seek an abortion. Since then, many American states, including
Texas, have imposed bans or restrictions. Now, a number of women in Texas are
challenging those changes in court, saying they've caused them serious harm. One
of them, Lauren Miller, spoke on the steps of the courthouse in the city of
Austin. Politicians in Texas are prohibiting health care that they don't
understand. They could do something, but they're not, and it's killing us. How
is it that I can get an abortion for a dog, but not for me? Today's legal
challenge in Texas is just the latest move in an ongoing battle between pro- and
anti-abortion supporters in the US. Our Washington correspondent, Nomi Rickbell,
has more. It was really powerful testimony from these women who have been
basically denied, they say, their right to have an abortion, given that, they
say, their lives were at risk, their foetuses were at risk as well. And standing
with them was Nancy Northup. She's the president and the head of the Center for
Reproductive Rights. It's a group that's dedicated to abortion rights. And she
made the point that the lawsuit's the first of its kind since Roe v. Wade was
overturned. And she was very blunt as well. She said it's now dangerous to be
pregnant in Texas, and said no one should be forced to wait at death's door to
receive health care. Also, she said that these women she was representing was
only the tip of the iceberg. It's really important to stress what these women
are after is not an overturning of abortion in Texas. What they want is clarity.
When the state of Texas banned abortion, they said there are exceptions. These
women are basically saying, what are the exceptions and under what conditions?
The polls still suggest that most Americans do believe in abortion rights, and
especially when it comes to those who need it because their lives are at risk.
So in some ways, this was the women's way of saying to them, look, we are very
ordinary, everyday women. All of them wanted to have the children. They didn't
fit the so-called stereotypes that maybe people have about women who have an
abortion. So this was their way of showing the public this is affecting normal,
everyday women who want a determination, not because they wanted to get rid of
the pregnancy, but because their lives and the life of the fetus was at risk.
Nomi Rikbal, the man who led the main US public health agency during the
pandemic, will today give evidence to a congressional committee investigating
the origins of the outbreak. Dr. Robert Redfield has previously said he believes
the virus came from a lab leak in China, a view recently backed by the FBI, but
strongly denied by Beijing. From Washington, Gary O'Donohue reports. Almost
three and a half years after COVID-19 first appeared in the world, there's still
no answer to the question, how did it come about? To date, neither the World
Health Organization nor the United States has come down in favor of one
explanation or the other, and China has continued to block access to key data
from the lab in question. There have also been accusations that some scientists,
without evidence, attempted in the early days to paint any hypothesis based on a
lab leak as tantamount to a conspiracy theory. Republicans are frustrated that
the Biden administration has so far resisted any kind of bipartisan commission
to look into the origins of COVID. Online romance scams can be big business,
with some victims losing thousands, even millions of dollars. The BBC has been
speaking to people in Southeast Asia who took part in these scams. They've
revealed the sophisticated techniques they used and the brutal conditions
unwilling scammers were forced to work under. Jowin Fung reports. A whispered
plea for help. I'm a Chinese man trapped in a scam compound in Cambodia. Didi,
not his real name, left China for the promise of a well-paid job. Instead, he
was trafficked to Cambodia, locked up in a compound and forced by criminal gangs
to carry out an online romance scam known as pig butchering. I'm recording this
video secretly from inside the bathroom. In the scam, victims are known as pigs.
Scammers use fake online profiles to groom them before tricking them to invest
in fake financial exchanges. Didi worked 12-hour days targeting people in
America and Europe under the constant threat of violence. Someone in my team
made a mistake today. He was beaten up in front of everyone, then dragged out of
the office. Videos shared with the BBC by activist networks show the type of
violence Didi witnessed is common in scam compounds. This is Xiaozui, not his
real name. He's a former scam boss. He's wearing a mask to avoid reprisals from
criminal gangs. He says he made hundreds of thousands of dollars running a scam
operation, even writing a guide for other scammers to follow. But that he now
regrets his actions. The pig butchering scam is all about using emotion. That's
how you win their trust. The profiles we make up are always very handsome, rich,
responsible and caring. It was a profile just like this that Cindy fell for. The
scammers stole the identity of an innocent social media influencer from South
Korea to target her with. Jimmy came at a time when I was the most vulnerable in
my entire life. Cindy Tsai is a successful businesswoman based in Boston in the
US. At the time, she was going through a divorce and had just found out she had
terminal cancer. Jimmy would message me every day. If I was sad in my
interactions with my husband, he was always there. When my husband and I had
decided that we were going to divorce, that's when it switched to much more of a
romantic relationship. After seducing Cindy, Jimmy tricked her into investing
more than $2 million on a fake cryptocurrency platform. Despite the large amount
that I lost, I actually believe that I've been luckier than most. I've given the
scammers enough of my time, I've given enough of my money, and I absolutely
refuse to give them who I actually am. After four months in captivity, Didi
managed to escape and make it back home to China. We approached the owner of the
compound where Didi was being held for common, but he did not respond. Hundreds
of gangs continue to carry out the pig butchering scam from compounds across
Southeast Asia, targeting people all over the world. That was Jowyn Fung. Let's
get some sports news now with Paul Sarris. Chelsea are into the quarterfinals of
the Champions League after a 2-0 win over Borussia Dortmund in the second leg of
their last 16 tie. The BBC's football correspondent John Murray reports from
Stamford Bridge. The Champions League could prove to be the salvation of Graham
Potter as the Chelsea manager. His team may be marooned in mid-table in the
Premier League, but in Europe they won their group before the World Cup and won
through by doing what they had to do, scoring two goals in a game for the first
time in 13 matches. Raheem Sterling rode his luck after a missed kick to shoot
Chelsea in front just before half-time. And early in the second half, the big
moment, a VAR-assisted decision for a penalty for handball. It was debatable.
Chelsea's new spot-kick taker, Kai Havertz, hit the post, but VAR intervened
again. The penalty was retaken, and this time Havertz found the bottom corner.
So Dortmund, who had won every match they'd played in 2023, are out, and Chelsea
are enjoying their best moment yet under their manager of only six months.
Chelsea manager Graham Potter was delighted with the victory. Fantastic
atmosphere, fantastic evening. Players were tremendous, the supporters were
tremendous. We had to be against a team that are doing so well, ten games on the
bounce winning, but I think over the two games, I think we've deserved to go
through. Elsewhere, Benfica thrash Club Rouge, 5-1 on the night and 7-1 on
aggregate to reach the last eight. Meanwhile, Spurs welcome Milan to the
Tottenham Hotspur Stadium later on Wednesday, one nil down from their first leg.
Elsewhere, PSG go to Bayern with a one nil deficit from their match in Paris.
Tennis, and one of the biggest tournaments outside of the four Grand Slams, gets
underway on Wednesday at Indian Wells. Carlos Alcaraz can become the world
number one if he wins the title, with Novak Djokovic absent from the tournament.
And the top three golfers in the world have been grouped together for the
opening two rounds of this week's Players' Championship at Sawgrass in Florida.
Spain's John Rahm has won five of his past ten tournaments and is the world
number one, but a second-ranked Scottish sheffler or Rory McIlroy, who was
third, can take top spot with a win. That was Paul Sarris. For many of you, this
song needs no introduction. New Order's Blue Monday is still the biggest-selling
12-inch single in UK history, and this week it celebrates its 40th birthday. It
borrows from the disco of Donna Summer, the synth-pop of Kraftwerk, and even
spaghetti western soundtracks. Peter Hook played bass, and he told us how the
single came about. You know, when we were doing it, we didn't actually think
much of the track. It was meant to be an encore that the machines could play
while we went and got drunk in the dressing room. We were using very, very old,
almost barbaric equipment. If you made a mistake in a nine-minute song, you had
to go right back to the start and start again. Still had no intention of putting
a vocal on. And then when Bernard heard it, and with a bit of pressure, shall we
say, from our manager, Rob Gretton, he was going, put a vocal on it, put a vocal
on it, it's great, you know. So we weren't too excited about it. I suppose if
you're going to say that the marriage of the music and the sleeve made it a real
nod towards the future, the floppy disk itself, the emulator disk that was
intrinsic in making Blue Monday, for all the samples, that they were all done on
the emulator keyboard. So we didn't realise when we were doing it that the
process of emulating the disk with the holes was the expensive bit. We were
ending up celebrating the biggest selling 12-inch, 500,000, I think it was, and
we were actually celebrating losing 50 grand. So... The secret of music that we
can never decipher is even we don't know why. And to hear the original mix that
me and Mike Johnson did in 1981 in Britannia Row sound as good today as it did
40 years ago is an amazing compliment. We really had no idea that this was going
to still be, today, our biggest earning song. It's 4.30 in the morning here and
that has really woken me up. That's Blue Monday by New Order, Peter Hook talking
about that amazing song. You've been listening to The Newsroom with me,
Charlotte Gallagher, and let's hear a bit more New Order. You're listening to
the BBC World Service, where So Jung Lee is exploring the alarming growth in
cyber sex crime in South Korea. Human Rights Watch recently named my country the
digital sex crime capital of the world. Illicit sexual footage. Verbal sexual
harassment. Dark web chat rooms. Sexual exploitation footage. Secret recordings
of sex in motels. Hacking personal information. The shame victims feel is one of
the weapons cyber sex criminals use to blackmail and manipulate them. They don't
see the footage as violent exploitation of women. It's just a commodity for
them. Year on year, there's been an increase in cyber sex crime. So, who are the
new cyber sex criminals? Somebody is watching you. Tuesday at 9.30 and 20 GMT.
This is the BBC World Service. My name's Hannah Ajella and I'm investigating
online romance scams around the world. I've been on a quest to find a woman
whose stolen photos are the bait in catfishing schemes used to trick victims
into relationships. And in episode six, I find her, the unwitting human face
behind the con. Now we can finally hear from Janessa Brazil. Join me for Love
Janessa after the news. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. A protest in the Georgian
capital Tbilisi has continued late into the night. Demonstrators descended on
the parliament building after lawmakers signalled support for a bill that
classifies organisations with funding from abroad as foreign agents. The UN
Refugee Agency has condemned Britain's plan to detain and deport asylum seekers
who arrive by boat. The UNHCR said it would amount to an asylum ban. The Biden
administration has welcomed a bipartisan approval to proposal to give the US
government new plans, new powers to ban the Chinese own video app, TikTok. The
legislation has bipartisan support in the Senate. Five women are suing the state
of Texas over its abortion legislation. They said they'd been denied the
procedure, even though their lives were in danger. Texas has an abortion ban but
allows terminations in an emergency. President Zelensky's advisor, Mikhail
Podolyak, has said he's denied any Ukrainian involvement in last year's attacks
on the Baltic gas pipelines. A New York Times report suggested a pro-Ukrainian
group had been responsible. A BBC investigation has revealed how criminal gangs
across Southeast Asia are trafficking migrants and forcing them to carry out
online romance scams. A former insider described brutal conditions facing those
imprisoned in compounds. The chief executive of Twitter, Elon Musk, has
apologised over an exchange he had on the platform with an employee. Mr Musk
appears to have offered Hallie Thorlason his job back. Cyclone Freddie is
expected to make landfall again in Mozambique later this week. The weather
system struck Madagascar on Monday for a second time. And scientists here in
Britain have found that bumblebees learn to solve puzzles by watching their more
experienced peers. Experts from Queen Mary University of London trained a set of
bees to open a puzzle box containing a sugar reward. These bees then passed on
the knowledge to others within their colonies. World News from the BBC. Hello,
I'm Hannah Ajela. And before we start, please note this series contains adult
themes. Behind every romance scam, there's the bait. In Love, Janessa, from the
BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts, I investigate the murky and surprising world
of online romance cons, also known as catfishing, and embark on a search for the
woman whose stolen images are being used to lure in countless victims around the
globe. Good morning! Hi! Wow! Hi! We brought Hannah with us! Hi! Turn this
around, there we go. Hi, nice to see you! How are you? Let me set the scene. I'm
in Nigeria, and that second voice is my producer, Laura, in Vanessa's apartment
in the US. I'm being carried around on a laptop, getting the full 360 tour via
video chat. I'm really good, thanks. It's so good to see you. We're trying to
figure out what we're going to do, like the sound, but I think my bedroom's
better. Vanessa's apartment is a one-bedroom condo. Small kitchen, big couch in
the living room, but not a ton of furniture. It's nice, but modest, really. And
it's very hot. I'm sweating. Don't mind me. It's supposed to get hotter, though.
I need to get this air conditioning fixed before it gets worse. Alrighty, let's
check this out. Then we go into her bedroom. There's a scented candle
flickering, a giant bed, piles of makeup and clothes. It's like a spa collided
with a slumber party. What do the words say? Oh, it says dream in the little
neon sign. I've seen it before, actually, that neon sign of the word dream that
sits on the wall above Vanessa's headboard. It's prominent in videos from her
camming days. Throughout this podcast, so many people have spoken for Janessa
Brazil. The scammers, of course, who stole her images and put words in her
mouth, and those who were scammed, who claim that Janessa Brazil needs their
help, their love. I can't imagine what it's been like for her, if she sees
herself as a victim, or if she feels at all responsible for the damage that's
been done in her name. What right do I have to even think she should be
remorseful? Is the worm on the hook guilty? These are the questions running
through my head as we settle into talk at last. Now finally, the real Janessa
Brazil gets to speak for herself. Janessa Brazil From the BBC World Service and
CBC Podcasts, this is Love, Janessa. The story of my wild quest to find the
woman whose face and body is the bait used in catfishing schemes around the
world. Episode 6. Love, Vanessa. Should I say my real name or my model name?
Vanessa is my real name. My model name is Janessa Brazil. And where were you
born? Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1982. Vanessa grew up in a mountain village
about three hours north of Rio. Very small town feel. It was a street that went
downhill and a bunch of houses, you know, up and down the cobblestone streets. I
used to love just walking around the streets and then that night I used to love
going out dancing at the discotheques. Vanessa's childhood, as she tells it,
contained a lot of sadness. Her father wasn't in the picture much. Her parents
divorced when she was young. Soon after, Vanessa's mom moved to the US with a
new boyfriend. My mom actually left me and my brother behind on my sixth
birthday. My brother was two and I'll never forget that day. So yeah, it was
tough. In 1994, when she was 12, Vanessa joined her mother in the States. So she
used to be a dentist in Brazil, but when she got here she couldn't practice. She
would have to go back to school. So she became a dancer, a stripper. Vanessa
describes herself as a shy immigrant kid with an unhappy home life. To fit in,
she learned English fast and swallowed her accent. She went to a private all-
girls school. I put myself through high school because my mom was like, I can't
afford to pay. So my mom went from being a stripper to making costumes for
strippers. That was her business. And so she taught me how to sew and I helped
her make costumes. And she paid me. $600 a month goes to school. And that's how
I put myself through. She'd always been a good actress, dressing up and
pretending to be someone she wasn't for fun. You know, it was just my thing. I
loved that. I was living such a horrible life. What I was doing was pretending
that I was an actress in a movie. I know that many of us are walking around
wondering about Paths Not Taken. What if, fill in the blank, then who would I
have been? But Vanessa's story seems unusually riddled with these junctures.
Points where things just happened to her. Things beyond her control. Events that
changed everything. Here's one. Vanessa was a really good student. She says she
has a photographic memory. She could study for a test on the bus to school and
ace it. By the end of high school, she had her eye on studying international
business at university in Hawaii. But I didn't realize that I didn't have a
social security number and I was illegal. So I was not able to apply for
college. Vanessa says her mother hadn't told her that she was undocumented. She
has her papers now, but at the time, a door slammed shut. She didn't go to
college. Instead, she got serious with her boyfriend, an older guy, a bouncer
she met at a nightclub. We were together six years before we got engaged, and
then nine years of marriage. The day before they were married, Vanessa got in a
car accident. Not too serious, but she got a settlement. I've always wanted a
boob job, so I made money with my car crash. So I figured, you know what, I'm
going to buy myself new boobs and a new car. So that's what I did. Vanessa
modeled a bit, then worked as a massage therapist. She took an admin job in an
office. I was married. I had a nice little job. I helped out with bills or
whatever. A low-key life. But then on a holiday, another one of those junctures.
Me and my ex-husband were on vacation in Florida. I look back, and I see this
couple. They keep moving over until they finally get to us, and we start
talking. Nice couple. She was very beautiful. Very porn star. Big boobs and big
lips. Just that distinctive look about her. We got to talking, and she finally
tells me that she's a porn star. Her husband is her manager. Next thing you
know, she started telling me about webcam and how much money I could make. I'd
be really great at this because I'm so beautiful. Blah, blah, blah. The whole
story. We go back home, and I was like, I don't think we're going to do that.
But I kept it in the back of my head. I was already having problems at work with
sexual harassment. So I gave it a second thought, and I like to give things a
chance. So I talked to my husband, and he said he'd be totally cool with me
working on webcam. Nudes. Whatever I was comfortable with, he was okay with me
doing. So that was like the biggest thing for me. They were living in Tampa,
Florida at the time. So I'd get home around 5.30 in the afternoon from my
regular job, hop on cam for a couple of hours, and kind of get warmed up, see if
something was going to be of my liking or if I was going to be comfortable.
Right away, she made a connection with the fans. I'll never forget the noises
from the site, like the noises that it made. Every time a guy would, I don't
know what it is from their end, but if they liked you, there would be a whistle
noise. Foo, foo, foo, foo. That noise would just be constantly going to the
point where it didn't stop. A woman taking her clothes off in front of a camera,
what is that experience like? I don't have a lot of experience and I was really
shy. So I just went on there and I said, you know what? I'm going to make an
alter ego and I'm going to be someone completely different. She decided to give
the persona a name, Janessa Brazil. The last name Brazil, obviously, it's from
where I'm from, but also is one of the most searched words on the internet.
First page on Google immediately. You know, that was pretty much it. I hate that
name, Janessa Brazil. But it helped me. It helped me get popular quickly.
Immediately, the money started rolling in. So she decided to quit her day job.
This is what everyone wants to do. Go on your bosses office and be like, I'm
quitting. And not have a worry in the world because you're making triple of the
money somewhere else in half of the time. It was the late 2000s and sex on the
Internet was evolving fast. The idea of an adult entertainment model having a
website, building and controlling her own image and money, it was still
relatively new. Porn is an industry that often marginalizes female creators or
flat out exploits them. Vanessa says she was one of the first to upend that
system. I started being able to think outside the box. I was trying to think of
ways of doing things that nobody else was doing. I launched my website December
2008 and made my first appearance on Howard Stern shortly after. And that's when
everything blew up. At the time, Howard Stern was one of the biggest radio hosts
in the US. Vanessa walks into the studio in a leopard print bikini and high
heels. And Stern asks her if she'd like to remove everything but the heels.
That's probably the part of the segment most people tuned in for. But Vanessa
also hangs around for an interview. She holds her own, standing naked among a
group of clothed, middle-aged dudes. She's funny, impressive, unflappable and
only 27 years old. And when I did my interview, my whole website crashed.
Vanessa was building herself into a brand. You're listening to Love Janessa from
the BBC World Service and CBC Podcasts. The Janessa Brazil image was carefully
cultivated. She had the long game in mind. At the peak of her career, through
subscriptions and live shows, and carefully managing her brand, Vanessa says she
was bringing in about a million dollars in revenue. Vanessa says she was
bringing in about a million dollars a year. I paved the way to the other girls,
and they still watch my videos to this day, to see what was she doing. And what
exactly was the thing that Janessa Brazil did so well? You ask them what they
want. What do they like? It's not about me, me, me, me. They're paying me $20 a
minute. It's all about them. It's kindness and caring. So that's what sets me
apart. Because most of the time, I actually do care. And I want to please them.
I know you like something before you actually like it. Because I read and
research. I read endless books on psychology, hypnotism, and how to manipulate
their minds, but not in a bad way. That's what they're there for. And they come
back for more. Caring and kindness, you win their hearts, you win their wallets.
And the rest is history. But as the Janessa Brazil machine got bigger and
bigger, it needed to be fed. And the fuel was Vanessa. It became too much.
Vanessa says that she was now the breadwinner in her marriage, and the marriage
was falling apart. All of it was wearing on her mental health. She says she got
a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, which she contested, and started taking
prescription drugs. She was working long hours in front of the camera. Sometimes
24, 48 hours at a time, I wasn't getting sleep. Just like money-making machine,
you know? Eventually, I became soulless. I was just like, gone. I realized there
was no one in there. And my fans saw that. You know, I couldn't get on cam
unless I was wasted, drinking two bottles of wine a night, four or five days a
week. I'm like, this is not a life. If I need to do this to get on there,
there's no way I can keep this going. And to make matters worse, there was
another layer of stress in her life. That layer is the reason for this interview
and this whole journey, and why I wanted to meet with Vanessa in the first
place. The Scammers. This started a very long time ago. This guy comes into my
chat, and he says that we're married. I was like, I'm sorry, what? And they're
like, you're my wife, and you told me you were going to quit this. And I went,
is this guy joking with me? Is this like a prank? And I was like, why don't you
just send me an email and tell me what's going on? And that's when I started to
realize what was happening. And it wasn't just the victims. She says the
Scammers started popping up in the chat during her shows, too. They would come
in and ask me to do weird things. Put your hand on your head, or like put a red
hat on. Because that was the ways they would prove to these other people they're
scamming that's the real me. It got out of control. How did you feel knowing
that your image was being used in such a way? I didn't think it was going to get
out of control the way it did. And I was like, you know what, this is probably
like a fad. And next thing you know, I'm just like, everybody would come in my
chat and would say, you're my girlfriend. I sent you money to get your visa.
What are you still doing? I'm like, what the heck is going on? It took me about
five hours a day to respond to these scam emails. I literally would respond to
every single one of them. And then my ex-husband started monitoring my chats.
And he's like, you cannot keep doing this because people are leaving your chat.
You're losing money. Do you have a sense or a figure in mind of how many of
these impostors have been using your face or identity? Well, I have a few fans
that told me how much they lost. And I have to say, I think the one with the
most money was $70,000. How do you send that much money to somebody you don't
know? It's something I don't think I've ever been able to wrap my head around.
Why these men keep going back, emptying their pockets for someone they think is
Janessa Brazil, someone they've never met in the real world. But Vanessa has a
very clear view of what she thinks is going on. It's the heart. Men are
caretakers by nature. They want to take care of a woman. And there's a purpose
for them because they're going to take care of this girl. And she's possibly
going to love him back. See, most of us grow up not knowing what unconditional
love is. Most of us grow up knowing what conditional love is. So even if they
don't have the money, they're still willing to give it just to feel loved. It
hurts me. My heart hurts. Not even because of the money, like where I could have
had it, but for them. By the mid-2010s, a decade since the invention of Janessa
Brazil, new online platforms for explicit performances were emerging, and
Vanessa gave it a try. But re-entering the cam world didn't feel very good to
her. So I just decided to give it up. I couldn't look at myself on there
anymore. I couldn't look at pictures of myself. I couldn't look at videos of
myself. I just was like, nope, can't do this. It just brings me back. I knew
every video that I've recorded, every picture I've taken, I could go through it
all and tell you exactly what was happening that day and how I felt. You could
see it in my eyes. This was around 2016, the time when Janessa Brazil's online
presence faded. The fake Janessa Brazils were proliferating, and their targets
were tracking down Vanessa. I had stories. It was sad. I started becoming
depressed. Then blaming myself. Maybe if my pictures weren't out there, these
men wouldn't be getting scammed, or maybe I should stop doing content. I no
longer want to give them the power to use anything of mine ever again. When I
shut that cam off, I was just like, I felt not awful, but numb. I knew it wasn't
for me anymore. I had to move on. That person is no more. There's just too many
bad memories attached to that. The one thing that I was still hanging on to was
Janessa that attached me to that past life, and I needed to let it go. That's
when I started focusing on Vanessa, finding her again, pulling her out, and
healing everything that came along with her that I had forgotten, because
Vanessa got lost in there, you know. So now it was time to care about Vanessa,
like take care of me for once. She got divorced, and she says she left without
much money. I packed my car, and I left everything behind. And I drove from
Florida and started my new life from scratch. Vanessa ended up in this small
town where she is for our interview. Even though she wasn't posting much, she
kept hearing from people who had fallen for the scammer version of Janessa
Brazil. So here's a question. There are a lot of pictures of beautiful, semi-
naked women online, available for the taking. What was it about Vanessa that
made scammers choose her? I say my look is very versatile. I can pass off for
Italian, maybe Greek, you know. It's true. Vanessa's beauty is racially
ambiguous, a global look for a global scam. And the sheer volume of Janessa
Brazil images in circulation was exceptional. You know, I had a lot of candid
videos, just like I did with my pictures. I took phone videos, you know, just me
out there being a regular girl, and they used that. I never really died out. The
scammers kept it alive. They kept my image alive. No publicity is bad publicity.
Scammers kept me relevant. So thank you guys, but unfortunately for the fans,
I'm sorry. So Vanessa, what are you doing with yourself now? I live pretty much
day by day. I have loyal fans that literally send me money weekly just to say,
Hey, I appreciate you. Don't expect anything back. I mean, I have this one
mysterious guy, and he sends me a few hundred dollars a week, which I use for
groceries and, you know, whatever else. And then I scrape by, and then some of
my fans help me with my rent every once in a while. I have this, I don't know
what it is, like this ability to just be able to get them to give me money, but
I don't give anything back. What it is, is it comes down to him thinking that
eventually I'm going to give in. They're going to change my mind. And they know
the game. I don't have sex with fans. Like, that's not my thing. And I make it
clear. You want a pretty girl to go to lunch with? Great. But that's where it,
that's right there. That's where it stops. And here's the twist. These men who
helped Vanessa pay her bills, some of them were scammed by fake Janessa
Braziles. So maybe this is part of what Vanessa means when she says she should
thank the scammers. You could say she's benefited from their work, if
indirectly. Of course, there's a massive difference between her and the
scammers. Beyond fraudulently claiming to be Janessa, they lie about being sick
or needing money for fake boobs. Lie about being stranded without food in
Toronto in the winter. Lie about being in love. Meanwhile, Vanessa says that she
is up front with the men in her life about who she is and what they get and
won't get in return. Transparency all around. The one that has bought me all
this furniture in here, and a lot of my stuff, my clothes, shoes, everything,
he's also another one that was catfished and then found the real me. When you
think that there are possibly thousands of fake Janessa Brazile accounts out
there, maybe even thousands of scammers hiding behind her image, it feels like
lottery odds that these men actually tracked down Vanessa, let alone became part
of her life. That made me wonder about one person who was sure he'd contacted
the real Janessa Brazile. Roberto. Remember Roberto? The romantic Sardinian
farmer who lost $250,000 to scammers. We asked Vanessa to check her inbox for
messages from him. She opened up her laptop. I am logging into my Gmail to see
if we can find this guy, see if we ever communicated with him. Okay, so let's
see. What's his email? Her inbox contains thousands of unread emails. Here we
go. So it dates back to, when is the first one? Here we go. 2016. His first
email to me is 10.30am, so this is it. Hi, I have the need to talk with the real
Janessa Brazile. And guess what? The real Janessa Brazile wrote him back. Next
time on the final episode of Love, Janessa. Hi Roberto, how are you? I'm very
good, thanks, and you? Ah, good, look at you, very handsome. Love, Janessa is
produced by Antica Productions and Telltale Industries for the BBC World Service
and CBC Podcasts. I'm Hannah Ajela. Thanks for listening. This is the BBC World
Service, and on the Food Chain this week… If you are using an internet radio or
smart speaker and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If
you're listening on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC
Sounds.