TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-22-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The most powerful countries on Earth. Listen to episode two of the invention of
Russia. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station. Coming up on
the Newsroom from the BBC World Service. Vladimir Putin blames his enemies for
the war in Ukraine. Responsibility for fueling the Ukrainian conflict lies fully
with the West and of course with the regime in Kiev. As President Joe Biden
rallies support for Ukrainian sovereignty. Stand with us. We will stand with
you. Let us move forward with faith and conviction and with an abiding
commitment to be allies. I'm Peter Goffin and at two hours, GMT will cover the
cyclone battering Madagascar, a deadly alligator attack in the US state of
Florida and in Syria, a glimmer of hope after the earthquakes. We began to dig
through the rubble for her parents. I heard a voice. It was the baby. Also how
international football is hurting the environment. All that coming up after this
bulletin on the BBC World Service. This is Danielle Jauowiecka with the BBC
News. Hello. Days before the anniversary of Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
President Biden has given a defiant speech painting Ukraine's struggle as a
generational conflict for freedom. Speaking in Poland, he said that Washington
and its allies would never waver in their support for Kiev. Addressing a
cheering crowd in Warsaw, Mr Biden said that, as he put it, President Putin's
lust for power and land would fail. Appetites of the autocrat cannot be
appeased. They must be opposed. That's only to understand one word, no, no, no.
No, you will not take my country. No, you will not take my freedom. No, you will
not take my future. Mr Biden also rejected the Russian leader's portrayal of the
war as a necessity, saying it was Mr Putin's choice. In Moscow, President Putin
painted a different picture to justify the war. I want to repeat, it were them
who are guilty, who are culpable for the war. We are using force to stop it. A
year ago, in order to defend our historical lands, to liquidate the threat that
came from the neo-Nazi regime, we decided to conduct a special military
operation, and step by step, we carefully, consistently will settle the task we
are facing. The NATO chief has accused President Putin of making the world more
dangerous after he announced that Russia would suspend its participation in its
only remaining nuclear arms control agreement with Washington, the New START
treaty. Jens Stoltenberg urged Moscow to reconsider the decision, which he said
dismantled the whole architecture of arms control. China's top diplomat Wang Yi
is in Moscow for talks with Beijing's strategic ally. He said relations between
the two countries remained, as he put it, as hard as a rock. On Tuesday, NATO
echoed US concerns that China could supply Russia with weapons in its war
against Ukraine. Here's Stephen Macdonald. China has been accusing the US of
prolonging the war. Now you've got the US saying it's China is the one that
could be making the war go longer if it starts supplying arms and ammunition for
the Russian war effort. Beijing says it's neutral. Researchers in North America
say this country is already supplying these dual-use technologies, so equipment
that could be used to fix fighter jets or jamming gear. Now later this week,
China's leader Xi Jinping will be making a speech and apparently calling for a
negotiated settlement in Ukraine. World News from the BBC. A court in New York
has ruled that victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by al-Qaeda militants were
not entitled to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the US. At the time of the
attacks, the ruling Taliban allowed al-Qaeda to operate from Afghanistan. The
judge said access to the $3.5 billion to compensate the victims would amount to
recognising the Taliban as the legitimate Afghan government, which violates US
government policy. A New York court has found Mexico's former security chief
guilty of taking bribes in return for allowing safe passage for drugs.
Prosecutors said Genaro Garcia Luna, once the face of Mexico's war on drugs, was
secretly receiving millions of dollars from the country's biggest crime group,
the Sinaloa drug cartel. Witnesses said they'd passed the money to Mr Luna. A US
prosecutor concluded the Sinaloa cartel could not have built its cocaine empire
without Mr Luna. His lawyer, Cesar De Castro, contested the verdict. The
government had no reliable evidence to corroborate their witnesses. Mr Garcia
Luna's family and the defence team trusted in the process, trusted that the jury
would see through the government's case. We are very disappointed that it did
not. This has been an extremely difficult and long road for Mr Garcia Luna and
his fight will continue. The US authorities have ordered a train operator to pay
the entire cost of cleaning up contamination after one of its freight trains
carrying hundreds of tonnes of chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier
this month. The head of the Environmental Protection Agency said Norfolk
Southern would bear the cost for the trauma it inflicted on the town of East
Palestine. Tehran has added 36 EU and British individuals, organisations and
companies to its sanctions list, accusing them of supporting terrorism
interference. The action comes a day after the EU imposed further asset freezes
and visa bans on Tehran. BBC News. You're listening to the Newsroom from the BBC
World Service with me, Peter Goffin. It's nearly one year into Vladimir Putin's
war in Ukraine and the Russian leader is in a bind. The campaign has become a
war of attrition. NATO is pouring money and weapons into the fight and Russia is
a pariah to the West. On Tuesday in his annual address to the nation, Mr Putin
blamed his enemies. Responsibility for fuelling the Ukrainian conflict, for its
escalation and for the growing number of victims lies fully with the West and of
course with the regime in Kiev. I wish to repeat, they started the war. We are
using force to stop it. A few hours later, a rival view of the world. Joe Biden,
visiting the Polish capital Warsaw, laid out the responsibilities of the US and
its allies to build global peace and security, dignity and respect. And he
called on all democratic nations to join the cause. Stand with us. We will stand
with you. Let us move forward with faith and conviction and with an abiding
commitment to be allies, not of darkness but of light, not of oppression but of
liberation, not of captivity but yes, of freedom. Well President Biden also made
clear that the US is invested in Ukraine for the long haul. And he said that
decisions made in the next five years or so would shape the world for decades to
come. Our North America editor, Sarah Smith, travelled to Poland for the speech
and gave this assessment. Joe Biden is inordinately proud of the way in which he
was able to coordinate a united and unified Western and NATO response to
Russia's aggression. And he repeats quite frequently and did again in this
speech that Putin thought that he would find the West weak and divided and
uninterested and therefore be able to take advantage of Ukraine. And of course
he found entirely the opposite. That is a real point of pride for Joe Biden and
it's something he wants to try to maintain over what he is hinting is going to
be a seriously long haul. If you talk to security officials in the US and people
in the White House, they tell you that there's a practical stalemate on the
ground at the moment and there's no incentive for either side to enter any kind
of talks or negotiations. So there's no point in even suggesting it at the
moment. Both sides of course will try and launch a spring offensive but American
intelligence doesn't seem to suggest that that is going to make any huge or
material difference. If you think about some of the bigger commitments in
weaponry that the US have made to Ukraine, the most recent one was promising
them M1 Abrams tanks which Ukraine had been asking for for months and the US
eventually agreed to. They're not going to arrive this year, it doesn't look
like. If they're going to be there for a spring offensive, it will be a spring
offensive in 2024. And the fact that the US is procuring and commissioning tanks
to send to Ukraine on that kind of timescale tells you that they're looking at
this lasting for a considerable length of time. Let's turn now to the African
country of Madagascar where a category five storm has made landfall. Cyclone
Freddy is one of the most powerful storms to hit the region in years and
residents of this island and the Indian Ocean are bracing for its full impact.
We used to be afraid of wind gusts but now it's more the rising water that
scares us. Also our house is at the bottom of a bridge so we're afraid of
flooding. We've inspected each of the homes to try and deal with the danger.
According to what we're hearing it's a very powerful cyclone which has to be
taken seriously. Well the newsroom's Nigel Adderley has been following this
story. Nigel, what's the latest from Madagascar? Well Cyclone Freddy made
landfall on the island at around 1630 GMT on Tuesday and the eastern coast has
taken the brunt of it so far. Winds of over 200 kilometers per hour. It's been
confirmed a man has drowned in the nearby port of Mananoro as we've heard that
people in the region are extremely worried about the potential damage this could
cause. Madagascar is of course one of the world's most impoverished nations and
the UN's World Food Programme has said more than 2.3 million people could be
impacted by this. And the storm landed north of Mananjari, a town of 25,000
people which is still devastated after Cyclone Barisaray last year which killed
130 people across the country. And 33 also perished last month when the first
tropical storm of the year, Storm Chesinau, caused more havoc with extensive
flooding covering an area of 90,000 people. You mentioned those other storms.
How common is this type of event in the region? More common than they believe it
should be because the cyclone season runs between November and April. They
average around 1.5 per year which is the highest average in Africa. But around
six tropical storms have hit the nation within the last year and this was one of
the worst seasons on record. The humanitarian charity Save the Children has
highlighted climate change as a reason for this and has also called on higher
income nations to increase aid to help those unable to protect themselves and
their properties. So Cyclone Freddie has made landfall in Madagascar. What's its
trajectory? Where is it headed from here? Well it's forecast the cyclone will
cross the island and then head towards Mozambique and Zimbabwe by Friday. And
disaster management in those nations are already planning to move people away
from those areas which appear to be in its path at the moment. All right Nigel,
we'll leave it there. Nigel Adderley, thank you very much. You're listening to
the BBC World Service. It is 2.12 GMT. Now let's take a look at Turkey and Syria
where rescuers are searching through the wreckage and rubble caused by an
earthquake on Monday. The region is still grappling with the effects of the
quakes that struck two weeks ago. Our correspondent Anna Foster is at a
makeshift shelter in the southern Turkish city of Adana. As the ground started
to shake once again, millions of people gathered up everything that was precious
to them and ran. Hundreds came to this sports centre, bedding down on blankets
spread across a volleyball court. For many, like Felice, it brought back painful
memories of the first quake two weeks ago. I'm concerned for our future. I'm
afraid for our children. I don't want them to be orphans. Mentally I'm upside
down. Almost half a million people have now left the earthquake zone in southern
Turkey. There's growing pressure on authorities to care for those who aren't
able to flee. Adana's mayor, Zeydan Karalar, visited survivors here and promised
to help. People filled this place up and thousands are on the streets again.
It's our job to erect them tents, provide them blankets and food. Many of the
buildings which collapsed in the latest quake were already empty, damaged beyond
repair by the first one, which killed more than 40,000 people. Most of the new
injuries were caused by panic. Some people jumped from windows to try and get to
safety. Now in spite of all that chaos after the earthquakes, there are still
moments of hope. A baby in Syria who was born and orphaned on the day of the
first quake has now been adopted. Thousands of people all over the world
volunteered to give her a new home, but she's gone to live with her aunt and
uncle. Speaking to the BBC, Khalil al-Sawadi said one day he'll tell his niece
how he rescued her from the debris. We began to dig through the rubble for her
parents. I knew that her mother was about to give birth. As I was digging, I
heard a voice. It was the baby. She was screaming. I had no idea her mother had
given birth and I started shouting, she's alive, she's alive. I pulled the baby
out with my bare hands and cut the umbilical cord. Then I took her to hospital.
The doctors told me she was OK, but I noticed she wasn't doing well. She'd spent
seven hours under the rubble by that time, so I was almost certain her parents
were dead. All I wanted was for the baby to keep the family name alive. At
first, I thought the baby was a boy. So when the doctors asked me for a name, I
said, let's name him Abdullah, after his father. I then went out to continue
searching through the rubble for the parents, but I was later told the baby was
a girl. I suggested naming her Aya, after her aunt, who had also died in the
earthquake. But the nurse said I should name her after her mother. So I've named
her Afwa. Two days after Afwa was born, my wife also gave birth to a little
girl, who we've named Aya. JSHAUN MANNY, CNN INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENT, U.S.
NEWS ANCHOR, THE WEST COAST, CALIFORNIA Khalil al-Sawati there, talking about
the miraculous rescue of his newborn orphaned niece. Now Genaro Garcia Luna was
meant to be fighting Mexico's war on drugs, but the former security chief now
faces 10 years to life in prison, after being found guilty of taking bribes by a
court in New York. Our correspondent Netta Tawfiq told Andrew Peetch about the
background to this case. This case really rested on the testimony of cartel
members who have been convicted of their own drug crimes. And those members gave
evidence about the bribes that Garcia Luna received, saying how it was all
delivered in cash, once left in a safe house in a false wall, one time at a car
wash in Guadalajara, another time at a French restaurant in Mexico City, across
from the U.S. embassy. And they detailed just how essential Garcia Luna's
involvement was to the cartel, passing along sensitive information about law
enforcement investigations. At one point, one cartel member detailed how they
were given federal police force escorts as bodyguards and police uniforms and
badges to be able to load shipments of cocaine. And prosecutors really say that
the Sinaloa cartel became this global cocaine empire and the biggest crime group
in Mexico, specifically because of Garcia Luna's help. How was he caught? Well,
he was living in the United States, and, in fact, there had been rumors about
his complicity with the cartels. Prosecutors in the United States, I should say,
initially decided not to go after him, thinking they didn't have enough
evidence. But after the El Chapo trial in New York—he is the former kingpin of
the Sinaloa cartel—after one of the witnesses, Jesus Zambada, said that he had
given millions in cash bribes to Mr. Garcia Luna, well, then he was arrested in
2019 in Texas. And are there more officials like Genaro Garcia Luna who may come
to court yet? Well, look, I think if you speak to many people in Mexico, you
know, as I have in preparation for this trial, you know, many will say that
there is always, you know, this fear that the Sinaloa cartel and cartels like
them can't operate without corrupt officials helping them. I will say that the
United States, while they thought this might be the start of not just going
after cartel members, but also corrupt politicians, well, Salvatore Sanfuegos,
he was the former Mexican defense secretary who faced very similar charges to
this in late 2020. Well, after they arrested him, Mexico got very upset about
that. They didn't take too kindly to an official, another official being
arrested in the United States. And ultimately, the United States did drop that
case. But I think this also does send a signal to other officials that if they
want to step foot in the United States and work with the United States, there is
a bit of caution that needs to be taken. Neta Tawfiq in New York. Now our
newsreader, Danielle, has some other stories we're following this hour. The
number of people killed in landslides which hit coastal towns in Brazil's Sao
Paulo state over the weekend has risen to 44. More than 40 others are still
missing. Locals have joined forces with rescue workers to search the mud for
survivors. More than 750 people lost their homes as torrents of earth and rock
came loose from hillsides after a record amount of rain fell in the coastal area
east of Sao Paulo. The daughter of the murdered American civil rights activist
Malcolm X says she's suing the New York Police Department, the FBI and the CIA
over his death. Ilyas Shabazz accuses the agencies of allegedly concealing their
role in her father's assassination in 1965. She announced the planned legal
action at the site where Malcolm X was fatally shot exactly 58 years ago.
Nigeria's First Lady Aisha Buhari says she ordered fake news posts that appeared
on her social media accounts to be deleted. On Tuesday, the Central Bank of
Nigeria issued a warning about a fake press release that was shared by her
accounts with incorrect information about the phasing out of old Naira notes.
Mrs. Buhari said in an Instagram post that this was not the first time her
accounts have been tampered with. Concerns have also been raised about the
spread of disinformation ahead of Saturday's presidential election. And the
filmmaker Steven Spielberg has been honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award
at the Berlin Film Festival. The director of iconic productions such as Jaws and
E.T. was also in the German capital for the screening of his new film The
Fablements, a drama inspired by his childhood and teen years. The 76-year-old
had this advice for those hoping to emulate him. I have a lot of kids coming to
my office and I meet a lot of young filmmakers, especially at film schools, and
I tell them all, study movies, study old movies, study contemporary movies, but
also write. It's very, very important that directors can also write or at least
associate themselves with writers because it's all about the story. How you
communicate the story, everybody has a different style and you have to also hone
your style, but to figure out what you want to say, that's the most important
thing. If you have something to say, there'll be people through film who will
listen. Steven Spielberg there with some tips for aspiring filmmakers. A
retirement community in the U.S. state of Florida is reeling after an 85-year-
old woman was killed by an alligator while walking her dog by a local canal.
Florida is home to more than a million alligators, but attacks like this are
extremely rare. Stephanie Prentice reports. It was a scene that a witness at the
Spanish Lakes Fairways retirement community described as horrifying. An 85-year-
old woman was walking her dog on the edge of a lake in Fort Pierce when a three-
meter alligator sprung out of the water, lunging at her pet. When she tried to
save the dog, the reptile grabbed her, dragging her into the water. The neighbor
told a local news station that her friend, who hasn't been identified yet, was
able to come up for air to shout for help before being pulled back into the
water. The dog survived the attack. Alligator sightings are common in many parts
of Florida, even on highways and in car parks. These people say they're
vigilant. Where there's water, there's gators. So you don't walk close to them,
or if you do, you stay aware of them. I had a dog. The dog never went in the
water or near the water because they're attracted to that. Expert trappers
arrived on scene and dragged the alligator from the bottom of the lake. It will
now be relocated or euthanized. Despite people and alligators living side by
side in all 67 counties of Florida State, the Fish and Wildlife Conservation
Commission said they seldom bite people and attacks, especially those which end
with someone dying, are rare. The newsroom's Stephanie Prentice. Now let's check
in on the latest sport news with Richard Newman. Thank you. The Liverpool
manager Jürgen Klopp says he's not feeling optimistic. His side can turn around
their Champions League last-16 tie with Real Madrid after losing 5-2, having led
the first leg 2-0 at Anfield. It's the first time the club have conceded five
goals at home in the competition. Klopp's side head to the Bernabeu in three
weeks' time. I think Carlo thinks the tie is over, and I think it as well in the
moment, but in three weeks. That's how it is in these moments, the closer you
get to the game, the bigger our chances become, and the lesser likely it is that
the tie is over. But tonight with a 5-2 and you see the game, it's like, oh,
they are pretty good in counter-attacking, we have to score their three goals,
so take some risk, that could be a bit tricky. Napoli have control of their tie
after winning 2-0 at 10-man Eintracht Frankfurt. Former Watford manager Javi
Gracia is the new man in charge of Leeds, but it's not clear if he'll remain in
charge beyond the end of this season. He's been appointed on what the Premier
League strugglers have described as a flexible contract. In rugby union, Wales
players have set a deadline of today to resolve a contract dispute with the
Welsh rugby union, or the threat of strike action ahead of Saturday's Six
Nations match with England could become real. The head coach Warren Gatland
delayed naming his team on Tuesday while negotiations continued. At Women's T20
World Cup, the host South Africa set up a semi-final with England by beating
Bangladesh. England, who were already through, produced record innings for the
tournament of 213 for five in their victory over Pakistan. And the World
Antidope Agency appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport over what it's
described as the wrong judgment of Russia to clear the teenage figure skater
Kamila Valieva of intentionally taking a banned substance. Details of a failed
test emerged after she'd already won team gold at the Beijing Winter Olympics
last year. Richard Newman. Now, football is already the most popular sport on
earth. About 1.5 billion people watched the most recent men's World Cup final.
But the game's global governing body, FIFA, plans to expand its reach even
further by including more teams in international tournaments. That may be good
news for football, but critics say it's bad for the environment and it clashes
with FIFA's commitment to reducing its carbon footprint. Our sport news
correspondent, Alex Kapstek, reports. Fans from Argentina celebrating their
team's spectacular World Cup triumph in Qatar. The tournament was watched by a
global audience of billions, making it by far the most popular single sports
event on the planet, with profits to match. The financial statements are looking
extremely, extremely good. So this shows how strong FIFA is today. And the FIFA
president, Gianni Infantino, wants to build on that success. It means
international football is set to become even bigger, but not necessarily better.
Is it ignorance or is it just that they don't care? David Wheeler plays for
Wiccan Wanderers in the third tier of English football. He also has the title of
sustainability champion at the Players' Union. And he's aghast at FIFA's
expansion plans. Like the next men's World Cup, which has been bumped up to 48
teams, with matches spread across the USA, Canada and Mexico. They tried to
claim carbon neutrality for the Qatar World Cup, which was probably one of the
most carbon-intensive events after the two world wars. They're now having a
World Cup over a continent, which is insane. It seems like it's a money-making
exercise at the expense of all else. FIFA is also upgrading the men's Club World
Cup. Real Madrid won the latest competition held recently in Morocco, a
relatively low-profile event contested by just seven teams. But the revamp,
scheduled for 2025, will involve 32 clubs. FIFA's hunger for more has also
extended to the women's game. A record 32 nations will compete at this year's
World Cup, with a brand new event added to the list. This was the traditional
welcome for the 10 teams who have been competing in New Zealand over the past
week for the final three World Cup qualifying slots, a tournament which raises
more questions over FIFA's commitment to lower its carbon emissions. My name is
Diane Caldwell and I represent the Irish national team, Republic of Ireland.
Diane is also part of a group of international players called We Play Green, who
speak out on environmental issues. I'm sure FIFA will say they've done it to
help the women's game grow there. Of course we all want the women's game to
grow, but it can still be done in a sustainable way and not by flying 10 teams
from different continents to New Zealand to compete in 13 extra games, you know.
In response, FIFA issued a statement saying the new play-off tournament was a
collective decision by leaders of all the international confederations. It also
insists substantial efforts have been made to tackle the environmental impact
when increasing the number of fixtures. The global game is already big business,
but do big profits have to come at a big cost to the planet, or can football
find a new tactic to tackle climate change? Alex Kapstik on the environmental
impact of international football. And that's all for this edition of the
Newsroom on the BBC World Service with me, Peter Goffin, a reminder of the main
news. President Joe Biden, in a speech in Poland, said democracies were stronger
and autocracies weaker one year on from Russia's invasion of Poland. Goodbye.
This is the BBC World Service with the story behind Louis Armstrong's concerts
in the former German Democratic Republic. In post-war communist East Germany,
loving jazz was dangerous. If you wanted jazz, you knew you have to speak with a
special person. You were willing to take that risk? Yes. So how did the famous
American musician come to play a series of concerts behind the Iron Curtain in
1965? I know we're going to have a nice stay here because I have a lot of
friends right here. Armstrong always told stories of performing in West Berlin,
and people would come from East Berlin, they would come from Russia, and that
always impressed him that these people would kind of put their lives on the line
just to go see him. I'm Kevin Lejean. I'll find out who pulled the strings to
make these legendary concerts happen. Cold War in full swing. Today at 10 GMT.
I'm Misha Glenny, a former BBC correspondent, and I want to tell you about 1709
when Peter the Great's army defeats the marauding Swedish forces at Poltava.
From then on, Russia had become a major European state. To find out how Peter
transformed Russia into one of the most powerful countries on earth, listen to
episode two of The Invention of Russia with me, Misha Glenny, on the BBC World
Service. BBC News with Danielle Jowowiecka. Days before the anniversary of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, President Biden has given a defiant speech
painting Ukraine's struggle as a generational conflict for freedom. Addressing a
cheering crowd in Warsaw, Mr Biden said President Putin's lust for power and
land would fail. China's top diplomat Wang Yi is in Moscow for talks. Mr Wang
told the Russian Security Council Secretary Nikolai Patrushev that relations
between the two countries remained as hard as a rock. He said the two sides
discussed their willingness to oppose all forms of bullying. A judge in New York
says victims of the 9-11 attacks in 2001 by al-Qaeda militants are not entitled
to Afghan central bank funds frozen in the United States. The judge said it
would mean recognising the Taliban government as legitimate. Mexico's former
security chief, Genaro Garcia Luna, has been found guilty of taking bribes to
allow safe passage for drugs by a US court. Mr Luna took millions of dollars
from the Sinaloa drug cartel, Mexico's biggest crime group. The Attorney General
in Peru says the US State Department has agreed to extradite the former Peruvian
President Alejandro Toledo on corruption charges. Prosecutors say he used the
bank accounts of accomplices in the US to receive millions of dollars in bribes
from the Brazilian construction giant Odebrecht. The US authorities have ordered
a train operator to clean up contamination after a train carrying hundreds of
tonnes of chemicals derailed in the state of Ohio earlier this month. Iran has
imposed sanctions on 36 EU and British individuals and organisations. The EU
imposed similar measures on Tehran a day earlier. The European Food and Safety
Agency has recommended that laying hens and broiler chickens are no longer kept
in cages. And that's the latest BBC World News. Around 600 years ago, a largely
wooden fortified settlement began a mission to gather in the Russian lands.
First it conquered its neighbours, places like Novgorod in the north, along with
Rostov and Tver. Soon it began expanding beyond the original lands of the Rus',
using rivers like the Volga that stretched south and east, towards Kazan and
Astrakhan on the landlocked Caspian Sea. Crazy Cossacks set out for Siberia.
Peter the Great took on the Swedes, and Catherine the Great challenged the Turks
before slicing and dicing Poland in one of the most cynical acts ever seen.
Imperial overstretch? Pah. Moscow was building the greatest contiguous landmass
the world has ever seen. I remember when I was a small child you sometimes see
these programmes on Newsnight or something and you'd have a map of Europe and
you'd see the Soviet Union and how many planes and tanks they had in the Warsaw
Pact and you thought, God, they're going to be in Tutankhamen by Thursday. The
Invention of Russia, presented by Misha Glennie. This is a remarkable success
story, but it also looks extremely aggressive, a sort of rolling military
machine. Episode 2. The Empire Strikes Back. I don't think it was different. I
think the Soviet Union was the manifestation of the Russian Empire. There was an
illusion of something different, a facade. And it's a facade that I think to
this day Putin manages to keep up. So my name is James Hill, and I have spent
much of the last 30 years living in Russia, working in Russia. In 1991, the very
end of the Soviet Union, I arrived in Ukraine, and in 1995 when I joined the New
York Times and Contract, I moved to Moscow. What's the country like? How would
you describe it if you were talking to somebody who'd just arrived from Mars?
Well, I remember the very first time I took a flight from Moscow to Vladivostok.
And first off, you fly for, I guess it must be about eight hours, and you land
in the same country. Of course, it's a place which fires up the imagination. And
so when I went there and I saw the Pacific Ocean, I thought, wow. And then of
course, I walked into the restaurant of the hotel that I was staying in. And
this was in, I think, 1994. And the menu was exactly the same as every other
hotel I've been in in the former Soviet Union. So Solyanka and borscht for soup,
and it was beef stroganoff. And I was shocked that because you traveled all this
way and you found something that was exactly the same as in a place which was
thousands of miles to the west and in a completely different time zone. Russia,
the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union, whatever name you give it, we're talking
about roughly one sixth of the world's land mass. You just can't escape the size
and the huge number of peoples it's embraced. And when it comes to how it
expanded, only one country really comes close, the United States. The French,
the British, Portugal, Spain, all their empires were overseas. The Dutch had to
sail halfway around the world to reach their empire. But here, the colonists, as
in the US, just kept pushing out across the land. At the end of the 16th
century, a small group of Cossacks went on a business venture into Siberia. The
business venture was that's where the furs came from. That's how you got rich.
And they didn't stop until they got to the Pacific. Project Braithwaite, author
of Russia, myths and realities. What they were doing was, of course, what the
trappers were doing in North America at the time. They were moving in, catching
the animals, fighting the locals, and then being backed up by, in North America,
the British army and later the American army, and in Siberia by the Russian
army. The methods they used, which of course were brutal in the extreme, they
massacred the natives and they were supported by troops sent by the Tsar from
Moscow. And that was the way people did things in those days. And we look back
on it now with some dismay, but that's what happened. Do the Russians look back
on the way they conquered Siberia in terms of the effective extermination of
many of the indigenous peoples? Do they have the same crisis of conscience that
some Americans have had about the way they conquered the West? I haven't myself
detected much in the way of Russian guilt complexes on this subject of the kind
that we feel now. Professor Janet Hartley, author of books on the Volga and
Siberia. I think when I wrote about Siberia, I did like to try to challenge some
of the stereotypes. And one of them was that Siberia is just a land of ice,
desolate. But in fact, the southern part of Siberia is really quite productive.
And once a railway was built, it was very advantageous to the Russian Empire to
export grain. We imported butter from Siberia in the early 20th century. I think
that would surprise people that they don't think of Siberia as a great exporter
of foodstuffs. And then, of course, it has the resources, iron, copper, and then
later on, oil, gas. But the issue there, of course, is that they are in remote
parts even of Siberia. Then they're not in the southern part. James Hill claims
to have visited pretty much all of it. As a journalist, as a photographer, what
often interests you the most are the places where you're on the edge of
something. In Russian, there's this wonderful word, krai, na krai. I spent a lot
of time, for instance, in the Russian Arctic. I went up to Norilsk, where they
have the famous nickel mines. And for instance, I also went up into Chukotka,
which is the area opposite Alaska. And so you flew nine hours to Anadyr, and
then I spent three days in a tractor vehicle driving to this fishing village on
the Sea of Okhotsk. So how do they run a country like Russia if it's so big, and
if it takes you nine hours and three days in a vehicle to get to a fishing
village? With great difficulty. And of course, the other thing they do is great
harshness. I was once in Kamchatka, and I had a five-hour drive, and I was
chatting with my taxi driver. On his hand, between his index finger and his
thumb, he had a tulip tattooed. And so I asked him what the tulip was for, and
he said, oh, it meant I sat my full sentence. Of course, I asked him, perhaps
nervously, what are we in for? He said, za shtoy. And I said, za ni za shtoy.
And he was like, for nothing. And in fact, what he'd been inside for was for
having dissident literature under his bed. And he'd been given 10 years in
prison for having dissident literature. And of course, the scale of that
punishment made me understand that the principal way in which they controlled
that enormous space was through fear. What they do think is that they were
bringing enlightenment to the natives. They believe that they were extremely
tolerant of native differences. They didn't force them to become Christians.
They recognized their religions and their ways. That's what the Russians tell
themselves, and you'll find Putin telling himself the same, that we were bearers
of civilization. It's of course a myth. It's the kind of myth that imperialists
tell themselves. But by very early on, by 1630 or thereabouts, the Cossacks had
got to the Pacific. I mean, they covered the territory with tremendous speed. I
think we should pause, Nisha, and explain the Cossacks. They were pioneer
frontiersmen spread across the steppes, protecting borders, grabbing lands.
They're sort of like guns for hire. Some even lived and worked inside the old
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, one of the really big powers of the day. They
just don't fit neatly on a map. So for Ukrainians, I suppose, they could be
perceived as cowboys. They are frontiermen who fight off the raids coming from
the Ottoman Empire to the steppe, to the wild steppe of Ukraine. There are so
many stereotypes, but the ultimate plan is to assimilate them. That was the
Ukrainian historian Olesya Kramiachuk, and this is Anna Reid, author of a
brilliant book called Borderland. The Cossacks inhabited those great plains that
we're seeing on the television now, those great prairie lands along the north
shore of the Black Sea. This was all a sort of empty no-man's land, which the
Cossacks, who originally were sort of runaway serfs, poor laborers, landless
peasants, settled. Ukraine, all of central Ukraine and western Ukraine is
Polish-ruled at this stage. It's part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. So
some have taken Polish stipends and allowed the Polish crown. Others are still
sort of autonomous down in the Zaporozhian Sich, which is a stockaded fortress
on an island on the Dnieper. You'll notice we've moved south and west. And the
reason these Cossacks matter is their support for a man who leads them against
the Poles, Bohdan Chmelnitsky. Chmelnitsky is a massive figure in Russian and
Ukrainian and Polish history. He was born around the start of the 17th century
to a landowning Ukrainian family, was taught by the Jesuits, although he was
Orthodox, and served in the Polish army against the Ottomans. And then he goes
back to the family estate in central Ukraine and for 25 years lives there quite
peaceably, avoiding the various Cossack rebellions against Poland. So why does
he end up leading the rebellion? It seems to be down to a personal grievance.
While he was away, a neighbour raided his house, killed his son and kidnapped
the young woman who he was planning to marry, his first wife had died. And he
went to the local courts for justice, didn't get it, went to Warsaw for justice,
didn't get it. And then in frustration went to the free Cossacks and he inspires
the Cossacks there to rebel again against Poland. The war that followed was
horrendous. They killed Polish landowners, they killed Jews. And when it went
wrong, Chmielnicki and the Cossacks called in the Russians to help. Chmielnicki
says, we will give you an oath of loyalty in exchange for guarantees for our
rights and that we, the Ukrainian nobility, can hang on to our land, that it
won't be handed over to Russians. The Tsar's representative says no. Tsars, we
make no promises to our subjects. Our subjects make promises to us. Chmielnicki
walks out, a few hours later walks back in again and he ends up signing a one-
sided oath of allegiance to the Tsar. He is such a complex figure because he, of
course, is perceived in Jewish mythology as an instigator of pogroms, of massive
anti-Jewish violence. But for Ukrainians, he's both perceived as a hero, you
know, as a rebel who managed to rise up against Polish landlords, but as a
complicated figure because of Pereyaslav Treaty, the treaty that he established
with Moscow Tsar. Russians interpret it as the Ukrainians coming home to join
the Russians, their brothers, become the little Russians in sort of official
language. The Ukrainians see it as something intended to be just sort of one
move in the long balancing act that Ukrainians always had to do between rival
powers to try and retain a bit of autonomy, playing off these more powerful
neighbours. But what you're saying is that in Russian schools, for example, this
will be taught as proof positive that eastern and southern Ukraine is part of
Russia, whereas in Ukrainian schools Chmielnicki will be taught as the UR figure
in Ukrainian modern national consciousness. I mean, the Russians, of course,
yes, they see him as leading the Ukrainians out of Polish bondage into sort of
reunion, you know, in this great sort of Slav brotherhood. There's a statue of
him outside St. Sophia Cathedral in central Kiev. It's in the middle of a
roundabout and it's put up, I think, by Nicholas II and it's Chmielnicki on a
rearing charger and he's pointing his sword northeast towards Moscow. Like, you
know, he's leading his people towards Moscow. It's always been a bit of a
controversial statue for Ukrainians, but he's still there, though now, of
course, ironically, he's all covered up with sandbags against Russian missiles.
Professor Janet Hartley. It might also be worth mentioning that we think of
Russia as a great land empire, which of course it was, but until the middle,
late of the 19th century, it did have possessions overseas in North America,
both in California and in Alaska. I didn't know about Northern California. I
knew about Alaska. Fort Ross, north of San Francisco. It was a trading post to
get some sea otters and they sold it off to a Swiss adventurer in 1841. Just
before we get back to the 17th century, Alaska. I've always wanted to know, was
there ever a possibility that Russia might have maintained their sovereignty
over Alaska rather than sell it to the United States? Because that would have
changed geopolitics in an extraordinary way. Well, it would, and so would
Russian California if they'd not sold it before the gold rush. But really, in
practical terms, it was just too difficult to supply. It's a nice idea, but it's
not really practical. This is the old Russian anthem, the imperial anthem, God
Save the Tsar. Written in 1833 by when Russia had moved into Crimea, further
into Ukraine, and taken a chunk of Poland to boot. Finland became part of the
empire in 1809 and the Tsar marched into Paris towards the end of the Napoleonic
Wars. Many of these changes were set in motion a century earlier by Peter the
Great and he did it by obliterating some old friends of these programs, the
Swedes. My name is Ulf Sander and I'm a professor of history at Lund University.
Sweden at that time has this power position, a great power position, because
it's an empire. The most Swedes tend to forget that we used to have a Baltic Sea
empire. The Russians, the Muscovites, dates back to Muscovy, had always seen the
Baltic as a legitimate objective for their foreign policy. They needed to have a
foothold on the sea to break out of their landlocked status. And the Swedes, who
had performed quite remarkably during the Thirty Years' War under their king,
Gustavus Adolphus, were pouring into Eastern Europe. And under Charles XII,
Charles XII was a remarkable soldier. I mean, he couldn't pass a town without
laying successful siege to it. Well, he's a warrior king and he becomes king at
a very young stage. Goes away from Stockholm, our capital, at also a very early
age and never comes back because he's on different battlefields in Denmark,
Germany, Poland and Russia. Russia was a main enemy. So we have to wage a war
against Russia. The Great Northern War, as it's called, ran for 21 years. As
well as the Swedes and Russians, it sucked in the Danes, the Poles, the
Prussians, even the British for a while. But the key moment came in 1709, when
the Swedish warrior king, Charles XII, led his troops too far, into a trap. So
they are marching through this Russian winter and it's cold and it's terrible
and the soldiers are dying like fleas. And in the end, they are ending up in
what is today's Ukraine, at Poltava. And they are just waiting for the Russians
to have this fight. And in the end, the Russians do come and they are much more.
And if anyone tries to invade Russia, well, they are not going to succeed. Ah,
the Russian winter. When you have archaeological investigations nowadays, you
can see that many of the Swedes actually have wounds on their backs. So they
were trying to get away, but few of them did. Charles XII made a huge strategic
error. And that was to believe that he could beat Peter the Great, whose
military abilities he rather despised. And so he invaded Poland, he went on into
Ukraine, and Peter cut off his supply lines behind him. So he was stranded in
Ukraine. His army was totally destroyed with nowhere to go. And that was in
1709, a key date in Russian history, which again, all Russians remember. And
indeed in European history. From then on, you couldn't manage European politics
anymore without taking Russia into account. It was able to dispose of Poland at
the end of that century. Then it went on to defeat Napoleon and so on. I mean,
Russia had become a European superpower. After Peter, then Catherine, under
Alexander I, Russia continued to expand. We hope to visit all these characters
in the next episode. But first, Miles, we have to travel south, 2,000 kilometres
south, to a part of the old empire where the food was more interesting and the
winters less harsh. Georgia. Like all good Russians, we've decided to go and eat
some Georgian food and of course, taste some Georgian wine. I have a fine
Georgian red here, so, go marjos, which means cheers in Georgian. Here's my
salad, which is very good news. My lens has just fallen out. I've ordered a
hajipuri. Now I haven't had a hajipuri since I was in Georgia 30 years or so
ago. And when I went to Georgia, I of course visited the town of Gori, which is
the birthplace of Stalin. Still a lot of nostalgia for Stalin among some people
in Georgia. And I picked up a rare memento, a bottle of Stalin vodka. How would
you define the Russian relationship with Georgia? Complex. I think it's a lot
more confused than we realise or admit it. My name is Natalia Antelava. I'm a
journalist. I'm from Georgia, country, not the state. So Natalia, your name
seems Russian to me. I am very Georgian. So the ending of the surname, it would
sound Russian if it was Eva or Ova, but Ava is a Western Georgian name. My
mother is a Russian speaker, so I spoke a lot of Russian at home. The history,
yeah, there was a lot of confusion about how to teach history. It's a country
which always had a very strong identity. Georgians are not Slavs, driven by
dreams of freedom and independence from multiple conquerors that were always on
the doorstep. So I think the biggest education for me wasn't necessarily in
school, but was what was happening just 50 metres down the road from my school,
where the Soviets brought in the tanks, killing 30 people. I saw all of that
history in the making, and my sense of history was definitely shaped by this
completely massive change when you suddenly wake up in a different country and
when you see people fighting for ideals and willing to die for them. Let's go
back, way back now, Natalia, and tell me, when did Russia first claim Georgia as
part of the Russian Empire? 1783, when a very historical treaty was signed that
gave part of Georgia the Russian protection from other foreign forces. And that
is really the big beginning of Georgia's quite tormented relationship with
Russia. One of the reasons we spoke to Natalia was because she had written about
how the Empire operated in subtly different ways from that of the French or the
British. Their empires emphasised difference, while Moscow insisted on sameness.
There is a Ukrainian philosopher, Volodymyr Yarmolenko, who has this concept of,
you know, if the West ran its colonies by telling those who they colonised, you
can never be like us because you're different from us. The Russians would tell
their colonies, you have to be the same as us. Hence Stalin, a Georgian, could
become leader of the USSR. But sameness, Russification, was frequently violent.
Dissidents locked up, killed in terrifying numbers if you didn't toe the line.
So was the USSR a continuation of the old Tsarist Empire, but under a new name?
Actually when I was in school, it wasn't taught as Soviet occupation, but that's
what it actually was. And those who did manage to survive then perished during
Stalin's purges. Of course, there's one huge irony which we can't escape, and
that is that Stalin, the great leader of the Soviet Union, was Georgian. Does
Georgia feel as though it has played a part in that Russian imperialism through
that single man? It depends who you ask. But I think Joseph Stalin continues to
have a completely outsized influence on the country. On Russia as well.
Monuments to Stalin going up in Russia, and we've seen how successfully Russia
used the fact that he was Georgian as a soft power tool in Georgia itself, kind
of that cultivating pride in Stalin, you know, a local boy who made it big, is
very much part of Russian propaganda toolkit in the way that Russia manages to
create and maintain alliances in a country that is mostly hostile towards
Moscow, right? Georgia has fought two wars with Moscow since 1991. That's why
many of them feel acutely involved in what's happening now in Ukraine. Some
Chechens may feel the same, I don't know, shared anger that Moscow now refuses
to accept the empire or the Soviet Union has come to an end. But has it? I think
when you look at the continuation of the Soviet Union that we see today in
Putin's Russia, I think there were a lot of people who were not ethnically
Russian who willingly took part in it and bought into how strong that idea is
and how all of Putin's narratives relate back to the Soviet days, the Second
World War, even the Stalin era. I see it as an extension of Russia. It's
actually fascinating listening to you, Natalia, because I can see you sort of
process the whole thing almost as you're discussing it, because it is a kind of
a tricky question. And, you know, I remember in the Soviet Union when Georgia
was the playground of the Soviet Union being more entertaining and less
miserable than Russians. And that's why Russians like to go to Georgia so much
is because they could sing, dance and drink. That's why they like to come here
to this day. And I think that is actually part of that Russian colonialism,
because often the country is basically perceived as a restaurant, like it's a
place with good food and where everyone is kind of ready to serve. It's like,
why do you need this democracy, elections? You make good food, you make good
music, be that. And that's not that different from any other form, I think, of
colonialism. Many in the West never really regarded Russia as a colonial entity.
Basically, Russia was Russia. It's taken the Russo-Ukrainian War for people to
realise both here and in Russia itself that we are now facing the slow, bloody
and painful demise of colonialism. Many of our assumptions, and maybe their
assumptions too, need now to be reinvented. This is the BBC World Service
exploring the seriously fun work of the Flying Seagull Project. My name is
Captain Bash. Ash has been on a mission to bring fun and frivolity to children
around the world. Even in refugee camps, in orphanages and care homes. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third-party
services and platforms, and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid-2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC Sounds. February
1999, his death sparked three days of rioting. Stay with us. The Bicyclic is
next.