TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 and bullying in the UK fire service. That's in a couple of minutes here on BBC
Radio 4. The National Education Union has refused an ultimatum from the
government to call off teacher strikes next week across the north of England.
The Education Secretary Gillian Keegan has written to teaching unions asking
them to suspend the planned action if they want to enter formal talks about pay
conditions and reforms. The NEU said the letter contained no suggestion the
government was willing to discuss pay rises for this year. The US President Joe
Biden says America and its allies will not tire in their support for Ukraine. In
a speech in the Polish capital, he also said that Russia's presidents' lust for
land and power would fail. Earlier, Vladimir Putin accused the West of starting
the war and escalating the conflict. Morrisons and Asda are introducing limits
on how much fruit and veg customers can buy. The restrictions will affect items
including tomatoes, peppers and cucumbers. The shortages are because of extreme
weather in Spain and North Africa, which is affecting harvests. The media
watchdog Ofcom has asked ITV and Sky News to explain why they contacted Nicola
Bulley's family after her body was found in Lancashire on Sunday. The mother of
two's family described the broadcaster's actions as shameful. British Steel is
expected to announce tomorrow that it's closing its coking ovens in Scunthorpe
with the loss of 300 jobs. It's not yet clear when they'll be shut down. The
ovens are used to turn coal into fuel for steelmaking. BBC News. And now in File
on 4, Jane Deeth investigates claims of sexism, bullying and abuse in the fire
service. And hears calls for radical reforms within the emergency service. You
have to live within five minutes of the station when you're a retained
firefighter. Okay, that makes sense. So on the left hand side, we're just coming
up to the fire station. Oh, what here? Yeah. The really modern building? Yes,
it's a lovely station. It says we are recruiting. Yes. So this is where I lived,
in this street here. You really were close, weren't you? Yeah, so I was just in
one of these houses up here. So I literally, the alert would go off and I would
just run just down there. It would take me like 10 seconds to get there. Donna
Wood was working in the NHS when she heard her local fire station in
Staffordshire was recruiting. She liked the sound of a career as a firefighter.
She's tall and strong, with long blonde hair. She strikes me as a measured
person, quietly confident. You know, actually going to incidents and actually
being involved in that and knowing that you're making a difference, that was so
rewarding. And to be there, to be able to help the people involved and to give
them the reassurance, you know, that they needed at that time. Donna's invited
me round for a coffee. Her house is just a few minutes from the station. So this
is us. OK. Shall we go through here? Yeah, come on in. Thanks a lot. Have a
seat. Oh, great, thank you. When Donna was in her 30s and her daughter was at
primary school, she had time to take a breath and think seriously about becoming
a firefighter. It was something she'd always been interested in. She wanted to
save lives, but she also wanted to say thank you to Staffordshire Fire and
Rescue Service for a very personal reason. I've always been quite a physical
person anyway, in terms of fitness and stuff. So I knew I could physically do
the job. But one of the main things really was I lost my mum in a car accident
when I was younger, when I was 18. And it was actually Staffs Fire Brigade that
went to that. Unfortunately, nothing could be done. But it was a driving force
for me to want to make an impact and, you know, be able to help in some way. So
when I finally got the opportunity to join, it felt like the right thing for me.
Women have been in the fire service since the 80s, but it's still overwhelmingly
male. Just 8% of firefighters are female. Desperate to become more diverse, the
fire service is on a drive to attract more women. For Donna, the job was a
complete change, but she liked her first taste of life on the station. Did you
feel that you'd found your home, you know, this was the place for you? Yeah. It
was kind of quite militarian in how they ran the drills and the training
exercises and stuff, which was something new to get used to. But I kind of liked
that as well. It instilled a bit of discipline. But yeah, it was good.
Staffordshire Fire and Rescue Service was very happy to have her. Donna became
their poster girl. She was the face of the modern fire service, in the brochures
and on social media, perfect for encouraging more women to join. I'd be smiling
on the poster. And, you know, I remember being interviewed about life in the
fire service and obviously I was saying how good it was. Actually, at the time,
I genuinely wanted it to be true because I wanted to have a really good and long
career in the fire service. But actually, the reality was completely different.
Reality was feeling lonely, ostracised, unsupported. Donna says no matter how
hard she tried, nothing was ever good enough. She was basically blanked.
Officers would come on station and they would ignore me or you'd go on incidents
and be ignored. You know, I would get on the truck and go to incidents and
sometimes I wouldn't even be spoken to. I could get back to the station and go
home and not one person would have spoken to me. There was, I remember, a
basement fire in Stafford that I went to. And I just remember just the thoughts
going through my head was, I don't trust them. I don't trust them to have my
back. Donna wasn't about to give up. She was ambitious. She got on with the job
and focused on passing her assessments. But while colleagues were given
encouragement, training opportunities and mentors, Donna says it wasn't on offer
for her. Rather, it felt like they wanted to find ways to force her out. One
time, her boss pushed her to do a fitness test, despite the fact she was waiting
for a scan to look into severe post-pregnancy back pain. He said he wanted her
to do the test all the same. So it was almost setting me up to fail and also
wanted me to make sure that I did that in front of the rest of the watch. Donna
didn't do the test. It turned out she had three slipped discs. She passed the
next test. But her first drill back with the watch seemed designed to be as
physically punishing as possible. They were advised by occupational health to
have a phased return to practical sessions. And it was far from that. Yeah, it
was a real beast in. It was a two-hour drill. Donna says she was asked to do a
lot more heavy lifting than normal. She had to get the ladder off the truck and
pitch it against a wall eight times and then do hose runs. She says usually a
drill involves doing one or the other, not all of them, all in the same
exercise. She completed everything that was asked of her, but it still wasn't
good enough for them. Because obviously I was quite physically drained
afterwards. They just made a point of saying that I need to get in the gym more
and that I'm not up to the standard. Yes, I was tired at the end of it, but
there wasn't anything that I couldn't do. They couldn't say that I failed on
anything. When a vacancy came up as a driver on the engine, Donna asked to be
trained up. She wasn't chosen. She later found out a manager had ruled her out
because she had a young son and he assumed she wouldn't be able to do it because
of her childcare responsibilities. He just decided to make that assumption. So
they put another driver through instead, who incidentally has four children. How
did you feel about that attitude? I think that was the point then that I
realised that a lot of it was to do with me being female rather than, you know,
me personally. They'd clearly got some real issues with females. When Donna
attended a culture workshop supposed to be all about making the brigade more
inclusive, she mentioned her situation. It went down like a lead balloon back at
base. She says things got even worse. Hurtful rumours were spread about her. She
was told she wasn't welcome at another station. One manager threatened to take
her to the cleaners, warning her he'd been there a long time and had a lot of
friends in the service. She was eventually diagnosed with PTSD. When she started
having suicidal thoughts, she realised she'd have to walk away from what she
thought would be her dream job. I was just losing myself. I was losing all my
confidence. It was affecting my home life. Me and my partner almost split up
because of the impact it was having here. It was affecting my relationship with
my children. And I just thought that it's just easier and it would be better for
other people if I just wasn't here. Then I won't have to deal with all the
situation that I was going through. So you felt there wasn't hope? Yeah.
Everything seemed hopeless at that point. And... Sorry, can we just stop? This
is why I don't like talking. We asked Staffordshire Fire and Rescue about
Donna's experience. It said it takes every complaint seriously and inappropriate
behaviour is dealt with robustly, that there's no place for harassment, bullying
or discrimination, and that it's always looking to improve support for staff and
make the service somewhere people enjoy working. Firefighters have to be strong
physically and mentally to do the job they do. These are resilient women we're
talking about. But Donna's not the only one who's told us they've been pushed to
the brink by the drip, drip, drip of being demeaned and harassed at other
stations around the country. Some of their stories we can't tell at all, in some
cases for legal reasons, in others because women have signed gagging clauses, or
they're worried they'll be sacked for bringing the fire service into disrepute.
But some women did want to share their experiences. We've changed their names
and we're using actors. Sarah was bullied by a male firefighter who did
everything he could to intimidate her and mess with her head. He'd shout in my
face, who are you to tell me anything? You're not the boss of me. What can you
teach me? He'd point and jab me in the chest. He'd get so close I could feel the
spit on my face. He was just a nasty old fashioned person. It was just because I
was a woman. I tried to avoid him and keep out of his way but he started
knocking into me with his shoulder in the corridors. He made my life a misery.
He started tampering with my kit. One day I found it thrown across the engine
house. I could never prove it was him but things always happened when he'd been
on duty. Someone threw my gloves and my water bottle in the bin. Another time I
found my health and safety paperwork in the shredder. It got to the point where
I was forever looking through and checking my fire kit thinking am I going to
find nails in my boots. It affected my mental health. One time I took an
overdose. Another time at the station I looked at the training tower which is
really high and I got it into my head that I'd run up the tower and jump off. I
just got to the tower when someone spotted me on the stairs and said hi. It
snapped me out of it and I ran away and decided I couldn't do it. Another woman,
Michelle, told us when she worked at Avon Fire and Rescue Service her manager
openly bullied her and the rest of the watch stood by and did nothing. He
started saying women will be the downfall of the fire service. He would
humiliate me, tell me to shut up and know my place. He'd say you're effing
useless. Then it became more sexually orientated. He would make comments about
how I looked. I'd go to the gym in my leggings and he'd say you got your pussy
huggers on again. And he'd make comments about my bottom. My colleagues were
lovely but they didn't stand up for me. They'd text me later that day and ask if
I was okay but they wouldn't say anything in front of the manager. The power
structures of the watch, the fear of speaking up or jeopardising their job
prospects with the boss, meant they stayed silent. I raised a complaint but when
they interviewed everyone who'd witnessed what he'd done they said no comment
but then nodded their heads. It was found guilty of some of it but not the
sexual stuff because nobody corroborated what I was saying other than the head
nurse. I kept nodding. Someone told me at the time the fire service is 20 years
behind the police when it comes to culture. Given everything I know now, I think
she's right. And Michelle wasn't the only one to suffer in Avon. Kirsty
contacted us to tell us she was harassed by a watch manager who then tried to
sabotage her personal and work life. He told my partner I was sleeping with
another firefighter. He said he couldn't bear to see me happy with my partner so
wanted to destroy that. He was suspended because of a different complaint put in
by somebody else but he would ring around and tell crews not to help me on jobs.
He sent messages to me on his brigade phone and I'd email HR every time an
incident happened but they told me it's your word against his. You can't win. I
ended up having a breakdown on the fire court one day. I had to walk away. It's
sad because they're not all like it. I still to this day want my job back but
it's not going to happen. I trained for a long time to do that job and worked
hard to prove myself. It's not about money. It's about justice. This can't keep
happening all the time. Avon Fire and Rescue Service told us it was sorry for
what Michelle and Kirsty went through. It admitted there have been cases where
behaviour has gone unchallenged. It said it's investing in leadership and
development and will reinforce courage in staff to come forward. We've spoken to
people from more than a dozen different fire services who've told us they've
been bullied, physically or sexually assaulted, raped. Some reported it and say
it wasn't dealt with properly. Others didn't even feel they could complain. We
can't tell you half of what we know because women are genuinely scared for their
safety if they speak out. When former Crown prosecutor Nazir Afzal was asked to
investigate the culture inside London Fire Brigade, he had to set up a secure
email address and meet people off station for many women even to feel safe
talking to him. He heard evidence from more than a third of women in the brigade
and they said being abused and degraded was routine. The amount of untreated
PTSD I found within London Fire Brigade was shocking. You know, women were
groped during training exercises, women were run daily gauntlets of sexual
abuse. Some were even punched and attacked. Some have the indignity of having
photos of them taken without their consent. Many were sexually taunted. One
woman told us that she'd received video calls from a man exposing his genitalia.
Another had been receiving inappropriate photographs. It was of this nature, day
in, day out, and it wears you down. There was one day in which I sat down with
nine different people, you know, all talking about their experiences one after
another. At the end of the day, we'd run out of tissues because of the amount of
tears that had been flowing. And I felt I needed counselling after hearing their
stories. And so I made sure that I got some help having listened to what these
women had experienced over the course of that one day, just me listening. So can
you imagine what it's like living that experience? Since Nazia Afzal's report
came out in November, more shocking revelations have lifted the lid on what life
is like for some in the fire service. Tonight's news investigation has uncovered
really shocking examples of sexual harassment within Dorset and Wiltshire Fire
Service. Last month, female firefighters in Dorset and Wiltshire revealed men
they worked with had been sending them unsolicited, explicit photos and
messages. One woman said a colleague demanded sexual favours at the scene of a
fire. Another, that men had taken photos of the dead bodies of women in car
crashes and shared them on WhatsApp. This was what the Chief Fire Officer Ben
Ansell said to ITV. I'm saddened, I'm shocked and I'm appalled. And I'm grateful
for you bringing them to our attention. And the assurance I'll give you is that
we will look into these allegations, we will follow the evidence and we will do
the right thing. We take this incredibly seriously. Firearm 4 has since spoken
to a woman who was a firefighter with Dorset and Wiltshire. We're calling her
Helen. She says the sexist and sexually predatory culture should come as no
surprise to the Chief Fire Officer because she told the fire service about her
treatment by two male managers five years ago. I would have fire axes thrown at
my head on drill. I had my firefighter helmet on but they threw them so hard the
force would knock me to the floor. They'd stand there and laugh. On drills
they'd soak me with the hose. They'd have it on such high pressure I'd be
covered in bruises. It's beyond belief. It hardly seems possible but it got
worse. One of them, a middle-aged man, started sexually harassing me. He was old
enough to be my dad. He started to grab me when I was coming down ladders. He
would lunge from my hips, always touching me around my waist and hips. One day
he came right up to me and got close to my face, almost touching my nose. He
breathed on me and I stepped back. He grabbed me by the tunic, picked me up by
my throat and smashed me into the back of the pump. Three people witnessed it on
the station that day. No one said anything. Helen went to her station commander
and said she wanted it to stop but it didn't. And one evening, a couple of weeks
later, the watch was at the station for training. They got to the end of the
drill. I went to my locker to take my kit off. I noticed the headlights of cars
pulling out of the parade ground. I thought, shit, they're all leaving. And then
all the lights went out in the whole station apart from the room I was in. He
would have known I was in there and he could see from the office. He came into
the kit room with this really sinister look on his face. He never said anything.
He walked straight up to me. He slammed me against the wall and tried to take my
tunic trousers off. I knew I was in trouble. I knew I had to get him off me. I
was strong and my boyfriend had taught me martial arts. I pushed him off me. I
grabbed him by the shoulders and I moved him 90 degrees. I ran to the door and
drove home. Helen doesn't want to think what might have happened if she hadn't
got away. But there were no witnesses and she didn't want to risk losing her
job. So she stayed silent about that terrifying night, even though when she went
into work, she was petrified. I was frightened of being left alone with him. I
began to suffer from panic attacks and developed a stammer. It was really bad
anxiety, just fear. Fear followed by disbelief. Within a few weeks, I was told
that I was unsuitable for the role. I was told to get my gear and leave. My
whole world fell apart that night. Helen emailed the Chief Fire Officer direct
to tell him what had happened and says afterwards she handed in a file giving
dates and times of the bullying and harassment she'd suffered. Dorset and
Wiltshire Fire Service said when Chief Fire Officer Ben Ansell received Helen's
original email, he did reply to her and sent details to HR, but it wasn't
explicit that there'd been a sexual element to the harassment she was
complaining about. The service said they tried to contact her to get more
details, but she'd failed to turn up at a meeting. Helen's adamant she never got
that reply. She says her union rep handed her full paper file listing all the
bullying and harassment incidents to the complaints department at headquarters
and that on three occasions, both she and her rep turned up for meetings only to
get a phone call as they arrived in the car park saying the meeting had been
cancelled. I was advised to leave it and walk away. I got told I was never going
to win because they were too high ranking and I wouldn't be believed. The men
who harassed and sexually assorted me are still in high ranking positions to
this day as far as I know. It's five years and I haven't really recovered. It
destroyed me. The brigade said Helen was dismissed because she was incompetent
and this decision had been reviewed by a senior officer and upheld. Helen says
that's just not the case. I came out top on knots, pumping and working at height
and trading school. I've never had any warning or criticism on my record. I
never put a foot wrong. I wanted the job more than anything. When the
allegations of appalling behaviour within Dorset and Wiltshire Fire Service
emerged last month, they said they were launching an investigation. That
prompted Helen to write them again. The abuse and harassment I endured within
your brigade was absolutely horrendous. I was a competent, enthusiastic,
dedicated female firefighter that you should value and have been lucky to have
had on your staff. Everything I was made to endure still affects me to this day.
Justice has still never been served. Since we've taken up Helen's case with
Dorset and Wiltshire Fire Service, it's offered to talk to her again, to
investigate her claims and take appropriate action. Helen didn't go to the
police about the man who attacked her, but firefighters do come to the attention
of police forces. File on 4 can reveal that in the last four years, 31
firefighters and staff have been reported to or investigated by police for
sexual allegations, but only one has been sacked. 33 of the UK's 49 fire
services answered our Freedom of Information request. North Wales had five
members of staff reported to police. Most brigades wouldn't tell us if people
had been convicted, but we know at least two were, and six people are under
investigation. We also asked the question another way. We went to police forces
for the number of people reported for sexual allegations where the occupation
was recorded as fireman, firefighter or fire service staff. This would only ever
be a very rough guide, because occupation wouldn't necessarily be known or
entered on the police system. But bearing those caveats in mind, just looking at
the third of forces that responded, 34 people working for the fire service were
reported to police. There were nine allegations of rape. These cases are of
course pretty rare. We don't know how many of the alleged victims were
firefighters, but we do know it happens. We can't go into detail in this
programme, but we've spoken to women who say they've been sexually and
physically attacked and have reported the abuse. But we've also spoken to others
who say they were too scared or had too little faith in the police or the fire
service to report it. I put this to Mark Hardingham, the chair of the National
Fire Chiefs Council. Women particularly are, if you like, breaking cover and
coming out and talking to the press, to the media, because they say they weren't
listened to or they were too scared, frankly, to speak up within the fire
service. That's a failure by fire chiefs, isn't it? If women feel a, that
they're not safe going to work and b, they don't feel safe talking about not
feeling safe. You're quite right. I mean, some of the stuff that we've seen
reported over recent weeks absolutely is a failure in the fire and rescue
service. There are a lot of things that we need to do. What I would say though,
is that in and amongst the experiences that people have had, I'm sure that every
fire and rescue service will have equally examples where people have been well
supported through their fire service careers and issues that have happened have
been dealt with and dealt with robustly and appropriately. I think what we're
seeing at the moment is that's not been consistently the case in fire services
and across every fire and rescue service. And when people object to this kind of
vile, in inverted commas, banter or object to being sexually harassed or object
to being racially harassed, often they say they're made to be the problem.
They're sent on conflict management courses, they're moved station, they're
silenced, or actually they end up being disciplined. Do you agree that sometimes
the old boys network swings into action and minimises people's complaints and
makes it impossible for them to get help? Yeah, I accept in the past that that
has been the case. The chief forester and a senior leadership team have a very
important role, but they can't do this alone. So if you see something happening
that doesn't feel right, doesn't look right, doesn't sound right, it's not just
for the victim to point that out and deal with it. Actually, the victim feels
most supported when other people will step forward and say, I'm sorry, that's
not right. That's not acceptable. Hard to do that if you're a junior firefighter
and you are being asked to call out an all-powerful station manager or watch
manager. You know, this is an environment of command and control, of rank.
That's a big ask. I accept it is a big ask, but actually it doesn't always need
to be the junior firefighter to call it out. What about the more senior
firefighter who might be seeing what's going on or another manager? And I accept
entirely that is not an easy thing to do. Very difficult thing to do if you're
more experienced in the fire service and have been around longer. But of course,
increasingly difficult if you are new into the fire service or actually if
you're from an underrepresented group. Well, yes, as we've heard, some people
decide it's not worth getting involved. Catherine Billing is Chief Fire Officer
in Cornwall and a leading member of Women in the Fire Service, which is trying
to make the culture more progressive. Last year, she had to sack five of her own
firefighters accused of exchanging pornographic photos and misogynistic and
racist messages on WhatsApp. I felt sick. I knew that we couldn't be immune. But
when you actually find it, you actually see it. Real sick things that they were
sharing. And we're professional people that the public trusts. You sacked them.
And yet some would maintain they are the wronged party. They do say, some of
them, it was innocent banter. Another firefighter actually resigned in
solidarity with them and accused you of emasculating the fire service through
some kind of witch hunt. I mean, what would you say to that? It probably shocked
me just as much as the content itself. I don't think any of us would have
thought that what they posted and what they discussed and their banter, as they
like to call it, was appropriate. What I did was right. And it wasn't a step too
far. And it wasn't emasculating the service. It was maintaining professional
standards and maintaining integrity. You get tired of challenging a lot of the
time. And one thing that we talk about as women is male allies are so important.
Catherine Billing hopes the next generation of men coming through will be the
allies female firefighters need. We've been told the selection tests are really
big on diversity and equality. But is that just a tick box exercise? Is
firefighter training perpetuating a toxic culture? It doesn't matter if you're
male or female. Diversity across the fire service is huge. And we all fit in and
work together as a team. Back in 2021, firefighters in West Yorkshire appeared
on the small screen in a fly on the wall BBC documentary. It was a big deal. The
local news did a story about it. Oh, there's plenty of banter, good food, plenty
of laughs, camaraderie. And that's one of the main things and what attracts you
to fire service. But some new recruits who just made it through the vigorous
assessments and had started training with West Yorkshire were met with something
quite different. One, we're calling Chris, says the instructors set the tone
from day one. This isn't his voice, but these are his words. Straight away, they
gave you this impression you were like there on the bottom of their shoes and
they've been through the same when they were trainees. That was a mantra they
repeated. We've been through this shit. So we're going to put you through this
shit. One trainer in particular told people that he would effing break the nose
or break the jaw. I'll smash your face in. There was nothing off limits. There
was jokes about rape. There was jokes about Nazi Germany. There was jokes about
bant children in houses. There was homophobic language. It was literally like
you couldn't say anything that was deemed too far. One of the trainers was very
vocal about his dislike for a particular section of the community, an ethnic
minority. He'd say they were always the ones to start fires and he referred to
them as the P word. This was a member of staff saying this to trainees. I've
been around lots and lots of groups of males and yes, you hear the odd thing
here and there and it can get inappropriate sometimes, but I have never, ever
been in a situation where all of those offensive terms were used in such a short
space of time and with such venom and aggression. Why do you think this culture
went on? On an individual level, I don't think they were bad people. I just
think there was such a toxic culture of banter, that's what they called it. The
culture was be as ruthless as you possibly can to each other. I can't believe
more firefighters don't kill themselves. That's how bad it is. It's extreme
bullying. Chris describes a hothouse drill which simulates going into a fire in
full kit, where a recruit collapsed with heat stroke. He says the instructors
told them to carry on with the exercise and when a female trainee raised the
alarm, she was mocked. She said stop the drill, this person's convulsing. The
firemen were like stop being an effing girl and carry on with the drill and she
said no, no, no, no, no, we need to stop. It got so bad that they called an
ambulance. We told West Yorkshire everything Chris had said about training. It
said HR and senior managers did investigate a complaint at the time, but there
was insufficient evidence to substantiate it and that other trainees had been
positive about the instructors. The service said it condemns any form of
discrimination. His Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue
Services told us it expects all services to investigate allegations like these
thoroughly and without delay. It said fire services have a long way to go when
it comes to equality and they can't afford to wait any longer to improve.
Someone's pointed me to a government report into the fire service from way back
in 1999. It describes the service as one of the last bastions of laddish
culture, where women are flashed at, men watch porn at work, black firefighters
are called the N word. Judging by the evidence we've heard in this programme, in
some areas not much has changed in a quarter of a century. The MP Caroline
Noakes is the Conservative Chair of the Commons Women and Equalities Committee.
We shared our evidence with her. When you look at the volume of testimonies and
the repeated themes in them, it's really obvious that the complaint system is
not working as it currently is. Now, it strikes me that what you need at that
point in the process is a clean broom to come in. Actually, the fire service has
not yet demonstrated that it can get its own house in order. So maybe externally
appointed investigators, a root and branch review, what's gone on, how has this
been allowed to perpetuate for so long, who is going to take ownership of this,
why are individual fire chiefs not making sure that their fire services do not
foster a culture of bullying and harassment? And if that has to come from
outside, then it absolutely must because you can't have a situation where this
can go on for 20 years, unchecked, unchallenged. Inspectors rated both West
Yorkshire Fire Service and Dorset and Wiltshire, where claims of appalling
sexist behaviour have emerged, as good when it comes to their values and
culture. We asked Caroline Noakes whether we can trust the inspectorate to see
what's really going on in fire stations. You can only believe that the
inspectorate is not doing the job adequately when you look at the evidence from
Dorset and Wiltshire, and yet that culture was rated as good. That culture was
not good, is not good. And any culture which allows bullies, abusers, harassers
to stay in post while their victims are forced out is poor. And what I would
argue is that we need to make sure that the inspectorate are inspecting the
right things, that they're talking to the right people, and that they're being
given access. And indeed, that individual firefighters have confidence to speak
to them freely and openly. But it strikes me that this is also a job for the
government itself to address what has gone wrong, in the same way that the Home
Secretary has spoken out about the Met, she should be speaking out about fire
services. This clearly starts at entry and finishes at the top. We've been
asking the Home Office for an interview for weeks. They eventually declined our
request but sent a statement, saying they've been clear in a white paper that
reform of the fire service is urgently needed. They said they would work closely
with the fire service, the inspectorate and the National Fire Chiefs Council to
make sure deeply concerning issues about culture in the sector are addressed.
Some fire chiefs are trying to cut rotten culture at the root. Greater
Manchester Fire and Rescue Service has sacked three firefighters and suspended
four others over offensive WhatsApp messages. And Northamptonshire has sacked a
manager after an investigation into inappropriate behaviour towards women. For
so long, a culture of misogyny has relied on a culture of fear. But women are
starting to break their silence now. They can sense this is the moment to fight
fire with fire. They're going to the media, they're taking their employers to
tribunals. Dealing with misogyny could cost the fire service its reputation and
a lot of money. You'll remember Donna from the start of this programme, who was
inspired to become a firefighter after she lost her mum in a car crash. She did
fight back against the toxic culture. She went all the way to the police and
fire commissioner and he partially upheld her grievance. I think if I wasn't sat
here today, they still wouldn't care. They like to promote all the right things
but practice none of them. And what is sad is there are probably other people
going through the same thing. She believes the managers at her station wanted
her out. If that's true, they got their wish. Donna resigned last summer. But
she won't resign herself to going quietly. She's taking Staffordshire Fire and
Rescue Service to a tribunal for constructive dismissal and discrimination. You
believe you were a good firefighter, but you've burned those bridges now. You
can't go back to that. How hard is that to accept? Very hard. It's sad. One of
the real reasons why I wanted to be there in the first place because of that
sense of making a difference. I'm not really going to get that doing something
else. It's a big loss. Yeah, a huge loss. It would be easier if I'd have done
something wrong or if I wasn't good at the job. But I know that I'm more than
capable of carrying out the job. And it's just sad that, you know, in today's
society, this is even happening. The producer of tonight's programme was Nicola
Dowling. The editor was Cole Johnston. If you've been affected by sexual abuse
or violence, details of help and support is available at bbc.co.uk forward slash
action line. Or you can call for free at any time to hear recorded information
on 0800 077 077. You can find this episode of File on 4 and many more on BBC
Sounds. The world looks to the battlefields of Ukraine and asks how and when
will it end? Both sides speak of all-out victory, but could there be a
settlement between the enemies? This is James Naughty and I've been exploring
with diplomats and peacemakers the lessons of other conflicts to see how they
might help in finding a pathway through the smoke of battle. After nearly a year
of war, when might the talking start to matter more? How Wars End on BBC Radio
4, available now on BBC Sounds. Now on Radio 4, it's time for In Touch with
Peter White. Good evening. Tonight… Sometimes the words that are used, such as
blind or loss of vision, may not necessarily have the same meaning by both the
patient or the clinician delivering that. And I think that clearly is a fault
which, you know, we try to avoid. We'll be hearing more from the Vice President
of the Royal College of Ophthalmologists about the kind of training specialists
get when it comes to delivering potential bad news about the state of your eyes
and why it may not be enough. But first, this Friday will mark a year since the
Russian invasion of Ukraine and still no sign of the ordeal of the Ukrainian
people coming to an end. Amongst our coverage of the situation for blind people
in Ukraine, we heard from the blind couple Olga and Denis Petrov, who took their
small child and seven animals across the border into Poland. Olga was also
pregnant at the time. Well, she's now had the baby. In a moment, we'll be
checking in with them to see how things are going almost a year on. But first,
we're joined by Lars Bosselmann, the executive director of the European Blind
Union. Lars, welcome back. Your organisation has recently sent financial aid, I
think, into the most war-affected communities in Ukraine. When we first spoke to
you, it wasn't quite clear what help might be needed and where it was going to
come from. What actually are you, have you been able to do over the last year or
so? We've been recently having very good communications and cooperation with the
National Assembly of Persons with Disabilities, which is the Ukrainian umbrella
organisation. And through and with the help of them, we've been able to do
mainly two things. One is actually a helpline, a help desk for people who
acquired blindness as a consequence of the war. And secondly, to help to at
least partially repair a residential institution which welcomes internally
displaced people with disabilities and blind partially sighted people amongst
them, so that they can at least stay there in a safe place for the time being.
Can we talk about those two separately? Let's start with the issue that you said
that there are actual direct victims of the war. Do we know how many people have
lost their sight or had their sight damaged? They are not overall statistics, as
you can imagine, in such times of war. But just to give you an indication, which
I myself got just over the last month, there were more than 150 people who
called specifically that helpline, which sounds a lot or little. That depends on
your interpretation and look at things. All these are people who recently lost
their sight or are about to lose their sight and need really help. And help in
that case, of course, means a lot, very practical daily life help, the technical
aids, the devices and so on that they would need to cope with the new life
situation that they are now finding themselves in. But also psychosocial help
and support, of course, as well. There's a lot in such a situation to it. You
also talked about helping structurally rebuilding places because presumably
there were areas, centres where blind people were living and working that have
been bombed. Yes, of course, we always have to remember this remains a drop in
the ocean compared to the needs that are out there. But nevertheless, we've been
able to repair one centre that is there that at least people can now stay and
continue staying and living there. But we receive from more places in Ukraine
reports about damages to educational centres, schools, and we'll try to get more
direct support to these places and continuously looking into further supporting
places in the neighbouring countries of Ukraine where many blind and partially
sighted refugees have, of course, found a temporary home, so to speak. And we
are also supporting some of the organisations there. We are also trying to
partner with other disability or blindness organisations also at the global
level so that the impact possibly of the joint action is a bit bigger than what
we can just do as EBU. Lars Bosselmann, good to talk to you. Thank you very much
for joining us. Now, two people who did decide to leave Ukraine and did so with
their five-year-old daughter and another child on the way, not to mention seven
animals, were Denis and Olga Petrov. Well, they crossed the border into Poland
and they're still there. We wanted to catch up with them. So I'm delighted to
say that they can both rejoin us. Let me start with you, Olga. You've now had
your baby that you took out in that very secure method that you had, but not
free of problems, I think. Explain what has happened. Well, I would say after we
arrived in Poland, everything went on pretty smoothly with my pregnancy and with
the delivery. So I was just delighted all the time that I was in this safe
environment. I had to adjust to a different medical system and figure out how
everything works. But compared to what was happening in Ukraine at the time, it
was like a really minor problem. I think the bigger complication happened
actually a bit later during Christmas. He got sick and it turned out that he was
having meningitis. Thanks to wonderful doctors who helped us, everything ended
well and we are now back home and he is perfectly healthy again. But it was a
very tough time for us. Right. So as if you hadn't got enough to cope with, that
was put on your plate as well. That was the feeling I had, yes. Isn't it enough
already? Let me come to Denis. What's the plan now? What are you thinking of
doing? Any plans, for example, for returning to Ukraine at the moment? It is
very hard to plan to return to Ukraine. I very badly want to return, but with
the children at this point it is unsafe. You know about those power outages and
rocket attacks that happen all the time. We wouldn't like to expose our children
to that. And presumably also because you've made contact, you've obviously got
medical contact with the new baby. So I suppose in a way you feel you want to
stay there for security to some extent. You're right. Because of the security we
have to stay here at least until the war is over and even after it is, it'll
probably take some time for life to go back to not maybe exactly normal, but to
at least some livable extent, you know. So we are waiting for that to happen.
And I gather that the Polish system has been quite accommodating to people who
come over in terms of getting equipment if they need it. Well, yeah, they
actually gave us similar rights as Poles have. So they allowed us to apply for
new equipment once every five years. They finance about 2,000 euros for a
Braille display and about the same amount for things like laptops and phones and
maybe accessories for those. So they allowed that also for us. So you're being
treated as national. Yeah, in the majority of ways. When speaking about the
accessibility to the rights that blind people have here or people with
disabilities have here, it's like 90 percent the same. Olga, can I ask you what
your own feelings are about, you know, how long you're going to stay, about the
risks of going back? Because instinctively, presumably, you want to go home.
Well, actually, I feel so safe and so accommodated here right now because
whenever I read these terrible stories about children or babies getting hurt or
getting killed in Ukraine, I have this feeling it's good I'm not there with my
children right now because with the children, I think it's really impossible to
be there. It's a great risk and I don't want to take it. And so as far as there
is war, I would really like to keep my children away from it because like even
my daughter, who was five at the moment, she stayed there for 10 days only
during the war. And it was so traumatic for her. I could really see the effects
after 10 days only. So I really can't imagine what it is like for children who
stay there for months, who really experience worse things that she had to go
through, who have to spend days in the underground or in cellars. So it's really
not anything that I want my children to experience. Well, the very best of luck
to all of you, including the newest Petrov. And thank you very much for joining
us again, Denis and Olga Petrov. Thank you. Now, surely you should be able to
expect the delivery of medical news about your eyesight to be given in a
thoughtful and sensitive way, especially if the news is potentially life
altering. People with long experience of little or no sight know that a good
life is very much still possible. People facing this for the first time don't
know that. But we've been receiving a lot of emails recently like this one from
Judy Cobbett. 40 years ago, my daughter had inflammation on the brain and it
destroyed her visual cortex. I'd previously been told that her sight could
return in time, but the specialist responded to this reassurance by telling us
that it wouldn't. This was said in a tone of impatience and stoicism. The eye
specialist was abrupt and detached, and he told us he would inform social
services that my daughter should be registered blind. This is clearly a routine
matter for him and had been the main purpose of the appointment. But surely
you'll say that was 40 years ago. Things must be different now. Well, not,
judging by the experience of Pauline Mottram, whose recent encounter with her
ophthalmologist gave rise to this avalanche of responses. He said that my
retinas are degenerating. And he said, basically, I'm in the process of going
blind. And he used the word blind, which I found really shocking. It was like a
sort of kick in my stomach. I mean, I told him that I live alone and I have no
family. And he just sort of looked at me. They didn't even give me any leaflets
for RNIB or anything. Well, the Royal College of Ophthalmologists is the
representative body for the ophthalmic profession in the UK. And we've invited
them on to the programme to give us some insight, really, into what is best and
current practice when it comes to delivering this kind of news and why these
sort of incidents still happen. Their vice president is Stephen Kaye, and he
joins me now. Stephen, first of all, I mean, what kind of training do
ophthalmologists actually get in this area of breaking the news? So
ophthalmologists get training initially when they're medical students, and all
medical students are taught how to break bad news to patients and what's needed
to provide the information necessary and support for the patient. And then
subsequently, once a medical student enters, say, ophthalmology, during the
curriculum, ophthalmologists themselves are given training, usually informally
and sometimes formally, on how to approach patients who are losing sight, what
information to provide and what services are available. This is assessed and
really ophthalmologists wouldn't actually qualify unless they were able to
demonstrate that they can provide this type of information and provide patients
with the support. And yet, Stephen, you heard there some of the experiences of
our listeners, two experiences 40 years apart, but one only the other day. So in
spite of what you've told me, it sounds like this is still happening. Yes, and I
was disappointed to hear that, and I can recognise these circumstances. I think
sometimes it comes down to firstly, the clinician not being fully aware of the
patient who's in front of them and understanding the patient's circumstances.
And sometimes the words that are used, such as blind or loss of vision, may not
necessarily be understood or have the same meaning by both the patient or the
clinician delivering that. And I think that clearly is a fault which we try to
avoid. Yeah, because obviously people, when they hear the word blind, if they've
not had experience, they immediately think totally blind and they probably
immediately think this going, you know, almost suddenly out of the blue, waking
up one morning. Yes, exactly. Exactly. And I think you kind of hit the nail on
the head there. It's kind of using the words, understanding the words and what
we mean by them. So an ophthalmologist might, for example, think about blind as
what's required to be registered, let's say, not being able to see the top
letter in the chart, less than three metres, whereas for the individual
affected, as you say, the connotations are, you know, complete blackness and not
being able to see anything. So I think it's really important that the right
language is used and delivered in the appropriate way. And I think, yes. One of
the things that Pauline was clearly most concerned about, though, was that she
left the consulting room with no knowledge of what was possible, what could be
done. What kind of training is actually given when it comes to providing
information about what services come next? You know, for instance, where people
can go for support, for getting around, for example, coping in the kitchen,
assistive technology, maybe clubs where you might meet other blind people who
could give, you know, real practical advice. Yes, exactly. So just taking one
step back there, it comes also having knowledge of the condition. So if the
person has a condition which is going to lead to a rapid deterioration in sight
or slow progression in sight or loss of central or peripheral vision, that kind
of information is crucial to providing, you know, a way forwards to the person
affected. So there's some sort of plan involved in what that's going to mean for
the person. We're not alone in delivering this kind of work. So we have the
people who support us, you know, known as eye care liaison officers or eye care
health professionals. And these people are crucial in providing the kind of
information and support needed. So, for example, if someone attends and is
losing the sight either slowly or rapidly, the information is provided as to the
outcomes of the condition. And then that person is then seen usually at the same
time as the appointment that's delivered by the eye care liaison officer. And
that person will then take them through what support services are needed. So
firstly, what community services are available, what benefits might be available
and what concessions that person might be entitled to. And that echo is crucial
to this process. But those echoes aren't in all hospitals by any means, are
they? You know, where they're there, they're very much valued, but they're not
everywhere by any means. No, exactly. And that's really important point. But I
think even in a situation where they're not available, they are usually nursing
staff who do have some training in this regard, perhaps not necessarily as well
as formally trained as an echo, but they do have some training in this regard.
And equally, as an ophthalmologist, it's expected that we do have some training
in that regard. So we talk to some extent what the echo provides. So if the echo
is not available, we would then say, you know, the services which a person is
entitled to, if they, for example, suffer sight loss and what benefits they're
entitled to. So we do have some knowledge about that. So it's not as if an echo
is not there, that there's no, the same kind of information is not available. I
wonder if there is a sense, though, amongst some ophthalmologists is that this
isn't my bit, what happens next. I do the eyes. I can tell you what might
happen, you know, physically. But when it comes to what happens next, that's not
me. Possibly, but I still think, you know, as doctors, we don't just see the
person from the eye point of view. You know, we see them as an entire person and
take a holistic view. And most times when we deal with patients, we tend to have
known them for quite a considerable period of time. So we have some idea what
their circumstances are like. And we do have that kind of knowledge to be able
to guide them to some extent. But I guess coming back to your point, yes, you
know, having people like echoes is essential and they're not enough of them. And
clearly, that's something which needs to be addressed going forwards. And is
that the main thing you think that could make a difference? Because there were
no echoes in Pauline's case and her local health authority is only considering
it now after her case. After the event. Yes, yes. I think we were trying to get
data on where echoes are and which hospitals have them and which don't. The need
for echoes and these type of individuals is understood. And whether the, I'm
sure we're all driven by financial circumstances, but I think regardless of
that, the need for echoes, you know, overrides the financial cost for them. So I
think in any eye department throughout the country, they're an essential person.
So I can't really see any argument not to have an echo in such circumstances.
OK, well, we stay with this subject. Stephen Kay, thank you very much indeed for
joining us. There are various ways you can talk to us with your comments and
queries about this or anything else you've heard in the programme. You can email
in touch at bbc.co.uk, leave voice messages on 0161 836 1338 or go to our
website where there's more information and from where you can download tonight's
and many previous editions of the programme. That's bbc.co.uk forward slash in
touch. That's it for tonight. From me, Peter White, producer Beth Hemmings,
studio manager Nat Stokes. Goodbye. That phone number once again to ask a
question or leave a comment for in touch is 0161 836 1338 and the email is in
touch at bbc.co.uk. Coming up next after the news inside health investigates
whether there's a problem with falling sperm counts and looks into a successful
treatment for one of the leading causes of male infertility. That's in a couple
of minutes. Continuing our celebration of the centenary of BBC Radio. We are
making changes to the way BBC live streams are distributed via third party
services and platforms and the BBC stream you are currently listening to will
stop working by mid 2023. If you are using an internet radio or smart speaker
and hearing this message, please contact the manufacturer. If you're listening
on web or mobile, this service is available to stream on BBC sounds.
Storytelling, film, television, owes so much to radio drama. On radio for