TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-06H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 discuss their differences. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. Hello and welcome to Newsday on the BBC World Service with Rob Young
and Reedy Clubby. Ukraine has vowed to keep defending the eastern city of
Bakhmut as Russian forces battle to secure their first major gain in months.
We'll hear from someone who was recently in the city. In Mexico, more than 300
people, including 100 unaccompanied children, have been found in an abandoned
lorry on their way to the United States. We'll talk to our correspondent in
Mexico. The UK government is attempting to toughen its migration laws, placing a
new controversial duty on the Home Secretary to remove anyone who enters the UK
by an illegal route. It's an attempt to crack down on people smuggling across
the English Channel. And the World Bank has suspended its engagement with
Tunisia after the country's president made racially charged remarks about black
Africans. Those stories and more after a bulletin of the latest world news. BBC
News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow. The Japanese space agency has said the launch of
its new rocket has failed after the second stage engine didn't ignite. It's the
latest setback for the H-3, Japan's first new medium-lift rocket for three
decades. From Tokyo, Sharma Khalil reports. Japan's new flagship H-3 rocket was
ordered to self-destruct minutes after it lifted off for the first time. It was
carrying a disaster management land observation satellite that was equipped with
an experimental infrared sensor designed to detect North Korean ballistic
missile launches. This is a blow to the country's efforts to expand its access
to space and remain competitive. The H-3 has been designed to lift government
and commercial satellites into Earth's orbit and to take supplies to the
International Space Station. The Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador
has said his government is working with the United States to secure the release
of four Americans kidnapped in the northern city of Matamoros. Opposing drug
cartels have been engaged in a violent conflict in Matamoros for months. Will
Grant is in Mexico City. President Lopez Obrador went a bit further than his US
counterparts when he spoke at his morning press briefing. He said that the
Americans had been caught in a confrontation between two groups. He said that
they'd crossed the border in order to buy prescription drugs or medication,
something that's very common in US border states where coming into Mexico border
towns, the prescription drugs are available at a fraction of the cost. But
that's not something that's been confirmed by the US authorities so far. He said
he was hopeful that it would be resolved soon. The UN children's charity UNICEF
says the number of pregnant women and girls who are suffering from malnutrition
has soared by a quarter in the last two years in countries like Somalia,
Ethiopia and Afghanistan. UNICEF estimates that more than a billion women and
adolescent girls across the world are malnourished. It's urged the international
community to make food security a priority. Labour unions in France are today
stepping up their fight against President Emmanuel Macron's plans to push back
the age at which workers can claim a pension by two more years to 64. Most train
and metro services will be cancelled and many schools will be closed. Hugh
Schofield has this report from Paris. This is the sixth day of strikes and
protests since mid-January and unions say it will be the biggest one yet with
more than a million people turning out, they hope, for demonstrations in Paris
and other cities. With the government showing no sign of backing down on its
pension plan, the talk is of escalation and in the days ahead there will be
calls to extend the strikes in key sectors like power generation and gas
terminals. So far, for all the noise and sporadic disruption, the campaign has
caused little damage to the economy and in the meantime, the bill is proceeding
through Parliament. World News from the BBC. Canada's Prime Minister has
announced a security investigation into alleged Chinese interference in the last
two federal elections. Justin Trudeau said he would also be appointing an
independent rapporteur to make expert recommendations on combating foreign
interference. The move comes after intelligence leaks in the media about China
allegedly attempting to influence the 2019 and 2021 parliamentary polls. China
has strongly denied the claims. The British government is set to introduce new
legislation later today to deny any possibility of asylum and eventual
citizenship to those migrants who use small boats to get to the country. The BBC
understands that anyone using them to make the short journey from France will be
deported promptly. The Refugee Council says thousands of genuine refugees will
be treated like criminals. The Australian Transport Safety Bureau has released
an initial report into the deadly crash between two helicopters in January. It
blamed a breakdown in communication between the pilots. Phil Mercer is in
Sydney. The collision happened 23 seconds after one helicopter had taken off
from the SeaWorld theme park in Queensland and the other was coming into land.
Air crash investigators believe the pilot in the descending aircraft didn't hear
a radio call from his colleague in the departing helicopter. The sightseeing
flights at one of Australia's most popular tourist destinations were operating
in non-controlled airspace where pilots communicate using a designated radio
frequency. Brazil's justice minister and the country's tax department have
opened two investigations into the former president, Jair Bolsonaro. After media
reports alleged he tried to illegally import jewellery worth more than $3
million. The collections were given to Mr Bolsonaro during an official trip to
Saudi Arabia in 2021. He says he's being hounded over the gifts he neither
wanted nor received. BBC News. Thank you for that news and welcome to Newsday
from the BBC with Rob Young and Reedy Clabby. Coming up this half hour we've got
stories for you from Ukraine, Mexico and Cambodia. We'll also take a look at the
UK's plan to crack down on people smuggling via small boats crossing the English
Channel from France. And Isaac will be here with all your sports news including
Brazil's Neymar likely to be out of action for the rest of the season because of
an ankle injury. We begin with Ukraine and the city of Bakhmut which has become
the focus of the fight between Russian forces and Ukrainian defenders. Rumours
of its imminent fall have been growing louder by the day as the Russian
parliamentary group Wagner has sent waves of men into the fight. But in the past
few hours President Zdenzky has confirmed that his forces would be digging in
not rolling over. The Ukrainian leader said his generals want to strengthen
positions around the city. I told the commander in chief to find the appropriate
forces to help our troops in Bakhmut. There is no part of Ukraine about which
one can say that it can be abandoned. There is no Ukrainian trench in which the
resilience and heroism of our warriors would be disregarded. The occupier kills
for the very fact that we are Ukrainians. Yaroslav Trofimov is the Wall Street
Journal's chief international affairs correspondent. He's just been to Bakhmut
and told us about its significance. The city of Bakhmut which is a small city of
only 70,000 people before the war began has really been the focal point of
fighting in eastern Ukraine for the last several months. And that's where
Wagner, the Russian paramilitary organization, has been really trying to push
through Ukrainian defenses. And it is the only place along the entire front line
where Russia has managed to advance since last summer. So Wagner has been able
to seize about 40 percent of the area of Bakhmut as of now. They are now in
control of the entire eastern bank of the Bakhmutivka river that runs through
the city. And the Ukrainian forces there are in a very difficult position
because the remaining two paved roads into Bakhmut are under artillery control
by Wagner, which means that any movement there is extremely dangerous. And so
all the resupply and evacuations have to go through dirt roads. And this time of
the year, obviously, the soil is wet and nearly impassable for wheeled vehicles.
I spoke to a couple of Wagner soldiers, former prisoners, recruited in the
prison camps, who were captured in the last few days. One of them told me they
had one weapon for the three of them sometimes. You know, they're not giving
rations, but they are sent forward with infringing tools. And what they do is
they dig in. They dig the trenches for the next wave to come in, even if
everybody in the first wave is killed. And the small groups of five, six people
advance, then they put in machine gun positions, and then the next wave can come
in and move ahead. The Ukrainians don't have as much ammunition as Russians do.
In trying to regain land, the Ukrainians cannot afford the same tactic because
the Ukrainians do care about the lives of the soldiers, and they just cannot
send them to certain death the way Wagner does, with his penal battalions
recruited among the worst of the Russian criminals in prisons. So basically, you
know, Wagner has carved out his own state within the state. When Wagner's owner,
Evgeny Prigozhin, goes to these prison camps, he tells very straight that we
have our own separate laws from the Russian Federation. Russian Federation
doesn't have a death penalty. But we, Wagner, if you step back, you will be
shot. If you drink, you will be shot. If you take drugs, you will be shot. So
the soldiers of Wagner don't really have an option of retreating or fleeing out
of the fire because they know they will be killed by their own. And so it's
actually safer for them to go ahead under the hell of Ukrainian bullets. You've
been hearing Yaroslav Tromifilmov, who's the Wall Street Journal's chief
international affairs correspondent. We're going to turn to Mexico now, where
officials have found over 340 people in an abandoned lorry trailer in the state
of Veracruz. 103 of them were children. Well, for more, I've been speaking to
the BBC's Mexico correspondent, Will Grant. I asked him who these people are and
where they were travelling from. Well, the most shocking part of this was that
there was more than 100 unaccompanied minors in the back of this truck trailer,
more than 340 people altogether, mainly from Central America, some from Ecuador,
but all clearly migrants on the route north to the United States to attempt to
make it into the US. Many had colour-coded bracelets on their wrists to sort of
designate which people trafficker they were travelling with. And in essence,
they were very, very lucky. An abandoned truck left on a highway in some part of
Mexico can often spell the very, very worst situation for those trapped inside.
In this case, there was some ventilation. Apparently, there was some kind of
structure. There was like a second floor inside the truck trailer just to cram
as many people in there, as many bodies as possible to make the most money out
of them on that route north. They are very, very lucky to be alive. And when it
comes to their welfare then, they've been checked and that they're all healthy,
are they? They are now in Veracruz. They're in there. Obviously, the minors are
in the hands of the welfare services in the east of Mexico. There's nothing
major. I think there may have been people dehydrated, but fortunately, it does
seem that there's no major casualties or no loss of life, which was not always
the case. Only last year, I was in Texas, in San Antonio, where a trailer truck
was abandoned on a back road just outside San Antonio and 53 migrants died
there. And I returned to Veracruz, the state in which this happened, where three
members of the same family had traveled from and had lost their lives in San
Antonio in the back of that truck. So it is very, very common that when these
trucks are abandoned with so many migrants inside, so little ventilation,
certainly the youngest and most vulnerable are very lucky to have come out of it
unscathed in this instance. Well, given what you were saying about the frequency
with which migrants in trucks heading towards the United States do die, it makes
the decision by parents to send those more than 100 children unaccompanied
towards the United States through Mexico even more startling. Yeah, I mean,
potentially, they don't know exactly in which conditions they'll be traveling.
They just know that they've designated them, they've paid the money to the
coyotes, as they're called in Spanish, the people smugglers, and that they will
be taken along the way. But these are decisions taken often in moments of
desperation or making the calculation that life in, for example, Honduras or in
poverty in Guatemala is simply not worth remaining in that country for and that
the risk is worth taking. No, and what is likely to happen to this group of
people next? The likelihood is that they will be extradited back to their own
countries. They may get some kind of grace period. They may indeed, just by
surely sort of a humanitarian gesture, be given the opportunity to settle in a
Mexican state, Veracruz itself. I wouldn't be surprised if that happened. I've
seen instances where people in truck accidents, for example, have been told,
look, we're not going to extradite you, we're not going to send you back to
Central America. You can stay, but you have to stay in this state and find work.
And quite frankly, for most, that's simply no more attractive than returning to
Central America because those southern states of Mexico, Chiapas, Oaxaca, and so
on, and even out east in Veracruz, life isn't going to generate many more funds
in those sorts of places than they would back in Central America. The real goal
is to make it to the United States, be paid in dollars, and be able to send some
of that money home. The BBC's Will Granthair talking to us from Mexico City.
Well then, from the United States, we look now to Britain, where later today the
Home Secretary will unveil new legislation designed to reduce the number of
refugees and migrants arriving on small boats across the English Channel. Under
the bill, would-be Channel migrants would be removed from the UK, banned from
future re-entry, and barred from applying for British citizenship. It's been
criticised by some groups, but the British plan bears a resemblance to a new
American strategy by President Joe Biden for controlling immigration on
America's southern border. That plan will see special humanitarian routes
created for a limited number of people fleeing certain countries, such as
Nicaragua and Haiti. Let's hear from both of them. First, President Joe Biden.
Today my administration is taking several steps to stiffen enforcement for those
who try to come without a legal right to stay. Do not, do not just show up at
the border. Stay where you are and apply legally from there. It is unfair on
those who migrate here legally when others come here by cheating the system. And
above all, and above all, it is unfair on the British people who play by the
rules when others come here illegally and benefit from breaking those rules.
Well first you heard US President Joe Biden and that was Rashi Sunak, the
British Prime Minister. For more on these plans to control irregular migration,
we can hear from Susan Fretzke, a senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy
Institute in Washington, DC. For both governments, I think there's a keen
interest in trying to make the manner in which people are arriving more orderly
and more regular. There's a lot of concern about people arriving in ways that
are seen as chaotic and unsafe and dangerous. And there's an interest in putting
in place incentives to try to change that. I think there are some notable
differences, however. The policies that are being put into place in the UK don't
have some of the same measures that have been put in place in the US around
creating more larger lawful routes for some of the main groups of people who are
coming to come legally or to facilitate entry at official border crossings
points. I think you could argue that in some specific cases, maybe there's
evidence that the deterrence has changed the incentives that shape the way that
people move. But often what we see happen is that it then creates new incentives
that cause people to adapt in other ways that sometimes are equally as unsafe or
unpredictable for governments as well. So, for example, putting up a border
barrier or a fence, people continue to try to find ways to go around that. That
just creates new risks. We are in an environment that is in some ways more
challenging than the one that was at play when the 1951 Refugee Convention was
created. We no longer have a clear-cut Cold War situation that makes it clear on
what grounds people might be fleeing and makes it easier for publics to see and
understand the grounds on which people are fleeing. And at the same time,
mobility is more open and available to people in search of protection than it
was at any time in the past. And that makes a very complex operating environment
for governments. You have to try to maintain public support for the principles
of refugee protection and at the same time deal with these more and more complex
needs and complex situations whereby people are presenting at borders. That's
Susan Fretzke, a senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute in
Washington, DC. And really that story is all over the front pages of the British
newspapers today, as you may well expect. The kind of large government
supporting Daily Mail says the government will push human rights law to the
limit. And the front page of the Broadsheet, The Times, says the government
plans an annual cap on the number of refugees but also says that ministers are
bracing for a legal battle over their migration plans. Let's get some sports
headlines now. Isaac is here. Hi Isaac. Yes, big news coming out of Paris
because Neymar has been ruled out for the rest of the season as he looks to
undergo surgery for an ankle injury. He was taken off during a match in February
and his club PSG, Paris Saint-Germain, say the 31-year-old has suffered several
instances of instability in his right ankle over recent years and surgery is
needed to avoid a major risk of recurrence. In the Premier League, Brentford got
a 3-2 win over West London rivals Fulham. Striker Ivan Toni was on the score
sheet amid a bit of a cloud at the moment. He's accepted breaking the FA's
betting rules. And in NBA news, police in Colorado say they're investigating
Memphis Grizzlies star Ja Morant. After he posted an Instagram line in which he
appears to brand a chagrin at a nightclub, Morant has been suspended by the team
whilst the NBA is investigating as well. It's illegal in Colorado to possess a
firearm while under the influence of alcohol. Morant released a statement
apologising for his actions. Isaac, thank you. This is Newsday from the BBC
World Service. And that's where we'll say goodbye to the World Service and start
the day here on BBC Radio 4. Good morning, I'm Tom Sanders. It's Tuesday 7th
March, the birthday of Serenoff Fiennes, born on this date in 1944, in Windsor,
where the sun will rise this morning at around 20 to 7 and set at 5.50. The
Shipping Bulletin isn't too far off then at 5.30, the latest news, sport and
business. Meanwhile, striking a different note. Music education in the UK has
been in decline for years. We've actually seen an overall decrease in the number
of schools that are offering those qualifications. It's decreased by about 35%
over the last 10 years. But music plays an important part in our lives, from the
classroom. It's very good for the emotional wellbeing of children. To the
economy. We want to be doing as well as we possibly can do because this island
exports so much music across the whole of the world. I'm Soweto Kinch, a
musician, and I'm finding out what needs to be done to keep UK music alive.
Rethinking Music, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, starts this morning at 11.30. Now
it's a very good morning to Chris Fawkes. Hi Tom, good morning. And now the
shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast
Guard Agency at 05.05 on Tuesday 7th March 2023. There are warnings of gales in
Fisher, Jumbyte, Biscay, Fitzroy and South East Iceland. The general synopsis at
midnight. Low Fisher 983, expected Baltic Sea 975 by midnight tonight. The area
forecast for the next 24 hours. Viking, North Utsira, South Utsira. Northerly or
north-eastly 4 to 6, occasionally 7 at first in eastern South Utsira, becoming
variable 2 to 4 later. Squally snow showers. Good occasionally very poor.
Forties, Cromartie, 4th, Tyne, Dogger. North or north-west 4 or 5, occasionally
6 at first and 3 later. Squally snow showers. Good occasionally very poor.
Fisher, Jumbyte. North or north-west 7 to Severgale 9, decreasing 3 to 5. Rain
or snow, then snow showers. Good occasionally very poor. Humber. East 4 to 6,
decreasing 3 later. Snow showers. Good occasionally very poor. Thames. North-
west 3 to 5, veering north-east 2 to 4 later. Rain or sleet, then wintry
showers. Good occasionally poor. Dover, White. West or south-west 4 to 6,
becoming variable 3, then east 4 to 6 later. Rain or showers. Good occasionally
poor. Portland, Plymouth. West or south-west 4 to 6, becoming variable 3, then
cyclonic 4 to 6 later. Rain or showers. Good occasionally poor. Biscay, variable
2 to 4, becoming south-west 4 or 5, increasing 6 to Gale 8 later. Rain. Good
occasionally poor. Fitzroy, Soule. East 4 to 6, becoming south-west 6 to Gale 8
in Fitzroy. Rain or drizzle. Good occasionally poor. Lundy, Fasnet. Cyclonic 3
to 5, becoming east or north-east 4 to 6, occasionally 7 later in Fasnet. Rain
or wintry showers. Good occasionally poor. Irish Sea. North veering north-east
later, 3 to 5. Sleet or snow showers. Good occasionally very poor. Shannon.
Variable 2 to 4 at first in south, otherwise north-eastly 5 to 7, perhaps Gale 8
later in south. Wintry showers. Good occasionally poor. Rockall, Malin,
Hebrides, Bailey, Fair Isle, Faroes and south-east Iceland. Northerly or north-
eastly 5 to 7, occasionally Gale 8 in south-east Iceland and 4 elsewhere. Wintry
snow showers. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Light icing in south-
east Iceland. And the weather reports from the coastal stations for 0400. Tari
Automatic. North-east by north 4. 24 miles. 1004, falling slowly. Stornoway.
North-north-east 6. Slight drizzle and rain. 8 miles. 1004, now rising. Lerwick.
North by west 4. More than 38 miles. 998, falling slowly. Lucas. North-west by
west 2. More than 38 miles. 1000, falling more slowly. Bridlington. West-north-
west 2. 998, falling more slowly. Sundetty Light Vessel Automatic. West by south
6. 11 miles. 999. Jersey. South-west by west 5. 14 miles. 1002, falling. Channel
Light Vessel Automatic. West 5. 1000. Stilly Automatic. South-west by west 4.
Recent rain. 30 miles. 1002, falling. Valencia. North-east by east 4. 27 miles.
1001, now rising. Ronaldsway. North-west by north 2. 1001, falling slowly. Malin
Head. North-north-east 4. 16 miles. 1003, falling slowly. Here is the weather
forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, valid for
the following 24 hours, initiated by the Met Office at 0500. General Situation.
A cold front is currently spreading outbreaks of rain or sleet slowly southwards
across southern England, but will become slow moving over the English Channel
later today before returning north-eastwards during Wednesday. Further north, a
very cold and unstable northerly airflow will continue with snow showers
affecting many areas. Cape Rath, Taratre Head including Orkney. Northerly or
north-westly 4-6, occasionally 7 at first in north, backing westly or north-
westly 3-5 later. Snow showers. Squally at first. Good, occasionally very poor.
Rattray Head to Berwick-upon-Tweed. North-westly 4-5, occasionally 6 at first,
decreasing 2-3 later in south. Snow showers. Squally at first. Good,
occasionally very poor. Berwick-upon-Tweed to Whitby. North-west 5-6, decreasing
3-4. Snow showers. Squally at first. Good, occasionally very poor. Whitby to
Gibraltar Point. North-westly 4-5, occasionally 6 at first in north, decreasing
2-3 later. Snow showers. Good, occasionally very poor. Gibraltar Point to North
Foreland. North-westly 3-5, becoming variable 3 or less later. Rain or sleet at
first in south, otherwise wintry showers. Good, occasionally very poor. North
Foreland to Celtebill. Westly 4-5, veering northerly or north-westly 2-4, then
easterly or north-eastly 3-5 later. Rain or sleet at times. Moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Celtebill to Lyme Regis. West 4-5, veering north or north-
east 2-4, then east 4-5 later. Rain, sleet or showers. Moderate or good,
occasionally poor. Lyme Regis to Land's End, including the Isles of Scilly. West
4-5, veering north-east 3-4, then east 4-6 later. Rain or showers. Moderate or
good, occasionally poor. Land's End to St David's Head, including the Bristol
Channel. Cyclonic 3-5, becoming variable 2-4, then east 3-5 later. Rain, sleet
or showers. Moderate or good, occasionally poor. St David's Head to Great
Ormhead, including St George's Channel. North 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first,
veering east 2-4 later. Rain at first in south, otherwise sleet or snow showers.
Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. Great Ormhead to the Mull of Galloway.
North backing north-west 3 or 4, occasionally 5 at first, becoming variable 3 or
less later. Snow showers. Good, occasionally very poor. Isle of Man. North
backing north-west 3 or 4, then veering north-east 2 or 3 later. Snow showers.
Good, occasionally very poor. Loch Foyle to Collingford Loch. North 4 or 5,
backing north-west 3 to 5, becoming variable 3 or less later. Snow showers.
Good, occasionally very poor. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Kintyre, including the
Firth of Clyde and the North Channel. Northerly backing north-west 3 or 4,
occasionally 5 at first, becoming variable 3 or less later. Snow showers. Good,
occasionally very poor. Mull of Kintyre to Ardenham Oak & Point. North 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 at first, veering east or north-east 2 or 3 later. Snow showers.
Squally at first. Good, occasionally very poor. Ardenham Oak & Point to Cape
Wrath. North 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, becoming variable mainly north-
east 2 or 3 later. Snow showers. Squally at first. Good, occasionally very poor.
Shetland Isles. North 5 or 6, occasionally 7 at first, decreasing 3 or 4 later.
Squally snow showers. Moderate or good, occasionally very poor. And that
completes the Shipping Bulletin. I'll be back with the general weather forecast
in a few minutes' time. But for now, it's back to Tom. Thank you Chris. This is
BBC Radio 4, it's half past five on Tuesday 7th March. Good morning, this is
News Briefing with Tom Sanders. Far-reaching legislation aimed at stopping
asylum seekers crossing the Channel in small boats is being unveiled today.
Talks begin this morning to try to avert further NHS strikes in England. In
business, further industrial action is taking place in France over plans to
change the pension age. And in sport, Chelsea need to overturn a 1-0 deficit
against Borussia Dortmund to reach the Champions League quarter-finals. The Home
Secretary has accepted that the government's plans to stop migrants crossing the
English Channel in small boats push the boundaries of international law, and she
prepares to introduce legislation in Parliament today. It's expected the
measures will put a legal duty on Suella Braverman to remove anyone entering the
UK illegally. Labour and refugee charities have called the proposals unworkable,
but the Conservative MP for Dover, Natalie Elphick, welcomes them. What I'm
hoping to see from this package of measures is that we see more action taken to
stop those boats leaving France in the first place, more is done in terms of
managing the English Channel between the two countries, and that there's
strengthening of the returns. Talks begin this morning aimed at averting further
NHS strikes in England. The Health Secretary, Stephen Barclay, will meet unions
representing nurses, ambulance workers, physiotherapists and midwives, which
have all put industrial action on hold while negotiations are underway.
England's UK is calling for everyone with a prepayment energy meter to be given
the opportunity to have it removed for free. The charity says half a million
older households have these meters, which are more expensive than paying for gas
and electricity via direct debit, and can leave people cut off if they run out
of credit. Energy suppliers say the meters help make sure customers don't fall
into too much debt. Ukraine's President has instructed his military commanders
to find additional forces to boost the defence of the besieged eastern city of
Bukhmut. Russian troops have been bombarding it for months and now surround it
on three sides. In his latest nightly address, Volodymyr Zelensky said his most
senior generals all advised against withdrawing from Bukhmut and insisted no
part of Ukraine would be abandoned. More details have been released about plans
to overhaul the student finance system in England. From 2025, people aged
between 18 and 60 will be able to borrow up to £37,000 to improve their skills
or retrain, with the option to use loans at different times in their life. They
can't be used for further education courses or apprenticeships and it's not
clear how the scheme will be funded. Remote learners also won't qualify. But the
Education Minister Robert Halfon insists the new scheme will improve support for
lifelong learning. These adults will be able to train and retrain and the beauty
of it is they'll be able to do it at their own pace. So if you imagine it's like
a train journey, you have the end destination of a qualification but you can get
on and off that train at various stations along the way. Archaeologists have
discovered a Roman shrine beneath a former graveyard next to Leicester
Cathedral. A dig had been organised ahead of construction of a new visitor
centre for people coming to see the tomb of King Richard III, whose remains were
found less than 50 metres away. A decade ago. Matthew Morris, an archaeology
expert at Leicester University, says it's an exciting development. There's
always been a tradition that Leicester Cathedral was built on a Roman temple,
based on antiquarian discoveries in the 19th century. It's always been hard to
judge whether that was true or not up to now, but we're now finding a Roman
building that looks like it might have a shrine status to it. Tickets for the
Eurovision Song Contest go on sale this lunchtime, with fans able to attend nine
shows during the week of the competition in Liverpool in May. It's the first
time the event has been held in the UK for 25 years. That's the BBC News this
morning, now let's rejoin Chris Fawkes for a look at the weather forecast.
Thanks a lot Tom, and cold air continues to work its way southwards across the
UK behind a weather front, and that weather front at the moment is across the
south of Wales, the south midlands, east Anglia and southern counties of
England. So let's start with the weather story for these areas. Now we do have
outbreaks of rain, but on the northern edge, the back side if you like of this
weather front, the rain is turning to sleet and snow. It could bring one or two
areas local accumulations of a centimetre or two, other areas will just keep the
rain in the sleet. So a bit of a mixed weather picture, but that feature will
continue to affect southern areas of England where it stays really quite grey
and gloomy today, quite a damp kind of day. Across Wales, the midlands, east
Anglia, after that weather front has moved out of the way, we'll keep a lot of
cloud for the first part of the day, the afternoon brighter, but with a few snow
showers coming in, particularly to north western areas. Northern England, bright
enough with a mixture of sunny spells and some snow showers, the snow showers
mainly affecting areas near to the North Sea coast today. For Northern Ireland,
it's a day of sunny spells and snow showers, the majority of any snow showers
will be towards the north western counties, the east is relatively sheltered, so
seeing fewer showers and more in the way of sunshine. In Scotland, we'll see
further accumulations of snow, particularly across northern and eastern parts of
the country with some difficult travelling conditions. The south west, a very
cold frosty start to the day, but there should be plenty of sunshine. Now
temperatures around 3-5 degrees Celsius today. Overnight tonight, it looks like
we'll see some snow across southern England and perhaps south Wales, could bring
some localised disruption with a few centimetres of snow around. And then I have
to tell you about Thursday's weather, it looks like we could see some extremely
heavy snow affecting northern areas of the UK, 30-40 centimetres in places, that
is likely to lead to very significant disruption. Tom. Oh, it's good to have
that warning, thank you very much indeed Chris. Time for a look at the papers
now, and many of the front pages focus once again on the Government's bill to
deal with small boat crossings in the Channel. The Times reports that the Home
Office is expected to buy two former RAF bases in Lincolnshire and Essex, which
would house thousands of detained migrants before their removal, either to their
home nation or to third countries such as Rwanda. It quotes Government sources
who admit they can't say if the proposals are definitely compliant with
Britain's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights, and they
expect a legal challenge. The Daily Telegraph reports that the bill will
specifically state the new laws may not comply with the Convention, although
ministers believe they do. It says the Home Secretary, in promising to push the
boundaries of international law, is directly challenging European judges. The
paper adds that the legislation will give Suelle Brafman powers to counter
European court injunctions, such as the one which last summer blocked the first
deportation flight of Channel migrants to Rwanda. We will push human rights law
to the limit, reads the headline in the Daily Mail, which says the measures will
be rushed through Parliament and could be in place by the summer. Writing in The
Sun, Rishi Sunak says the plans will take back control of our borders once and
for all, while the Home Secretary tells the Daily Express the government owes it
to the British people to solve the issue of channel crossings. The Eye says some
Conservatives think the measures are unworkable because the UK lacks capacity to
detain tens of thousands of asylum seekers and may struggle to find countries to
take them when they're removed. It quotes former Tory Cabinet ministers who fear
the Prime Minister risks over-promising and under-delivering. The Telegraph
features another series of WhatsApp messages from Matt Hancock when he was
Health Secretary. In the latest exchanges, he's seen discussing a potential
threat to block funding for a disability centre in a Tory MP's constituency as a
way of forcing the backbencher to support new lockdown restrictions in England
in 2020. The paper quotes the MP in question, James Daly, who says he's
"...appalled and disgusted the project had been talked about in that way, but
confirms that no threat was made." A spokesperson for Mr Hancock said the
newspaper had given an entirely partial account of events driven by an anti-
lockdown agenda and what it was accusing him of doing never happened. The
Guardian reports that more than 1,000 so-called super-emitter sites pumped the
greenhouse gas methane into the atmosphere last year. The paper says the worst
single leak at a fossil fuel facility in Turkmenistan gave off gas at a rate
equivalent to running 67 million cars. Methane now accounts for a quarter of
global heating. And the Daily Mirror says reports that Boris Johnson has
nominated his father Stanley for a knighthood are beyond belief. Sunak must stop
this farce, it implores. The Independent website quotes unnamed Conservatives
who think the nomination is outrageous and ridiculous nepotism completely
without merit. Its headline reads, Arise, Sir Dad? And that's our look at the
morning papers. The business now and another round of strikes is beginning in
France in protest at changes to the state pension age. The details from Katie
Silver. Labour unions in France say they will try to bring the country to a
standstill today over President Emmanuel Macron's plan to push the age of
retirement back two years to 64. Trains, air traffic control and power
generation will all be impacted. It's the sixth day of nationwide protests since
January against the reform, which opinion polls show most French citizens
reject. British retail sales increased in February up about 5% on the same time
a year earlier. However, this was still much lower than inflation, which has
been running at 10%, indicating that the volumes people were purchasing actually
dropped. Retailers are facing volatile trading conditions as consumers cut back
on buying non-essential items. Later today, the chair of the Federal Reserve,
Jerome Powell, will address US lawmakers on the country's interest rate policy.
He is facing pressure, particularly from Democrats, over how high interest rates
are impacting those with less money. The Fed has raised rates eight times in the
last year to tame inflation, whilst trying to avoid falling into recession. On
the markets last night on Wall Street, the Dow Jones gained 40 points, ending at
33,431. And the FTSE 100 lost two-tenths of a percent, finishing at 7,929. In
Japan a short time ago, the Nikkei 225 was up four-tenths of a percent at
28,353. On the currency markets, the pound is trading at $1.20. Against the
euro, sterling is at 1.13. That makes a euro 89 pence. Sport Now and Chelsea
will be looking to reach the last eight of the Champions League this evening.
With that and the rest of the sport, here's Andy Barwell. Chelsea need to score
two goals in a game for the first time since late December if they're to be with
a chance of reaching the quarter-finals of the Champions League. The German side
Borussia Dortmund travel to Stamford Bridge after winning their last 10 games in
all competitions and with a 1-0 advantage from the first leg. Benfica hold a 2-0
lead over Club Brugge in the night's other Champions League round of 16 clash.
Brentford move to a point behind seventh-placed Fulham in the Premier League
table and with two games in hand after beating their West London rivals 3-2.
Connor Benn claims he's had suicidal thoughts after accusations of doping. The
welterweight fighter twice tested positive for a women's fertility drug last
year and faces a ban from UK boxing. He's constantly protested his innocence.
And in cricket, despite losing by 50 runs, England's white ball captain Jos
Butler said he had no regrets over team selection, giving teenage spinner Rohan
Ahmed his one-day international debut in the third game in Bangladesh. England
took the series 2-1 and they stay there for a T20 campaign. Finally a glance
back at some of the stories that were making news on this date in earlier years.
In 1965, dozens of civil rights activists in Alabama were injured by state
troopers using tear gas, whips and sticks to break up a protest in the town of
Selma. The state governor had ordered the officers to prevent the demonstrators
from marching to the state capital Montgomery. The incident became pivotal to
the civil rights movement. On the 50th anniversary, President Obama spoke at the
site of the violence. There are places and moments in America where this
nation's destiny has been decided. Selma is such a place. It was not a clash of
armies, but a clash of wills. A contest to determine the true meaning of
America. In 2018, the NME, one of the world's most famous music magazines,
announced it was seizing its weekly print edition. And in 2001, Hull University
announced it was offering a degree course in Yorkshire studies – the first time
a university curriculum had been devoted to the culture of a single English
county. And that is news briefing for this morning. Now on Radio 4, it's time
for Prayer for the Day with Rachel Redeemed. Good morning. I don't know if you
have a picture of me in your head. When I hear a voice, I conjure a face. I
wonder who you are seeing as the person behind these words today. Would you see
my teeth damaged in a skiing accident? Maybe you would spot that my right eyelid
conceals some very neat plastic surgery that corrects a droopy eyelid. It's fair
to say you wouldn't see my racing thoughts, big emotions and struggles with
executive function as I await a diagnosis for ADHD. Like many people today,
particularly women, who are exploring whether this diagnosis fits their
experience. I've appreciated seeing the sunflower lanyard spriking many collars.
I find it a helpful reminder that I shouldn't assume everyone is like me, for
one. We simply don't know what is going on for someone else, mentally or
medically. For example, if someone has a white stick, I'd try and give extra
space or offer my seat on public transport to an elderly passenger. When we can
see someone in obvious difficulty, most of us would like to respond with
kindness. However, with so many folks having unseen or undiagnosed issues, I for
one am not always as quick to offer grace for the interactions that test my
chronically low patience. I believe how I treat people matters, whether I know
their struggles or not. Maybe it just takes a moment of consideration and a
willingness to wait. Who knows, that may be the very thing that I could do for
someone that they needed that day. Lord, you know our weaknesses and struggles,
even experiencing the frailty of life on this earth. May we be more mindful of
your compassion and be conduits of your other-centred love to those you have put
next to us. Amen. That was Prayer for the Day with Rachel Redeems. On Farming
Today now with Anna Hill, why one farmer says that an indoor cow is a much
happier cow on his farm. Good morning. Hill farmers face a cut in their incomes
of 60% over the next year, something which one academic tells us will have an
impact on much of the countryside. First though, all week we're taking a closer
look at dairy. The traditional practice of letting dairy cows graze outdoors on
pasture for much of the year is still predominant in the UK. But it's estimated
that around 20% of UK dairy farmers keep some or all of their cows indoors all
year round. David Brooks milks more than 230 cows in Staffordshire on his
400-acre farm. He's recently invested in a new shed to house his animals indoors
365 days a year and says he's delighted with how beneficial it's been for both
him and his livestock. Bob Hockenhull has been to meet him. I'm standing in the
new cow housing shed at Lower Loxley Farm near Utoxeter. The 200-strong herd
have been milked earlier this morning. Most of them are now lying in their deep
sand beds looking pretty contented. The building is about 225 feet long, 80 foot
wide, with a high-pitched roof you could say almost cathedral-like and it's open
at the sides for maximum ventilation. With me is the farmer David Brooks who's
invested nearly half a million pounds in this new facility. David, why did you
do that? Well, we had to do it. We had to future-proof the business. In fact, we
were probably contracting because of the lack of investment. What this building
has delivered is a massive uplift in productivity and the cows are so content
they've actually increased milk production by something like 25%, although we
have increased the herd marginally by about 10%. So we've seen a massive return
on what we've actually invested. Before the new shed was built, the cows were
grazing in fields cut off from the farm by a busy A-road. Quite often, much to
the frustration of local commuters, there could be 100 cars held up by us moving
the 200 cows across the road. Our cows in the summer were spending about a third
of their day effectively on concrete being buffer-fed while they were waiting.
Now the cows can actually realise their full potential because they can leave
the parlour after the beds have been prepared and cleaned out. They can go lie
down and are happy. You've had problems with lameness in the past and problems
with cows falling down. How much has that been overcome by this new facility? So
the first thing we did with this shed, when we poured the concrete, we put in a
deep groove and that gives the cows confidence to stand on the concrete. And
also, by fortune of the site, we've got a slope on the floor of the building and
that allows the drainage of the urine. So the cows actually are in a cleaner
environment with cleaner, drier feet than they would have been in the previous
shed. And of course they haven't got muddy gateways to be going through or
horrible cow lanes and all the rest of it where lameness can happen. So it's an
easier environment to control lameness. You've got to bring in the silage here.
They would have grazed outside in the grass before. I mean, isn't it sort of
adding to diesel costs, the fact you've got to cart all the grass in here now?
We were already doing that with buffer feeding because they were spending so
long away from pasture. They were eating what they should have been eating at
pasture. So my cows, unfortunately, they'd go out to the graze and they'd go and
lie in it and poo in it and they wouldn't eat. So they'd be coming back, waiting
at the gate to come back to be fed. Whereas now, that grassland that they were
grazing, we can actually improve that and we've done a lot of that. So we're
getting better yields, potentially, from this grassland, which will give us
better proteins and energy from that silage for multi-cutting it. So the cows
will realise their full potential. Dairy farmer David Brooks at Lower Loxley.
Yes, he's not in the arches. He is real. Now, a leaked document is said to show
that the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, DEFRA, is lagging
behind its official target of implementing green policies to combat climate
change and that it's in danger of missing a legal deadline to submit a climate
plan for agriculture by the end of this month. DEFRA has faced criticism by the
government advisers on the Climate Change Committee. We'll hear from Lord Deben,
who chairs the committee, in a moment. First, I asked Toby Helm, political
editor at The Observer, which published the leaks, what they'd found. These are
documents from very senior civil servants in DEFRA, making absolutely clear
their concern that their own department and their own Secretary of State,
Therese Coffey, has not yet come up with anything like the detailed policy on
how to reduce carbon emissions that it should have done and that it needs to by
the end of March. One would have thought that there were many opportunities for
DEFRA to achieve these targets. Yes. And that's where the kind of politics of it
comes in. I mean, not only have you had a change of Secretary of State
reasonably recently, but you've now got Therese Coffey, who nobody really thinks
is particularly a champion of the green side of things, if you want to put it
that way. Although she would dispute that, I'm sure. Although she would dispute
that, I'm sure. Yeah. Within government, she's not seen as being particularly
interested in it. But there's also the wider politics of this, which is that,
you know, the Tory party draws a lot of its support from the rural community and
a lot of the things which they would need to do, such as decreasing herd sizes,
encouraging more tree planting, all those kind of things, would not be popular
with farmers who have already feel they've been messed around enough after
Brexit. However, the government would say, wouldn't it? It has a massive tree
planting programme. It has ELMS in place, the Environmental Land Management
Schemes, which encourage farmers to do a lot of environmental work for their
payments. So it's not as if the message of green farming isn't there. Is this
more of a problem of actually getting this down on paper and submitting it? I
think it probably is partly that. It's not just DEFRA, actually, that is being
criticised, also the Department of Transport and other policies. I think the
government as a whole is seen as way behind. I think there is simply the
impression one gets from what I read from the civil servants is that there
hasn't been sufficient focus on it. There hasn't been sufficient determination
within government. And in DEFRA's case, that is particularly bad. Toby Helm,
their political editor at The Observer. We asked DEFRA to respond. It told us it
does not comment on leaked documents. Well, the Climate Change Committee was set
up as an independent statutory body under the Climate Change Act to advise the
UK and devolved governments on emissions targets. Lord Deben is the committee
chair. I asked him if he agreed that DEFRA is behind in its targets of
implementing green policies. It just hasn't done it. If I may put it as bluntly
as that, this has not been the priority. I think it is the priority now, as far
as I can see. Therese Coffey has made it much more of a priority. But her
predecessors, right the way back to Liz Truss, have really not put this as the
key priority. DEFRA is behind. So what do you think is going wrong? Well, I
think it's much more what was going on. Of course, you blame the present
Secretary of State. But the real problem was that the Secretaries of State
before, because after all, she's only recently inherited this, the Secretaries
of State before simply didn't do it. And they didn't have that programme. And
that's why we told them back in June, we said to them, then you're nowhere near
meeting what you have to meet. And the law says that. What if they miss this
deadline then? Well, the courts can impose it, and the whole point about the
Climate Change Act is that it set up the Climate Change Committee. We report on
what the government has done. We give the government the targets. The government
then puts those to Parliament, and if they're accepted by Parliament, they
become our legal requirements, which is what has happened. And then we say
whether the government is meeting it. So the courts can impose that on the
government, which would be very embarrassing for it, and is the wrong way,
because the government should be finding the most cost-effective, the most
sensible way to reach the targets it set. Lord Deben there. Well, that greener
farming process we've just been discussing, and the payments under the
Environmental Land Management Schemes, or ELMS, is coming under close scrutiny,
especially by hill farmers. New figures from DEFRA show that incomes for upland
farmers are facing a massive hit, as payments under the new ELMS scheme do not
come up to the level of previous payments under the old EU system. The expected
income for upland farm businesses published by DEFRA for 2022-23 is just
£16,300. That's a 65% reduction. Hill farmers have always relied more heavily on
subsidies, and the EU system of paying per hectare underpinned their income. It
was hoped that post-Brexit the new Environmental Land Management Scheme would
pay farmers for providing public goods, such as carbon sequestration, wildlife
habitats and flood mitigation. But upland farmers say they're getting less money
for providing public benefits than lowland producers. Julia Aglianby is
Professor of Practice at the University of Cumbria. She told me first how the
changes to farming payments are impacting hill farmers. If you're producing for
nature, really that should be if you're producing great hay meadows or looking
after the climate, those benefits are the same whether they're produced in the
uplands or the lowlands. But the government has decided to set the payment rates
according to a system called income foregone plus costs. So that is the amount
of money that a farmer loses. If they're delivering for the environment, they
will lose some agricultural production. As a result of this approach, the rates
that are being paid in the uplands for pasture are £98 a hectare, while in the
lowlands they're £151 a hectare, even though the benefits from that management
for society are identical. Some would say in the uplands are worth even more. So
what we're finding is that farmers in the uplands are effectively being trapped
in less profitable businesses. We know that upland farming has always been less
profitable, but what we would have hoped and what had been promised by the
previous Secretary of State, George Eustace, is that upland farmers would have
great opportunities in this new green economy to deliver for society and be
properly rewarded for doing so. Unfortunately, that is not the reality of how
the payments are being structured. So this new system under Elms was supposed to
create a really conservation-minded sort of farming. Are you saying that because
farmers aren't seemingly going to get paid enough for doing that, that it won't
happen? Well, it's very unlikely. What is the incentive to change at the moment?
What we're seeing is some farmers are so disillusioned by the approach the
government is taking, they're actually intensifying their livestock enterprises
because that's the only way they can see to maintain their turnover. We know
turnover isn't equivalent to profit, but farmers are feeling very trapped where
they are at the moment because there's no alternative. Julia Aglianbi. In a
statement, DEFRA told us average farm incomes have been unusually high in the
last couple of years. However, looking back over the last decade, the forecast
for upland farm incomes in 2022-23 is not especially an outlier. It added, we
calculate payments using an income foregone plus costs, as this is the fairest
way to set payments. Farmers will also be able to earn payments for working with
their neighbours and taking action at higher levels. That's all we have time for
today. I'm Anna Hill. The studio manager was Nick Ford and the producer in
Bristol was Rebecca Rooney. And now, Tweet of the Day. Miranda Khrostovnikov
presents a bird which intrigued Darwin, the Galapagos Mockingbird. The isolated
Galapagos Islands are crucibles of evolution, as Charles Darwin demonstrated
with his famous finches. But the local mockingbirds also intrigued him.
Mockingbirds are thrush-sized, grey and white birds with long tails and a
remarkable vocal range. There are four species of mockingbird in the Galapagos
Islands, which probably all descended from a single migrant ancestor and then
subsequently evolved different adaptations to life on their separate island
clusters. The most widespread is the Galapagos Mockingbird, which occurs on many
islands and has adapted to a variety of locations by altering its menu and even
its breeding season. Most Galapagos Mockingbirds feed largely on nectar and
insects, but on the more remote rocky islands, where variety is limited, it pays
to be versatile. So in places, they will steal and break into seabird eggs and
even attack and kill young nestlings. They'll also ride on the backs of land
iguanas in order to prise ticks from the reptile's skin and will boldly approach
tourists for food. These remarkably resourceful birds aptly demonstrate the
theory of the survival of the fittest. Tomorrow morning, Sam West describes a
creature that makes strange sounds, reminiscent of a rolling snooker ball,
followed by a champagne cork being unscrewed. On 92 to 95 FM, 198 Longwave on
BBC Sounds and Digital Radio.