TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-00H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 11 o'clock. Rishi Sunak will hold talks with the President of the
European Commission Ursula von der Leyen tomorrow, with expectations high that
they'll agree a new deal on trade in Northern Ireland. Mr Sunak had earlier told
the Sunday Times he was determined to get the job done on Brexit. Speaking to
reporters tonight, Ireland's Prime Minister Leo Varadka welcomed the
development. Police have been given more time to question a man about the
attempted murder of an off-duty officer last week. Six people have been arrested
in connection with a shooting of Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell in
Olma. Nearly 60 people, including 12 children, are known to have drowned after a
boat-carrying migrant sank off the southern coast of Italy. The vessel broke up
in rough seas in the Calabria region. The former Environment Secretary George
Eustace has warned that shortages of some fruit and vegetables could last for as
long as three or four weeks. Supermarkets are limiting the sale of some produce
after poor weather disrupted harvests in the Mediterranean, and other factors
such as high energy costs and labour shortages hindered domestic production.
Israeli and Palestinian officials meeting in a rare summit in Yemen say they
will take steps to end a recent surge in violence. Tonight, Israeli settlers in
the occupied West Bank set fire to Palestinian property, killing one Palestinian
man after two Israelis were shot dead in their car. And in football, Manchester
United have beaten Newcastle 2-0 to win the League Cup at Wembley. Celtic
defeated their old firm rivals Rangers to claim the Scottish League Cup. They
won by two goals to one at Hamden Park. BBC News The storyteller and satirist
David Sederis returns to Radio 4. I thought I'd support the movement the way I
had become accustomed to, by donating money and then telling people I'd donated
twice as much. The author shares his incisive humour and social critiques of
modern life, and himself. The moment I got my first vaccine, I started thinking
of the coronavirus the way I think of scurvy. Something from a long ago time,
something that mainly pirates get. A new series of Meet David Sederis, your
Thursday evening comedy at 6.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sands. Something understood
will be taking gifts as its theme in half an hour, but first it's time to join
Clive Anderson. Yes, thank you, hello and welcome to loose ends in a time of
toil and mule at the top of all our political parties. The current leader of the
Labour Party says their previous leader isn't going to be allowed to stand as
their candidate for the constituencies represented for 40 years. Well, of
course, these days the Conservatives change their leaders almost as often as
Boris Johnson hosted parties in number 10. Liberal Democrats and Greens come and
go before many of us have committed their names to memory. Then last week the
redoubtable SNP leader, Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, suddenly fell
on her claymore. Two or three rivals have now emerged as front runners, all in
their 30s or 40s. Politicians in this country seem to be getting younger and
younger. In contrast to America, where the next presidential election is likely
to be contested between the same very senior citizens who fought each other last
time. Of course, now four years even older, read my lips or turn your hearing
aid on. I'm not breaking any election promises. I can't remember I left my car
keys. I don't recall what I said on the campaign trail. Well, we have youth and
experience in this week's loose ends with the actor Danny Sapani here to tell us
about his latest TV drama The Diplomat, which is to be found on the Alibi
Channel. And as it turns out, it was elsewhere all along. Comedian Alistair
Beckett King joins us to tell us about his first novel for children. I think
it's to be first of many and it's called Mudder at the Museum. We have music
from Yasmin Lacey and the distinguished actor David Morrissey is performing the
role of co-host today. Who are you bringing onto the loose end stage? Yeah, hi
Clive. Well, my guest today is the wonderful Tara Fitzgerald. She burst onto our
screens in the 90s in some of the best British movies and TV of that time. Hear
my song Brastoff and Kamma Maal Lorne amongst them. And then of course she
played Dr. Eve Lockhart in the hugely successful TV series Waking the Dead. But
she's currently appearing in Tom Kompinski's Duet for One at the Orange Tree in
Richmond and I'm looking forward to talking to her about this amazing revival.
We're all looking forward to that. Just looking at your face Tara as you are
being described. Checking every word. That's a worry isn't it? For those of us
doing the introduction. Let's start with Danny Sapani whose extensive acting
career has seen him in any number of roles on stage and screen. Recent years in
TV series such as Killing Eve, The Crown, Halo, Harlots, Penny Dreadful, Mother,
Father, Son as well as blockbuster movies such as Black Panther and Star Wars.
But Danny you're now in The Diplomat. It's a complex crime series set in
Barcelona in the world of diplomacy, dishonesty and international malfeasance.
But you're not a diplomat. You're a grieving and aggrieved father who we meet
early on in the first. Yeah, I play a guy called Colin Sutherland and he arrives
in Barcelona to identify his son who has died and we later find out through some
sort of mysterious situation and it gets darker and more mysterious as the
series goes on. You're clearly suspicious from the first. From the off. At the
beginning of the programme there's an actress Eva Akiladi who is apparently just
a witness trying to do her best to say well you know you may have had a bit of
coke, you may have been drunk, you shouldn't have been in the water. And oh well
I've only seen a couple of episodes but I'm doubting whether she's a reliable
witness. Well yeah, I mean you start to feel that there's more to the story from
the beginning and what you learn. It's quite interesting I suppose because what
do we know about our children really and Colin learns a lot about his son, some
of it true and some of it not so true and that leads to his suspicions. But
that's your storyline as it were. The series is set in the sort of consulate,
the British Consoles in Barcelona and they're dealing with all sorts of things,
unexpected deaths but also lost passports, drunken hen nights, all those things
they have to deal with. All those things that happen with DBNs, distressed
British nationals which is a kind of new thing for me to learn about. That's all
of us, isn't it? That's all of us pretty much, yeah. But it's a great vehicle
for all sorts of stories and as I said, Colin's stories, bands over the six
episodes but there's a new story each week that delights with all sorts of
interesting mayhem. So Sophie Rundell is playing the actual Consul. That's
right, Laura Symonds, she plays and she leads the show. And then there's Stephen
Cree who arrives who's a Consul General or something and from the off he looks a
bit dodgy as well. He can't help that. Yeah, but yeah, there's plenty of new
characters that come in that make it even more interesting and even darker and
more mysterious as we go along. Has anyone had to use Consular Services as well
abroad? I lost the passport once. In Bangkok, not fun. Well, I must say I got
arrested once and my whole team got arrested and the British Consul and High
Commission weren't particularly useful, I must say. Maybe that was just you.
Yeah, I've quite possibly. I mean they've seen your show. Just looking at your
CV, I assume you have filmed all around the world but I know Star Wars might
have been filmed in Elstree and the Black Panther might have been filmed in
various green screens but I was very lucky to hold an old piece of Star Wars kit
from the 1970s and it wasn't until I sort of held that old kit that I really
felt that I was in Star Wars because otherwise I was just surrounded by green
screen. Yeah, feel the force, literally. But yeah, I've been quite fortunate
recently. I've been in Turkey filming and also Atlanta which is where Black
Panther was filmed. But you're, I mean in that sense, made for life. Of course,
it looks as though you're going to have plenty of work anyway but you can just
go to fans conventions for Star Wars, for Black Panther, Halo, you're as well.
These are all things with big, big followings, obsessives. I don't know how else
to describe them. Yeah, yeah, I mean certainly the Comic Con thing is massive,
isn't it? All over the world. I did one in Preston once which was a bit of an
eye-opener. Preston as well, so it lacks Barcelona and Preston. Yeah, but
definitely there's a big, I didn't sort of plan it, you know, but the sci-fi
shows, you know, Halo is very much a sci-fi show as well. And Star Wars. And
Star Wars. Yeah, I mean it's huge but my part was a post-production so they
realised that there was something missing and I was very fortunate. You, you
were missing. I was missing. You've also done Indian films. I have. Now is that
different again? Incredibly different. And does that involve going to India or?
It does, it does. I've done three Indian films, one filmed in London and two,
one in Tamil Nadu and one near just outside in Kerala. What language was the
film being made in English or in Tamil? No, it was Mayalam. So I was speaking in
a different language. Everything in all the films in India get dubbed afterwards
so sometimes it might be your voice or sometimes it might be somebody else's. So
you're speaking English on the day? No, I was speaking English in the first film
but in the second film I was speaking a different language, one of the five
languages in India. I can't remember exactly which one. How come you got into
that? It was just, once I'd done the first film which was called Singham 2, so
it was the sequel to Singham 1. I played a villain in that but he was a British
speaking character and I got such a huge following after that film which, you
know, I was literally randomly picked by this director who'd seen my face and
said, that's my guy. And so, yeah. So you're a villain? I was playing a villain.
Your face. Screamed, screamed, I'm afraid so. And the character in the film had
the same name as I have, Danny, so I... That can't be a reason you can't cast
no. No, no, you never know. You know, it was funny on the pretty easy end. Yeah,
so, but that was an incredible experience. I got to work with Surya who is a
huge, I mean, I think Tom Cruise of Tamil movie making and yeah, and so I think
that led on to the second film. Anyway, The Dippermat begins on the 28th of
February at 9pm on Alibi with the all episodes available on Sky and Virgin as
well. Yeah, we can all look forward to watching that. Thank you very much for
coming. We have some music now. And I'm delighted to welcome to Lucentz Yasmin
Lacy who's about to release her first album, Voice Notes. And it's exciting,
Yasmin, but when you were on Lucentz before 2018, you'd already recorded your
first EP, Black Moon. Yeah. And you've been a couple of other EPs since then,
but tell us about this album. This album, yeah, so out on the 3rd of March and
it is a collection of stories, all my responses to what's been going on around
over the past couple of years, you know, usual themes, some heartbreaks, some
changes. Plenty of heartbreaks in it. Soul, would you call it? Love is wrong,
Yasmin. I would say Soul, music from the soul for the soul. But there's some
there's some bit of love is rocking there as well. Yeah. One of the tracks,
you're not doing this one now, but Bad Company, you tell us about your inner
demon. Yeah. She's called Priscilla. I've called her Priscilla. What's she like?
A nightmare. She's the bad side of you or the bad. Yeah, bad, but also, you
know, Priscilla is probably at the forefront of like, Priscilla is probably the
one that gets on stage. It's quite nerve wracking. She's got a lot more, you
know, about her. Is there a sort of a nicer version? Have you got Angelina or
somebody testing with Priscilla? Just Priscilla and me, basically. Just the two
of us. You're back living in London now. I think you were last time when you
were in Nottingham and you're doing and you're doing youth work for quite a
while. I was. Was there a sort of hesitation about going into music full time?
Yeah, I mean, I never I never set out to do music. And it wasn't like I hated my
other job. I actually really loved it. But then I just was like, OK, if I get
more work in one or the other, I'll just sort of go with that. I got quite a few
gigs and still getting up. So I'm here. Well, I was going to mention you've got
a gig at the St Pancrasole Church next month. It's hardly worth it. It's sold
out already, isn't it? Yeah. We'll mention the mothers afterwards. But what are
you going to be performing today? I'm going to be performing Pieces, which is
from Voice Notes. So it's you and you've got Sarah Tandy here to accompany you
on our piano. So where we go? Yasmin Lacy. When we first met, I thought I needed
love and to be loved by you. But there's something else that I'm seeking outside
you. Because there are still pieces missing of me. But they have fell through
the cracks when we became complete. And I thought it'd be different. I did never
thought I'd know love like this. Forever grateful that you flipped the scrapes.
Thought it'd be different. I did never thought I'd know love like this.
Sometimes love shows there are holes. Take other pieces on me that you fell in
love with. I didn't know loving you meant missing pieces of me sometimes. From
then till now I can't believe I've made strangers out of me, me and you. We fill
this house with love. The mortise made from us. And I know that nothing in this
moment will last. So here are some last words I hope you understand. And I
thought it'd be different. I did never thought I'd know love like this.
Sometimes love shows where there are holes. Thought it'd be different. I did
never thought I'd know love like this. Sometimes love shows there are holes. I
did never thought I'd know love like this. Sometimes love shows where there are
holes. Sometimes love shows where there are holes. Take other pieces on me that
you fell in love with. And I'll do the same. This was never a vein. No, no. No,
no, no. 3rd of March, Yasmin's playing Cross the Tracks Festival London on the
28th of May and Gotwood Festival Wales on the 11th of June. And that was that
sellout concert as well that's happening before that. Thank you very much,
Yasmin. That was lovely. But now let's come to comedian Alistair Beckett King, a
familiar face at the Edinburgh and other festivals on Mock the Week, another TV
program on YouTube and other sites on the internet. But Alistair, you're adding
another string to your bow with the publication of your first novel for children
featuring her character Bonnie Montgomery and her alter ego Montgomery Bonbon.
So first off, why children's book and why now? Well, I always say why be
unsuccessful in just one medium? Why not try everything? Yes. And see if you can
achieve mediocrity across the boards. What happened was, do you remember
Lockdown? Did that happen to you folks? Oh, yeah. Well, it was it was tough for
everyone. And most stand up comedians were tearing their hair out because we
travel around the country trying to make people laugh. And one of the things I
did was an interactive murder mystery on Twitter. So every day for a week, I got
my partner to do different 1930s hairstyles. And I played a variety of
suspicious characters who had committed a murder. Yeah. And an editor from
Walker Books got in touch with me and said, have you thought about writing for
children? Yeah. Which I know is not how you're supposed to get published. What
you're meant to do is you're meant to write a manuscript and then and then
carry, you know, carrying on your back. You meant to slog from building to
building with people slamming the door in your face. This is a more modern day.
You're putting stuff out there and people actually seeing it. Yes. Saying, oh,
that's that's that's that would work for children. Whatever you want. Yeah. This
stuff you're producing, it seems like children might enjoy it. Yeah. So the
central premise at the heart of this book is a small girl changes her look. Yes.
So she looks like a like a grown up detective. Exactly. So it's a bit like
almost Shakespearean that way. Thank you. Yes. You're the first person to
compare my writing to Shakespeare. The first of many, I hope. No, no, no. The
writing. But the concept where you see, you know, as you like it or something,
we accept the fact, oh, yes, she she looks exactly like she did when she had a
woman's frock on. Now she's got trousers on. Nobody can recognize it. It was the
first thing I said to the editor. I said, as in Jacobean drama, the disguise is
impenetrable in my writing. So Bonnie Montgomery is 10 years old and she's
brilliant at solving murders. But if you're 10 years old and a schoolgirl,
you're not allowed to get involved in murder cases. So she has to put on a big
mustache, a beret and a raincoat and do a sort of a steadily dodgy impersonation
of the actor David Suchet playing Poirot. And she passes herself off extremely
convincingly as the mysterious foreign detective, Montgomery Bonbon. And it's in
a museum called the Hornville Museum. Yes. Was that inspired by the Horniman
Museum? Well, I very legal reasons, I will say no. But the the Horniman Museum
does have its overstuffed walrus, which I'm a huge fan of. Yes. And in the
Hornville Museum in the book, Abilard Hornville, the founder, has put all the
animals together wrong. Yeah. So you may draw conclusions from that. I won't be
drawn on that issue. All right. So anyway, the lights go out in the museum, dead
body emerges and you put there's lots of jokes in there for the children and for
grownups, I think. I think it's a funny book. There's definitely jokes. It's
also I tried to do a fair play murder mystery. You know, there's an element of
locked room in there. So so I think, you know, there's a there's a good chance
people will at least solve some of the clues. You know, I want I want those one
I spotted early on, but not that it helped me solve the who was the murderer.
But there's a very easy clue that I put in. Yes, that's the one I keep the
children. I want to make sure the 10 year olds I'm there with them. I wanted to
make sure the younger readers and Clyde Anderson had something. So stand up, are
you back doing that now or do you think an author you'll be now and sitting at
home just writing books or? Oh, that would be lovely, wouldn't it? Just to never
leave the house. You're on tour. I think I am on tour. Yes. Now that it's legal
again, not just it wasn't just me who was banned. We were all banned. But now
that we're allowed, I'm out on tour. I'm doing stand up and stand up companies.
Fantastic. I love it. It's so different from writing books because when you're
doing jokes, the audience tells you like every 30 seconds if it's working. You
get feedback at the end of every sentence. Whereas with a kid's book,
especially, it was published before any children read it. So the actual audience
don't get to read it until like two weeks ago when it came out. And finally, I'm
getting kids saying, oh, I liked your book, which is so nice because up until
this point, authors really have to hold their nerve. People worry about what
should be in books for children, but murder is all right. Yeah, kids love a bit
of murder. I get to go to schools with it and say, who likes murder? And the
kids are like, well, are you worried it might be edited out? You know, with, you
know, Roald Dahl, his books have been popular with children for decades. And now
somebody's going through the fine tooth comb and taking out everything that
might some way offend somebody. I think the straightest thing about that is that
the edits are like they're just I'm sorry to whichever editor did it, but
they're just poorly written. I feel like sort of the brand for Roald Dahl is I'm
a horrible old man telling you a disgusting story. And I feel like there's a
limit to how much you can clean that up and still keep it. It is the USP of his
work. So cutting it out. It's odd. Yeah. You also do you do a podcast, Law Men.
And it's not about the law, but about folklore. L.O.R.E. Yeah. That's another
interest of yours, obviously. A huge fan of folklore, the sort of the weird.
What we do is James Shakeshaft and I'm my co-host. We don't do the legends that
have had the Hollywood treatments like Robin Hood and the Loch Ness Monster.
It's it's the things that you have to be in that town to have heard of, you
know, like, oh, there's a haunted well. There's a witch. There's a that street
has the ghost of a duck on it. Yes. That was beheaded by the villagers. It's the
really weird ones that haven't had the story editor come in and make it all make
sense. Is that true? There is there is a haunted duck. I can't remember
somewhere in the Cotswolds. There's the village. There was a duck. No, no, it's
near Stoke, but STOAK, not Stoke, Stoke, the other Stoke. There was a there was
a duck that was menacingly the villagers. So they cut his head off and then it
came back as a ghost and continued to menace. That is brilliant. It's like a
zombie duck. Yes. Alistair Beckett King, thanks for coming. Murder at the
museum. His book illustrated by Claire Powell. Well, that's out now. And it's
one for 10 year olds and upwards. Eight to twelve. Eight to twelve. Eight to
twelve. OK. All right. Over to you, David. Thanks, Clive. Tara Fitzgerald is no
stranger to playing a musician. In the groundbreaking British film, Brass Off,
she played Gloria, the girl with the flugelhorn who shook up the grimly, colory
brass band, not least of all distracting you, McGregor, from his trumpet
practice. But now she's giving a tour de force performance as Stephanie Abrahams
in Tom Kipinski's duet for one at the Orange Tree Theatre here in London. Tara,
welcome to the show. Thank you, David. So tell us I saw the show the other
night. It's fabulous. But tell us a little bit about Stephanie and who she is
and what happens to her at the start of the play. Yeah, so it's it's a play that
was written by Tom Kipinski, as you said. It was written in the 80s and for
Francis de la Tour. And Stephanie Abrahams is a virtuosic violinist, but she has
contracted multiple sclerosis. So her ability to play her instrument has been
taken away. And she her husband thinks it's a good idea for her to go and get
some counseling from a psychiatrist. So the play takes us through six sessions
with the psychiatrist and her resistance, her initial resistance to the whole
process, I think is is how you start. Maureen Beattie plays the wonderful
Maureen Beattie therapist. It's quite an unusual setup because, you know, we're
used to therapists being sort of touchy feely and very sort of, you know, sort
of, you know, come in and tell us, but she's quite combative, isn't she? Yeah,
she's great. Yeah. And and that as an audience is quite surprising that she
takes her on. Yeah. I mean, how does that feel? Well, I mean, you know that it
was written originally for a man. Right. And this is the first time it's been
it's been played by two women. So immediately that gives it something. It does.
It really does change the dynamic. Yeah. And the research that they're both
undertaking into sort of their histories, you know, their parents automatically
the dynamic is different again. But I think for Stephanie, the combativeness is
a necessary approach. I think that's probably her reading of her character. I
mean, she's so in denial or locked off or unaware or not in touch with her
feelings and and actually very reluctant to to engage. So she's being challenged
about her actual condition. Not about I mean, her actual condition is true. So
but her acceptance or lack of acceptance for her. Her attitude towards. Yeah,
her attitude towards it is definitely because the other thing that comes out,
which is wonderful, is the fact that here here is someone who is, you know, the
joy of her life, which is playing the violin, has been taking away from her. But
the therapist wants to mine her acceptance and nonacceptance around it. And that
becomes about her relationship with her husband, her relationship with her
father and mother and her history of how she got there. And I think that's
what's wonderful about the play is the fact that, you know, she has this illness
that could take away something. Yeah, she loves. Yeah. The therapist is trying
to build her back up again. Yeah, exactly. So I think there's a sort of that
approach is this that destruction to reform kind of approach. And obviously it
deals with the grief cycle, you know, or the the denial cycle or whatever it is.
But I think the reason the play lives, as you say, and works so well is because
actually the M.S. is a side. Yes. It's not really about that. It's about the
fact that she is losing the thing that she lives for. And she is an artist and
she can't, you know, whatever type of artist you are, if you're not able to
create, you lose that possibility. She cannot see anything else for her. This is
the thing you do. This is the thing, you know, you can give, you know, you're
you're able to to bring something different, maybe change the way somebody
feels. If you can't do that, then then what is your purpose? And she can't she's
not a polymath, you know, she can't see what else she might be able to do. Is
this reflecting the Jacqueline Dupree story with her question? Yeah, it is. And
I think it was. Well, originally, everyone believed it was written based on her
life. And subsequently, I understand he might have said it wasn't exactly. But
the the parallels are so. Yes, very much. Strong. I mean, she was with Baron
Boyman. My my character in this is with a comparable conductor, composer. So,
you know, I think and she has MS and she, you know, she's young. Obviously,
quite quite young. Yeah. Because also has children. The whole thing is about
children as well, isn't it? Because she doesn't have children. So it's that
thing of like the putting everything into your craft. Yes. And sacrificing your
young mother life. I mean, and therefore motherhood. Yes. I mean, it was so
rich. I mean, what do you I mean? It's quite a daunting prospects from just the
technical point of view lines wise. Yeah. But then are you meeting classical
musicians? Are you looking at MS sufferers? Are you are you doing that? I did. I
did all that. Yeah. I mean, it needed it really needed it. Yeah. It's a it's a
chunky great thing. You know, and I I didn't want to do it a disservice at all.
You know, it's to me, it feels quite an important piece. Peace and important
play. Yeah. And and perhaps one that hasn't fully been realized yet. Yeah. When
it was first done with Francis, it was played for a year. That's right. I mean,
could you imagine yourself doing it for that? I mean, she must have such
stamina. Do you really? I mean, it wasn't. But I mean, you know, you never feel
that watching it. But afterwards, when I was traveling home, I thought, God,
you're doing that every night. And it's so not just technically, but emotionally
what you give every night is unbelievable. I mean, also the fact is, it's in the
round. Right. And it is just us sat focusing on each other, you know, in this
sort of moving stage situation, this dialogue, very intense. You come off for
seconds to change a top and go back on again. You know, so it's it's very. And
we have a violinist in the play as well. Isn't she wonderful? So there's a
wonderful during the scene change, there's this wonderful sort of violinist who
comes on a place and you look at her. And we know that there's the connection
between you and the music. It's a fantastic play. It's a wonderful performance.
It's at the Orange Tree. It's still to the 18th of March, I think. So I urge
everyone to get down there because it's fantastic. Thanks, Steve. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, David. And Tara Fitzgerald. That's the loose ends tied up
for another week. If you just missed the program, if you want to hear it again,
it's waiting for you in the treasure trove. That is BBC Sounds, including
interviews with Felicity Kendall and Mark Steele from a couple of weeks ago. But
thank you to this week's guest, Alistair Beckett King, Danny Sapani, Yasmin
Lacey, David Morrissey and Tara Fitzgerald. Today's producer is Suki Firth, the
studio manager of Gail Gordon and Mike Millam. Next week, my guest will include
Richard Curtis and Ben Bailey-Smith. But for me for now, goodbye. Loose Ends was
presented by Clive Anderson. And if you'd like to listen to any of the recent
music performances on the show, you'll of course find them on BBC Sounds.
Explore the world of arts and culture on front row. The atmosphere changes, the
hair starts to stand up on the back of your neck. The biggest news and
interviews. It was an absolute dream of mine to perform on a stage. Alongside
live discussions, debates and the latest reviews. She's a series of contrasts,
which I thought were quite fascinating. I loved it. I can't recommend it enough
because it's so thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom
Sackliffe, for Front Row. You are a national treasure. No. Live every Monday to
Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you can listen to past episodes on BBC
Sounds. Now on Radio 4, it's time for Something Understood. And John McCarthy is
considering the pleasures and pitfalls of giving gifts in a programme originally
broadcast in 2014. Imagine you're asleep. It's Christmas Day and it's also the
morning of your birthday. Your partner has long ago slipped out of bed and is
now busy assembling a small orchestra on the stairs of your house. 50 musicians,
including trumpets. And so, oblivious to the kerfuffle which has preceded this
moment, you wake to hear this. Your partner's birthday gift to you. Well done to
Richard Wagner, who must surely get top marks for the most romantic, sumptuous
and beautiful birthday gift ever given. His Secret Idyll, which he wrote for his
new wife, Cosima's Birthday, in 1870. There's clearly an art to giving gifts and
it's this skill that, in the end, is a very important part of the work. There's
clearly an art to giving gifts and it's this skill that, at first glance, Mrs
Wilcox in E.M. Forster's Howard's End appears to lack, but one that Margaret
Schlegel can apparently help with. I thought we would go to Harrods or the
Haymarket stores, said Mrs Wilcox rather hopelessly. Everything is sure to be
there. I'm not a good shopper. The din is so confusing and your aunt is quite
right. One ought to make a list. Take my notebook then and write your own name
at the top of the page. O, hooray! said Margaret, writing it. How very kind of
you to start with me. But she did not want to receive anything expensive. Their
acquaintance was singular rather than intimate, and she divined that the Wilcox
clan would resent any expenditure on outsiders. The more compact families do.
She did not want to be thawed to 2nd Helen, who would snatch presents since she
could not snatch a young man, nor to be exposed like a 2nd Aunt Julie to the
insults of Charles. A certain austerity of demeanor was best, and she added, I
don't really want a yuletide gift, though. In fact, I'd rather not. Why? Because
I've odd ideas about Christmas. Because I have all that money can buy. I want
more people, but no more things. I should like to give you something worth your
acquaintance, Miss Schlegel, in memory of your kindness to me during my lonely
fortnight. It has so happened that I have been left alone, and you have stopped
me from brooding. I am too apt to brood. If that is so, said Margaret, if I have
happened to be of use to you, which I didn't know, you cannot pay me back with
anything tangible. I suppose not, but one would like to. Perhaps I shall think
of something as we go about. Mrs Wilcox surely does think of something truly
wonderful to give to Margaret, her house, Howard's End. On the face of it, this
might seem to be a perfect gift, but it's one that brings trouble in its wake,
unleashing a storm of jealousy and family feuding. How careful one has to be.
I'm on a mission, a shopping mission. I want to get someone a present, a gift.
She's a relation who I knew very well when we were children, but I haven't seen
for ages, but we're having a reunion in a couple of weeks' time, so I want to
get her something special. But what? The trouble is, I don't really know her
tastes now, and I don't want to get her something that she doesn't like. I'd
really like to get her something that she adores, but what shall I get? So I'm
going to go out and look around various shops and market stores and hope for a
bit of inspiration. Mission so far unaccomplished. I'm still trying to find the
present for my relation I haven't seen for a long time. So I've decided that the
best thing is to go back to basics and write a list. Top of the list, books.
Could be music, CD or something, or DVD, a film. Perfume, soaps, nice things. I
don't know. I think I need another walk with more inspiration. Perhaps I need to
get inside some shops and property. Maybe if I give myself a deadlobby, I could
help. I guess as we get older we learn to mask our indifference to certain
presents or disappointments a little bit. Just a couple of years ago, a little
nephew was presented by his beaming grandma with a big box carefully wrapped.
Once he got through the wrapping and into the box, he looked glumly at her and
said, well, that's exactly what I didn't want. We can probably all remember
really, really hoping for one particular present to come through. One Dog and
His Boy by Eva Ibertson Right up to the last minute, Hal went on hoping. He
would open his eyes on the morning of his birthday and hear a snuffling noise
outside the door and the dog would come running in. Sometimes the dog was brown
and fluffy. Sometimes it was white with a smooth coat. Hal didn't mind what it
looked like. It would be alive and it would belong to him and it would be there
when his father was in Dubai and his mother was out with her friends and he was
alone in the house with the maid who changed every month and was always so
homesick and so sad. But the phantom dog remained the phantom. Nobody scratched
on the door when Hal's birthday came and the sound of barking which made Hal's
heartbeat fast turned out to be in the street. Hal dressed and went downstairs
where his mother waited beside the breakfast table piled high with parcels.
Hamleys was not the best known toy shop in London for nothing. They had sent the
latest Xbox game and the new board game and a laser gun and a radio controlled
metal detecting car. Harrods had sent an iPod and a giant chemistry set and a
Roboquod. Now are you happy? Asked his mother watching him as he opened his
parcels and he said yes he was and she told him that his father would be back
that evening and would bring him something from the airport. So Hal took his
presents upstairs and played with them and in the afternoon the van arrived with
the party tea and the birthday cake. Then the friends came only they weren't
really his friends and played with his toys and broke the metal detecting car
and tipped the chemistry set on the floor. If I had a box just for wishes and
dreams that had never come true the box would be empty except for the memory of
how they were. But there never seems to be enough time to do the things you want
to do once you find the room. I've looked around enough to know you're the one I
want to go through time. Time in a bottle which Jim Croce wrote as a gift for
his unborn son. The song turned out to be a hugely poignant gift as Jim was
killed in a plane crash when his son Adrian was only two. I suppose we can't
always know how significant our gifts might become. Even a token present can
take on huge emotional meaning as life moves on. One of the best presents I ever
got particularly as a child was when my dad had been away on a business trip and
he sometimes came back with presents for my mother, brother and I but not always
but on this occasion he came back and I remember it was late at night we'd been
allowed to stay up late to welcome him home and he handed out these presents and
mine was this fabulous cowboy pistol. I remember it to this day it had white
handles, a white grip and this long black barrel and I just thought it was
fabulous. I'm realising too that not only do I want to get my relation, a
present that she'll love, hopefully cherish, can use etc etc and enjoy but I
also wanted to think well of me for having got it and she'll say well John that
was really clever, how marvellous you are. I want to walk like I'm the only
woman on earth and I can have my pick. I want that red dress bird. I want it to
confirm your worst fears about me, to show you how little I care about you or
anything except what I want. When I find it I'll pull that garment from its
hanger like I'm choosing a body to carry me into this world through the birth
cries and the love cries too and I'll wear it like bones, like skin, it'll be
the goddamn dress they bury me in. Okay maybe not something to wear, maybe that
would be courting disaster. Am I ever complicating this? I think I'm one of
those people, probably like a lot of men, who are not very good at shopping,
don't enjoy it, but I do get excited looking towards someone's birthday or
particularly at Christmas time when there are often lots of presents to get to
lots of different people, hoping that I'm going to get something really special
for them. Speaking of which, there's a sale on in this shop, it looks rather
interesting. I'm not helping with my mission to get the relation something but
nice jackets. My head is the apple without a recall, My heart is the house
without any door, My soul is the palace wherein he may be, He can unlock it
without any key. I Gave My Love An Apple, sung by Louise Jordan I hope I know
the cultural issues around gift-giving in this country, but when travelling
there are all manner of things to consider. One needs to be aware of social and
religious circumstances so as not to offend. Flowers, a simple and safe bet I
always think, are a major risk it seems in some parts of the world,
Chrysanthemums, for example, being widely associated with death. In Japan the
presentation, the wrapping and the expressions used when giving the present are
as important as the gift itself. Wherever you are it comes down to getting it
just right. All in all trying to be nice is a bit of a minefield. Sometimes our
gift-giving is transparently straightforward but it's also possible to be
manipulative when we give. Good Gifts by Dorothy Nimmo He gives her a black lace
bra, her heart swells, she fills the sea cup. He gives her a bottle of champagne
costing 24.50. He has got a bargain. He gives her a basket of strawberries. Open
wide, he says gently, she opens. He gives her a smooth round bloodstone to wear
around her neck. So cold. He gives her a little house. All day long she cleans
her fingerprints from the paintwork. He gives her five gold rings. One in her
ear, one in her nose, one in her nipple, one in her navel, one in her finger. He
takes a fine gold wire and threads it between. Ear, nose, nipple, navel and
finger. He twitches the end. She dances. Open wide, he says gently, she opens
her nose, one in her nose, one in her nose, one in her nose. Open wide, he says
gently, she opens her nose, one in her nose, one in her nose, one in her nose.
Open wide, he says gently, she opens her nose, one in her nose, one in her nose,
one in her nose. Mourn, Children of Israel, a chorus from Carissimi's oratorio,
Jephthah. The great warrior of the Old Testament vows to God, if you give the
Ammonites into my hands, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me
when I return in triumph from the Ammonites will be the Lord's and I will
sacrifice it as a burnt offering. Tragically, it was his daughter who came out
first to meet him. A reminder to us all to be careful what gifts we might rashly
promise to others. Gift by Tamim Al-Bargouti My life is a gift given to me on my
zero birthday. Today I pulled out the ribbon, unwrapped the box and found lots
of things ordinary, but also wonderful. A watch of gold and of gold is every
hour in one's life. A jack in the box which makes you laugh or scares you to
death, it depends. Two beautiful baby dolls, the first a toy, the second is not.
A prisoner's crown and the shackles of a king. I also found the jack of spades,
you turn him upside down and he stays the same. I found books. I found a long
videotape labelled 50 years of conflict between Zionists and the Arabs. I found
hell in an ink pot. I found heaven in an ink pot too. I found an Arab horse on a
race track covered with glue. I found a stove with no flames. At the bottom of
the box I found a white card with my name on it. The rest has not yet been
written. I did not know what to do with all these things. Oh God, thank you. But
why the trouble? I put them all back in the box, I closed it, wrapped it, tied
the ribbon. I threw it skywards and up it went. The gift turned into a host of
flying dumps that I will follow forever. Why did I do that? I really do not
know. Then there's the matter of how to receive a gift. Billy and Peggy have
worked alongside each other for years in a chip shop. Whilst Peggy was dreaming
of winning the lottery, Billy has been saving up and bought her a beautiful
ring. He's proposed to her, she hadn't seen his love coming, thinks the ring he
offered was worthless and flung it into the sea. Isn't it easy to sometimes have
set ideas and not see what's on offer right in front of our eyes? Dream on Peggy
Bateman, dream on Peggy Sue, of sunsets and of sports cars as you smile along
the queue. Dream days to months and months to years in reveries of luck, but
never for her dreaming did her numbers once come up. So as she was cleaning fish
one day with a slit from tail to jaw, something slithered through her fingers
and fell onto the floor. She took it over to the sink then and she washed the
shining thing. Bright diamonds and bright sapphires set in a golden ring. It was
one in a million, one in a million, the chances of one being a million. Oh Billy
love your rings come back and underneath this light I can see it's made of pure
as gold. The stones are shining bright. Oh and Billy stood beside her with a
smile like the sun. He put it on a finger and he said Peggy Sue you've won. Sell
the ring and taste the freedom you dreamt of all these years. He kissed her then
and as they kissed they could taste each other's tears. Billy go back to your
frying and sing me love is blue. You're kindly and you're comforting. I'd rather
stay with you. It was one in a million, one in a million. When the chips were
down it was one in a million. Chris Wood singing Hugh Lupton's words in One in a
Million. A story of chance, love and how to receive a gift. Alexander McCall
Smith writes gracious acceptance is an art. We think that we have to learn how
to give but we forget about accepting things which can be much harder than
giving. Accepting another person's gift is allowing him to express his feelings
for you. Here's A Blade of Grass written and read by poet Bran Patton. You're
indignant. You say it's too easy to offer grass. It's absurd. Anyone can offer
anyone a blade of grass. You ask for a poem. And so I write you a tragedy about
how a blade of grass becomes more and more difficult to offer. And about how as
you grow older a blade of grass becomes more difficult to accept. It's a lovely
moment when you think that's it. That's exactly the right present for this
person. But it might not be. And what might that say about you? Are you putting
too much of yourself, your own taste, for instance, in thinking that he or she
might like to wear this or that? I've sought salvation in a bookshop. Everybody
likes reading. I'm bound to find the right book. However, I realise I'm
outstanding in the history section. I've been browsed through the travel
department. Two areas that I find particularly interesting. Would my long-lost
relation be remotely interested in these areas? I don't know. That looks
interesting. What's that one over there? It's not the present I was looking for.
I got that from my daughter, but I was looking for a present for an older
person. Anyway. Thank you very much indeed. Thanks. Bye now. Thank you. Bye.
Bye. It hasn't been a complete disaster. I've seen one or two things that I
rather fancy for myself that I might come back and get another time. I've got a
book with my daughters and that's good. Just not quite what I set out for. Maybe
I should stop focusing on things. What about an event? Something to do. Cinema
tickets, theatre tickets. Going out for a nice meal. Flowers. It just keeps
getting round and round in my head. The end of César Franc's Violin Sonata,
which the composer wrote as a wedding present for the virtuoso violinist Iza E.
That ends tonight's Something Understood About Gifts, which was presented by
John McCarthy. The readers were Fraser James, Rachel Atkins and Brian Patton.
The producer was Rosie Bolton and it was a Whistle Down production for Radio 4,
originally broadcast in 2014.