TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at Midday. British military intelligence says Ukrainian forces
defending the eastern city of Bakhmud are facing increasingly strong pressure
from Russian forces. Defending the city would be a rare battlefield success in
recent months for Moscow. Our diplomatic correspondent James Landale has been
monitoring developments from Kiev. The Institute for War, which is an
independent US research group that looks at open source data and satellite
communications, they now say that the scene is set for Ukraine to carry out what
it calls a controlled fighting withdrawal. What we're seeing here I think is
clearly an evolution in a battle for this city that has taken place over the
last seven months at the cost of many, many thousands of lives. Bakhmud's deputy
mayor, Alexander Matchenko, said that there had been fighting on the streets but
that Russia had not taken control. He also explained that measures had been
taken to try to support the 4,000 civilians still living there. It is very
unsafe in the city and the entire population that is staying there right now is
living in the shelters. There's no water or gas or electricity and we have given
heaters to everybody who stays in the city so that we can support the local
population. Unite has defended not joining other health unions in suspending
strike action by ambulance workers planned for England next week. Unison and the
GMP called off their walkouts after the government agreed to reopen pay talks
for both the current and next financial years. But Unite rejected that approach.
Oneka Saab is from the union and says that the government's expectations for the
talks are unreasonable, including the idea of workers being offered a one-off
payment this year instead of an actual pay rise. It doesn't resolve the dispute.
It's not going to resolve the long-term problem in the NHS. And you don't start
negotiations like this. What you do is you say, this is what we want to talk
about, this is what the other side want to talk about, and then you go in. But
you don't say you are not allowed to talk about this and you must only discuss
this. The head of the UN's nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, who's in Tehran,
says he's had constructive meetings with Iranian officials after inspectors
detected uranium enriched to near weapons grade level in the country. He said he
hoped that such talks could pave the way for important agreements. Diplomats say
Mr Grossi hopes to persuade Iran to increase its cooperation with UN inspectors.
Police in Australia say they've made what's thought to be the country's biggest
ever drugs bust. In a joint operation, American agents seized two and a half
tonnes of cocaine off the coast of South America in November and replaced it
with fake packages they could track. Twelve people have been arrested trying to
retrieve the cargo near Perth. The police commissioner for Western Australia,
Cole Blanch, said it had been a complex operation. This was an extraordinary job
and the job's not over because we say we go after those who supply these drugs,
who organise these drugs to be distributed throughout our entire community, not
just Western Australia. A cross-channel ferry which suffered a fire in its
engine room yesterday afternoon has docked in Calais after being towed there
overnight. The 94 passengers and 89 crew could finally disembark from the Isle
of Innisfree. Its operator, Irish Ferries, said it would launch a full
investigation. And one of Hollywood's most familiar supporting actors, Tom
Sizemore, has died in hospital in California. He was 61. His personal life was
troubled. He had drug problems and served time in prison for domestic violence.
On screen he played hard-boiled characters in crime dramas, war films and
westerns, among them True Romance, Wyatt Earp, Devil in a Blue Dress and Heat.
BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Now it's time for Moneybox with Felicity Hanna.
Hello. It is a really tough time to be a renter. Moneybox has learned that rents
are going up but the number of rooms being advertised is going down. And not
everybody rents but everybody eats and the cost of food is climbing too. We'll
be digging into our shopping baskets to see where the hikes hit hardest. Plus
families of young people with learning disabilities say they're disappointed
with a new ruling about how they access their child trust funds. But first,
there has been a lot of speculation that the current energy price guarantee is
to be extended beyond April 1st. Now remember, that's the government scheme that
has been keeping a typical household energy bill to around £2,500 a year. If
there is no announcement, bills are set to rise to about £3,000 for a typical
home. But some energy suppliers say they're expecting the current guarantee will
be extended for a further three months. This morning, Emma Pinchbeck, the Chief
Executive of Energy UK, which represents suppliers, said the sooner they have
confirmation of this, the better. This is about making sure customers get as
much notice as possible and then for us making sure we can do things like
calculate direct debits correctly, give people enough notice, get our systems
ready. So as much notice as possible would be great from the Chancellor if they
are doing this for sure. Well, Ellen Fraser is an energy analyst at the
consultant firm Beringa and joins me now. Ellen, good afternoon. Hi. What would
this mean then for people's bills? Well, I think it's a really positive thing if
the government is making noises about holding the energy price guarantee at
£2,500 per customer. We are very frightened as an industry about the impact of
that going up to £3,000 given the number of additional people who will start to
struggle to pay their bills. So it's a positive piece of news. I think we need
to be careful though that something called the EBSS, the Energy Bill Support
Scheme, which was £400 over winter, is due to stop at the end of March. And that
will see bills already move up properly up to that £2,500 mark. So if we don't
see that, what we'll see really in aggregate is a move from about £2,100 to
£3,000, which is really quite a sizable hike. I mean, you say there that the
government's making noises about it. I should say there has been no official
confirmation of this. And in fact, the Treasury told Moneybox this morning that
wholesale prices falling is good news, but it says prices are volatile. They can
increase as fast as they fall. And they added that if prices returned to their
late August level, the government would need to borrow about an extra £42
billion and possibly increase taxes in order to keep funding the energy price
guarantee at current levels. So we asked them, did that mean yes or no to an
extension? And they said they have no further comment. Ellen, given where energy
prices are at the moment, how much might this cost the government? So based on
the current energy wholesale price, and exactly as government says, it is
volatile. But actually we're seeing prices stabilise going forward. So the
expectation is that if government held the increase just to the £2,500 mark on
our fourth three months, so from April through to June, that would be a cost of
about £2.5 billion. So it's a significant amount of money. But in reality,
actually, the government has had a slightly easier ride than was forecast. So
over the winter period, they've subsidised the residential sector. And remember,
there are also a number of subsidies in the small business and the large
business sectors as well. But in the residential sector, it's been around about
£26 billion so far, which is actually significantly less than some of the
original forecast, given the wholesale price actually came off slightly faster
than expected. So if the original budget were held, then government should have
headroom to be able to fund with additional support for customers. And in a
sentence, Ellen, even if they extended this guarantee, bills have still doubled
from where they were 18 months ago. Can we ever expect them to get back? We can
expect them to decrease. Whether they'll really get back to the same level is
hard to say. But certainly in June or July, when the energy price cap is
revised, we're expecting that actually to drop down below the current subsidy
levels from government. So good news as we tip into the latter part of this
calendar year. Ellen Fraser, thank you very much for joining us. Well, energy
costs put the squeeze on household budgets, but so does the cost of food. And
that's been rising too. Moneybox reporter Dan Whitworth has been going through
some new numbers released this week and joins me now. Dan. Well, the Office for
National Statistics, FLIS, asked more than 4,000 adults from right across the UK
about the impact of rising food prices. And there are some stark results. Around
one in 20 households said at some point in the last two weeks they'd run out of
food and couldn't afford to buy more. More than a quarter said they couldn't
afford to eat a balanced diet. And 12% said they'd eaten less food than they
should because they didn't have enough money to cover the cost. There's some
really staggering numbers there. And Dan, this isn't from a campaign group or a
charity. That's the National Statistics Agency. Exactly. Yeah. OK. What else do
we know about how people are coping with rising prices? Well, another big
indicator earlier this week was from retail analyst Kantar. Its latest figure on
food inflation shows that prices are 17.1% higher than this time last year. Now,
that means you're paying nearly a fifth more for the same shopping trolley or
basket of food. But, of course, FLIS, that's 17.1%. 17.1% is the average. Some
things have gone up in price more than others. Well, I went to speak to some
supermarket shoppers in Halifax. Budget-wise, when all the family was at home,
we're actually still at the same. So I've reduced the family size, but my
budget's still the same. When you say you've reduced your family size, what do
you mean? Who's left home? My daughter's left home. So we want less mouth to
feed, basically. But the budget's still the same, even though there's only two
of us at home now. What are you doing to try to mitigate the impact of
increasing prices? We plan all our food for every meal, plan it, budget it, and
then go out and stick to the plan. You've got to shop around to try and save a
little bit or cut down on other stuff. And what kind of impact are these
increasing bills having on your pocket? I'm skint by three quarters at the end
of the month. I mean, I'm on a pension as well. So I've got to budget a lot more
than I used to, a hell of a lot more. Eggs and, you know, milk and things like
that, which is a necessity of life. And they just increased so much, especially
having kids at home. It's quite hard to manage, basically. And have you noticed
in terms of, let's say, your weekly shop, is it noticeably you're paying more
now than, say, six months or 12 months ago? Yeah. When I was spending about 20
to 25 pounds, I'm roughly paying 40 to 45 pounds a week, yeah. So it's a huge
difference, you think? It is, yeah. A lot of difference. It's just not just one
supermarket. It's like, you know, different stores. You just see where you can
get cheaper food. And to be honest, my husband and myself are working very hard
just to maintain our bills every month. And we got no savings. We just live on
our wages just to pay our bills. That's all. We're struggling. And, you know, we
just got to live with it, aren't we? What price increases are you noticing,
especially on what kind of products? Everything. From grocery and just 10, 15
pound difference whenever you come in. Yeah? We're struggling, you know. You
know, we're struggling. Got to cope with it, you know. What can we do? So I used
to come to the supermarket for my weekly shop. 40, 45 pound, good amount of food
and, you know, some extras, toiletries and stuff. Spent 60 plus pound today,
which is a lot for us. And I've just kind of just got the basics. You try to cut
out on certain things, but everything is important, like, you know, clothes,
food and the basics is all increased. So what are you meant to cut down on? Cut
down on one meal a day? Well, for your kids or for yourself, which we do for
ourselves. We rather feed our kids. And you know, maybe I sometimes have days
where I feed my kids and have their leftovers. And that's a fact because I mean,
obviously, I'd rather feed my kids and go hungry myself. But what else are you
meant to put down on? Well, that was Dan speaking to shoppers in Halifax. And
I'm joined now by Kalpana Fitzpatrick, digital editor of Money Week, who's been
covering this issue. Kalpana, good afternoon. Hello. Hearing people talk so
matter of factly about missing meals, that is shocking. It is absolutely
shocking. And actually, the 17% food inflation figure is quite a hard number to
digest there. So and what's worrying also is adding hundreds and hundreds of
extra pounds to an annual family shop. So these are definitely 100% very
worrying. And also, those comments are, you know, they're difficult to hear as
well. So yes, so one of the things that, you know, I would say is, I think
people are actually doing what they can do. They're shopping around. We've all
tried to budget supermarkets, trying to budget cut back on how we consume food.
But one of the things that in conversations that I've had in my research is a
lot of food also goes to waste. The average typical household throws away around
700 pounds worth of food. So one of the things to really think about to address
this is, there's a really great website actually called Love Food Hate Waste,
which is full of recipes about what you might be able to do with food that you
haven't quite been able to use up, how you can freeze it and recipes that you
can make use of. So it's definitely worth having a look at that as well. So that
we're all a little bit guilty of probably maybe throwing the odd thing away. But
we're now at a stage where it's too expensive to let food go to waste at all.
And we really all got to tighten everything that we have. Kevin, some people
though, we should make the point, shouldn't we, some people are more affected
than others by these rising food prices. Absolutely, absolutely. So it's, you
know, like I said, we were all thinking of ways of how can we manage and it's
other bills as well. So one of the things that I would say is, have a look at
the wider picture and don't just focus on food. So when I say look at the wider
picture, this is impact, you know, costs are high everywhere when it comes to
rent that you've mentioned energy, council taxes going up in April, broadband
prices are going up in April. You know, these are all bills that we all have to
pay. So one of the things, there's a website called Turn to Us, worth looking at
to make sure you're not missing out on any benefits. Thousands and thousands of
people miss out on benefits every year. Don't be afraid to ask for help if you
need it. Check if you can get a council tax discount. Are you entitled to a
social tariff when it comes to your mobile and broadband and even your energy?
And if you're struggling with mortgage payments, talk to your bank. If you're
struggling with rent payments, talk to your landlord, raise the red flags as
soon as possible, because things can get a little bit out of control. Yes, I
mean, you're so right. Food prices, food bills, they don't exist in a vacuum.
You've got other bills, other household finances. But can you give us some good
news? Are there any signs that prices are going to stop rising so very quickly?
I don't have a crystal ball, unfortunately. But however, speaking to experts all
the time, I feel that high prices are here to stay for a little while longer. In
fact, this 2023 is going to be quite a tough year. And I don't like to say that,
but I feel like we all need to work out our budgets and work a little bit harder
because we don't know what's coming next. Kalpana Fitzpatrick, thank you very
much for joining us. And Dan will be talking more about food costs in
Wednesday's Moneybox Live at 3pm. And Dan, you want listeners to get in touch?
Yes, definitely. We really do on this one. So how is the rising cost of food
affecting you? I, for one, while I'm doing lots more shopping at discount
supermarkets, the brand names in my cupboard flisks, they're all but
disappearing. I'm planning meals very now pretty much second nature. But we want
to hear from listeners. Tell us your own stories on trying to keep food bills
under control. Please do send me an email moneybox at bbc.co.uk and include a
phone number if you can so I can call you back. Thanks Dan. But don't go
anywhere because we've reported before on a campaign to make it easier for
families of young adults with learning disabilities to access their government-
backed child trust funds. Well, this week, those families have reacted angrily
to what they say is a failure of the Ministry of Justice to address the problem.
Okay, so this all started back in September 2020, when the first of these trust
funds started to mature. But when they were set up 18 years before that, there
was no mechanism put in place for parents of children with learning disabilities
to access their children's money on their behalf. But because of the Mental
Capacity Act 2005, which is basically designed to protect people who can't make
decisions for themselves, it means a trip to court, which can take months and
cost at least hundreds of pounds. So what's the latest? Well, earlier this week,
the Ministry of Justice announced it would not amend that Mental Capacity Act,
which is what campaigners had hoped for to make the process more
straightforward. Justice Minister Mike Freer said he appreciates how frustrating
this must be for parents and guardians, but that any new scheme would be just as
complex to set up and navigate as the current status quo. Instead, the
government has begun work to, quote, digitise and streamline the existing
process. Now, one campaigner told me this decision has the potential to
permanently deny disabled young people access to tens of millions of pounds. Now
one small, but perhaps hopefully more hopeful note, the financial institutions
which actually hold on to this money have already started streamlining this
process to try to keep those cases out of court. Well, that's something. And
just quickly, Dan, another update on a story we've been following recently about
spray foam insulation in lofts causing all sorts of problems for people wanting
to borrow against their homes. Yes, the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors, that's RICS, has published guidance after several high profile
trading standards cases highlighted poor standards of work, illegal
modifications and high pressure selling to vulnerable groups. Now RICS says its
guide should help consumers make informed decisions. If you want to take a look
at it, we've just tweeted a link to that guide from at Moneybox on Twitter. Good
to know, Dan. Thank you very much. Now one of the UK's biggest flat share
websites has told Moneybox that rents rose almost 13% last year. So in January
2022, the average UK monthly rent listed on SpareRoom was just over £650. By
January this year, it had risen to almost £750 a month. And it is a bit of a
perfect storm because SpareRoom tells us demand is also increasing, but there
are fewer properties being advertised. Our reporter Star McFarlane is
particularly interested in this as she rents and so do many of her friends, and
she's been taking a look at the state of the rental market. 240 applications for
one room within an hour of it being listed, being outbid by someone who could
pay two years rent up front. These are just a couple of real situations I've
heard about through friends, strangers and a few in between from up and down the
country of what it's like if you're currently looking for somewhere to rent. I
decided to speak to someone who's in the middle of trying to move to see if the
same could be said for where I live in Manchester. So my name is Nathan, I'm 27.
I work for the civil service in the city centre and we're currently in my
apartment. It's a very nice apartment, great view. What has led you to need or
want to move? The cost. It's gotten extremely expensive to live in this flat.
It's now approaching, well it's just went over £1000 a month each for rent and
bills. Originally when we moved in, it worked out about £825, £830 in August,
but then all the bills just went out of control. Our electricity is insane, my
electric account gets charged like £280 a month and we don't even turn the
heating on because we can't afford to. And tell me a bit about what your
experience has been like looking for somewhere to live. It's been very, very
difficult. It's hard to, on the likes of spare room, it's hard to even get a
response from someone. I actually made it two of you and probably only like six.
Messaged probably about 100 people. Some of them have been alright, a few of
them have been what I would expect to pay for what I'm getting and then some of
them have been like very, very overpriced. Like some have been like £750, £800
and they're like a tiny little shoebox and I'm like that's not worth paying
that, you can't even fit any furniture in here so why would you pay that? Is it
frustrating? It's extremely frustrating yeah, especially because like in regards
to actually trying to secure somewhere when you're going to viewings and stuff,
trying to get responses out of people is like getting blood out of a stone. I
have a viewing today so fingers crossed that that works out well. Nathan seems
to think that the most likely way he's going to find somewhere is by looking for
just a room as opposed to the whole place. But just how realistic is that?
Annie, a live-in landlord based in Newcastle, has been renting out the spare
rooms in her home for the past 10 years after her grown-up children flew the
nest. My heating bill has gone up by £2000, it's gone up by £2000 a year. So
I've put the rent up £50 a month so it was £350 in its net.