TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-07-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The new series of Rewinder. Oddly captivating. Hmm, perhaps you're right.
Saturday mornings at 10.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. I mean, get the message.
BBC News at three o'clock. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said she's
confident that new legislation aimed at stopping migrants crossing the Channel
in small boats is compatible with international law. The Refugee Council has
said the measures, which include a ban on people claiming asylum if they enter
the country illegally, break the UK's commitment to giving people a fair
hearing, regardless of how they get here. Tamzin Baxter from the Refugee Council
told The World at One that the legislation, if passed, would cause untold misery
for those seeking asylum in the UK. There are 160,000 people awaiting a claim on
their decision in our asylum system, watching their life go by in limbo in
hotels. This legislation will affect them. And what's more than that, what we're
not clear on through this legislation is where are these people going to go to?
Ultimately, we don't have returns agreements with other safe third countries to
return them to. A man has gone on trial at Manchester Crown Court accused of the
murder of Olivia Pratt-Corbell in Liverpool last year. The jury heard that nine-
year-old Olivia shouted out, mum, I'm scared, moments before she was shot in the
chest at her home. Thomas Cashman, who's 34, denies that he was the gunman.
People aged 75 and over are to be offered another booster jab for Covid-19 from
next month. Vaccines will also be given to care home residents and anyone aged
five and over who is immunosuppressed. Hundreds of thousands of people are
holding rallies in towns and cities across France in the latest protests against
government plans to raise the retirement age. President Macron wants to increase
it by two years to 64. The United Nations has warned that the cost of repairing
the damage from last month's devastating earthquakes in Turkey and northern
Syria will be more than $100 billion in Turkey alone. That's much higher than
initial estimates. Tickets for all nine shows at this year's Eurovision Song
Contest in Liverpool sold out just 90 minutes after going on sale. The
organisers say tickets for the grand final went in just 36 minutes. BBC News.
Well, we'll have a sellout crowd, no doubt, of our own for the season finale of
The Kitchen Cabinet next and then at half past three a food-related edition of
Costing the Earth as Peter Hadfield travels to Southeast Asia to investigate the
environmental impact of prawn farming. And at four o'clock this afternoon Joshua
Rosenberg will be back with a new series of Law in Action, today considering the
possible legal routes to delivering justice for Ukraine. First on Radio 4, Jay
Rayner and his panel of culinary experts are raring to answer your questions.
Hello and welcome to our final episode of this season's Kitchen Cabinet. Today
we're in Manchester, a city famous for its industry, music and of course
football. Dishing out the halftime oranges and the pep talks are cooks and
writers Rachel McCormack, Nisha Katona, Somaya Osmani and often seen dribbling
in corners local boy chef Rob Owen-Brown. Ladies and gentlemen, your panel. Now
walking through the streets of Manchester you may notice a number of bee symbols
hanging from old warehouses, walls and shops. This winged insect is a proud
emblem denoting the Mancunians' hard work ethic and the city as a hive of
activity. I've been doing my research and I found that the worker bee gathers
just 0.8 grams of honey in their entire life. Now whilst I'm sure bees don't sit
and ponder this fact with any level of self-consciousness, it's not a lot in
human metrics. So what I want to know from you panel is what have you worked
very hard on to very little end? Rob Owen-Brown. I suppose one that really sort
of springs to mind is the hotel probably described as fairly badly run. Kitchen
had been notified about a wedding for 300 people. I'd never been in charge of
running a wedding or doing the prep or the setup or any of that. Starter, get
all that prepped. Main course, get all that prepped. Dessert, get all that
prepped. Ready for the bride and groom sitting down at one o'clock, only to be
told by reception that the date was a week out. You prepped for a wedding for
300 people a week ahead of time. Okay, well as futility goes, that's brilliant.
Rachel McCormack. Well, I was in Aragon in Spain before Christmas and I was
doing various work things and someone decided that what they really needed me to
do with them was go truffle hunting. So I ended up in this hotel in this
province called Darroca with, it was like four adults in a car and one, the guy
who was driving us, who was a truffle hunter, he had been a bomb disposal expert
with a dog. But when they had the ceasefire in Spain with ETA, he'd had no
longer need to be the bomb disposal expert, but the dog was going crazy because
it had nothing to do. And someone said, my uncle is a retired goat herder and he
was obsessed with, he knew all these people in this mountain who would go
truffle hunting. Why don't you train your dog how to be a truffle hunter? We
drove an hour from the hotel to some mountain that I'm not allowed to tell you
where it is, but to be honest, it's in Aragon. We got our legs shredded by all
the thorn bushes and then there was rosemary bushes. Rachel, did you find any
truffles? I know this is the point. We went two hours up this mountain in the
dark and we did not find one truffle. Brilliant payoff. Samaya. Yeah, well, for
a while, I ran a social enterprise cookery school in Glasgow and I took it upon
myself to teach Glaswegian old men how to cook a curry. And by the end of like
many hours of teaching them how to do it meticulously, they said, pal, a chicken
tikka masala comes out of a jar. So yeah, that was a bit wasted. Wasted work.
Nisha Katona. Very proudly, I now I'm building my 21st restaurant. I was a
barrister for 20 years and I just wanted my Indian family to be proud of this
fact. But in fact, they are so ashamed of the ignominious end of my barrister
career that they still ring up and say, how many hotel have you got now? To kind
of gild it, to make it feel as though it's acceptable. So yeah, I live under the
pall of that. And if Nisha's family would like to prove that they are actually
very proud of it, they can email us at TKC at BBC.co.uk and we'll pass on those
emails. Right, after that litany of futility, let's see if we can be as
productive as a worker be by answering our first question from John Biddulph
from SAIL in Manchester. Hello, panel. Do you approve of or use stock cubes?
Well, let's have a heated debate. Nisha, Katona. Oh, absolutely. They're the
ultimate culinary enabler, I think. I absolutely love them. And not just in
dishes where you require that liquid and that umami, but they're fantastic
crumbed up in things like salad dressings, especially Japanese salad dressings.
They're a really brilliant thing to have in your armory. So I absolutely rave
about them. I'll tell you why that comes from sort of the background, you know,
where we have meat on the bone. So there are no spare bones in Indian cooking to
boil up to make stock. They're precious things, bones. So stock cubes are a
really big thing in the Indian kitchen. Rachel. I use them quite a lot to make
soup. It's just one of those, you just add what you, to make sure things aren't
too boring, you can just add different type of spices. Otherwise you feel like
you're eating the same thing again and again and again. That's the issue really
with stock cubes is they taste the same. And all you have to do is just add
things to them and you won't notice the difference. I think what happens is so
many times we have professional chefs who don't want to say that because they're
afraid of being called out. And I think there are a lot of chefs who don't want
to say that because they don't use stock cubes in their kitchen, which I can
understand. But cooking at home, absolutely all the time. Well, let's go to a
professional chef, Robert Owen Brown. Look, they've got to play something. I
suppose that, you know, into a stew, into soup, into something that's going to
cook for a long time, they're great. The only problem you might have with one is
if you mix up a stock, sort of stock cube, hot water, dissolve that thing, you
will never get that liquid to reduce down. You're going to have to add a lot of
content so you couldn't reduce it down to make a sauce. If you're going to put
fat into that, you know, reduce stock down, add double cream and things, fine.
But don't expect you to get beautiful sort of glass type sauce. I mean, that's
the point. They don't have gelatin in them. They don't. Samaya? Yeah, I mean, I
wouldn't live without them. And one of the things that we did when we were kids
was because, you know, we got sick of eating boiled rice all the time, we would
actually just heat up butter, put some cumin seeds in it, bung a lot of rice and
cook it with a stock, like, you know, and just let it all absorb in and cook the
rice, absorb, and it has a lovely meaty flavour without the need for meat and
without actually going through all the things of cutting ginger, garlic, onions.
Everything's just yum. Well, I think we should complete this completely
uncontroversial set of answers by throwing it to the audience. There's about 200
of you here at Manchester Grammar School in Manchester. The clue was in the
name. If you never use a stock cube, shout no after three. One, two, three. No.
And let's finish this. And if you use stock cubes, shout stock cube after three.
One, two, three. Stock cube. OK, well, I think that's pretty much completed that
one for you, John. And the other three people, I bet you feel really good about
yourselves. You're listening to The Kitchen Cabinet on BBC Radio 4. We've donned
our mats and brollies and are coming to you from a city that knows the damp
well. Moving in off the Atlantic Ocean, the moisture made Manchester's climate a
fertile environment for the development of resilient cotton and led to the
city's affectionate 19th century nickname, Cottonopolis. One dish closely linked
to this important part of Lancashire's history is that of the rag pudding. Here
to tell us more about this pudding is maker Paul Jackson from Jackson's Rag
Puddings. Hello, Paul. Hello. The name is a little deceiving, isn't it? It is.
It's not a great name, is it, a rag pudding? The name of a rag pudding in
Lancashire, in particular Rochdale and Oldham, essentially came from the cotton
mills when they would be making shirts and the back of the shirts were down to
the back of the knee. They had a very long tail on them. So the lady of the
house needed a rag. So the chap got a cold bum during winter. She would chop
them off and she would use them for rags. And she would also use them for
wrapping a suet beef pudding in. And that's a rag pudding. How did Jackson's Rag
Puddings start? It started in the early to mid 80s. Our family had a kookmeat
tripe shop and my dad was looking for something different to sell. So my
grandma's recipe of a rag pudding, my mum made a dozen. They sold on the day,
she made another dozen. They sold 50, 100. And then on Saturday afternoon, when
I was about 13, 14, we would start to make hundreds. Eventually the high street
failed and we got a unit and that's where we were. How many do you make now?
528,000 last year. That's quite a lot. It is, yes. You've got some in front of
you, which Rob I know you've already been trying. You grew up eating rag
pudding, didn't you? Especially Jackson's, I'll be honest with you. I'm a
Radcliffe Berry lad, so Berry Market was full of these. If you got there early
enough. But my mother made rag pudding, my grandmother made rag pudding. Made
sweet and savoury ones, to be honest with you. I like mine with a little bit of
kidney in, but these are absolutely superb. Nisha, I think this is a first for
you, isn't it? And I was born in Lancashire and I'd never heard of that. I'm a
South West Lanx girl, you see. And that's crazy, because that's delicious. That
pastry is heavenly. Rachel, what do you think would make a great accompaniment
to this? More. LAUGHTER Seriously, apart from more, chips and roast potatoes
don't work. You don't want a crunch, but you want mashed potatoes, you want your
steamed vegetables. You don't really want to complicate things. Sumaya, you also
live in Glasgow, land of the pie. Oh, yeah. Is this familiar for you? Yeah, it
has that sort of familiar comfort of flavour, but I can really feel that suet,
and I don't think I've felt that up on the top of my palate for a really long
time, and I really like that. There's something quite comforting about that.
And, Paul, what are the key techniques in the process for making one of these?
Essentially, the difference between a cloth pudding and a rag pudding is the
muslin traditionally would have been tied and dropped in a porcelain pot and
steamed, whereas the rag pudding is actually wrapped like a Christmas parcel.
And then we put them tightly packed to each other on a perforated tray, because
they're tightly wrapped, and that takes a lot of... many, many years to stop the
seepage coming through, but that's the principles to them. And you mentioned
steaming. Let's take a question on that from Helen Hosker from Wilmslow in
Cheshire. Thank you, panel. I have a lovely underused steam oven in my new
kitchen. I occasionally use it for vegetables and fish. Please could the panel
give me some inspiration to use it more? Right. Well, I'm just a bit jealous
now. Is it a solely dedicated steam oven? It is. Oh, Helen. Ooh. Wilmslow in
Cheshire, you say? LAUGHTER Well, let's cut straight across to Nisha Katonia,
who's recently... I mean, like, to claim she lives in the world, but has moved
just over the border into Cheshire. I like to say that. Do you have steam oven
envy? I do have steam... That's incredible. Do you know, things in banana leaves
are fantastic in a steam oven, and they're quite easy to get hold of. You can't
get hold of them, you know, tinfoil works as well, but Bengalis love... And
that's where I'm from. They love to steam things like fish, chicken, prawns, and
the secrets to a really good Bengali steaming are really simple. English
mustard, lemon juice, a bit of coriander, and a bit of green chilli if you want
to go for that little bit of heat. Samaya, what would you put through Helen's
steam oven? I would love to, you know, cook some rice in there, because rice
comes up beautifully, especially if you favour it with things like pandan
leaves, which have this delicate flavour that you use a lot in Malaysian
cooking, which is a gorgeous flavour. When you steam rice in a steam oven, more
flavours from the pandan leaf would infuse into it. The rice. I'd also make
dumplings, noodles in there. That'd be really quick and easy and super
delicious. Rachel. Ask your fishmonger if you can get hold of a monkfish liver,
and then wrap that up in a very light cheesecloth and cook that in the steam
oven. And then when you take it out, you let it go cold and you slice it, and
it's kind of like fish foie gras. It is lovely. It's really, really nice. And we
don't use monkfish liver enough in the UK and in other countries. It's
incredibly expensive. So, that's probably to go with the quite expensive steam
oven. LAUGHTER There are some ideas for you, Helen. Panel, Anisha was talking
about wrapping in banana leaves, and Paul's been talking about wrapping in rags,
obviously, so I'm interested in other dishes that need wrapping. Anisha? Well, I
grew up with a lot of paneer being wrapped. So, daughter of a Hindu priest, we
didn't very often have meat or weren't very often allowed meat. And so paneer,
which is Indian cheese, it's kind of the basic level of cheese, which is just
milk curdled with a bit of lemon juice, and you hang it in those muslin sacks.
So, I remember growing up and there would always be these muslin sacks hanging
on every single sink in the house. In the shower cubicle, you'd go on and
there'd be, you know, there'd be this huge kind of penulus udder of dripping
cheese. And those are my memories, you know, this kind of muslin-wrapped cheese.
Yeah. Now, we've been talking about wrapping and we're talking about steaming.
Paul, you mentioned the use of suet in your rag pudding. That's a vital
ingredient, isn't it? It is, yeah. It allows us essentially to stretch that
pastry so we can wrap it. Rob, for those who don't know, what exactly is suet?
Suet is from the inside of the animal, usually beef and lamb, and it's the sort
of hard fat that wraps itself around the kidneys and the sort of fillet end at
the bottom, you know, right inside the belly of the carcass. It's massively
cheap. All you want to do with it, get a nice lump off your butcher. You want to
render that fat down. Don't cook it too hard, don't cook it too fast. Just bring
the temperature, let the fat melt. You want to, once it's all melted, you're
going to end up with some little bits of sinew and tiny little bits of meat.
Just fire it through a sieve, and you can put some salt on those little nibbly
bits. Fire it through a nice sieve, let it cool down, get it into a container in
the freezer, and then as you need it, pull it out and just grate it. And you've
got wonderful fresh suet. And cardiologists all over the country are wincing at
the radio. Sumayya, it's an important part of certain dishes in Northern
Pakistan and Afghanistan, isn't it? Yeah, absolutely. They cook a lot with the
suet there. We call it charbi, and the bits of the meat are actually sometimes
put on tikkas. And so you have a piece of meat and a piece of charbi, and it
melts while it cooks. So it actually makes, it softens the meat, it adds flavor
to it. But what they also say is a lot of the balti cooking up in Northern
Pakistan is done with charbi, which is suet. And why it's done is because it's
very cold up there, and it says it keeps you warm. It actually gives you energy.
And during the winter, where they don't have a lot of natural heat, well, they
have natural log fires, but they don't have central heating. This keeps your
body warm. So we've talked about the Indian subcontinent. Rachel, other recipes
that are good with suet? Anything that really you want to make pastry with. If
you look at old Scottish and old English recipes from like the 20s and 30s, and
their puddings and their pastries, they've almost always got suet in them,
because it makes for a much lighter and flakier pastry. Like if you've had an
Eccles cake with margarine and you've had an Eccles cake with suet, the
difference is tremendous. One of the things that they make, for example, in
Argentina, because they've got a lot of cattle there, so Argentinians are
obsessed with beef, and they make empanadas, which are basically small pies. And
a lot of the time, they don't put butter in them, they don't put vegetable
shortening in them, they put in suet. And I think, although your cardiologist
might not be pleased, I think if you make it a special occasion and you eat
beef, then you should have an Eccles cake with suet in it and never have one
with vegetable shortening or margarine. OK, well, it's good you've laid down the
law there. Paul, it would be a slightly remiss of us not to mention that rag
pudding, although obviously the panel thinks it's delicious, it's not the most
attractive pudding, is it? No, it's not the most Instagrammable or photogenic
product in the world. Panel, I wonder if there are any dishes that look
unappetising, but our panel finds delicious. Rob? I don't know if there's loads,
but one or two that spring to mind. I mean, an oyster. If you've never eaten an
oyster, I love them, but if you've never eaten an oyster and you pop the top off
an oyster, that looks like something that's fallen out of a child's nose. It's
really bad quality. It's not a pretty-looking thing, is it? Rachel? If you've
ever made a scrambled egg, but you've got all kinds of vegetables in the sauce
first and then you add the egg and stir it round, it really does look like dog
sick. But it tastes absolutely amazing. One of the lovely things about radio is
the way you can paint visual images through words. Thank you, Rachel. That
teaches us you don't judge a book by its cover or a dish by how good it looks on
social media. And a big round of applause for Paul Jackson from Jackson's Live
Pudding. APPLAUSE Let's take our next question from Ruth Perkins from Ancoats.
Which smell do you long for when you open the lid or unwrap your chosen dish? I
personally couldn't live without basil or dill. Right, so we're getting a bit
Proustian here. His was taste, but this is smells. Rachel? I really still
nowadays, when I open a bottle of old-fashioned oaked Rioja, because nowadays
Spanish wine has really changed and it's really modern and a lot of it tastes a
lot better. But there's a thing about an old-fashioned oaked Rioja which just
reminds me of being 19 and being in Spain and eating, thinking I was an adult
for the first time and I was at a table with a tablecloth and I thought, this is
the life. And so now when I have a tiny wee bit of that smell, I think, yep,
that was the life and it was a bit of a disappointment in the end. I think we've
just had Rachel McCormack's superhero origins. Nisha Katona? I'd have to say the
smell of coffee. And Murakami describes it as the smell that separates night
from day. Deep, gruff coffees that get straight into the endorphins and raise
your blood pressure by about 10 times. That's the kind of coffee I want.
Fantastic. Samaya? Well, I love the smell of fresh garam masala and, you know,
all my pans, even this empty pan here, if you just put your nose in there, it'll
smell of that and it reminds me of home. It takes me right back. Rob? I'm going
roast lamb. You know, put a joint of lamb in the oven and then disappear out for
a couple of hours and then come back into the house. You can almost smell it
halfway down the street, can't you? You know, come back into the house and it's
just one of those wonderful, meaty, fatty... Yeah, it's just great, isn't it?
And it's full of promise and, you know, mint sauces come in, and gravy and all
of those things. Ruth, thank you for taking our panel to their happy place. My
pleasure. Right, class is dismissed. Remember to sign up to the disco. Robbo and
Brown, please stay behind. I want a word with you. Everyone else, form an
orderly queue to the lunch canteen, please. Chop, chop. No dilly-dallying. What
awaited you in the school lunch canteen? The steaming vegetable medley, crinkle-
cut carrots, a mountain of mash, or maybe the memorable fluorescent pink
custard? Panel, I'm interested in your memories of the school food canteen. Rob,
what was it? It's funny that you mentioned pink custard. We had green, minty-
flavoured custard. But it wasn't even custard. It was just thickened up milk
with some sugar in it, and green food colouring and mint essence. Oh. Rachel?
The thing that we used to have was that everybody hated was this sort of egg...
I think it was supposed to be a souffle. It had maybe been a souffle in
somebody's imagination once. But it was kind of like an egg and onion thing, and
it just wobbled in the nastiest way, and it just looked absolutely horrendous
and tasted even worse. And the worst thing was they always used to serve it with
mashed potato that they'd used an ice cream scoop for. Did anybody... I mean,
was it just my school, or did everybody do that? And you're sitting there going,
why have I got mashed potato that looks like it should be vanilla ice cream, and
it's not? I mean, that's a cruel thing to do to an eight-year-old. Samaya, was
this part of your experience growing up? No, we would come home by 1.15 and have
a nice lunch at home. Oh! Yeah. But I did have a year in England, and I was
horrified by what I had to eat. Nisha? Yeah, I wasn't allowed to eat beef, of
course, daughter of a Hindu priest, and so I was sent to school with a packed
lunch of samosas and onion bhajis, which I would spend the whole lunchtime
pedalling them for beef sausages and those lumps of kind of grain cow cadaver in
gravy, which were amazing. You do not know you're born. Yeah. Well, our gracious
hosts tonight, Manchester Grammar School, have verified that one of the dishes
they were serving their students in the 70s and 80s was the Manchester tart.
Ooh. Ooh, I don't know whether that's approving or flashback. Certainly it was a
school canteen favourite. Rob, as a local boy, you grew up with the Manchester
tart. Explain what it is. Right, um... Shortcrust... Oddly enough, considering
it's a shortcrust pastry base, a thin layer of jam, custard that was set, and
then desiccated coconut and a really crap glass of your cherry. Yeah. Some
heathens put banana in it. Ah! LAUGHTER Nisha, what do you think people thought
of it? Cos you were also from this part of town. Yeah, and it was a big primary
school dessert and people hated it. Honestly, most people hated it. And it's a
desiccated coconut for children. That is the ultimate insult to injury. So, you
know, people shrivel when you mention the Manchester tart, generally. Shout yes
if you liked the Manchester tart when you were a kid. One, two, three. Yes! Oh,
well, that's interesting. Actually, I should go the other way. And no if you
hated it. One, two, three. No! Oh! The no's have it, Jay. Do they? I think it's
a split debate here. Rob, you're not the biggest fan of desiccated coconut, are
you? If you're not reaching for that, all the hundreds and thousands, what would
you be topping the Manchester tart with, or indeed any other pudding? Well, you
see, I'm not one for messing about with a recipe, but if you were going to
improve a Manchester tart, you'd leave the banana out and then you would
definitely pipe a lovely little soft meringue on the top and then blowtorch it
so you get a beautiful golden topping, nice gooey, and then you get down into
the sort of cold custard and things. All right, other toppings. Samaya? I would
make a lovely compote of dried Hunza apricots, rehydrate them, cook them in
sugar, puree them, make them really soft and then pour them on top. Ooh. All
right, I am going to go back, though, to desiccated coconut for dishes that
benefit from it. Is there anything you think, Samaya? Yeah, there's a lot of
dishes that we cook, savoury dishes that we cook with coconut, and there's a
Hyderabadi dish that we make a lot of, especially the communities in Pakistan,
called Bhagarik Bengan, which is really gorgeous, tiny aubergines that are
filled with a mixture of peanuts and unsweetened desiccated coconut and
tamarind, and then it's cooked in a lovely savoury sauce, so they're gorgeous
and gooey and delicious. Rob, if you're not using them to top a tart, there is a
good place for them, isn't there? Yeah, I mean, they're great in a coconut
macaroon, aren't they? Who doesn't love a coconut macaroon fresh out of the
oven? Beautiful. Desiccated coconut can act like concrete, you know, in a cake
mix. It gives a real bit of sort of stability to cake mixes, so half polenta,
half desiccated coconut in a real sort of Italian polenta cake. Really good.
That does sound good. Misha? Desiccated coconut's the way that we bring a kind
of heft to curry sauces, because remember, they're all gluten-free, we don't
thicken with flour, so if you're making a korma and you want to bring that
luxurious kind of depth of flavour and texture, that's when you add a bit of
desiccated coconut, so it's so simple. Turmeric, chilli, garam masala, three
spices, chicken, yoghurt, and then a bit of water to loosen it down, and
desiccated coconut's fantastic. You've got the sweetness and the nuttiness and
all of that exotic richness. Now, we have pretty much, in certain ways, dissed
the Manchester tart, but custard is an important thing, so I wonder how to make
a great custard. Rachel, what's the key as far as you're concerned? I think one
of the first things you need to make sure you do is throw out your cornflour.
Don't use cornflour in thickening a custard, it doesn't work, and I mean, just
the flavour is dreadful. You need to really use really good eggs and you need to
use really good egg yolk and you need to have a lot of patience and you need to
stir for a very long time. OK, Rob, give us, you know, the basics for making
good custard. I always go half milk, half double cream, because, you know, I'm a
chubby kid. And if you can get more fat in, that means more flavour. I would
always, if possible, use duck eggs, because the colour and the richness that you
get from a duck egg is mega. Really good vanilla, if you can afford it, and
icing sugar, because it dissolves really quick. Custard sugar works fine, but
icing sugar will go in a lot faster. Cook it nice and gentle until it starts to
leave the sides of the pan and just keep cooking it until you get a coating,
something that will run off the back of your spatula or run off the back of your
spoon. Rachel, there is one other custard tart, which it has to be said is
probably more popular these days than the Manchester tart, isn't there? I would
reckon it's probably easier to get a pastiche de nata in Manchester than it is
to get a Manchester tart. They have taken over. There are these wee custard
tarts from Lisbon that suddenly in the past ten years are absolutely everywhere.
You can get them in Brazil all the time, you can get them everywhere in the UK,
you can get them in my local bakery in a suburb of Glasgow. They have a special
Lisbon bakery in Glasgow that only sells them, and bizarrely, you can't get them
at all in northern Portugal. All right, I'm going to test this with this
audience here in Manchester. Let's give you a spread of a year. Shal,
Manchester, if you've eaten a Manchester tart in the past year. One, two, three.
Manchester. Oh, Rob joining in, but there's about five of you. Shal, nata, if
you've eaten a pastel de nata in the past year. One, two, three. Nata. LAUGHTER
Well, that's it. Portugal, 500. Manchester, three. What other custard tart
dishes are you a fan of? Rob? A classic head custard with a load of nutmeg on
the top. Well, as simple as that. Absolutely beautiful. Nisha? I love the way
the Thai cuisine treats custards, where they use pandan sort of instead of
vanilla, so you're getting that lovely flavour. And also lemongrass, it just
makes it so much more fragrant and aromatic. Really nice twists on the custard.
That sounds very, very good. We have time for one more question from Andy Bell
from Bury. Hello, panel. I'm a great believer in rules should be broken. What
golden rule of cooking do you always break or often break and why? Right, golden
rule breaking. Rachel? Well, the Italians always have a rule for absolutely
everything, when it comes to cooking, and one of their golden rules is not to
double carb. So every single time I have a macaroni pie with chips and I triple
carb, I just want to tell the Italians to get stuffed. LAUGHTER APPLAUSE Nisha
Kapona? Well, I would chew my bones and use stock cubes wherever you can.
LAUGHTER Samaya? I would say break every rule about recipes. I really believe in
cooking with your intuition, so I think that I just don't follow recipes. You
have written them in the past. Ah, yeah. I have to. I have to make a living.
LAUGHTER Rob Owen Brown? I'm a bit of a bugger for messing with things when
they've gone in a pan. You know, when you put something in, you want it to seal,
so, you know, I'm a bit of a nuisance. I've got to walk away. Nice hot sauce pan
with a little bit of oil or butter in there, and I'm trying to brown two chicken
breasts up. I'm a bit of a nuisance for wanting to give it a bit of a shake,
wanting to just have a little bit of a peek. Yeah, I can't help myself. And
opening the oven when you know you shouldn't. Just a fraction. That's all we've
got time for today, Manchester, and for this series of the Kitchen Cabinet, but
do not fear, we'll be back in April, travelling to all corners of the country,
although, excitingly, we'll also be recording a special episode allowing
anybody, anywhere, to ask us the question they need answers to, so please do
send them to tkc at bbc.co.uk. But for now, it's goodbye from me, Jay Rayner,
Rob Owen-Brown, Rachel McCormack, Samaya Osmani, Nisha Katonia, and our audience
here in Manchester. The Kitchen Cabinet was produced by Bethany Hawken. The
assistant producer was Dulcey Wodcock. It is a Something Else production for
Radio 4. The Patch on BBC Radio 4. One producer. What was amazing to me as an
outsider was how normal all this was. One random generated postcode. So I've got
to press that? Press that button and a story unfolding there you wouldn't
otherwise know about. What do you sell then? Everything and anything. Unheard
stories from across the UK. What do you do after being a prison officer? The
Patch on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds on Wednesday mornings at 9. And in tomorrow's
opening episode, we'll be visiting the mysterious US military domes, which can
be found in rural Norfolk. On which note, there's just time to mention a new
series coming next week, in which the BBC's security correspondent Gordon
Carrera will be exploring the decision to go to war in Iraq 20 years ago. Shock
and War Iraq 20 Years On is next Monday to Friday at 1.45. Now on Radio 4, it's
time for our environment show, Costing the Earth. Today, Peter Hadfield is in
Southeast Asia in search of the source of the world's prawns. Oh, hi. Can I
order one ibikatsu, the chicken and prawn donburi and pad thai. Onion bhaji, two
of the spicy shrimp, jinga tikka masala, pilau rice and the prawn booner please.
King prawn with hoisin sauce, three of the sesame prawn toasts and a bag of the
prawn crackers, please. Thank you. Whatever your preference when it comes to a
Saturday night takeaway, Thai, Japanese, Chinese or Indian, there's a pretty
good chance that prawns and shrimp are in there somewhere. The market's worth
£50 billion annually, and consumption of our favourite crustaceans keeps on
rising. What you probably won't be told by your favourite restaurant is where
those shrimp and prawns come from. 55% of them are raised on farms rather than
fished from the ocean, and that really does matter for the environment. We are
sure that some of the species in here will be totally destroyed. I just saw a
monkey passing by. This was the habitat, this was the area where the monkeys
used to live. Now it's completely destroyed. They're just looking through to
find scraps, whatever they can find. They will burn the wood and then they will
clear all the land here. Otherwise they make a pond for the shrimp. For the
shrimp. There are global assurance schemes that inspect prawn and shrimp farms
to check that they're being as environmentally friendly as possible, but most of
the small-scale tropical farms don't sign up. Only 5% of farmed shrimp and prawn
are sold with those stamps of quality. That means that most consumers around the
world have absolutely no idea of the impact their dinner is having on the
environment. So we've come over the river and we're looking at just the other
side of this ditch, is a tangle of dead mangroves that have been bulldozed.
Siti, what have they done here? They're basically opening up a new shrimp farm.
This is going to be a new shrimp farm? And so the next step will be they will
dig this out, make a pond and then put shrimp in there? Yes. Most kinds of fish
farming have a serious impact on the environment. Just like farmed salmon, the
shrimp are fed on ground-up fish and the waste from each farm has to be disposed
of. That often means that antibiotics and other chemicals pollute groundwater
and coastal estuaries. But the most damaging impact of prawn farms can happen
when they're first built. A traditional tropical prawn farm is created by
cutting down mangroves. Mangroves are an incredible habitat for wildlife, as
nursery grounds and spawning grounds for many fish species, but they're also a
very crucial habitat for humans. They provide us with trillions of dollars worth
of ecosystem services annually through carbon capture, fisheries production,
coastal stabilisation and we really do need to value them. David Koenig from the
ZSL's Institute of Zoology is an expert on mangrove forests, that tangle of
shoreline vegetation that hugs tropical shores all over the globe. At Whitsnade
Zoo, he gave me a beginner's guide to their mangrove display. So we've got some
Rhizophora propagules here. This one here in front of us? Just in front of us
right here. So Rhizophora are one of the most widely distributed species groups
within mangroves. Kind of the classic mangroves you'll see, the ones you see
with the large kind of prop roots. And it's species like these that are often
cleared to make way for coastal developments, one of which being fish pond
development. Now even as a non-expert, I can see that the effect of this would
be to bind the sediment together and it does stop a lot of coastal erosion,
doesn't it? Absolutely. One of the best ecosystem services that are provided by
mangroves is their ability to absorb wave energy. So in scenarios where we have
tsunamis, etc, mangroves are really that first line of defence in many coastal
systems. So not only can they protect human development, but they can also
stabilize the environment. They can protect human development, but they can also
stabilize sediments. And then that comes on to their second key ecosystem
service they provide, which is carbon capture. So mangroves themselves can store
about four times the amount of carbon that a tropical rainforest can. And the
main mechanism behind this is actually the entrapment of sediments within the
root structure. So that is actually where the vast majority of carbon is stored
in mangrove systems. It's in the soil themselves. It's in the sediment rather
than in the structure, the wood structure. Let's get on to prawn farming then.
The destruction of these through prawn farming, how bad is that getting and how
bad has that got? Since about the 1970s, it's estimated we've lost about 35% of
mangrove cover globally. And one of the primary drivers of that has been the
establishment of fish ponds and prawn ponds. And the driver behind it is that
mangroves exist in prime real estate for prawn aquaculture. They get regularly
inundated with seawater. They're a good bag for a very good area with which to
build a fish pond. However, they have a very limited lifespan. Because of the
fertilizers, the pesticides and the feed and the chemicals they need to put in
to maintain them, they only tend to last seven, eight, nine years. So once a
pond exceeds its life expectancy, they simply move and create a new one. And you
get this long kind of creep and gradual erosion of mangrove forests. After
seeing that display at Witsnade Zoo, I'm now confronted on all sides by
mangroves in the wild along the banks of the Raja Hitan River, which is on the
west side of Malaya. The sky is blue and it's a rather beautiful day to be going
up the river. So how long have you been living here? Yeah, 80 years. My father
also here. To me, as a stranger, this looks beautiful now. Now not beautiful.
Yes, looks can be deceiving, because these lines of mangrove trees are just a
thin green curtain hiding a dirty secret behind them. I'm Peter Hadfield, and on
this week's Costing the Earth, I'm travelling up the west coast of the Malay
Peninsula, looking at how millions of acres of thick mangroves have given way to
dirty black ponds farming shrimp, also known as prawns, and the consequences
that has for wildlife, for human welfare and for coastal protection. Forty years
ago, when the owner of our boat used to swim in these waters, he tells me the
fish were plentiful, the water was clean, and thick mangroves stretched deep
into the interior. So now we're going to go ashore and see what's replaced them.
This is a bit firmer. So we're going to see if I can get over this barrier and
get up and see the shrimp farm up close. We're looking over this barrier with
the river behind us. We've just scrambled up the bank. Each of these ponds is
probably about an acre in size, maybe half an acre, and they've got paddle
wheels going at one end to sprinkle water onto the... mosquitoes... onto the
site. in order to oxygenate it. And the two that we can see here in front of us,
there's another one behind that and another one behind that, and some palm oil
plantations to the left. There is a pipe that's going directly from this down
into the river, so although that's not flowing at the moment, there's no doubt
that discharges the waste directly into the river. So we've come over the river,
and we're looking at... just the other side of this ditch is a tangle of dead
mangroves that have been bulldozed. Siti, what have they done here? They're
basically opening up a new shrimp farm. This is going to be a new shrimp farm?
And so the next step will be they will dig this out, make a pond, and then put
shrimp in there? Yes, basically that's what's happened. I think they're doing
work there. They're doing it right now. Are we able to get over there? Can we go
around? Yeah. My guides are with a local NGO called KUASA, which is trying to
document and stop the destruction of mangroves in this area. My name is Smadhi
Razan, chairman for KUASA. Right, which is the local NGO here. You're really
fighting against this mangrove destruction. Okay, look, we're standing here in
an area where they just destroyed very recently this mangrove. When was this
done? Around three months before. They already have a pond, a shrimp farm there.
And then now they plan to make a more big shrimp farm. So there is a shrimp farm
already, just the other side of this, which we can't see. And this is an
extension. We've got a beautiful original mangrove just next door to this
disgusting brown muddy field that is full of dead mango trees. How does that
make you feel? Yeah, sure, very bad. And also we are sure that some of the
species in here will be totally destroyed. I just saw a monkey passing by. This
was the area where the monkeys used to live. Now it's completely destroyed.
They're just looking through to find scraps, whatever they can find. They put
all of the cut mangrove trees into piles. They're now dead wood. Will they burn
that? Yeah, we can see they will burn the wood and then they will clear all the
land here. Otherwise they make a pond for the shrimp. There's another monkey
going through. There he goes. Yeah, it's a very sad sight to see the monkeys
looking at the wreckage of their home, isn't it? Yes, their home has already
been destroyed and it's more critical now. Mangrove areas were once a rather
unloved feature of tropical waters. Shrimp and prawn farming seemed like a
pretty sensible use for this wasteland. All that changed on Boxing Day 2004. It
hits Banda Aceh with the force of 60 hurricanes destroying everything in its
path. 45 minutes later at 9.30, a 60-foot wave crashes into Thailand. 30 minutes
on, it engulfs the island of Phi Phi. At the same time, on the other side of the
ocean, the wave traveling west hits Sri Lanka. So the tsunami that hit a few
years ago, there were images where you could see this effect of mangroves
absorbing wave energy. Where mangroves weren't present, you had waves that were
coming in and out of the ocean. Where mangroves were present, you had waves
penetrating hundreds of meters inland. But where mangroves are present, they
absorb all that wave energy, they stop it at source and therefore it doesn't
have that same destructive impact. So unfortunately, across most of Southeast
Asia, we've lost large swathes of mangroves and therefore we've lost that
natural coastal defence system. Are local people aware of this? Do they realise
just what the value of these mangroves are where they live? Since the events of
that tsunami, definitely there's been an increase. And there is a real want and
desire to not only protect but enhance the mangroves they've got. So definitely,
since that has happened, there's been an increased awareness and kind of
appreciation of these habitats. I'm standing at a dockyard at the estuary of the
Beruas River, looking out across the Straits of Malacca towards Sumatra. With me
is Wong Mei Ying, a member of the State Assembly who's been campaigning against
the destruction of mangroves in this area. So what happened here when the 2004
tsunami struck? The waves were very, very high and here the waves didn't
directly hit the fisheries. They went inside the river. Oh, it went up the river
too. Yeah, so it just destroyed boats, but the fisheries, the buildings, they
all survived. So this whole part of the mangroves protected the whole fisheries.
So anywhere where you did not have mangroves, they suffered damage from the
tsunami. But where you had the mangroves, they absorbed the tsunami. The wave
did not go through. Yes, there is a direct lesson. The tragedy of 2004 was a
turning point for mangroves in the region. Farmers realised their value as a
coastal defence and some shrimp farming companies changed their business model.
Historically, shrimp farming developed in mangrove areas. These are low-lying
coastal areas of relatively cheap or otherwise underused land. And they provided
what was believed to be an ideal opportunity for developing the ponds that
shrimp are grown in. Grant-on-Immink is the CEO of Think Aqua, a charity that
works with small-scale shrimp farmers to reduce the damage they do to their
local environments. When you farm shrimp in mangrove areas, then very often the
ponds are not as productive. And many shrimp farms today are in higher areas
where water is pumped into the ponds from the sea. If you site the ponds above
the high water mark, then you're at less risk of flooding. The soil quality is
actually better and you have a much better chance of managing the water quality
within your ponds more effectively. So we can make an economic case for the
farmers to convert ponds back to mangroves. But in many areas, governments are
also encouraging farmers to do this. We see in Thailand that there's been
regulatory control to remove shrimp farms from mangrove areas. In Vietnam, in
Indonesia, the governments have signed up to international declarations that are
supposed to be protecting mangroves. Changes to industry practices were also
driven by retailers in the UK and the United States. Under pressure from
campaign groups like WWF and Greenpeace, many supermarkets decided to distance
themselves from companies involved in land seizures, modern slavery and mangrove
destruction. When you buy shrimp in a supermarket in the UK, you can be pretty
confident that the product that you're getting will come from a farm where
mangroves haven't been damaged. But it's less easy to know in a restaurant
whether those shrimp all come from areas where mangroves haven't been damaged.
We can always ask the restaurant where they source their shrimp from, but many
of them don't have the detailed information that we need to really understand
where those shrimp have come from. While mangrove destruction continues in the
areas I visited, on a global scale the movement to protect them has made most
remaining mangroves a little safer. But what about the trail of destruction that
the industry left in its wake as it spread around the tropics? Amazon's charity,
Think Aqua, is just one of the conservation groups advising local people on the
post-shrimp clean-up. Rejuvenating old shrimp ponds is a relatively
straightforward process technically. When you farm shrimp, you end up with silts
very often in the bottom of ponds, and if the ponds are still quite natural and
originally dug into the mangrove sediment, then you can plant new mangrove
seedlings. And there are local NGOs in many of the countries that we're working
who are actively growing mangrove seedlings and looking to plant them in old
shrimp ponds and other coastal areas. Near the town of Barit Puntar, the Penang
Inshore Fishermen's Association has set up a mangrove restoration area to bring
back the spawning grounds of fish that once thrived along this coastline.
Starting from that side, here, 33,000. 33,000 mangroves you've planted. So we
planted in year 2000. Now each is 22 years. And they've grown up very well.
They're looking very healthy. You're happy with these ones? Yeah. My name is
Suhaiza. Actually I assist the FIFO when they have the programme. FIFO is Penang
Inshore Fishermen's Welfare Association. How many species do you have in here?
Actually we have 50 species of mangrove, but in here we have 31 species. At the
moment the water level is down and the roots of these mangroves are exposed.
This one is the rhizophora. Does this give fruit, this one? Yeah. It looks like
a string bean hanging down. So when it drops, it drops directly into the mud and
then just grows. But if it falls sideways, no good. So it has to fall, it's very
pointed, sharp at the bottom end and that goes straight through into the mud. So
you see our nursery, we make sure they're all like that. You have to make sure
you plant them the right way. To make sure that they will grow. Right. At the
Rajahitam River further south, Wu Mei Ying of the State Assembly showed me
another area that's been replanted. And what's happened to the mangrove on the
side here? In 2018 there was a group of people who wanted to apply for this land
for shrimp farming. And they just made an application to the authority, never
got approval, but they started to destroy. They started destroying it anyway?
Yes. They considered that I already applied, the land belongs to me. Even though
they never got any black and white, they said the authority already approved it.
So even though they won't give approval, the company still goes ahead and
destroys the mangrove? Yes. During that time the police came and took the people
away. There are some mangroves trying to regrow. Have these been planted or is
that natural? Yes, with the effort by Kwasi and I joined together with them. We
planted here for two times. We planted how many? Three thousand over. Three
thousand? Wow. So they grew along this river bank here? Yes, mainly for this
area. So these are now growing up in between the dead logs of the old trees that
they've cut. Eventually will this mangrove regrow do you think? We hope so. Oh,
there's some fish down there. There was a fish just jumping, so there are fish
in here. The problem isn't a lack of will or effort. Local people really want
their mangroves back. The problem, as I discovered, is that these muddy
estuaries are a battlefield between environmentalists who want to reclaim land
for mangroves and the shrimp farming companies who see a need for more shrimp
farms. Nor is Madhya Razaan of the local conservation group, Kwasa, showed me
what can happen. This area was an area of mud flat and you started planting
mangroves here. How many trees did you plant? Seven thousand. Seven thousand.
Yeah, with the local community. That must have taken an awful lot of work. Yes,
we take two, three months to finish it. And then suddenly the local villagers...
We plant about two months, then we get to know that they're demolishing our
mangroves that we just planted. So this strip in front of us, about 50 metres
wide and about a kilometre long, they have dug this out and destroyed all the
mangroves you planted. How did you feel when you saw that? We cannot even... One
of the villagers, she cried. Oh no. Because it's not easy to plant the
mangroves. Very, very angry, very upset. Yeah. Because of what they've done. We
decided to plant here because of the community request. Right. And we want to
repair. Oh, repair. Yeah, yeah. Right. I think we repair. Right. Yeah. And when
you're planting this, you have to go in up to your knees in mud. Yes. And I
mean, it's difficult work, hot work. Yeah, and also on the hot weather. Yeah. I
feel now. Like it is now. Very, very hot. What will happen now? Can you replant?
Because this area is very hot. This land now is belong to the government agency,
right? Yes, it is. And they are planning to make the prawn, the shrimp, a pond.
So they will proceed whatever they... Some state governments in Malaysia are
protecting some mangrove areas, especially as buffers against tsunami. The
national government says it wants to strike a balance between the environment
and the economy. The prawn industry, after all, is a huge employer. But it comes
at the expense of another local industry, fishing. We are in Kampung Baru, the
nearest fisherman jetty from Kampung Aceh. And we're going to talk to some
fishermen here. And Siti here is going to translate for me. How long has he been
fishing? He started fishing when he was 17. Now he's 40. What does he think
about them cutting down the mangrove to make the shrimp farm? He thinks because
of the shrimp farm, there's this one species of... Okay. It's gone now. It's
gone. It's gone completely. It's really hard to find. What does he think is the
reason? They're dumping all the chemical waste water into the sea. Have the
fishermen here been protesting against that? No, they don't want to cause
trouble. Why? He feels there's nothing that can be done. Who doesn't want to do
it? We can't do it. It's been a long time. They did last time, but they gave up.
Oh, they've given up. Yes. Here's another sluice pipe. And this is absolutely
filthy black water, man. Yes, you can see it's totally black and directly to the
river. Just coming straight out of one of the shrimp ponds. So I'm going between
the mangrove area and the ditch. On one side, there's a sluice pumping waste
water out of the shrimp ponds. And it's going into this muddy ditch filled with
green algae. And on the other side is a mangrove that's been torn down. Now, I
have to admit that as someone who loves sailing, mangroves have always been a
bit of a nuisance. So it takes a lot to learn to love a tangle of roots and
spikes planted in mud. But even if you just see mangroves as an area of swamp,
and you don't appreciate their value as a carbon sink or a spawning ground for
fish, or protection from tsunami, or a filtering system for water, even if you
undervalue all of that, you just have to look at the alternative, which I'm
standing in front of, a fetid yellow and black ponds of scum that are the
leftovers of shrimp farms. Just down the road, I met a local resident called
Ismail. So how close is your house? It's about five kilometers from here. Okay.
What do you think about all of this development? I mean, not just here, but the
ponds over there? Personally, I think it's very annoying for me because...
Basically, it's giving a hard time for the fishermen here. So basically, they
don't have any source of income because of this shrimp farm. Is it good for the
economy, though, do you think? Directly, I don't think so, because basically
what I know, all these prawns or shrimp, they're exported outside. And doesn't
that help Malaysia? I mean, exports? For the locals, no, no. If they say they
can provide jobs, they didn't hire locals. They hire outsiders. Actually, we
don't mind if they want to make some money, but please take care of our
environment. Costing the Earth was presented by Peter Hadfield. The producer was
Alistair Cross. Next this afternoon on Radio 4, in a new series of Law In
Action, we'll be exploring the legal options to achieve justice for Ukraine.
That's next after the news. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was filming East
London Mosque when the story broke the three schoolgirls from the area had gone
missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State group. Breaking
news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly missing... Shamina
Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of the so-called
caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and into Syria to
find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her story. What do you
think people think of you? Is it dangerous?