TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-10-02H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Please also check out the Federation's website and Facebook. I have calculated
the schedule and information of the teacher in charge. Hikari yo kokoro ni. Look
forward to the next time. K-Zoo Radio K-Zoo This is Radio K-Zoo, AM 1210
Honolulu, Hawaii, for the time is now... Gogo sanji desu. K-Zoo Radio You are
listening to K-Zoo Radio, AM 1210. The 2023 Sakura Matsuri Calendar This year,
the Sakura Matsuri, a festival held in Japan, is held. There are 15 contestants
for the 71st Sakura Matsuri. They are aiming to be the representative of Hawaii,
and are learning Japanese culture and Japanese tradition. K-Zoo Radio is
broadcasting the Sakura Matsuri Calendar, which introduces the contestants who
are active. Broadcasting is broadcast live from 5 p.m. on Mondays and Thursdays
from February 20 to March 16. The rerun is broadcast live from 9 a.m. on Mondays
and Thursdays from March 13. And the rerun is broadcast live from 9.30 a.m. on
Fridays. This program is... Platinum Sponsor Jenkins Eye Care Gold Sponsor
Dentist Richard Tamaru Ballet of the Temples Silver Sponsor H&H Wellness Glasses
of Paris Hawaii Life Consulting Kumi Suda Yoshimitsu Uehara First Honolulu
Reality Yamamoto Drapery These are the sponsors. The Hawaii Food Bank will start
applying for the Senior Farmers Market Nutrition Program from March 1. This
program is a 50-dollar coupon that allows farmers and farmers markets and
roadside stands to receive free food. It is registered every year. Participating
farmers are also recruited. If you are over 60 years old, you can apply online
at hawaiifoodbank.org backslash sfmnp or contact the Community Program Manager,
Jarrett Kawatani, to send your application. The phone number is 808-954-7877.
This message is brought to you by Ethnic Education Hawaii, making communications
accessible for all. Honolulu Festival March 11-12, at the Hawaii Convention
Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural
performances and activities. From 12 p.m. on the 12th, the Grand Parade and the
Nagaoka Fireworks will color the night sky. See you at the Honolulu Festival!
March 12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki
Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances and activities. March
12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach
Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances and activities. March 12-13, at
the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can
enjoy free cultural performances and activities. March 12-13, at the Hawaii
Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can enjoy free
cultural performances and activities. March 12-13, at the Hawaii Convention
Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural
performances and activities. March 12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala
Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances
and activities. March 12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center,
and Waikiki Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances and activities.
March 12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki
Beach Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances and activities. March
12-13, at the Hawaii Convention Center, Ala Moana Center, and Waikiki Beach
Walk, you can enjoy free cultural performances and activities. I'm back with the
Akira Men's Pineapple Rap. I was wondering what Akira Men was doing, and my
mother came to me. Hello, I'm Kuniko Muramoto. How is Akira Men? He's doing
well. He's doing well. That's good. We're starting the case afternoon. Today's
Thursday is Karin Ogura. I'm here with Kuniko, Akira Men's mother, and three
other guests. Kuniko is a professor at Ritsumeikan University. Dan Shiro is also
a professor at Ritsumeikan University. Hello. You look like you're going to talk
on stage. No, I've never done that. You're a professor at a university. I've
been working full-time, but I've been involved in some things. I see. You two
are from Ritsumeikan University. You're both from Hawaii, and you're both
teachers, right? I've seen you on social media in Hawaii and Japan. Thank you.
I'm Nana Horoiwa. Nana, you came here a while ago to talk about psychology. Yes,
I've been here before. And there's another teacher, or rather, my master. Master
Chikurin. What kind of master? A lot of things. A pottery master. I see. This is
Atsushi Takebayashi. Hello. He's the representative of Move for Japan. We're
going to have a talk at the Honolulu Festival, where we'll be looking back at
the past years since the Great East Japan Earthquake. Nana, could you tell us a
little bit about what's going on? The two of you started to move to Tohoku right
after the earthquake and started to think about supporting the people in Tohoku.
But you were told that you'd hear about the people's feelings and that it
wouldn't be very helpful. So you decided to become a witness to the people's
feelings and that's how you've been doing your work. I'd like to hear more about
that from you. I see. First of all, as a teacher at Ritsumeikan University,
you're here to support the East Japan Family. Dan, Shiro, and your family are a
manga store. Oh, you're a manga store too. And you're here to talk. I'll give
you a little bit of a schedule. Starting at 12 o'clock on Saturday, Dan, Shiro,
will be talking about the story of the people who support the people. The title
is, From 2.45 to the 12th Year of Fukushima. Kuniko Muramoto will be talking
about it. On Sunday, we'll have a free talk between the two of you. Today, we'll
have a free talk as well. We're a team of 20 to 45 people from the East Japan
Family Support Project. We've been working to become a witness to the
reconstruction while interacting with the people in four prefectures in Tohoku.
Ms. Muramoto, is this something that you started right away? Yes. We received
the earthquake on March 11. At our university, we raised the issue of the
disaster relief and educated people. So, when we heard that we needed to do
something about the disaster relief, we asked our teachers and students. We
thought, what would be the best? It's so far away, we can't go there often, and
we can't stay there for long. So we thought about what would be best. We came up
with this idea in the middle of the year. So, every year, we went to four
prefectures in Tohoku. We went to each prefecture once a month. We've been doing
this for a long time. So, you've been doing this for 12 years, and what has
changed? What has changed in your opinion? Well, one thing is the power of the
people of Tohoku. The power to overcome difficulties. I was always impressed by
that and learned a lot from them. Of course, there are still many things to
learn, but the coastal areas have been affected by the change every year. The
mountainous areas have been devastated, and new things have been built. So, now,
a new, shiny city is being built. The large-scale expansion site has been hiding
the sea for a long time. I feel very sorry about that. But I think it's a good
thing that we've been working hard to rebuild the city. However, there are more
and more difficult situations in Fukushima. So, from the 12th year, we will
focus on Fukushima and continue to work. What are the more and more difficult
things? The government is spending money on reconstruction, and they are
building new things. But there are still many problems that cannot be solved.
Many people have forgotten that they have already reconstructed the city without
being able to return to the city. There are many people who have forgotten, so I
think we need to tell them about the problems. Mr. Dan, in this project, you
exhibited family manga. What is this about? It's a little different from what
we've talked about. For example, when there is a big tsunami, people experience
that many things are taken away. After being taken away, people feel despair and
think that it is difficult to recover. But as time goes by, it is difficult to
recover on your own. The same is true for the world. Various things are
happening around the world. For example, there are people who have suffered
damage. There are also people who have had a hard time even at a small level in
their personal lives. There are many people who have done their best. When you
are in the most difficult situation, you can't get out of it and you have to do
your best. When you have time to do that, you can see how other people have
lived. You can see it in a small story. You can see that someone is doing their
best. You can see that someone is doing their best. You can see that other
people are living for something. I'm sure that this will help you. In that
sense, it reminds you of the stories that you thought you had lost in your life.
Or, it reminds you that you can live from now on. It reminds you that you can
live from now on and that you can give your power to the future. I think that's
what the story is about. I see. Today, we have two professors at Ritsumeikan
University. Dan, Dan Shiro. I thought it was a first name. Dan Shiro. I thought
it was a name like Mr. Hanashira. Dan Shiro and Kuniko Muramoto. They have been
supporting the disaster from Hawaii as Move for Japan. Now, they are known as
Take-chan of Yakisoba. They are also known in Hawaii. In Tohoku, at first, they
were not from Hawaii. I saw a letter from them saying that they were supporting
the disaster from somewhere in Japan. I thought that many people were waiting
for yakisoba because they visited the disaster frequently. They provided warm
food. This is Takebayashi. Is this a grandpa from Hawaii? It says grandpa, but
actually, it was an old man. An old man from Hawaii? He was polite. He was
called an old man from Hawaii. He was called an old man, not an older brother.
He was a great old man. He was a great old man. In Hawaii, he was a bit younger.
In Take-san, he was an older brother. In English, anko means you can go to any
age. After the disaster, not only in Tohoku, but also in Kumamoto, there were
many places where people visited. Speaking of Kumamoto, when I went to Kumamoto,
Mr. Muramoto also came to visit. Oh, really? I also went to Kumamoto. When I
went there, Akira Men, the son of Mr. Muramoto, was in Kumamoto. He said he was
going to Kumamoto. So I contacted him to meet him. We went to the Takidashi. Oh,
I see. It was in Mashiki. How many years has it been since the disaster? I think
it was in April. It was in April 2014 and 2016. There were two disasters. He
told me about the situation in various parts of Japan. How many times have you
been to Tohoku? I've been to Shin-Chi-Machi, Fukushima, 57 or 58 times. Oh, I
see. So you've been there many times in a year. Yes. I've been to Japan twice. I
had to do something else, so I went there again. I see. It's not a common thing
to go to a place like that. I can't do that. I feel like I'm doing this because
I have a strong feeling that everyone is doing this. I feel like I'm doing this
because I have a strong feeling that everyone is doing this. This time, you're
going to do this with the booth of the Harenokai, right? Yes, I'm going to use
the space of the Aloha Life Church. I'm going to use some of it to get some of
our materials and space. I'm really looking forward to this opportunity. I just
heard from Nana-san about you two. I'm really looking forward to it. I see.
That's what it is. In the senior life, the young women of the Nadeshiko Club
came up and brought various local crafts to this Honolulu Festival. brought
various local crafts to this Honolulu Festival. They were selling them and were
also doing activities to support them. Is the Fukushima picture book project
also taking place there? Yes, it is. It's the same place where you can see the
two of us talking. We have chairs lined up and screens in front of us. It's not
a movie, but an animation. It's not an animation, but a paper play. It's a paper
play-style animation movie. It's a long movie. It's about 1 hour and 20 minutes
long. It's about the fishermen at the time. There was an earthquake and they
left the boat to go protect it. It's a story from that time to now. This time,
we have English subtitles on both Japanese and English. You can watch it on both
Japanese and English. Please come and watch it. The animation is about the
fishermen of Fukushima. It's a boat-type animation. Yes, it's a normal boat-
type. A boat-type? A boat-type sea? I see. The theme is the fishermen living
with the Fukushima sea and the earthquake that caused the earthquake. It's a
paper play-style animation. That's what it is. And, do you have any
announcements for this time? There are English subtitles on the boat-type sea,
and at the two-person talk show on the 11th, we have a translator. Some people
only know the English translation, but they can come and watch it. I see. The
title of the talk show is The Story that Supports the Future. What is the title
of the talk show? Can you tell us about it? As I said, this time, we have a
display space where you can see the stories of various people from all over
Japan. The display space is a short story about various people. So, rather than
the story of the disaster area, people who watch the short stories of various
people can learn a lot from it. When I was in the gallery in the morning, I
thought of telling the story. I see. And after that, on the 11th, at 2.45 p.m.
on Saturday, you mentioned Fukushima. The title is The 12th Year of Fukushima.
Can you tell us more about it in the talk show? I don't think there is anything
we can do about a big problem. But I mentioned earlier that the project is to be
a witness to something very important. I think that if someone is watching with
interest or trying to understand, it may not be a visible power, but it may be a
message that people forget. I have that tendency. As a witness, I have visited
Fukushima and experienced what I have experienced from my current position. I
hope that we can bring our feelings to the people and that it will be a message
of support or a message of hope to the people. That is my message. Where in
Fukushima have you visited? I have visited many places. At first, I couldn't
enter the evacuation area. I stayed in Fukushima City. I see. In 2015, the coast
guard was released. I visited Namiie. Now, I have visited Shirakawa, Iitate,
Futaba, Okuma, Tomioka, and other places in the form of fieldwork. I have
visited them once, twice, and three times a year to record their activities. I
see. You mentioned that you couldn't enter the coast. There are people who have
been connected by playing the ukulele in Fukushima. They won the K-2 award at
the International Ukulele Contest in Hawaii. They were in the inland area of
Fukushima, so they were not affected by the disaster. When a disaster like this
happens, it is not a big deal but the difference between the place where the
disaster happened and the place where it didn't happen is very big. During the
disaster, the tsunami came to Hawaii, and it took about a week to broadcast the
news. For example, a tourist ambassador came from the west side of Japan. But
the story of the disaster was not broadcasted. The tourist ambassador came to
Japan to promote the disaster. So, the people who heard the news and the people
who asked questions were very concerned about the balance of the situation. I
think it is the same in Fukushima. The teachers are supporting the disaster from
outside. Take-chan is also supporting it. I think Fukushima people are also
suffering from the disaster because they are not in the coast guard and the
disaster is not a disaster. I went to the U.S. right after the disaster. I don't
think Kansai is a disaster. But when I go outside the country, I am called a
disaster. I think it is scary to be separated from yourself. But the farther you
are, the bigger the disaster is. In a sense, compared to people who are far away
from Japan, people in Hawaii are always supporting the disaster. I think that is
one of the reasons. I think it is good to be away from yourself. If you don't
want to think about yourself, you can be a defender. You can forget about the
disaster. Or you can be indifferent to the disaster. You can't avoid the
disaster. You can't forget about the disaster. You can't face the disaster. You
can't remember the disaster. I think that is happening. I see. I would like to
invite the teachers to come to the convention center in the future. Mr. Tan,
would you like to say something to the audience? If you want to see the manga,
we have the English version. You can read it. Please have a look at the manga. I
see. Is the manga drawn by you? Yes, I drew it. You are a manga artist. I am a
manga artist. You are a manga artist. I want to hear the voice of a storyteller.
I want to hear the voice of a storyteller. I think it would be good if you could
talk about the manga. I have been doing the manga talk at the convention center.
I see. Mr. Tan, please say something. On that day, I had a talk with the
teachers at the convention center. There was a picture exhibition of the Move
for Japan and the Nadeshiko Club. I used the pictures from the exhibition for
the convention. It was very interesting. I see. The convention center is located
on the right side of the convention center. Mr. Tan, please. I have something to
say. Can I say something? Please. We are a band called Nakayoshi Band. We play
at the beachwalk in Waikiki at 5.20 p.m. It is a sacred place where Jake played
when the earthquake happened. We play for about 30 minutes. I heard that you
were a bird. Yes, I was. On Saturday. Mr. Hitomi Shibatani plays at the
convention center. We play at Waikiki. We play at the beachwalk. If you are near
here, please come to see us. We sing songs. Thank you. Please come to see us at
the Honolulu Festival this weekend. We came back to Japan after 4 years. We will
play at the beachwalk and play with Mr. Hitomi Shibatani and Nakayoshi Band.
Thank you. Let's finish with Akira. Aloha, oh yeah. Can you sing with us? I was
surprised. I will sing and dance instead of Akira. Thank you. The lunch is
Hawaiian beef loco moco. Tropical fruits are super juicy. I always grab these
snacks from Subi. Stay Aloha, oh yeah. 808 Rainbow State instead of Hawaii.
People say, how is it? Mahalo, Nuiro, Uncle and Auntie. Ni hao, kawaii, oh
afuranai. Boroke ka hōrabe, Maui, Hawaii. Aloha, oh yeah. Ni hao, kawaii, oh
afuranai. Boroke ka hōrabe, Maui, Hawaii. Aloha, oh yeah. Aloha, oh yeah. Aloha,
oh yeah. Nice to meet you, everyone. I'm your guide today. I'm Akira. Aloha
spirit. Aloha spirit. Aloha spirit. Aloha spirit. KZ Radio It's time for Dewa
Oto. Thanks to your participation, this popular program has aired for a long
time. The purpose is for KZ listeners to help one another with information.
Let's keep this program positive and moving forward. The views and opinions
expressed in this program are those of the callers and do not necessarily
reflect the views and opinions of KZ Radio. KZ reserves the right to edit
comments as necessary. KZ Radio It's time for Dewa Oto. It's time for everyone.
Please call 808-941-5966. Please call 808-941-5966. Please wait for your call.
The Honolulu Festival is finally here. There are 10, 11, 12, and 10 are the
invitations for the Governor's Luncheon. And at night, the convention center is
open to the public. There are 11, 12 free admission events. You can't miss them.
Here's a message from KZ. Let's spend more time for health and do more things
that we love. The improved new coronavirus vaccine has a high prevention effect
against severe diseases, hospitalization, and the worst outcomes. The last
vaccine was approved in September 2022. We can get more information about the
vaccine at vaccines.gov. We can do it. Pete Ford by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services At the Mitsuwa Marketplace, you can get a discount and
a free 1-hour mall parking validation for more than $10. At the Waikiki store,
you can meet the team that will help you to make the store more exciting. You
can talk to customers and decorate the store. The starting price is $17. You can
send your application from the homepage. For more information, visit the website
at www.mitsuwa.com and visit the Waikiki page. This is a presentation of the
Honolulu Festival. It has been 12 years since the quake and this is the 13th
festival. We have introduced the festival in detail at the booth in the spring.
Please come and see us. After this, when the phone rings, the people from the
Handbelkwler University will come to the studio and talk about the Honolulu
Festival. They will be here in the morning. We will be talking about the
festival after the phone rings. We have already introduced the festival and from
7pm, we will have a one-hour farewell concert at the Central Union Church. The
Handbelkwler is the perfect place for the farewell concert. It will be Ms.
Arai's concert. I will try to not miss the voice of the handbelkwler and the
voice of the cherry blossoms. It will be from 7pm. Please come and see us with
your family and friends. After that, from 4.15pm, we will have a live at the
Aloha Hotline at the FMA. We will be talking about the live at the FMA at 4.30pm
with Ms. Reiko Ruiz. We will be giving you a live talk every time. Please don't
miss it. We will also have a cherry blossom festival calendar from 5pm. We will
be able to introduce the three of you so please look forward to it. We will be
with you until 6pm. After that, we will have a live at the Aloha Academy at 8pm.
We will be able to hear from you in the studio. Please call us. If you are new
to Spectrum TV or internet services, please call the Japanese support line at
1877-987-3324. If you only want to add TV Japan, please call toll free at
1855-243-8892 and request Japanese View. TV Japan has a number of channels for
Japanese View. Please call. Hello. This is Takashi. Hello, Takashi. Today, on
the 95th episode of the Spring Selection High School Baseball Drawing, we will
be having the 3rd match of the 3rd day of the Okinawa Elementary School which is
related to this program. It will be at 8.30pm in Hawaii. It will be a big match
between the Gifu Prefecture and the Okinawa Prefecture. I see. I think the Gifu
Prefecture will be there. Yes, they are. They were here earlier. Yes. It will be
over around 10pm. I will be reading the details at the restaurant. Hello.
Japanese translation. Japanese translation. 第四日、第三試合の二回戦で 神奈川の慶応と対戦です。
開幕試合は宮城の東北と 山梨の山梨学院が顔を合わせます。 選手、先生、高松聖行・瀨川の高松聖行・横井・理夫太首相に決まりました。 はい、もしもしどうぞ。
ごめんなさい、りんりん鳴らしてお話し中、 あっ大丈夫だよ、はい。 I woke up at 3am this morning, so I want to
have a cocktail and get some courage and say something. When I went to the
supermarket, there was a super cute couple. I think they were over 80 years old.
They were holding hands, talking to each other, and they were talking in
Japanese. I thought, isn't this a little too much? I called them and I was so
jealous. They were holding hands, talking to each other, and they were so
loving. I was already 70 years old, so I wasn't interested in men. So I googled
how old people were and how they could have sex. I found out that people over
the age of 70 and 80 can enjoy sex more than young people. I read that. Can I
talk to them? You can go if you have time. It's daytime. And they say it's good
for your heart and body. There are many people like this at nursing homes. I
thought, I don't have a bubble like champagne, but if I get older and go to a
gay home, I'll meet him and I'll really enjoy sex again. I don't feel like that,
but do you feel like having sex? Let's stop here. I don't think so. The sex of
humans is the same. It's a little high. Especially today, the sky is blue. Are
you drinking champagne? Forced contact, orso K. Just put it on when you sleep
every night and your eyes will be forced naturally. It is also suitable for
children who cannot have sex yet. It suppresses the prohibition of sex. Alamoana
Advanced Eye Clinic is 20 times in Alamoana Center Building. Call 944-9911.
Please use both Japanese and English. It's time for phone call. 808-941-5966. I
don't think age is related to everyone's age. Recently, Yahoo News was talking
about the topic of I am a man, Madonna's Kumi Hayase. I came to the studio of
K-Zoo with Hiroko Hayashi. I was living in California at that time, so I was
able to talk a little. I'm back in Japan now, and I'm on a radio show. I'm
showing various gorgeous scenes with the fan club on SNS. There was a little
news about the affair. Oh, Mr. Hayashi is 71 years old. He was 62 years old.
He's getting more and more beautiful. I just thought he was in love. It seems
that there are various messages about evacuation. It's amazing that he has such
feelings. I was watching Yahoo News. It's time for phone call. 808-941-5966. I'm
going to the National Baseball Team. WBC is also a player who is really great. I
think we'll have a match with Korea tonight. The fifth World Baseball Classic
WBC was held at Tokyo Dome. The first league, the B team, had two games. Japan's
representative Samurai Japan won two consecutive games. We won yesterday. From 7
p.m. With Korea. From 7 p.m. Japanese first-team leader, Darvish of Padres. I'm
Zouen Saito. I've been in Hawaii for 50 years. I've been contributing to the
garden industry. If you have any questions about the garden, please feel free to
contact me. I'm Zouen Saito, the doctor of the garden. The phone number is
808-386-8000. 808-386-8000. It's time for phone call. 808-941-5966. I get a lot
of messages every day, talking about food and living. I got a call. Hello?
Hello? Yes, it's Keisu. Can you see the baseball field? WBC? Let's ask WBC.
Hello? Hello? Yes, please. Can you hear me? Hello? Yes, it's Keisu. Can you hear
me? Can you hear me? Can you see the WBC? Can you see the World Baseball Classic
here in America in Hawaii? I can connect to the internet and watch Japanese
websites. I was able to do that when I was playing soccer and the World Cup. I
can watch sports news on my phone. I saw the scene where Otani scored two goals.
I wonder if I can watch the game in full. I want to buy my dream home in Hawaii.
If you're a real estate agent, please feel free to contact us. Hello? It's
Keisu. If you're recording... Hello? I'm sorry. I lost connection. Please try
again. If you're recording cable, you can watch Fox Sports Channel 214. If
you're recording Spectrum, you can watch Hawaiian Tentatsu 75. 75. I think so. I
think it's good. The semifinals and the finals are in Florida. You can watch it
on Channel 2. I see. The semifinals and the finals are okay? I think it's 2 or 3
p.m. in Hawaii. I see. The semifinals will start on Sunday, right? Yes, it will.
Then it will be 5 hours. I think it will start at 8 p.m. You can watch it on
Channel 2. I see. Thank you. If you're recording cable in the U.S., you can
watch Spectrum, Fox 214, and Hawaiian Tentatsu 75. Hello? Excuse me. I'd like to
ask the baseball player who he is supporting. Who is he supporting? I think many
people are watching the baseball player. Hello? Hello? This is Keisu. We're
connected, but I'll hang up for now. You can enjoy popular Japanese TV shows on
demand. In March, there will be a variety of TV shows. The drama will feature
the hit series, Dragon Sakura, and the latest series, Lonely Gourmet. The movie
will feature 8 new titles, including Everest and The God's Gift. The anime will
feature Chibimaruko, and the variety will feature Masahiro Nakai's third match
and the season 2 of Arashi. The campaign is currently in progress. If you pay a
total of 3 months' worth of viewership when you join, you will receive an Amazon
Fire TV Stick. Enjoy DLibrary Japan on your TV screen. You can apply for the
campaign from the website. First, please watch a free episode. You can also
watch a part of the popular show. Hello? I'm sorry. I'm a little out of it. I'm
sorry. Thank you. This is Fox 214. Yes, that's right. Thank you. Let's continue.
Hello? Hello, this is Keisu. Excuse me. Baseball is the same as the NFL Super
Bowl in the United States, right? Yes. The Super Bowl. So I really want to ask
you, who does he think is going to win? Who is he supporting? Which team? I
understand. Thank you. I understand. If you're listening, please answer. In
Japan, the TV Asahi series and the TBS series are on the ground and broadcast
and broadcast the Japanese game, Samurai Japan. In the internet, Amazon Prime
Video is broadcasting the entire game, the semifinals and the finals,
exclusively. This time, WBC has Amazon Prime Video. Hello? I'm sorry. I have a
request. Yes. I'm interested in the game, of course, but I enjoy the game. You
enjoy the game. Yesterday, I watched the Korean and Australian games. I watched
it from 6 to 9. And then I thought, if I don't sleep, it's going to be 12 again.
I think I slept for an hour. And then I watched it again. This morning, I
watched golf from 7 o'clock. Oh, I see. In the United States, basketball is more
important than baseball. Basketball. Yes, now. Now, it's called Marquis Madness.
It's the heat of March. So, this year, Fox also made a move. Until now, no one
has played the World Classic. Basketball is more difficult now because of the
university. So, I'm going to play volleyball for three days from tonight. And
the day after tomorrow, the top teams from UCLA and New York will come. I have
to watch that, too. It's a sports festival. Not only baseball players. Thank you
for answering. Thank you. Hello. Hello, Karin. Hello. I watched it until 4
o'clock this morning. I couldn't sleep. Your voice is like that. It's still
evening. I can't sleep even if I try to sleep. It's like a high school girl.
Yes, until 4 o'clock. I had a big haze in my head. I heard Thunder's punch and
the haze flew away. Was it good or bad? Was it good or bad? That's what it is.
It's different for each person. But I feel that white people are getting along
better with each other. I think it's wonderful when they walk together. I think
it's cute and I think there's love. But I'm sorry to say this, but when Asian
seniors walk together, they support each other so that they don't fall down. I
think that's why. That's it. Thank you for your time. Please watch DALBISH, too.
Samurai Japan will continue from 12 to 4. Samurai Japan was watched last night
by Shouhei Ohtani and Reman Ikinerima. It was a game that won by 8 to 1. What
kind of game will DALBISH play with Korea this time? Not only DALBISH, but
Samurai Japan. What kind of game will they play? It was time for a phone call.
It was too quick. After this, we will welcome the Handwell Choir of Hakuo
University. I will call you up to here. I will be in charge of it again from 10
am tomorrow. Thank you for your continued support. It will be 4 o'clock soon. I
will welcome you to the Handwell Choir of Hakuo University. Welcome back. Thank
you. Aloha! I've been waiting for you. First, please introduce yourself. These
are the three choir members who came to the studio. Please tell me your name and
the year of the university. I am Haruka Koda, a fourth-year student at Hakuo
University.