TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-16H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Friday morning at 9.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at three o'clock.
Downing Street says the government's new asylum plans are consistent with
international law and the UK is ready to defend them in court. The measures set
out by the Home Secretary would see anyone found to have entered the country
illegally removed from the UK within 28 days and blocked from returning in
future. Suella Bravman said it would dramatically reduce the number of small
boats crossing the Channel. But the UN's Refugee Agency has said that the bill
does not comply with Britain's legal obligations. Catherine Stubberford is a
spokesperson for the organisation. Fundamentally the bill in its current form
extinguishes the right for people in need of protection to seek it in the United
Kingdom no matter how compelling their claim might be. In practice they would be
left in limbo, they would be subject to detention, unable to establish their
status and access the protection to which they are entitled under the Refugee
Convention. The BBC says it will have a frank conversation with Gary Lineker
about its impartiality guidelines after the Match of the Day host made negative
comments about the government's asylum policy. The reward leading to the
conviction if whoever tried to murder a police officer in County Tyrone last
month has been increased to a hundred and fifty thousand pounds. John Caldwell
suffered life-changing injuries after being shot in front of his son in a Sports
Centre car park in Oma. Eight people arrested and questioned by police have all
been released. Snow has caused travel disruption across several parts of the UK.
Bristol Airport was closed for a time and drivers in the West Midlands and
Eastern England have been advised not to travel unless it's essential. Overnight
temperatures at Kimbrace in the Highlands dropped below minus 15 Celsius. The
daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Sussex has been christened at the couple's
California home. Prince Harry and Meghan have announced that a service was held
for Princess Lilibet Diana on Friday. Their daughter became a princess when King
Charles acceded to the throne. BBC News. In half an hour we'll ask whether a
weight loss drug could help tackle obesity in the UK. Some doctors think the
drug is controversial and there are ethical elements too. Inside Health, is it
half-past? But now it's time for Moneybox Live with Dan Whitworth. Hello and
welcome to the programme all about your money. Something every single one of us
spends some of that money on is food and whether it's at the local corner shop
or the big or small supermarkets and everything in between the price we pay for
that food is rising at the fastest rate many of us have ever seen. According to
the latest figures you're paying 17% more for the same basket or trolley of
shopping than you were this time last year. So if your monthly shop last year
was £100 you're now paying £117. So how is that impacting your finances and what
can you do to try to bring your shopping bills down? Well remember this is your
programme and we'd really like to hear from you. If this is something you've
noticed please do send your questions or your comments to moneybox at bbc.co.uk
and to get us started I've been speaking to Farhat outside her local supermarket
in Halifax in West Yorkshire. I used to come to the supermarket for my weekly
shop. £40-45, good amount of food and you know some extras, toiletries and
stuff. I spent £60 plus today which is a lot for us and I've just kind of just
got the basics. You try to cut out on a certain things but everything is
important like you know clothes, food and the basics is all increased. So what
are you meant to cut down on? I sometimes have days where I feed my kids and
have their leftovers. I'd rather feed my kids and go hungry myself but what else
are you meant to put down on? Well listening to Farhat is Chris Hamer, Director
of Insight at the British Retail Consortium. That's kind of the trade industry
body which speaks for supermarkets. Chris hello. Good afternoon. Chris good
afternoon to you. Tell me what are your members telling you about how this big
rise in food prices is affecting their customers? Well our members are telling
us that it's a really tough situation for them and for their customers at the
moment and they're working hard to mitigate the effects of rising costs that
they're seeing coming into their businesses to try and you know not pass through
as much of those costs to their customers as possible but you know there's no
doubt that for retailers like their customers are facing tremendous cost
pressures from the price of energy and the price of goods so yeah it's a very
difficult time and I think they're trying their best to mitigate the costs. And
Chris just explain, you touched on it there a little bit, what are the key
drivers behind this really sharp rise in prices that we've all seen over the
last few months? The biggest driver is the Russian war in Ukraine and the effect
of effectively the shortage in raw materials like with oils, grains and
fertilizers and also the effect of sanctions on Russia so and the spike in
energy costs that we saw as a result of that so it's good to see that we've you
know some of those costs have started to fall back but those are still you know
within the supply chain so energy unfortunately is something that we all need in
terms of production of goods and of course running stores, keeping fridges and
freezers running costs an awful lot of money at the moment. You mentioned in
your first answer that your members are trying to mitigate the impact of this
rise in prices, explain that in a little bit more detail, what are your members
doing exactly to try to lessen the impact on shoppers? Well I think that
probably the first thing to mention is that this is a really competitive market
so retailers will you know fight for their custom because customers are
currently voting with their feet and we see a lot of switching between retailers
that are offering great value and those perhaps that aren't offering as much.
Retailers are also holding back, I mean believe it or not despite you know those
very high numbers they are still holding prices back as much as they can. Other
things they're doing are things like value ranges so expanding the number of
items that are within a value range, expanding the number of stores that those
products are stocked within and other things like offering discounts to
vulnerable groups. And of course just to add one more thing they're also helping
their staff so retail is one of the biggest employers in the country and they're
also providing increased wages to their people as well. I mean in the context of
that Chris and I hear what you're saying, I mean in the context of that your
members are expected to make massive profits this year in the billions of
pounds. I mean bearing that in mind shouldn't they be doing more? I think
retailers can always do more and also government can help with that as well but
I think it's fair to say that when you look at the sales numbers and the same
with profit the volumes are actually falling so the value of money today is
worth less than it was a year ago so you see that in the profits that come
through as well. Okay but we are talking in the billions of pounds it's not
going to hit too hard though surely? Well the margins that retailers typically
make particularly in food is very small so it's also very single digit
percentage of sales that retailers make at the end of the day and I think that
competitive market should remain to keep prices down for customers. If we made
the industry sort of have much lower rates of profit actually I think that would
be bad for the consumer. Okay understood and I think just finally Chris one of
the biggest questions that people want answered is when is this going to stop?
Richard a listener of ours emailed us asking exactly that. When will things get
back to normal he asks he wants a date no matter how ballpark he says that
basically he can start looking forward to things and prices in the supermarkets
getting back to normal what's your answer to that? Well I'm afraid it's quite
grim reading if I'm honest you know even if prices stayed exactly where they
were today the overall inflation rate would reduce to about half a percent by
Christmas so you know the government's promise of halving inflation well that's
going to happen but it's not that's quite different to whether you'll see prices
fall we expect prices to start falling in the summer so there's still you know
we're seeing month-on-month increases in prices right now but on the you know
the silver lining is that the commodity markets the prices of goods globally
have fallen but it takes at least nine months for that to flow through to the
prices that customers see on the shelf. Okay understood Chris Hamer from the
British Retail Consortium thank you. We're joined now by Lisa Webb a consumer
expert at Which and Sabine Goodwin from the Independent Food Aid Network or IFAN
which supports more than 550 food banks across the UK thank you both for joining
me. Lisa Webb I'm going to start with you first if that's okay these rising
prices are hitting everybody of course give us some more on the numbers because
Which I understand has a monthly food inflation tracker what types of food are
rising in price fastest at the moment and which ones are rising more slowly? Hi
Dan yeah we do have a tracker and actually what we do every month is we're
tracking the price of around 75,000 different products across eight different
brands of supermarkets so we try and get as many as possible across the board
what we've been seeing is all food prices are going up we do know that already
but actually things like butter, spreads, milk and unfortunately the big one
that really bothers me is cheese going up huge amounts we saw one value cheddar
cheese going up by 96.6% I am a massive cheese fan. It's crazy. It's gutting
it's awful but butter and spreads that's been going on for quite a long time
that's nearly 30% up for things like that 26% for milk these are all real basic
products that people really don't go without can't go without a lot of the time
unless you're avoiding all dairy you're probably gonna have these things in your
basket each month so these are having huge impacts. And Lisa we heard from
Richard just a few moments ago he talked about the summer he talked hopefully by
the end of the year that we might start to see these increase in prices start to
slow and potentially drop you're obviously got a lot of data at which what's
what's that data telling you? Well we're not seeing it yet unfortunately the
tracker is showing prices are going up and they aren't showing any sign of
slowing down at the moment I am slightly heartened by what Chris said about that
nine month period and that the prices are coming down somewhere but they haven't
reached us yet but it's not what we're seeing at the moment and I don't want to
be the purveyor of doom and gloom but currently I'm not seeing prices go down.
Okay really useful to hear thank you Lisa stay with us because I'm going to
bring Sabine in now Sabine from the Independent Food Aid Network which as I said
looks after or help support hundreds of food banks. Sabine tell me about the
type of people coming to use your food banks now compared to say a year or two
or even three years ago. Hi Dan well your demand for independent food banks has
been increasing relentlessly and what we're seeing is more and more people who
are in work more pensioners people in work who work with the NHS people working
within the food industry in supermarkets or as delivery drivers and people who
have been sanctioned and had their benefit payments removed so there's similar
groups as before but also new groups new cohorts of people particularly people
who are working that we're seeing increasingly more complex cases sorry. No no I
was about to say because we work before Sabine and that sort of change in your
clients people who are coming to you is something you've talked about before
explain why why do you think that is? Well what we what we know for sure is that
there was a poverty crisis in this country way before the pandemic started
before the cost of living increases exacerbated the situation and our social
security system has been cut back and cut back so that by now that it's so
threadbare it can't really be called a safety net at all and alongside that
wages are inadequate they just don't match the the cost of living and benefit
payments are going to be increased in April but the rise doesn't doesn't match
the reality of the cost of living and we know through the winter people have
been building up more and more debt. Just to come back to you with that Sabine I
mean the government can only do so much as you say I mean benefits are going to
rise in April in line with inflation I think around 10% which was a figure taken
from September and also there's I mean there's billions of pounds coming in the
cost of living help that's coming from the government but food inflation is
obviously hitting people across the board but it particularly hits those in the
lower income households more particularly is that right? That's right because
they're already been struggling for years I mean but before this pandemic
started 43% of households on universal credit were reporting severe or moderate
food insecurity yes the government is doing you know making welcome increases
and is helping but they need to do a lot more if we're not to see devastating
impact on this on people's mental and physical health in years to come. Okay a
stark warning Sabine. Lisa and Sabine please stay with us because I'm delighted
to say now we're joined on the line by Rebecca from Wiltshire. Rebecca you're a
family of three yourself and two teenage children so I'm guessing two very
hungry mouths to feed and you also work part-time. Tell me have you noticed any
difference in your weekly or your monthly food bill? Well when for us Dan once
the cost of living crisis began being mentioned in the media I knew I had to
take some radical steps to ensure the bill didn't increase above what I was
already paying which is 70 to 100 pounds a week and so I did take those some
radical steps and actually I do believe that I've managed to keep our bill the
same and mitigate our own personal household inflation on food. Okay and so talk
me through that talk me through that how have you managed to do that then
Rebecca? Okay well the first step that I took was to join the Oleo community.
Now what's that I've not heard of that before explain it to me. Yeah Oleo is an
app that you can download on your phone and it's run by a group of volunteers.
Those volunteers go to a number of supermarkets and pick up collections at the
end of the day for food which is going to go out of date that day. That food is
then taken back and uploaded to the app where people can request it and then is
distributed fairly between those requesting it. The volunteers that do the
collections then keep 10% of that food for themselves as a reward for doing that
work. So I think over the last 18 months by using Oleo I have saved
approximately £2,300. Okay and there are obviously I'm sure lots of apps out
there on the market that you're using this particular one so you're using sort
of smart tech in practical terms when you're walking around the supermarket I
mean have you changed what you're buying how much you're buying are you are you
watching what you're putting in your basket or your trolley more closely?
Absolutely, the days of filling a trolley at a major supermarket are gone. I
pick and choose where I go I've downgraded to a different supermarket. You don't
downgrade you're just using a different supermarket Rebecca. Okay, okay so we've
also got to consider transport costs to those supermarkets. I've also researched
the time of day that our local shops do food reductions. I've then instead of
taking the car and using the fuel I've walked to the shop and on a regular basis
and picked up the reduced items at the end of the day. They come back they get
popped into the freezer and makes a massive difference to the overall food bill.
So this is something you're addressing head-on Rebecca? Absolutely, yes. Can I
ask you because I'm really interested in this because you've obviously got two
teenagers so not young children teenagers is it 13 and 15 I think? How are you
talking to them about what's going on about how this is impacting your household
personal finances? Okay well we are waste warriors so... Go on, I like the sound
of that, tell me more. We're waste warriors we don't waste food in our
household. First I have to say they were a little bit dubious about some of the
methods that we were using and the reduced food items and the tickets and the
yellow tickets and things like that. But gradually over time they've come on
board and they now get quite excited about making pizza bases and adding their
own toppings on night film nights and making their own popcorn instead of
sending out for a takeaway. Yeah, yeah. So they are on board they are and it's
good education for them. It's good for them to know that things aren't as they
always have been. Yeah understood, understood. Now Lisa I'm going to bring you
back in here. You've obviously just heard Rebecca's experience does that match
up with what your data with what your numbers are showing you in terms of what
Rebecca is trying to do to sort of mitigate the impact of these rising food
prices? First of all I think Rebecca is is an inspiration that she's taken so
many steps to try and help herself and I think for anyone who is able to do that
that is brilliant. Some of the things that Rebecca mentioned though are simply
not available to everyone and that's where we're seeing quite a lot of the
issues. For example being able to walk to your shop to get things. People in
more rural areas simply can't do that and one of the things that we've seen with
our research is actually there's this idea that you have the biggest stores out
of town and then you have these convenience stores and for example you'll have a
Tesco extra versus a Tesco Express or a Sainsbury's big versus a Sainsbury's
local and actually our research last year showed we tracked prices week by week
in Tesco extra versus Tesco Express and we found that if you continue to use
that little shop the convenience version you could be spending over £800 a year
just by buying the same products in that shop rather than the big one. I mean
and I hear that and I understand that but obviously that's a difficult thing
because those shops if they're typically in city centre or town centre locations
they're going to have larger overheads right? That is exactly what they'll say
absolutely but the problem is that a lot of the time they're not actually
allowing the value ranges to be as available across all the stores and those are
the things that we really want to be made more available to more consumers. Okay
well thanks for that Lisa and just Rebecca before we let you go what would be
your message to listeners about how you can try to lessen the impact or indeed
like you say deal with teenagers, family members who might not have sort of come
across this stuff before? I think just get the word out there that you know
there are ways and means of helping ourselves and as I say seeking out the
reductions, making use of vouchers and discount coupons. Most of us know some of
it but if we can just share tips between ourselves and there are ways and not to
worry about it too much because there are ways and means of cutting back in
quite a nice way for example eating out is now a luxury for us we don't tend to
eat out very much but we do have home dinner parties and we enjoy creating a
restaurant ambiance at home with a few simple ways of creativity you can make a
lot of fun for a fraction of the cost of going out. That sounds really nice
Rebecca and a very optimistic message to end on so Rebecca thank you very much
for joining us. Now back to me talking to shoppers in a supermarket car park in
Halifax. Uzma talk to me about your food shop you've got a big boot full of food
there I have yeah. Are you noticing any increase in prices what kind of impact
is that having on you? Eggs and you know milk and things like that which is a
necessity of life and they just increased so much that sometimes you know you
have to see what to get especially having kids at home and you know it's quite
hard to manage basically and to be honest my husband and myself working very
hard just to maintain our bills every month and we got no savings. You're
obviously spending more on your shopping are you or your kids at all going
without are you not buying certain things anymore are you not perhaps eating as
much as you were are your meals smaller are you skipping meals? To be honest
yeah me and my husband's probably have one meal a day where my kids obviously
they need you know every two to three hours something to feed but it's just hard
hard managing at the moment. Sabine I'd like to bring you back in now we heard
from Uzma there about skipping meals to make sure her children have enough to
eat I mean being blunt that sounds desperate is is Uzma a one-off case is she
one of a small number or have you heard about this happening more often? What's
happening with Uzma is happening all over the country parents and families are
cutting back on meals frequently and more and more often this is this is
horrifying to hear but it is becoming normal and that's what we need to be you
know really shocked about and changing immediately we can't be sort of
normalizing this cutting back because yes you can cut back which you if you if
you're able to but if you don't have the ability to cut back you because you
don't have internet connection to do the research that your previous caller was
referring to and if you don't have enough income to budget I mean you can't
budget with nothing you know the social security payments are so low now that
you know oftentimes people have used this up within a matter of moments and
they're waiting with nothing until the next universal credit payment comes
through or alternative payments. Sabine let me ask for some practical advice
some practical help from you if people are struggling what would be just briefly
your key two or three pieces of advice about where people can get help if they
need it? Yeah if you're struggling financially then you know first of all don't
put off seeking out help local advice and support agencies are there to help you
maximize your income and your first port of call should really be local advice
services. Understood. We co-produced a leaflet called the worrying about money
leaflet that's now available in over a hundred local authorities actually you
can find that on the those on the IFAM website and those leaflets help with a
step-by-step guide. So don't bury your head in the sand basically. That's number
one and then number two? Yeah fine don't bury your head in the sand find that
local advice and support or national advice and support lines and get that help
and find a way to maximize your income and you know for all listeners out there
we all need to collectively be asking our elected representatives to change this
to make those systemic changes that mean that we are all in a position to access
a living income whether we're able to work or not. Okay okay Lisa I just want to
bring you in on a quick question we've had in on the email this from Francis
practical question why does a chicken and sweetcorn sandwich in one local
supermarket cost three pound fifteen two days ago and three pounds forty in a
different city the next day why are prices not the same across the country for
the same product as Francis asks why is that Lisa? It's a really good question
Francis and this is something that we're talking about supermarkets can do more
because as you can see they have the ability to control the prices depending on
regions depending on size of store depending on how much footfall they have they
control their own prices and that's why the price is different because they've
chosen to put a different price on that product so what we want is much more
transparent prices from supermarkets and for those ranges to be more available
in more places. Okay all right well look thanks for that Lisa and Sabine and
Lisa stay with us because I'm now joined by Melanie from South Wales Melanie
hello good afternoon thank you for joining us. Good afternoon thank you for
having me. Melanie obviously as you know we're talking about rising food prices
how is that affecting you in your situation? Well I'm an unpaid carer so I
received carers allowance I have a teenager with autism and and a younger child
they're currently aged 11 and 14 so before the cost of living crisis I was
already being extremely careful and doing a lot of the things I'm continuing to
do I mean the yellow label product in supermarkets I've always made a made good
use of and I've tended to sort of use the freezer a lot so I've been doing more
of the same and looking into more ways of saving money I was I was blessed with
a very thrifty parents my mother's nearly 80 and she still has an allotment so I
don't grow my own food myself but I've grown up with a sort of make do amend
kind of kind of approach to life. Taught from an early age it sounds like. Very
much so I mean I have in the past kept chickens and have my own eggs again not
not not at present but I use things like the too good to go app that's very very
useful. So again more smart tech we were hearing from Rebecca earlier. More
smart tech yes that's very very useful you can get ready-cooked meals sort of
surplus to requirements from carvers and places like that and you can also get
bags of groceries the only thing I will say is it's a bit potluck so you might
pay three or four pounds for perhaps ten pounds worth of groceries which is
wonderful but then again if half of the things in the bag are not things you can
personally use I mean I always try and I know other people who can use them so I
tend to pass them on but it's not always the best way to save money. Yellow
labels are absolutely great but some supermarkets discount more heavily than
others you will go into some of the big supermarkets and you'll find that their
idea of a last-minute discount is about 50 pence off the price and they're quite
often the more expensive things so it's not always a good way to save. There are
other supermarkets that will put a lot of fresh produce down very very low and
also things like bread and that's useful you can buy some in some supermarkets a
loaf of bread for 10 pence for example. Melanie, I think I know the answer to
this next question. How do you feel about all of this? Are you resigned to it?
Do you wish it would all just go away or perhaps are you facing it head-on and
trying to deal with it as best you can? I think you've already answered that. I
am trying to make the best of it but I do think it's disgraceful I think the
perception of the average income is somewhat skewed by some of the people that
tend to earn a bit more and I think the average person is really struggling. I
think it's particularly difficult for families like myself but I'm luckier than
many I'm sure so I feel I'm quite grateful for what I have but it shouldn't be
this difficult. Yeah okay and I just want to bring in another email that we've
had from Catherine in Stoke. Someone emailing how she shops in a small but
beautifully formed covered fruit and veg market stall in Hanley in Stoke-on-
Trent. Always well stocked, includes produce from the region and provides a
variety of food cultures. Sabine and Lisa I just want to come back to you now
towards the end of the program. It sounds like Melanie, although she's trying to
deal with it as best as she can, thank you for joining us Melanie and everyone
indeed are facing some pretty challenging times. So Lisa and Sabine, one last
question for both of you. What can people like Melanie, like Rebecca, like all
of our other listeners, what's the one thing they can take away from this
program that will help them? Lisa I'll start with you first please. I think
importantly this can't go on forever. We are pushing the government and we're
pushing supermarkets to do more so I'm really hopeful that more will come and
things will get easier. Okay brilliant and Sabine yourself please, final
thought. Sabine Yeah final thought is there is hope but this poverty crisis
isn't going away anytime soon and we need to be collectively asking our elected
representatives to do something about it because it's not going to happen just
like that. They need to understand the scale and the severity of the problems
that people are facing. And so you want to see very much more so sort of
government policy or supermarket policy change because you feel as though
consumers have done what they can so far just briefly. Exactly so I mean the
government needs to really ensure that people can access an adequate income
whether through benefits or wages and supermarkets can play their part too by
ensuring that all of their workers are paid a real living wage. You know we're
supporting many people who are working supermarkets actually. Okay understood
understood. Well look that is all we have time for. My thanks to Lisa Webb from
Which and Sabine Goodwin from the Independent Food Aid Network. Thank you both
and thank you to you for all your calls and your emails. You can listen back to
this program on BBC Sounds in just a couple of hours. Now this time next week
Felicity Hanna will have reaction to Jeremy Hunt's first budget as Chancellor
and we want to hear from you ahead of it. What are you hoping to hear? Please
get in touch with us email moneybox at bbc.co.uk and it's the same address for
any of your money worries or triumphs. Do get in touch. Tell us what money
issues are on your mind or if you have any stories you'd like us to investigate.
Our email again moneybox at bbc.co.uk and she's a busy woman. It's also Felicity
with you on Saturday's Moneybox 2. Listen on Radio 4 from 12. Today's program
was presented by Dan Whitworth and produced by Amber Mahmood. Could Britain's
obesity problem be tackled by a weight loss drug on the NHS? In a minute we'll
hear the experience of someone who lost nearly four stone after being part of a
trial. Inside Health is after this. Wild Isles with David Attenborough starts on
Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. Now on Radio 4 it's time for Inside Health
presented by James Gallaher. First thing I did when I had lost all the weight
was half-hour flight in a Tiger Moth. It was bought for my 60th birthday as a
present and I was too heavy to do it because there's a maximum weight limit. I
was way over that and that's why it was so significant that I was there because
I had lost all this weight. Something I'd never been able to do without the
semaglutide. Then you flew. I was flying in more ways than one and boy did I
enjoy it. Well you heard Jan mention it, semaglutide. It's a weight loss drug
and it's been called a new era in tackling obesity. And we know excess weight
increases the risk of type 2 diabetes, heart disease and some cancers and at the
same time the usual medical mantra of diet and exercise, diet and exercise has
failed to turn the tide. By 2035 half the world's population, yes half, is
projected to be either overweight or obese. And against that backdrop a
seemingly simple jab that sheds the pounds is making huge waves. Game changing
weight loss drug to be made available on the NHS. Hollywood's worst kept secret
is coming to a pharmacy near you. Maker of fat loss drug says shortages will be
fixed. Those are just some of the recent headlines about semaglutide. You might
know it by its brand names though, Azempic and Wagovi. Now today we're assessing
what they can do, whether they can work and why some doctors think this drug is
about as controversial as they come. It's important because semaglutide is not
just some promising drug on the distant horizon, it's already here. There's so
much to unpick and it's a topic that let's be honest reflects back on our own
opinions about obesity as well as society's failings. So who better to kick us
off than our resident GP Dr. Margaret McCartney. Margaret, say thanks for coming
in. Thank you for having me James. So have you been following as closely as I
have all the headlines around Hollywood's little secret, the skinny jab? Yeah
well we clearly read different types of newspapers there. I have to read all of
them. But yeah I mean that the hype about these new drugs is astonishing. I've
seen so many pictures of supposed transformations. Yeah and I think that there's
a huge expectation and pressure, there's waiting lists I'm seeing on online
pharmacies all over the place. Well this is the thing isn't it, I mean kind of
we've had Boots, High Street chemists announcing that later in the year it's
going to be able, you're going to be able to walk into there and be able to get
it after a consultation. You've got people in private clinics selling it,
National Health Service is considering whether it should give it to people to
help with weight loss. I mean there's a lot to digest. There certainly is and
when I was looking through various private clinics websites you know some of
them are saying things like you know we've just managed to obtain a supply you
know so there definitely are shortages and we certainly got letters through the
post my GP surgery saying that there were shortages. So just remind me what
exactly is this drug? Okay so I think it's probably better if we talk about a
family of drugs that have been used up till now for people with type 2 diabetes
and have issues within that you know their conditions not being well controlled
on the medication they're already on. So we are using some of these drugs just
now in NHS practice under specific circumstances but what's happening is the
reach of these drugs has been broadened to include treatment for people who want
to lose weight or who are obese and this is new this is different because when
it's been used in type 2 diabetes a side effect of it has been weight loss but
this would mean using these medications specifically for weight loss and people
whose condition is obesity. We're going to unpick it all but how controversial
do you think this is as a discussion? Maximum I think it's 10 out of 10 James.
Well Margaret stick around because we're going to chat to Jan who's taken the
drug in a minute but first we've been on the streets of Cardiff to ask would you
take it? Definitely as you're getting older the weight starts to affect
everything else like your bones and everything like your knees and your feet and
legs start hurting. 25 years ago I could run. I can't run now. Especially my job
sitting down all day I'm a bus driver you tend to eat a lot of rubbish you sat
down in the same position so you're not getting no exercise and then the weights
piling on eating late at night as well there's an out. He's out the house 14
hours a day some days I could be doing a 16 hour shift last thing I want after
that is a gym on in my bed. I would never ever consider taking it's too
dangerous. If I was obese and the NHS recommended it I may consider it. No I
wouldn't be interested in taking a drug that did that I'd rather manage it
myself thank you. Seeing something so easily accessible I just be able to lose
weight to look like I don't know like Kim Kardashian or whoever is that you want
to look like is quite worrying. How much testing have they done on people who
are obese and are they still okay are they going to be okay in five ten years?
Well it's a good question isn't it? Fortunately we can turn now to Jan who we
heard from right at the beginning of the program. She was on those trials of
somaglutide having injections every week for 15 months that given alongside
dietary and exercise advice and over the 2,000 or so people that took part on
average people lost 15 kilograms over that time while they were taking the drug.
If you're still in pounds and stone that's about two stones worth of weight
loss. So we can chat now to Jan. Hello. Hi hello it's lovely to be here. So
you're one of the few people in the world that has actually taken this drug
somaglutide for a little while aren't you? I have spent my whole life dieting
basically. I would lose weight I then put it back on I'd start another diet I
did all this sort of commercial ones with the groups even down to when I was six
years old I was on a giant trial in a hospital. That must be quite a burden to
carry your whole life and I don't mean that literally I mean just
psychologically. Yes I mean for I think it was 12 weeks I was inside a
pediatrics ward being sort of my food was monitored I was being exercised and it
was all looking at if you can stop a child being obese then you stop the adult
being obese. So yes from age six basically I've had a weight problem. I mean I
you know at school I was very active I was just big and active so like I was in
the netball team I was a house captain so it didn't hold me back but it was
something that I battled with constantly. And let's fast forward in time when
did you get involved in the trial? It sounded really good so I was very
enthusiastic and it was a blind study so it could be that I wouldn't get the
medication but it was also the whole approach to lifestyle exercise nutrition
and went enjoyed the trial and fortunately I got the medication the semaglutide.
So it was weekly injections was it working? Basically I knew within a few weeks
that I was on the medication because I started changing around food like I'd go
into a coffee shop and I'd order a coffee and I wouldn't be staring at the
muffins and the millionaires shortbread and thinking I need one I need one. I
could actually look at them and think that looks nice I don't want one I don't
feel hungry which was a miracle basically. Was that the first time in your life
that it had been? Yes totally it was my body was saying you don't want it it
wasn't me using willpower thinking I can't have it it's not good for me or I've
had my 600 calories today I can't have that because there's another thousand
calories or it's six points or it's a yellow or whatever. I went back for my
appointment with UCLH and they were like oh no no we can't say whether you're on
it we don't know even who's on it. So my comment was well I'm on it or I've been
abducted by aliens because I have conclusion after 62 years of life I've
completely changed around food. It allowed you to do things that you wouldn't
have been able to do before? Yes the classic being the flight. I'm Stephen
O'Reilly and I'm director of the Medical Research Council's metabolic diseases
unit at the University of Cambridge. Stephen welcome to Inside Health. Hello.
These drugs how did they work what is it that they're doing inside our bodies?
Well they mimic a natural signal and there are two sorts of natural signals that
our body gets to help us understand what our nutritional situation is and and
one is the long-term signals that come from our fat cells and the others are
shorter term signals that come from our gut and come from our pancreas and
they're hormonal signals. They're little small molecules that float in the blood
and go are made by the gut and made by the pancreas and go to the brain and
actually keep the brain informed about what you've just eaten and how much
you've eaten. Now what these drugs do is that they dial into this system and
they actually soup it up to supernormal levels and so the nice thing about them
is they're quite safe because they're actually acting on normal systems they're
just turning the volume up to max. So are they working on what the gut's doing
or what the long-term fat stores are doing? Well what they're really working on
is your appetite and they're working on the bit of your brain that senses
whether when you're hungry or satiated and they're changing that electrical
signaling in the brain to make you feel less full and it really is pretty much
as simple as that. I mean there's no magic metabolic effects of these drugs.
They only work by changing what you eat. They really do work quite powerfully on
that. They make people much less hungry, they make meal sizes much smaller and
if you dial the dose right, if you overdo it you get nausea and sometimes
vomiting and diarrhea but principally these drugs are dialing in to human
appetite. And do things start to balance out over time because we know how the
human body responds. Your fat reserves start to disappear then that sets off a
whole other load of hormones. Do you get a bit of a tussle between the drug and
the rest of the body screaming, no I'm actually losing weight here? Yeah indeed
you do and that's been what's stymied many many dietary interventions. Lots of
people can lose weight when they decide to go on a diet and they do so really
well and they can be helped by professionals and they get their weight down. But
the depressing thing about many of the studies are that after two years those
pressures that the body's put on to put the weight back are immense and more
than 90% of people tend to end up back at the weight they were before they
started on their dietary journey. The thing about these drugs is and we all know
so far about them being prescribed for over a year and a year and a half, as
long as you keep taking them the weight stays off. Well so far on this Inside
Health special on somaglutide we've heard what the drug is doing inside the body
and the undeniable quite frankly evidence that while you're taking it the weight
comes off. But Margaret McCarney you're still here with me in the studio. The
real issue is what happens when you stop taking the drug? This is the big
problem. So the trials up till now have shown benefits for many people who are
taking it at the time this weekly, subcutaneous injection, and it definitely has
a real effect you know there's no question about it. But then when you stop it
many people put that weight that they lost back on again. So the problem is then
this becomes a drug that's not just taken to lose weight and keep the weight
off, it's a drug that seems to need to be kept taken in the longer term in order
to ensure that that weight doesn't return back again and that's for me a big
problem. Is there a health benefit though in losing weight even if it's just for
that short window of time while you're taking the drug? Does that leave a
lasting benefit or is it only while you're losing the weight? You could see that
perhaps if you had say a hip replacement that needed to get done and you were
outwith the weight criteria that the NHS puts on you, you can see how that might
work for you. That you might just want to you know even a temporary weight loss
might be something. Maybe some fertility treatments have weight categories. You
can see how that might be something that's appealing to some people even if they
know that the chances are the weight will go back on when they stop it. But in
terms of the risk factors and so forth, blood pressure, lipids etc, these seem
to return back to where you were to start off with once you've stopped taking it
for that group of people that seem to put the weight back on again
unfortunately. So there does seem to be a benefit but the benefit is mainly
there when you're using the drug. The problem is what's going to happen next? I
lost 28 kilograms which is roughly about four stone. Let's fast forward a little
bit further. The trial ends, you stop getting the semaglutide. Even though I was
promising the world to anybody who would give it to me. Was that tough? In a way
yes. I was quite upset because the weight was going back on and I had started
looking at food again. I was going to say were you back in the coffee shop,
you've got your coffee and now the Muffet's calling. They were calling more
because those sensations, those feelings were returning and to me it was going
in the wrong direction again. And then there was a decision to have an
operation, wasn't it? To have a gastric sleeve. Gastric sleeve because that
would then increase my natural gut hormone production and by the fact that they
would reduce half the stomach it would mean that I would have a lot less space
to eat. So you'd feel fuller, faster again? Yes. So Jan, no regrets? Absolutely
none whatsoever. It's the best thing that ever happened to me. Jan's a happy
customer. Well the NHS does already prescribe semaglutide for some cases of type
2 diabetes. That's under the brand name of Azempic. So what about purely for
weight loss? Is that something the NHS should be doing? This time you need a
higher dose of semaglutide and that's marketed as Wagovy. I'm sorry there's so
many different names but you've probably heard a random mix of them in the news.
Now all the evidence has been considered by the National Institutes of Health
and Care Excellence and that gives us advice to the NHS in England, Wales and
Northern Ireland. But they're not considering semaglutide for anyone and
everyone. They're only considering it for people with high body mass indexes who
need specialist services by the NHS, weight loss clinics and they're not looking
at giving it forever, only for a maximum of two years. We've already heard how
weight goes back up once you stop. So there's been criticism that obesity is not
being seen as a lifelong condition and there have even been warnings that being
forced to stop after two years could cause psychological harm. So back on the
streets of Cardiff, is this something our taxes should be spent on? Yeah I think
it should be available through the National Health Service because financially
it would help everybody. I'd much rather see more education from school time
upwards, re-healthy eating, being able to cook properly etc etc. I don't think
it should be made available to anybody because you will get people that might
not necessarily need to lose weight but would take it anyway. I think as long as
it's prescribed by a doctor and not something that I could just order myself on
Instagram because I'm feeling particularly self-conscious today then I think
that that's a good thing. So Margaret, the big discussion in the UK in terms of
NHS provision has been around whether people should have it for basically around
about two years. Is that moral to do it for that length of time? Do you know
what I mean? Because like if you're basically saying that you might lose weight
for two years then it's all going to come back on and everything reverts back to
normal. So I'm almost like going what's the point? Yeah yeah yeah so certainly
not everybody will gain the weight back on again but a majority of people will
and I completely get that because it's kind of a bit unfair I think in some ways
and because people particularly that I think are using this treatment are people
that have tried pretty much everything else. It's not their fault. We know
there's a huge amount of weight stigma goes on, you know there's a huge amount
of blame and shame attached to it. I mean it's really pretty awful for many
people who are wanting to lose the weight and have struggled usually for years
and years and years and if you get something that ends up working for you and
you've gone through the treatment pathway, you've complied because it's not just
about the injection you still have to follow you know diet and exercise
guidance, you're meant to have a calorie deficit every day, you're meant to be
doing more exercise, you know it's a big commitment and then for the NHS to go
and withdraw that again it does seem to me to be a bit unfair then to leave
people at the end of it and I do worry that if the NHS calls a halt to funding
then only people that can afford it may end up getting it privately and what
makes me really upset about this is we know that there is a very clear
deprivation quality to this, that deprivation is a real risk factor for obesity
so we're talking about the most vulnerable people in our society already. This
begs the question if you need to stay on the drug for basically forever in order
to keep the weight off, do we know what happens when people stay on it for a
very long time? So we absolutely don't, it's a new drug we don't have that very
long-term data and in my view everyone that's on it longer term like that should
really be in a trial, they should be followed up so that we know exactly what's
going on and also what's not going on because many of these people you know will
end up I think taking it for years and years and years. Do we not get a clue
from people with type 2 diabetes who are being prescribed it for that, they must
be on it for a longer time, we must have seen some of that data. Yeah but again
you know I think it's a different set of circumstances perhaps from weight loss
and certainly you know that there are concerns you know about rare side effects
you know for example it does increase the risk of gallstones for example, in
animal studies they've detected, it's not human studies but in animal studies
detected an increased risk of thyroid cancer for example. We also know things
like it can produce a decrease in muscle mass in some people which again is
important because muscle is useful as you're getting older in particular. So you
know all these things they have to be looked at really carefully. I am Navid
Sattar, I'm Professor of Metabolic Medicine at the University of Glasgow. Navid,
welcome so much to Inside Health. No thank you. There are still some
uncertainties so there are a number of ongoing trials which are looking at the
safety of the drugs prescribed at higher doses that cause sufficient weight loss
in terms of are there any other hidden signals of harm that we didn't know
about. So those trials are going to start to report out towards the end of this
year, next year, the following year. So in about two or three years time once
that data comes forward I think that will spur on the even wider usage of these
drugs beyond weight loss. The other big issue of course with these drugs,
they're very expensive. Now clearly the NHS cannot afford to be giving this drug
to millions because we simply can't afford it. So over the next few years I
think some of these things will resolve, we'll have better trial evidence about
safety and I think hopefully the cost will come down and then we will gradually
start using these drugs in more and more people is probably the vision that most
people see. Navid, I can't quite figure out in my head whether it's something to
celebrate that medicine has produced a drug that can help people lose weight at
least while they're still taking it or if it's actually the opposite that we've
tried and failed so badly to tackle obesity throughout society that we now need
to start turning to drugs. I know I think that's a brilliant point and I think
many of us have been wrestling with that. I mean to be honest with you I would
love it if we had a society where we did not have an obesogenic environment, we
did not have so many dense calories easily obtainable at cheap cost all over the
place. I would love that. I would also love if more people were able to walk to
work, cycle to work, have more activity and enjoy that. But we don't. By 2035
half the world's population is going to be overweight. So it's a reality of
industrialisation of cheap sugar, cheap fat, putting in lots of calories all
over the world and that has fed into human biology of being tempted by food and
overeating and that's a problem because effectively the NHS is a bit of a shit-
show at the moment. Many of our patients have four or five conditions as a
result of their excess weight and yet at the moment we pay lip service to it, we
treat the downstream disease and we don't treat the obesity and that's a big big
problem. So as the cost of these drugs come down we should be using them in more
and more patients. Navid it sounds to me like you want a lot of people on these
drugs for a long time. No I don't. No I don't want individuals to be on these
drugs for a long time. But what we should be doing and it's a paper we wrote in
The Lancet with some world leaders is that we should be looking at the evidence
base of tackling weight both by lifestyle and by some of these drugs earlier in
the course of many diseases. I mean even at the start of diagnosis of some of
these conditions can we prevent that individual developing their second, third
and fourth or fifth condition many of which are currently linked to excess
weight to almost change the paradigm and prevent many developing multiple
conditions at the same time. Navid Sattar there. Now what we've been talking
about so far is the health impacts of obesity and whether the NHS should pay for
somaglutide but there is another dimension to the story because if you've got
the money you can just go buy it. The drugs available in private clinics and
high street pharmacies often needing only an online consultation. Now how this
collides with celebrity culture and ideals around beauty also raises issues
doesn't it Margaret? I think that medicine as a profession should be
particularly humble when it comes to the issue of weight because medicine has a
long and very dirty history when it comes to promoting treatments for weight
loss that just simply do not work at best or are actively harmful. I don't think
we've really covered ourselves in glory you know that have been drug after drug
that's been licensed put out into the world we've been told that will help you
lose weight and then has been withdrawn so I think we have to be really careful
because there's a huge pressure from society on medicine to come up with some
kind of solution to this. You know if we're thinking about the obesogenic
environment that we're all said to live in shouldn't that be worthy of better
exploration rather than expecting individual people to first of all become obese
through the environment and then to accept a medical intervention to treat it.
What's the difference, let me be controversial, what's the difference between
this then than something like a statin or blood pressure medication which are
again often you know a symptom of lifestyle? Yeah so it's different because
obesity is such a stigmatized condition I think and it's such a visible
condition so many people have many risk factors that they manage to keep quite
quiet about that most people wouldn't know but because obesity is visible I
think it makes it much more difficult for somebody to exist well in society when
there's so much obesity bias and stigma about. And then you've got a layer on
top of that Margaret, the celebrity culture that seems to have come with it.
Huge number of celebrities loving the amount of weight loss they've had. Then
you've got all the ones that have had remarkable amounts of weight loss and then
you're sat there kind of going have they been taking that? Have they been taking
the drug as well? I mean it's really thrown weight loss into like the A-list
celebrity world. Yeah and again it's a real shame because there's not that
element of privacy I suppose for many people that are perhaps thinking about
using this drug or are using that drug and I think that's again it feeds into
the stigma about obesity as well. But I think the other problem is that we're
not talking really about health a lot of the time here we're talking about
aesthetics. Yeah we're talking about the way that we look and that's not healthy
and you know I know that are many people who are carrying excess weight who do
feel as though their life is impaired because of it and you know I want them to
get the best possible treatment but also I don't want young people to be
thinking that they should use something like this in order to look in what they
would consider to be a better way because society is the problem it's not them
you know so really we have to be very careful whose problem it is that we're
treating. Yeah one of the things that I'm kind of worried about with all the
discussion around this is whether it suddenly drives up cases of eating
disorders. Yeah I think you're absolutely right to be concerned about that and I
really do worry about the vulnerable people in society who will see this and
they will think well there's another way that I could try and make myself look
thinner. So you know I think when it's rolled out into a drug for purchase
something that's just on your shopping list quite literally I do really worry
that this then becomes a societal issue that are big moral and ethical issues in
there. Margaret I've got a little bit of an article that I'm going to read to
you it might increase your blood pressure but I just want your reaction to it
anyway. Is this a cure for obesity? I honestly wonder about the sanity of our
media that are promoting that kind of message you know it's clearly not a cure
for obesity. Margaret thank you so much for coming to the studio today there are
just so many issues and ethical dilemmas around this drug aren't there and I
think we're all going to have to tackle them as a society and it's going to get
even bigger because today we've been talking about somaglutide and the way it
tricks the brain into thinking we're full but there are more weight loss drugs
on the horizon. Here's Professor Stephen O'Reilly on where he thinks we're
heading. I see it as the beginning of an exciting era where we can really help
people who have struggled for a long time and we're not talking about cosmetic
and we're talking about the serious health implications of being obese and
reducing those are really what those of us who work in the area I've been
interested in doing. Stephen I'm curious is somaglutide the one or is it more
symbolic in showing that a weight loss drug is possible? I think it is and
inverted commas a breakthrough although there are others coming and and very
soon there'll be a posse of these agents competing with each other for
prescribing and I think there are many naysayers who said it wasn't possible.
Drug development for obesity has been very challenging. There have been
effective drugs but have been dangerous and there have been safe drugs that
haven't worked. Now we have a pretty safe drug that looks like it works and if
we take blood pressure as an analogy we now have much better outcomes with
people with a very high blood pressure than we ever had before and we have that
largely because we can use two three different types of drug age which work in
different ways and get everyone's blood pressure down so they don't have strokes
and they don't have heart attacks. So that's our main aim is to stop people
having awful side effects of their obesity and if we can do that effectively and
safely I'm very excited by the possibilities. Just paint me your vision of the
future Stephen. Where are we going to be in 20 to 30 years time do you think? I
really hope we do two things. We need to improve our obesogenic environment for
all sorts of health reasons but not only obesity to prevent obesity happening
but there will be obese people and they will become ill unless we treat them
appropriately and I think that in 10-20 years time carefully and treating
obesity properly as a medical condition we will be able to improve people's
longevity and their lives and their health. It's life-changing and I feel it
should be available on the NHS to people who have battled with their weight for
years, people who say need to lose weight because they need to have an operation
and their BMI is too high. Also it should be for people who can't afford to buy
it as well but it needs to be done properly. I was monitored, I had
nutritionists that I spoke to regularly, I had people who would help me with the
exercise program and what I was doing and steps and things like that and also
there was the medical side of checking for side effects, doing blood pressure,
monitoring the whole person. That's what made a success having the whole
package, the wraparound package, not just once a week stabbing myself with an
injection. Jan, thanks so much for coming on and sharing your experience. You're
welcome and hopefully this will help a lot of other people out there. Well, what
do you think? Is a weight loss jab necessary or a sign that we've given up
making our lives and society healthier? Who should get it and for how long? I
mean it is a surprisingly complicated subject, isn't it? I'd love to hear your
thoughts. InsideHealth at bbc.co.uk is the email address. Thank you for
listening. I'll see you next time. Inside Health was presented by James
Gallaher. The producer was Erica Wright and if you were expecting to hear James
discussing how ballet and other types of exercise might help people with
Parkinson's disease, that'll be in next week's episode. Matthew Syed dives into
the murky world of rewards after the knees and at 4.30 how do those who create
online content make algorithms work for them when the rules keep changing?
First... Hello, Greg James here and I'm back with a brand new series of
Rewinder. Can you believe? It is back again. We have access to the enormous BBC
archive once again to unearth some hidden gems. If I'm gonna say, let's go back
and get my pig. This week, find out what salad Kate Winslet cooked on Ready,
Steady, Cook. Bit of an iceberg lettuce. Why were people complaining about
Uruguela? Because we obviously had this problem of spoons bending in my wife's
hand. And how could you win this prize? Good bouncing 16-pound hands. No, no,
really. That's Rewinder with me, Greg James.