TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-15H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 I'm not a monster. Listen on BBC sounds in a couple of minutes. It'll be time
for GQT BBC News at 2 o'clock the bodies of more than 40 migrants have been
found on a beach in southern Italy after their boat broke up in rough seas About
80 people survived and a search and rescue operation is continuing Initial
reports suggest those on the boat included people from Iran, Pakistan and
Afghanistan Pope Francis prayed for the victims and survivors in St. Peter's
Square This morning I heard with sorrow about the shipwreck on the Calabrian
coast I pray for each of the dead for the missing and for the other migrants who
survived I thank those who are helping them and those who are giving them
assistance May the Virgin Mary help these brothers and sisters The government
has hinted that politicians in Northern Ireland could be given new powers as
part of a fresh deal on post-Brexit trading arrangements The deputy prime
minister Dominic Raab said the UK was on the cusp of securing a new settlement
with Brussels Involving less strenuous customs checks on goods traveling from
the British mainland to Northern Ireland Dominic Raab has also said he'll resign
if an inquiry finds that he bullied civil servants Eight formal complaints have
been made against him The union which represents civil servants the FDA has
separately called on health and safety executive to investigate claims of
widespread bullying in Whitehall The government says it doesn't tolerate such
behavior Two Israelis have been shot dead in the occupied West Bank as a high-
level security meeting between Israeli and Palestinian Officials is being held
in Jordan to try to calm a recent wave of deadly violence 62 Palestinians and 9
Israelis have been killed in violence so far this year US and Egyptian
representatives are also at the talks Thousands of people in Australia have paid
their respects to Olivia Newton-John at a state memorial service in Melbourne
The singer and actress who had a string of hits and starred in movies such as
Greece and Xanadu died from breast cancer last year aged 73 BBC News This
afternoon we begin a dramatic adaptation of an epic swashbuckling tale set in a
slave colony in the Indian Ocean A novel that tackles racism head-on Alexandra
Dumas long forgotten classic George Before we begin the first installment of
George John York will examine the novel showing us how it set the template for
many of those That followed a page turner full of plot twists cliffhangers and
larger than life characters The opening lines is at 245 and then the drama
begins just after three But now on radio for gardeners question time is Peter
Gibbs Hello and a warm welcome to the program today We're tucked away amongst
the hedgerows of hail on the fringe of Greater Manchester Welcoming us is the
local horticultural society who last hosted us back in 1975 no less hello again
hail Obviously pleased to see us back Well the name hail derives from an old
English word meaning shelter or nook the Collins English Dictionary describes
nook as a secluded or sheltered place a retreat and for us nature lovers We
often feel that our plants and green spaces offer a sort of revitalizing retreat
from the challenges of life Well later in the program producer Dan Cocker visits
Horatio's garden in London to hear just how powerful that can be But first let
me introduce you to our panel passionate plants woman Christine Wharton a
veritable Encyclopedia of botanical knowledge James Wong and the mr. Cool of the
plant world Ashley Edwards your panel So let's take our first question hello,
I'm sue riding I'm from Cleveland Avenue allotments I've got a red chili plant.
It's still bearing chilies now if I prune it will it perform again this year
James Can you prune it and keep it going absolutely so chili is a perennial
plants? We tend to grow them as annuals in the UK mainly because it's very very
difficult to overwinter them Because they require this kind of dormant period
where you have really high light levels But quite cool temperatures and our
houses are often the exact opposite of that they're often quite warm and dark So
you've already beaten me on the horticulture steaks because I've tried so many
times to grow a chili bonsai You can actually train chilies to create a bonsai
and they look incredible, but I've never got them to overwinter So if yours is
happy to take off the the chilies when they've ripened you can stick it outside
But if you're doing what you're doing just carry on actually your head gardener
at Horatio's garden We'll be hearing more from that later on in the show of
course you've got a greenhouse Do you manage to grow chilies through winter we
do they're anything we have chilies in the greenhouse They tend to be a pest
magnet and a lot of pests will overwinter on those chilies So I've seen chilies
lots of white fly and then next year that can infect the the new plants But
sounds like you're doing the right thing you're overwintering it I'd say
probably in spring you might want to give it a fresh pot of compost to get
really get it going and Start feeding when those flowers appear start feeding it
weekly with a high potassium feed like a tomato feed is fine And Christine give
it much of a trim back or you can take it back by practically down to a third
They respond well to pruning the key thing is do it now Because they really like
a long season and if you want the wood to be produced very quickly the easy You
know the early you prune it to the greater length of season. I would go on this
afternoon and slaughter it But sounds like you're doing the right thing so thank
you very much excellent Thanks for your question and who's next hello Laura
Murray plot holder heel allotment Is it worth investing in a trickle water
system or should I just stick with the watering can? I Christine what would what
would you go for I think it very much depends on what you're trying to achieve
if you're having to pay for water if it's meat ed if it's regulated if you've
got free access to water a Supply of water to a plant is beneficial one of the
things that we fail to recognize Particularly vegetable growing are things
called critical watering periods Not all plants need water all the time they do
need water to establish and then a lot of vegetable are best left in a classic
example of peas and beans Anybody in this audience ever seen a pea or a bean a
plant wilt Not a hand inside no and that is common now isn't that fascinating
And it helps to explain that you shouldn't really want to establish and they've
come through when they're growing well Leave them until they flower and then
water very heavily during that farming period But a lot of people will water
throughout the season get very substantial growths of foliage and sweet fatty
addams thereafter except leaf so An irrigation system is fine if you know what
you're doing and you just don't turn it on the run away If you know what you're
doing and you understand which plants need water in the when they're watering
that's fine Ashley what are your thoughts? Well watering is one of those things
that's really hard to get a hang of and it takes a lot of practice to see how
The plants react to how we're watering them. I Would prefer that you go down the
route of watering with a large amount of water But less often so that you're
encouraging those plant roots down into the soil with trickle watering The
plants can often form roots of the surface So when we do get hot weather all
those roots of the surface dry out a lot quicker So I would suggest watering
really well less often but also having a mulch on top as well, which will help
conserve water James yeah, I absolutely agree with that because that kind of
Tendency towards the water water little and often you're actually just watering
the surface and wasting a lot of that water because it evaporates The one time I
would think that would be a really great idea though is if you have lots of pots
Particularly filled with bedding plants if you have a summer like we had last
year And you have hanging baskets you'll be watering literally every day
Significant amounts and that's all the almost the only way to keep them alive if
you're not out with the watering can every morning It's 6 a.m. So in in that
specific circumstance Bedding plants that need a lot of water in in pots that
are quite small and dry out quickly Then I would recommend a watering system.
Otherwise, perhaps not. Thanks very much for your question We'll go over here.
Mary butch or Tatton Park Japanese garden. Can you tell me how to grow saffron?
successfully, please So James saffron it's a type of crocus is that right? Yes,
that's correct. We might think of saffron as Incredibly exotic because of the
kind of foods that we now associate as being so we might think of the region of
La Mancha In Spain, for example, but I think the biggest producer is India
places like Iran, which are the key commercial growing areas however, saffron
was once really widely used in in cuisine in the UK and in fact places like
saffron Walden are named after that not Because of the color but because it was
a huge production area even Croydon where my mom has her garden It's comes from
the anglicaxon word for saffron Valley So saffron was really widely cultivated
in the UK until quite recently The thing that really got rid of it as an
industry was labor It was incredibly expensive to pick and it was just cheaper
to import it than to pay people to pick it So saffron can be grown in the UK and
not just grown grown well because it used to be a commercial crop There are a
few caveats to how to grow it and one of which is buying the corn size corn
sizes that are sold by lots and lots of Catalogs can be quite small and it takes
a while to get them to flowering size So as a general rule, they need to be
about 50p sized So really quite a large corn and secondly, they need to really
bake in the summer and that can be quite tricky to do So the best advice is to
plant it on a south facing slope Don't plant it through grass as people might be
tempted to because it's a crocus Then the combs need to get I think there's a
certain number of hours They have to get above 20 degrees for them to produce
actual flowers So you need to get a really really sunny environment south facing
slope if you're going to put them through grass Please keep that grass short if
not something like an alpine bed or a gravel garden will really work because the
the gravel not only Absorbs the heat it retains it at night so that can help add
to it. Other than that I think a general high-postas fertilizer just to
encourage it a little bit on all work that but I think there are a couple of
commercial Attempts of plantations at a renaissance of them in in the south of
the UK I'm not sure how well they're doing actually because it's been a while
since I I followed them up But I knew there were some attempts about five years
ago. So it'd be interesting to see how they're going. There are various
commercial organizations in the Yeah, and Norfolk Sussex Kent To the dry places
the drop the dry hot places Manchester hail In our dreams Yeah, no, I mean you
could try covering it with glass and keeping the war It's the winter that you
didn't have problems with growing it up here. You could always grow it in a ball
frame And do it that way so that you know, you've a frame Specifically for that
ball and you cover it in the back end. So like a cold frame Yeah Like a cold
frame and cover it from September through until March And that would keep you
dry as soon as you see the shoots coming then you water and you may well be
successful But it would be the winter wet that gets it up here I'd also watch
out for squirrels because squirrels love to eat crocus as their favorite food
and They will be after them. So yeah, you have to be on guard the sparrows seem
quite keen on crocus as well Yes, my experience. So when when I've grown it in
Croydon trying to start the Renaissance myself The one thing I say about it is
yes, you do need lots However, because we don't use very much of it in the UK if
you had a dinner table sized plot There was in a sunny environment and you
wanted to have something that comes up and looks pretty At the end of the year
when nothing else is around October November. They usually come out then it's it
You don't need very much of it. That's enough to make you maybe three piler and
how many are you gonna have a year? That's all you need you could really impress
your dinner guests. That would be so impressive wouldn't yeah Are you still
fancy get married? Yes, definitely. I think I'll go down the ball frame Good. We
like a challenge on this program. Let us know how you get on. Okay, let's move
swiftly on to our next question Kathy Tilby After a walking holiday in the
Dolomites I bought Edelweiss plants for me and my traveling companions as a
reminder They're all looking decidedly ill now will they come back to life? I
can't believe that the cold weather would have seen them off They're pining for
the mountains James what you think I think they should come back to life How
have you tell me a little bit more about how you're growing them two of us
planted them in pots and one of us Planted it in the garden, but they're all
looking quite dead. Okay, so it Edelweiss are Plants are as you know from a very
high altitude. They even have specialist Adaptations that involve nanotechnology
To survive the really high UV light conditions They get on the tops of the
mountains the white fuzz that covers them is actually these tiny Filament like
hairs that splits and then split again and then they carry on splitting until
they're down to the nano level where the same thickness as the wavelength of UV
lights, so we're actually a scientist Investigating that kind of white fuzzy
structure to keep solar panels working for longer because just like the living
solar panels and leaves Technological solar panels eventually wear out from the
light itself So that story is to tell you that they don't mind huge amounts of
light a really really searing conditions What they don't like is lots of wet so
they grow in very high altitude where they have very fast draining soils They
can grow in scree environments and also in Meadowlands, but they really don't
like wet conditions So pots could be an option if they might be a little warm
for them in that environment the ideal Situations and Alpine house and Alpine
house is essentially designed to loads and loads of light in but not get too hot
So you'll often see Alpine houses like the one at Kew has this really really
high roof and you think why is it got this enormous? Bolted roof when the plants
are tiny and it's essentially to allow the heat to rise and escape So like a
cool environment loads of light and really really good drainage Ashley if you
ever tried them No, I've never tried them But I have worked in the the Alpine
house that James was talking about and yeah We also have the big sails that come
up to protect the alpines in there in the heat of the summer and cool the whole
Area down and they're also Funnels which blow in fresh air this constant breeze
that blows through the whole glass house and that's really important So I'd say
place it somewhere where you can get a good airflow You don't want it tucked
away in a humid corner or somewhere where it's gonna sit and rot away basically
so yeah, lots of fresh air and Well, drear and well-drained soil as James
already said, do you think it might be winter wet? That's my it could be we've
had that and it's it's very humid the winters here It's not that crisp clear air
like in where were they where they come from? So yeah, very different climatic
conditions I'd say so you might be struggling a bit. I think so Look, it's a
beautiful flower. I thought maybe the conservatory but no no air need to move
somewhere with a high altitude Up to the light district. Thanks. Good question
If you'd like to get in touch with us with your horticultural questions or
queries drop an email to us at GQT at BBC dot co dot UK or you'll also find us
on Twitter at BBC GQT Well, thanks for that panel. I will get back to the
questions from our audience here in Hale very soon But for a long time this
program has championed the health and well-being benefits of gardening and the
calming influence of green spaces Well three years since lockdown changed the
way all of us do things We continue to receive emails and social media posts
about what gardening means to many of our listeners a common thread being that
an outdoor Oasis a verdant balcony or even a single indoor potted plant can do
wonders for the soul Indeed the healing power of nature was officially
recognized at the end of last year when Scottish doctors were urged to prescribe
Gardening to improve mental health assist with long-term health conditions and
as a remedy for loneliness Well GQT producer Dan Cocker met today's panelist and
head gardener Ashley Edwards To see how gardening therapy is used at Horatio's
garden in Northwest London Actually, it's great to be back here Horatio's garden
in Stanmore. There are lots of these gardens around the country Tell us the
story about Horatio's. It's great to have you back here. So welcome back. Thank
you lovely to see you So Horatio was a young man. He was an aspiring doctor he
volunteered at the spinal treatment center in Salisbury and He noticed there was
a real lack of outdoor space for patients having long stays in hospital And so
he went around did a survey found out what people would want from a garden
Tragically his life was cut short at 17 But the really amazing legacy that was
left behind was the results of his survey and that was eventually what created
Horatio's garden and the first garden was built 10 years ago now in Salisbury
and So from there we've expanded like I said, we have six gardens now And the
aim is to have one at every spinal injury center across the UK Horatio's vision
wasn't just about the pretty flowers and the beautiful landscaping There's a
real deeper meaning behind these gardens aren't there? Yeah, the gardens are a
sanctuary they really are and when you're spending a long time in hospital That
can be really difficult not just for you, but for your family members So to have
that space we can come outside Enjoy nature seabirds trees plants see the
different changing of a season to really ground yourself with nature and that is
so beneficial for our mental health and well-being and The patients they really
benefit from that. The garden is quite unique here because it's cut in two by
the ward. So we have a very Gregarious side as Tom Stewart Smith the designer
likes to call it. So very social. We have lots of our Music sessions there the
other side of the garden, which is the north side more of a woodland style
garden a sanctuary Quiet spaces you can tuck yourself away into the garden pods.
There are smaller versions of the garden room So they're more intimate you can
have a private conversation with a family member Well, you might just want to go
in there and have a cry have an emotional moment You know people are going
through some really tough times here But it's the garden can really benefit
people and allow them that space to feel their emotions and And process what's
happened by the time the beneficiaries leave Horatio's garden Do you make sure
that they have a very good grounding in horticultural studies? Good see of you.
I Try I do try a lot of people are like oh, I can't God and I'll kill everything
but actually if you just show someone the Basics how to sow a seed, you know and
how to water properly People are like wow, I never knew I could do this and it
that's for me. That's the most Enjoyable part of the job is teaching people new
skills during the horticultural therapy sessions It's nice in here actually it's
nice and warm We've come into your greenhouse and this is where you carry out
your horticultural therapy sessions for the beneficiaries, isn't it? Yeah, so in
here in the greenhouse We do lots of tabletop gardening. We use adaptive tools
And just cater it to people's knees really so if people are wanting to Practice
their hand function so we can do seed sowing and start off with quite big seeds
peas and beans and then work our way down To tomato seeds and that's another
really amazing thing to see how far people come with the amazing help of the
ward You know the occupational therapist and the physio team. They really get
amazing care here and We can add to that by adding this whole thing to the house
We can add to that by adding this horticultural element as Gardeners, we know
that there are loads of benefits to greenery being around nature and being
around plants Why do you think that is actually why do we get so much joy from
being around nature? But that's a really good question. It's a really deep
question. I think personally It's all about slowing down and really taking
notice and observing and in nature Everything moves at different pace, so we're
forced to slow down really And seeing everything on that minute scale you
realize how small you are really in the world It's very humbling to work in
nature and we're part of nature You know that is why it feels so good because
really we're all part of this big biome and When we tap into that that is when
we get the major benefits from working with plants or being in an outdoor space
Well, we've been joined by one of the patients here, Pia Gupta. Hi Pia. Hi. What
do you think of this garden space? I think it's so beautiful. Like when I'm
here, I don't feel like I'm at a hospital at all I really like it How long have
you been here? So I came to Stanmore around like mid December and I'm due to
leave on the first of March And I think every day that I've been here I've
actually been in the one of the garden pods or walking around the garden, but
I've really been enjoying the space So I've been walking around seeing like the
winter flora and fauna and then hopefully I'll get to see some of the spring
bloom as well Were you at a hospital prior to this? Yes, I was at Royal London
actually in my land white chapel area I was in a hospital bed for a month I
didn't get to see the outside at all the closest thing to the outside was this
small window Looking on to the operating theater. So when I came here, it was
such a big change and I really appreciated it How has this garden helped you? I
think that like due to the garden I've been able to spend time with my friends
and family away from like the hospital situation so it encourages them to come
visit me more and Obviously, that's really good because I'm quite a social
person and I get my energy from being around people So having the garden space
is like an escape from the hospital So I think it's really helped my mental
health that way and I think from the physical side Obviously, I've been able to
practice my walking like walking around the garden So I think it's been really
great overall. Well, I wish you all the best for your recovery peer This place
certainly looks like it's doing a great deal for you and all the other
beneficiaries here. Thanks for talking to me Thank you Ashley you do
Horticultural therapy sessions here at Horatio's garden if you're at home and
you fancy A little bit of your own horticultural therapy. How do people start
doing that? well, you know you can if you're lucky enough to have a garden just
get out there and Get your hands in the soil and be observant. I would say
especially during winter when it's a bit quieter in a garden But if you really
look up close to things you'll start to see shoots emerging and that will give
you real hope I can see around us now. There's lots of Narcissi shoots popping
up through the soil and you think wow, I can't wait can't wait for spring And I
always remember last year we spoke to oziki bruister who's the horticultural
therapist at that rhs bridge water and she said to me that It's always darker
indoors than outdoors and that really stuck with me and I think Especially in
the darker months It can be harder to get yourself out there But once you're out
you really do realize the light is so much brighter outside It's always going to
be so just just get out there if you can get to a green space Take a 15 minute
walk. You'll feel so much better for it Amazing. Thanks. Ashley. You're welcome.
Thank you for visiting producer dan with beneficiary peer gupta and head
gardener ashley edwards at her ratio's garden in northwest london And a look at
the well-being powers of plants and nature panel this sort of notion of
gardening being good for you Obviously isn't a new one for seasoned gardeners
But how does it make you feel now that horticulture is being recognized as more
than pretty flowers? Anybody following your instagram james will know how much
it means to you being surrounded by greenery? Yeah, absolutely. I think one of
the problems that plants have is that they're just too pretty That's quite easy
to dismiss them Uh, if you know if microchips or crude oil was nice looking
people might dismiss it I think people don't understand quite how Practical and
quite how a measurable impact that plants really have on our lives We think
about them as kind of a quaint hobby in many senses But what's really exciting
to me is that the evidence is now coming out very very strongly in favor of the
real measurable benefits it can have originally when some of the um, the early
work was done on plants and well-being There were some slight problems with it.
So for example, they would look at Um health outcomes of people living near
parks and it turns out that people who live near parks Have much better health
outcomes even things like birth weights are higher But guess what rich people
live near parks and one of the the key determining features is how much money
you make? But now we have intervention studies So we're not just looking at a
population and trying to find parallels and trying to find connections between
two different things We're actually going in and and taking a community and
putting plants in one and not plants in another Uh, and in that data that
there's sort of much more rigorous trials are really coming out time after time
for everything from Exercise performance right down to pain medication There's
lots of really measurable stuff and I think it's those trials Which are really
confirming what us gardeners knew anyway But it's that's going to be a big thing
to get People like politicians to sit up and take notice Actually, it's worth
funding horticulture because you save money in other areas such as healthcare.
It's a societal benefit It isn't just about being pretty or having a nice
environment. It actually makes economies work better It makes societies function
better. It reduces crime rates and can improve health outcomes Thanks very much
You're listening to gardeners question time on radio 4 and bbc sounds with me
peter gibbs And joining me on the panel today are christine warton james wong
and ashley edwards who are taking questions from an audience of hails finest
horticultural enthusiasts And which of you has our next question, please John
ross from the hail emalcment society If offered a plot riddled with couch grass
mayor's tail and bin weed And you intend to adopt a no dig approach What is the
team's advice as to what's the best starter for What is the team's advice as to
what's the best starting actions? Given that scenario, I would move on and get
an allotment somewhere else Because you know, I know that i'm not gonna win It
sounded like it struck a chord with the audience here anyway, but it's true,
isn't it ashley? You know there's so many times people really keen take on a new
allotment We're getting to the time of year now They really want to get going
and they turn up and they're presented with just this horrible horrible weedy
Matt Yeah, what do you do? It's hard not to turn around and just go home, isn't
it? But I think you come in with the idea that okay You're never going to get
rid of all of this grass or horse tail It's just not going to happen and
especially not in one season So what I would do is just concentrate on Maybe a
few square meters to start with lay your cardboard thick and then mulch like
heavy heavy mulch And at least then you'll have some weed free soil to grow in
um raised beds can also help so if you if you build a raised bed and Lay
cardboard at the bottom of that and then put your soil and compost into that
then at least you've got Some growing space, but I think it's going to take you
years to get it to the point where you want it And so you just have to kind of
think you know, am I going to invest this time? But it's going to be so worth it
once you've harvested your first carrots, you'll forget about all that hard work
And the idea of no dig being as you say that you just keep layering stuff up.
You never actually turn the soil over Is that right? Yeah, so you start with
usually cardboard is the bottom layer and then on top of that you put organic
compost And you keep layering every year the compost breaks down worms like to
digest it and take it down into soil So it's really good for soil health which
then improves plant health you get healthier crops And you also preserve the
soil structure so when you're digging over like the old methods that I was
taught actually in an rhsnq was double digging and That was like not only does
it hurt your back, but you also destroying the soil structure So it is worth
going down this route of no dig you you were looking for the lazy option I
didn't think I'd get it It seems like it's it's not possible So, grin and bear
it john. Thanks very much. Let's take another question penny merrell hail
allotment society We are told to look after our soil given that many of our
members are reluctant to use animal byproducts and are organic What else apart
from compost leaf mold and manure can be used to replenish nutrients? I suppose
there's the aspect here that a lot of people are vegan these days and are
looking for alternatives to Traditional stuff that would have used as penny
says, you know, like blood fish and bone, for example So what are the
alternatives james? Oh one that i'm really excited about recently is wood chip
There's a whole book on it that came out a couple of years ago that i've become
it's so niche and i've become fascinated by it And it's because this is borne
out by significant amounts of new child data Wood chips are stuff that so many
people who are having garden work done will have That you very often have to pay
for it to be taken away If it's being generated on your own grounds from healthy
plant matter that from not dead or diseased matter It has an almost miraculous
effect used in the right amount. You can just lay it on the top surface. You
don't have to dig it in Digging it in would would actually be counterproductive.
Just lay it on as a thick mulch I've been really surprised by the amount it can
change Uh a soil in a very short space of time the one caveat is you need to
make sure it isn't chipped from a plant that's diseased But otherwise it's a
really exciting new use for something that we haven't really considered in the
past Yeah, because christy I think a lot of tree surges probably struggle to get
rid of this stuff don't they they generate so much they do Indeed. Yes, um,
however, I would slightly Render what james has just said by temper his
enthusiasm. Well I think you've to consider soil types And what your where
you're starting from and where you're going from as well So I think a lot of
these new materials we do need to just be a little bit cautious of Um and like
anything to do with the soil It's very complex and james will understand where
i'm coming from with this one But you know You can build up lignin in soils and
that can cause problems and when you're looking at trying to maintain soil
health It's very difficult and I think in the future We are going to have to
look at growing things that we can compost to actually put back into the land
Ashley what do you tend to go with? Well, I think Something I did recently at my
mom's garden Actually was like get some shears just chop all the herbaceous
stuff down and leave it on the top and that was me being lazy But also it would
be really good to incorporate that will become incorporated by worms insects And
you know that will eventually end up in the soil and feed the plants and that's
kind of what would happen in nature You know, the plant would eventually feed
itself with its own dead leaves So I think that's something you could do chop
chop up your herbaceous plants leave them in situ and just let it rot down What
do you think penny? So all those of us that have been using wood chip for our
paths have been doing it all wrong Stick it on the beds instead. So the thing
with putting wood chip on a path is it rots down really surprisingly quickly And
everyone thinks the words a nightmare well It's actually a great thing because
people think you can't use it as a mulch because it takes ages to rot down
Anyone who's put on a path knows it rots down really fast Okay. Thanks for that
Let's move over here now. It's Jacqueline Ohanian hail allotment society As our
seasons become less predictable cool dry springs torrential rain and drought in
summer mild wet winters How will future gardeners achieve the holy grail of free
draining? Moisture-retentive soil when mulch is washed away and grit adds to the
risk of dry soil Good question. Yeah, and virtually every plant you buy in the
garden center on the label It says free draining moisture retentive soil,
doesn't it always which always seems a bit of an oxymoron to me but Anyway,
James, how do you do it? There are very few Curel questions in life curel
answers, but one of the times that does exist I think is in horticulture and
that's organic matter because organic matter will improve any soil whether you
have the the problem of Trying to get it to retain water or trying to to do the
opposite trying to make it free draining organic matter Amazingly is the silver
bullet that does both of those two things I wouldn't say that adding an
aggregate like sand or grit in in outside of a pot culture in the ground Really
makes a difference When this has been tested scientifically you have to have so
much grit to really make a difference outside of pot culture You're talking
about lorry loads even with a heavy clay soil. Yeah, you I think it's something
ridiculous like 30 percent If you think about it compare visually a plant pot
full of marbles and the plant pot full of flower And then when the poor water
through both the water through the marbles just disappears straight away The
water and the flower sits there and eventually may get there Now if you start
pouring putting aggregates into that you Alter it considerably if you put fine
aggregates into a clay any Pause any air that was there is going to get blocked
up. So it sets like concrete It does sweep fatty addams to the actual marbles or
the the large particles What we want is an amalgamation of the two and when we
get an amalgamation and that is a process That takes a role that organic matter
achieves It brings the particles together to form a larger size particle And
that gives you moisture retention and air and that's what you're ideally doing
The big problem of course these days is getting enough organic matter And I
don't believe that we do enough with green manures And if you've got vacant land
or areas around the edge of an allotment, you can always put green madode Sice
it compost it. Sice it again compost it. There are ways of generating organic
matter But if you're in the town situation or if you're in your home garden It
is very difficult to get substantial amounts with the reduction of transport of
organic matter these days with farming legislation It's becoming harder and
harder. I think long term we've got to look at the generation of organic matter
on our own pieces of land to feed on If you think back historically Farmers have
always added organic matter even cavemen let things go down and you know as
things change and particularly the world war two When things you know petal was
rushing and everything else we stopped moving when you're around then we had a
big kick in the pants again when foot and mouth came in and we can't get hold of
manure in the way we can and fertility is declining now during the war years
that was addressed by using good old grow more An artificial fertilizer, but
we've realized now that after a certain period of time using artificial soil
nutrition plateaus And you maintain it But it doesn't actually do much to the
soil that old saying feed the soil and the soil will feed the plant Is as true
today as it always has been so muck muck muck and more muck is the answer to
your answer question And an example of of creating your own green matter is
something like a green manure So you're planting seeds into the into the ground.
You can look them up in any catalog. There are lots of different species
specifically selected for that and what they're doing is creating that organic
matter right on your plot and digging it in and the miracle of it is it works
both As a physical sponge like literally trapping and holding air and water But
we now know there's a biological action on top of that So it creates food for
microbes in the soil that they're then creating things like gels Underground
that are keeping that water and air in place. Uh, the one thing it aggregates I
think it's there's a university of washington study that's something like 20
percent minimum If you think about how much soil you have in your garden and
you're going to add 20 percent of that I mean you'd be the the amount that would
cost to buy would just be ridiculous. It's just not worth it I hope that's
useful jackalene. Yes. Yes. It's very useful. Thank you. Thank you. Uh, let's
move along here now Hello, bonnie hadfield gulf road allotment member We're in
the process of downsizing our home Unfortunately, this means smaller and often
barren garden space What suggestions would the panel make to help us create a
private garden oasis for ourselves and birds? I might add we're in our late 70s
so time's not on our side for slow maturity Oh nonsense Christine where would
you start? Ye pessimist Yeah, it's it's almost that's almost nearly if I'd in my
mind if people saying I'm putting the garden to bed for the winter Um, you know,
we can still keep growing and plants do grow fairly quick if you want rapid
results I mean look at the annuals look at bulbs look at um plants adora de
groans so containerized plants a reasonable size It's not going to be cheap But
you can create a fairly instant garden quickly by doing those things I mean the
greater the diversity the greater the attraction of insects and birds and
butterflies etc Think about the early part of the season and the back end
Because most of us when we think of gardening we think of march to around about
october Now if you want diversity and you want insects life and other things
coming in you need to provide pollen early on So remember the bulbs and remember
the winter flowers remember the autumn bulbs that will take you into remember
the fruits And you know the viburnums and the prunices and all of that the
critaguses and all of those things that will provide food I was going to suggest
buying bare root plants actually and by Your instinct might be to buy instant
mature plants, which will look good, but there'll actually be more work for you
They'll be really expensive. Um, but if you buy bare root in the autumn and
plant those plants will soon catch up to anything bigger So so buy smaller
rather than bigger and those plants will soon catch up. Um Also, you could try
planting a native hedge and you can get those bare rooted and you'll get you can
get lots of variety In a very small area with berries flowers So there's
something every season and you can even have autumn color as well You'll also
attract birds and wildlife and that's beneficial to the whole garden You can see
how enjoy the instant effect of a visitor's to your garden James there's one
thing I would add to the aforementioned list all of which I agree with and
that's water So instantly if you're trying to add character to a space adding
water will do that If you want to attract wildlife to a space, that's one of the
key things they need It also the way it plays on light and the sound it makes
Instantly adds sort of characters. I think it's built in built into us to be
fascinated by the movement of water I'll keep you going for the next 30 years.
Well, that's all right. That will do me Thanks very much bunny And who has our
final question, please Paul Pearson Gulf Road allotments Our first allotment
harvest was a bumper crop of big succulent beetroot The following year recipe
books at the ready in anticipation We surveyed a row of disappointing marbles
Has any of the panel experienced a similar boom and bust if so with what crop or
plant? courgettes Christine peas. I normally grow really good peas, but last
year none Not a single pea germinated 400 pea seeds seats and not one I have no
idea why call yourself a gardener Well, the nice thing about gardening is it
does throw wobbles like this and it makes you realize you actually know sweet
funny It keeps you in your place And you know sometimes I I think that sort of
question leads to an awful lot of thought and you never really know but you
know, we're looking at climate soil types water all sorts of things like levels
varieties You know the more you know the more you can question and the more you
can think about But I certainly didn't ever come up with an answer, but I had no
peas either It's very often weather though, isn't it James? Yeah, absolutely one
year to another. Yeah, absolutely I think specifically in your beetroot example
was your year where you got really bad beetroot last year Um, no, it was it was
our first crop which was about 10 years ago But I just remember the contrast
between this fabulous wonderful year thinking that's it cracked beep beetroot
Yeah, and the following year zero nothing Well, if you have a really really hot
dry summer, for example They don't have the the water that's needed to swell the
actual roots themselves And I thought it might be last summer So the last summer
would have been a really bad year for that kind of thing. Um, and it it is often
really um specific parts of weather and even in a in a in a week window if you
for example have a late frost That knocks out all your early flowering fruit
trees. It doesn't matter what it's like for the rest of the year It could be
incredible But if they get killed in that tiny window particularly with
something that is an early flower like a kiwi for example Then you're really
really going to be in trouble. So it is You know you kind of think as humans We
kind of think back on the year and think it was a nice year because generally it
was like this From a plant's perspective. It only matters what happened that one
night sometimes that affects the whole year Blame it on the weather I think I
did at the time. Thank you Thanks a lot Uh, that's it sadly for this week's
gardeners question time Thank you to our audience here inhale to our questioners
and to you for tuning in Uh next week producer dom travels to brighten for a
chit chat about well chitting potatoes with regular panelist julia sergeant But
until then from me peter gibbs our esteemed panel christine warton james wong
and ashley edwards and the gqt production team It's goodbye and may the weather
be with you I think the weather will be with us if we want to get out in the
garden in the next few days gardeners question time Was produced by bethany
hocken the assistant producer was dulcy wadcock. It's a suntan house production
for pbc radio 4 Radio 4's lent talks for 2023 Six reflective moments taking
inspiration from the lord's prayer with meditations on forgiveness fatherhood
and finding heaven on earth A collection of personal stories from the man who
forgave his brother's killers to the writer escaping a war zone to facing
despair, but finding hope Sharing experiences on faith humanity and how the
words of the lord's prayer have impacted people's lives Lent talks begins this
wednesday evening at 8 45 on radio 4 and bbc sounds Now just before today's
drama, which is a new adaptation of exandria domar jois John york looks at the
original novel opening lines Have you ever on a long cold melancholy winter
night? Alone with your thoughts and the wind whistling through the hallway the
rain pounding against the windows Have you ever longed to flee our wet and muddy
paris for some enchanted oasis? Somewhere fresh and carpeted in green where you
could lie in the shade of a riverside palm tree and doze off without a care in
the world Well the paradise of your dreams exists And so begins a book you may
not have heard of by a writer you almost certainly have A book that remained out
of print and obscure for many years one brookley excised from the author's canon
And it's called george Hello i'm john york and this is opening lines the series
from bbc radio 4 that takes a look at books plays and stories That have made a
mark and asks what makes them work? For most of us it's hard to imagine a world
without the count of monticristo the three musketeers or the man in the iron
mask As templates for swashbuckling action adventure their influence is profound
As novels they had a huge impact turbo charge when they were given new life by
douglas fehrbank's junior Swinging into action on the silver screen Pirates of
the caribbean indiana jones even lara croft and tomb raider All of them owe
their being to the blueprint for action romance and fun laid down by the french
writer alexandria du mar And he wrote george published in 1843 firmly in this
tradition Yet george for more than a hundred years completely disappeared I'm a
writer and lecturer in storytelling and i confess i'd never heard of this book
until recently And now i have read it my question is how did i not know about
this before i loved it it's a ridiculously entertaining read We've got two
episodes about george in this one i'll be looking at this swashbuckling page
turnout of finding out more about the man who wrote it and how his rise fall and
rise again echoed the plots of so much of his fiction In the second episode i
look more closely at the theme at the heart of the book race and how it affected
Dumas and possibly the fate of this book Because race is the subject matter of
george and it's perhaps one of the reasons it's remained hidden for so long So
what is george about? As you heard at the beginning the book begins with the
literary equivalent of a drone shot The invisible narrator hovers above a
tropical island in the indian ocean Then zooms right down into the heart of the
exotic multiracial and complex society That is the setting of our tale Tinikova
is the translator of the latest english edition of george the first to be
published for over a century He was almost a screenwriter ahead of his time. You
know, he begins by saying to the reader Have you ever imagined on a cold bleak?
Winter night in paris and immediately he's bringing you along with him, you
know, the readers are saying well, yes Yes, actually, you know, it is a bleak
winter night And so he's taking your hand and sort of flying away on this Magic
carpet to this exotic Lush place but the image of paradise is deceptive We know
it now as Mauritius, but here it's the eel de france And as the name suggests
under french occupation or only just it's 1810 and the british are taking over
They fought for control of the sugar cane for the plantations for the slaves
that are at the heart of this tale It's a ruthlessly hierarchical society Slaves
are at the bottom of the pile the colonists at the top stuck in the middle the
free black people and those of mixed race melatos as du Mar himself refers to
them in the language of the time When we meet the eponymous george, he's a
sensitive and rather fragile boy the son of pierre munier a wealthy mixed race
man Munier has behaved heroically in the battle with the british But that is no
key to success in the eel de france Pierre is racially insulted after the battle
by a white family on his own side and forcibly reminded of his place George
witnesses his father's humiliation and tries to fight back But pierre his father
quickly stops him George is involved in an altercation with a white father and
son the de malmediz and That kind of sets us up with our hero and our villain
for the tale The muniers are a wealthy family. They themselves own slaves But
george has committed a serious offense in standing up to a white man and his son
Pierre afraid that george will suffer ill-treatment because he's made an enemy
out of this Malmedi father and son sends him off to france along with his
brother chock to be educated Once he's in paris george decides to embark on a
program of self-improvement And it's here you start to see tropes that would
form the stuff of superhero movies a century later Picture a montage George
running george fencing george studying george suddenly able to best opponents
seem laughed at him five minutes before He provokes a jewel to conquer his fear
of death Vittens a casino to beat any desire to gamble and then confronts his
biggest temptation Women because he's so muscular and handsome. He can have his
pick of of the ladies So he seeks out this beautiful woman A high society woman
in paris and he goes to her home Sort of seduces her With words until she's
eating out of his hand. She'll give him anything he wants She's offering herself
to him and then he just Talks to her all night. He he lectures her about
philosophical topics All night The self-made hero is now ubiquitous. You see it
in jane air. It's luke skywalker It's batman and for du Mar and this was one of
his first novels. It's a recurring theme in his work So remodeled as a suitably
chased 19th century superhero george returns to the ille de france to avenge the
insult Dante's father all those years ago David Coward is emeritus professor of
french literature at Leeds university. He sets out to overturn the system that
exists on the island Revenge is an important theme The plot centers on it
because justice and revenge are the essential themes of all of du Mar's fiction
I'm not going to tell you what happens because well, you can hear the east
enders drums that do Do do do even now Du Mar is one of the first masters of the
cliffhanger and the story is full of plots with sword fights forbidden love
fights to young women evil slavers pirates dashing rescues All creating endless
anticipation all deferring gratification in a way that just propels you like a
rocket through the tail All of these ingredients, of course are what du Mars
novels will become famous for Tina kova you always know when you're reading du
ma Style is unmistakable and anybody who's read the three musketeers or the
count of monty cristo or the man in the iron mask They all know there are some
hallmarks of du ma's writing style big larger than life characters and
extravagant descriptions of locations And gallant heroes and dastardly villains
and it's all it's all quite exaggerated in a way. So that's what george is about
But what about alexandra du ma himself? Dumas grandfather was a white french
landowner on the island of hispaniola Now heti and his grandmother was a black
slave called marie sassette They had a son who became the youngest general in
the french army. This was du ma's father But his father argued with napoleon and
was sent to prison for two years and died shortly after he was released
alexandra's mother was left virtually penniless and so he went to paris to try
to make his way He became a scribe for a member of the french royal family and
at the same time began to write plays to make more money on the side and He was
good He was really good. The plays were hugely successful and soon he was famous
and rich But his life is as extreme as many of his characters And the best was
yet to come When he turns his attention to novels So I'm john york and this is
opening lines from bbc radio 4 available now on bbc sounds George was a success
as soon as it was published and set the pattern for many of his later novels His
fictional heroes all overcome enormous obstacles. They triumph in the face of
adversity Their classic fictional tropes and amazingly to a large extent a
reflection of du ma's own life In his own life du ma was a superstar as dickens
was to us He was to france and his life was equally as grand as his reputation
He lived what could be called a big life. He earned a lot of money and he spent
a lot of money, too Indeed despite his phenomenal earnings. He was often short
of cash. He was famously generous to friends, but he also Inevitably had several
wives and mistresses to keep either quiet or in the manner they'd become
accustomed to by the 1890s In the early 1900s there was what was called du ma
mania Which infected the whole of the english-speaking world? The du ma really
is a writer who has been read all over the world and still is I mean even in
shorshank redemption There is a scene in the library where someone says what's
this book by this dumbass? And the guy's no, no du ma. It's the count of monty
christa Fame wasn't enough to insulate du ma from trouble It wasn't the high
living or sexual shenanigans that got him into real difficulty though It was
politics. He was forced to flee france as was victor hugo because of his rather
left-wing opposition to um to uh to establishment privilege He was also involved
in 1860 61 In the revolt in italy and he helped to run guns for garibaldi, uh in
the revolution there And he went on publishing he was Addicted to writing and he
went on and on until the late 1860s and finally he had a stroke then went to
live with his son in On the northern coast of france and would sit for hours
just looking out to the sea and then one day He died quietly Du Ma died in 1870
in puy and was buried without ceremony at the local cemetery a small ending for
a literary giant It's always tempting to belittle those his work reaches a mass
audience Outside of france hitchcock was dismissed in his time Spielberg is
still argued over and critics get incredibly upset about james cameron's work
But du ma is hugely important Not just because his work is still read around the
world and new film and tv versions of his books are still being produced more
than 150 years after his death It's more than that His novels are where romance
and action venture come together in perfect fusion for the first time And george
is a great example of that but more Artists often talk about the trojan horse
effect about how you should smuggle Serious ideas to a mass audience by pushing
them inside the horse of popular culture Well, that's what george does its
action venture romance and racial politics It's a novel ironically that may have
finally found its time It's a fabulous book and it deserves to be much better
known In the second episode I will be looking at this serious political content
of race and slavery That runs like a seam through the work how they're
approached in the book and what we know of how they affected du ma himself I'm
john yall. Thank you for joining me for this episode of opening lines The
reading was by sandale and it was produced by alison vernan smith. It's a peer
production for bbc radio 4 All the episodes so far are available on bbc sounds
where you can also subscribe to the series And the adaptation of george is just
after the news Are you the poet a woman said to me in the street? Lemm sisay
isn't anyone else now I can say she said that I finally met benjamin zephaniah
Lemm sisay explores uniqueness. You are a visible original a pinnacle of miracle
We're talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room. He just
said you failed. You are the lord mayor of manchester Lemm sisay is the one and
only are you that poet tony walsh on friday mornings at 11 30 on radio