TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 5 FM, 198 Longwave, digital radio and BBC sounds. This is BBC Radio 4. Hello
and welcome to the World at One with me, Sarah Montague. Three men are arrested
after a police officer is shot at football practice in Northern Ireland. He was
accompanied by his young son and in fact putting footballs into the boot of his
car when two gunmen appeared, fired multiple shots, drawn round a short distance
and as he fell to the ground the gunmen continued to fire shots at him. Police
blame dissident Republicans. We'll hear why. A year on from Russia's full-scale
invasion of Ukraine we have an eyewitness account of what happened in the city
of Maripol as it was overrun. We organised the shelter in the kids room with a
lot of mattresses. We just managed to get there and then I heard a very strong
explosion and that was exactly in the same spot when I was cooking the food.
With the United Nations preparing to vote today on whether to demand that Russia
immediately withdraw from Ukraine we'll ask the UK's United Nations ambassador
if that isn't too little too late. And we'll be remembering the voice of BBC
football, John Matson, who has died at the age of 77. Radford again, oh what a
goal! What a goal! Radford the scorer! It was voted the goal of the season and
for me it was the goal of my career. One of the many commentators he inspired,
Clive Tildsley, will tell us what made Motti so special behind the mic. The BBC
News is read by Vigielis. Three men have been arrested in connection with the
attempted murder of a senior police officer in County Torone. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell had been coaching football at a sports centre in Oma
when he was shot last night. He remains in a critical condition in hospital.
From Oma, our Ireland correspondent Chris Page has the latest. All morning
police officers in white forensic suits have been carrying out searches in the
car park where their colleague was shot. John Caldwell was putting footballs
into his car with his son when he was attacked by two gunmen. He ran from them
and when he fell on the ground, the men continued firing at him. Eyewitnesses
have said the sports complex was busy with children at the time. The
investigation is at an early stage but police have said they are focusing their
enquiries on the group known as the New IRA. It's thought to be the largest and
most active of the dissident Republican organisations who are opposed to the
peace process. Three men have been arrested in County Torone, they are aged 38,
45 and 47 and are being questioned in Belfast. The leaders of the five biggest
political parties at Stormont have issued a joint statement of condemnation. The
Irish Prime Minister, the Tisha Cleo Veradker said the shooting was a grotesque
act. Rishi Sunak described it as appalling and disgraceful. New figures show
that the number of asylum seekers waiting for the Home Office to make a decision
on their claims has reached record levels. There are now about 166,000 people on
the list with the majority of those waiting at least six months. The Prime
Minister has pledged to reduce the asylum backlog by the end of the year. Our
Home Editor Mark Easton reports. Rishi Sunak has vowed to stop the migrant boats
crossing the Channel by swiftly returning asylum seekers arriving by irregular
routes. But his hopes of speeding up the asylum system by eradicating the
backlog of cases have been dealt a blow by new figures showing the numbers
awaiting even an initial decision from the Home Office has risen by 60% in a
year, topping 160,000 for the first time. Ideas to clear the backlog include
granting asylum to migrants from five countries with high acceptance rates
without the need to attend a face-to-face interview. Instead, they must complete
a 10-page form in English. The number of individual asylum claims in the UK was
89,000 last year, the highest number for 19 years, but still well below the
numbers applying in Germany, France and Spain. The Labour leader, Sir Keir
Starmer, has promised that if his party wins power at the next election, the UK
will have the highest growth in the G7 by the end of its first term. He's been
setting out five missions that his government would prioritise in a speech in
Manchester. Our chief political correspondent, Nick Adley, was listening. These
pledges, Labour says, will be the guiding missions of a future government led by
Keir Starmer. You can expect to hear a lot about them in the next 18 months or
so, and we're promised more tangible targets in the coming weeks. The key
economic pledge Labour is making is a bold one to ensure the UK has the highest
growth in the G7 by the end of its first term in power. It's a sign of
confidence that the party is already engaging with what it would do in a second
term, part of a so-called decade of renewal. But a list doesn't provide results
on its own. Just ask Ed Miliband, whose famous six priorities were written on a
stone and didn't lead to an election victory. The Conservatives said Sir Keir
liked the principles needed to lead and was offering no new ideas. Scotland's
chief constable has announced he will retire in the summer after nearly six
years in the job. Sir Ian Livingston said Police Scotland had delivered best
value to the public purse and praised its work through the COP26 climate summit
in Glasgow and events which followed the death of Queen Elizabeth at Balmoral.
He had recently raised concerns about financial pressures facing the service.
Kate Forbes, who is vying to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as Scotland's first
minister, has said she is greatly burdened and heart-sore about the reaction to
her comments on gay marriage. The finance secretary, who is a committed
Christian, said she would not have backed same-sex unions if she had been an MSP
when the legislation was passed and some of her backers withdrew their support
as a result. In a lengthy Twitter post, Miss Forbes said she never intended to
cause hurt and would protect everyone's right to love without harassment. The
Premier League has given a cautious welcome to government plans to establish an
independent regulator for men's football in England. It was recommended in a fan
review last year with the aim of making clubs more financially resilient. The
league said it appreciated the move but stressed it was vital that regulation
did not damage the game or its ability to attract investment and grow interest.
The legendary football commentator John Motsen has died at the age of 77. Known
affectionately as Mottie, he started working on Match of the Day in 1971 and
commentated on nearly two and a half thousand games, including ten World Cups
before his final match in 2018. Our sports correspondent Andy Swiss looks back
on his 50-year career with the BBC. With his infectious enthusiasm and his
trademark sheepskin coat, John Motsen was one of football's most famous voices.
He joined the BBC in 1968 but his big break came four years later in an FA Cup
tie between Newcastle and non-league Hereford. That commentary on Ronnie
Radford's goal turned Motsen into a household name. He went on to cover 29 FA
Cup finals and more than 200 England games, paying tribute to the Director
General of the BBC Tim Davy, described him as a legendary figure in British
sports broadcasting. John Motsen who has died at age 77. Fidgey, thanks very
much. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell is currently in a critical but
stable condition in hospital in Northern Ireland. He'd been coaching a young
sports team in Oma last night and was with his son when two gunmen attacked him.
At a press conference this morning, Assistant Chief Constable Mark McEwan
described what happened. Around 8 o'clock last night, we saw that John was
finishing up from coaching an under-15 football team. He was accompanied by his
young son, and in fact putting footballs into the boot of his car. When two
gunmen appeared, fired multiple shots, John ran a short distance, and as he fell
to the ground, the gunmen continued to fire shots at him. We'd like to
acknowledge the assistance and the quick, brave actions of one member of the
public who gave first aid and the actions of our partners in the ambulance
service. At this time, there were many other young people, children, awaiting
pick-up by their parents. Those children ran for cover in sheer terror towards
the centre. Three men have been arrested. The Assistant Chief Constable
explained the focus of their inquiry. Our primary focus of that investigation is
on violent dissident Republicans, and within that, a group called New IRA. We
continue to work against these groups. We know that they have a level of
capability, and as we've seen, this horrific attack play out last night. As I
say, we're keeping an open mind. That's where the focus of the investigation is
at this moment, and you will understand why I won't be drawn in further detail
at this time. The attack was condemned across the political spectrum, as joint
statements from all the party leaders in Northern Ireland said there was no
tolerance for such attacks by the enemies of our peace, and those responsible
must be brought to justice. Reverend Graham Hare is Rector of St Columba's
Church in Omer, and he was giving his service as the attack happened. Last
night, actually, with it being Ash Wednesday, the beginning of Lent, we had a
service in church, and actually during that service, some members of the family
became aware of the events unfolding and had to leave that service. At the
conclusion of that service, then the news began to break across the congregation
of exactly what was unfolding on the other side of town. Do you know how the
family are? The family are in an enormous sense of shock and disbelief. I think
due to the reality for anyone who goes through trauma like this, there's a sense
in the immediate days of disbelief. Obviously, we're dealing primarily here with
a husband and a father, and so our immediate thoughts and our prayers are for
John and for his family. Did you speak to some of those who were there? I have
been in contact with parents who were collecting the children. The tragedy here
is that here we have a public servant, a man who put his life in the line day
and daily in the pursuit of justice and the pursuit of peace. Here he was
serving his community as a football coach alongside his son and friends. It's in
that environment that these evil cards choose to come and gun them down in front
of children. It is that barbaric evil that I think has shocked this town to its
very core. Reverend Graham Hare, Liam Kelly's chair of the Police Federation in
Northern Ireland. Good afternoon. Liam Kelly, can you hear me? Sounds like we
have a problem with the connection to our guest. Liam Kelly, can you hear me?
Lines, told the lines drop. We will get back to hear his thoughts. Let's move on
to another news story today. There are currently 100 and before we move on, I'm
told we might have the line up again. Liam Kelly, can you hear me? Liam Kelly? I
can hear something. Liam Kelly, can you hear me? Yes, sorry. Great stuff. Sorry,
the line dropped just as we were coming to you. We were just hearing from the
Reverend Graham Hare, whose rector was St. Columba's Church, just about the
response to this group, the dissident group that's behind it. There were so many
different groups. We've heard of obviously the real RA critical to the OMA
bombing back in 1998. But now this is the new IRA. Can you just give us an
explainer of who they are? Well, firstly, good afternoon. The first thing I want
to do is absolutely condemn what has happened last night to one of our off-duty
officers. Again, John Caldwell is a dedicated, experienced senior detective in
his professional policing role. But also he's a decent, hardworking family man
who's committed to improving society, both personally and professionally. And
last night he was involved in a little spare time he has in providing voluntary
coaching for young people and community service. So, I mean, it's absolutely
abhorrent that he has found himself in the position that occurred last night.
And in relation to the new IRA, who are the main line of inquiry that P.S. and I
are following for this attack, they have been, what are termed, a dissident
Republican group of small numbers. But in that part of Northern Ireland, they do
have obviously a dedicated resource, albeit small. They have showed they have
deadly intent. And that has manifested itself before. Most recently, before
Christmas, when we had a gun attack or we had a vehicle attack on police
officers in Derry, Silly and Struban, both on a patrol vehicle and with a bomb
being left outside a police station. So this group are real. They exist within
Northern Ireland context. And my appeal today is for the public to come out and
give the police the information to get these people put before the courts and
put behind bars. Are they increasing threat, do you know? Well, they've had a
diminished threat because the security services in conjunction with the P.S. and
I and our partners have been able to infiltrate the group. And we've had a
number of successes over the last few years in relation to them. But they still
have a cohort of support and experience. So in relation to whether they're grown
or not, I really can't comment on that. But what I can say is they are clearly
still here and they are obviously posing the threat and that manifested itself
last night. And in terms of their motivation, is it possible to say to what
extent it is, political, ideological or even criminal? I have no idea what their
motivation is because they've never come out and said that. I can only speculate
as the previous group, they seem to think, particularly in operating in a
political vacuum, that violence is the answer to get whatever their warped
ideology is over the line. So it will be interesting to see in the common hours
and days whether or not that any particular group actually claims responsibility
for the attack. I think John Caldwell last night and what ideology that they're
going to be attached to that. But ultimately the ideology that they may or may
not have is doing nothing for our society. It just creates misery and heartache
and it's bereft of any humanity. I mean, we had a man providing a community
service last night, shot multiple times in front of not only members of the
public and children, but his own son. I mean, that's absolutely abhorrent. Do
the police have the resources they need to deal with it? And the reason I ask is
that in 2019, the head of the police service of Northern Ireland, Simon
Bernhardt, asked for more funding to help deal with an increase in paramilitary
activity. Is it still a challenge? Well, it's absolutely a challenge. And again,
because of devolution and reducing budgets for our government in Northern
Ireland, the policing budget has unfortunately been slashed over the last number
of years. And I mean, the projection for next year is that it's going to be cut
by a further £100 million. That's not going to help the police in dealing with
this. So I mean, I would call today that those in power, particularly in
Westminster at the moment, because we've no devolved government in operation in
Northern Ireland at the moment, is that they actually give the chief constable
both the funding and the resource that he needs to keep our community and to
keep our police officers safe. Liam Kelly, thank you very much. And then let's
move on because there are currently 166,000 people waiting to hear if they will
be granted asylum in the UK. That's how big the backlog is, according to the
latest data out this morning. Of those, 110,000 have been waiting for longer
than six months. While they wait, they can't work and they need to be housed,
which is why hotels across the country have been booked up and paid for by the
government for some of those. Madeleine Sumption is director of the Migration
Observatory at Oxford University and is across all the numbers, Madeleine. Good
afternoon to you. Good afternoon. Just first of all, the size of that backlog,
it's just been increasing year after year, hasn't it? Yes, the backlog is big.
It's 100,000, as you said, 160,000 people and it's increased by around 60
percent over the last year alone. But this actually is a longstanding problem
that we've seen much slower processing of asylum claims over the last five,
almost 10 years. And that has allowed the backlog to build up steadily,
particularly over the last five years, even before the recent uptick that we've
had in asylum applications. Why is that? There's no single explanation for it. I
mean, the key thing that comes out of the data is that fewer decisions are being
made per decision maker in the system. And part of, I mean, one of the factors
that's often been identified is the high staff turnover and low morale among
decision makers. And so you have a situation when if you have newly recruited
people, it takes some time to get up to speed. We've also seen some other
factors like additional steps that have been inserted into the asylum process as
a result of policy changes that may have contributed. OK, well, we have this
idea of fast tracking some given that the Prime Minister has promised that the
backlog will be gone by the end of the year. That's 12000 people who are from
countries like Afghanistan and Syria and who applied before July will have the
option. Well, we'll be able to fill out a 10 page form in English within a
certain timeframe and to be granted asylum potentially without an interview.
There's been a huge amount of criticism from all sides. What's your view of it?
I think this is an interesting one. I mean, different people, some people have
said, you know, this is very permissive policy. Some people said this is a
crackdown. I think it's probably neither. I think it's actually relatively
uncontroversial in principle, something that, you know, we're talking about a
group of people here who are effectively guaranteed to be given asylum
eventually. So the question is, is there any point in having people sit in the
backlog for a year and a half, often more during which time, you know, we know
that being in that backlog hurts their prospects after they do get status. So I
think it's more just a process designed to make the system a bit more efficient.
It's been used similar types of processes have been used in a number of other
countries. There are, of course, some questions around the details of how it's
done. And so one of the concerns, for example, has been, you know, it's not just
checking, are you in fact Syrian or Afghan? There's quite a lot of information
that's being requested in the questionnaire. And so I think one of the concerns
has been, well, will there be any support for people to fill it out, especially
since it is in English. And that there's a lot of information that they're going
to have to provide. Madeline Sumption, thank you very much. Well, the prime
minister has made the stopping of small boats of migrants crossing the channel,
one of his five key pledges setting out his priorities. So what difference would
it make to those? Natalie Alfix, the Conservative MP for Dover and Deal, where
many migrants come ashore. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. What do you make of
this fast tracking idea? Do you think it's going to make any difference? Well, I
think as we just heard is one of those ideas that's perfectly sensible in terms
of administration within the home office, which certainly needs to be more
efficient and speed it up. But there is a serious risk of sending mixed messages
to the people smugglers and indeed emboldening them. And that's my real concern
with this development. Because on the one hand, we say if you come into the
country illegally, you can't stay here. And now on the other, we're saying
unless you came in before last summer, in which case, just make sure you get
your paperwork straight. So I am concerned that this will send mixed messages in
an arena where we need to be very, very clear about the fact that we do not
think people should be coming into the country illegally. Well, you think it
will make a difference to those now because it's only going to apply to people
who came before July and only from certain countries. And who would, as you say,
probably get asylum anyway. And we know that the people smugglers, they're not
concerned about backlogs. They're not concerned about the time it takes. What
they sell is when you get here, you can stay here in the UK. And that's at the
very heart of their business model. And that's why stopping the boats,
particularly leaving France, making sure we have returns and all those other
measures are so very important. So I do think there is a serious risk of mixed
messaging and that we'll have to see what happens in the next weeks and months.
And most importantly, what happens in that March summit with President Macron in
terms of whether we see a real breakthrough and practical action on the ground
to stop small boats. I mean, with 166,000 people in the backlog now, I mean,
something needs to be done to speed it up, doesn't it? Well, there are lots of
areas where there are backlogs and those need to be addressed. So if we take the
100,000 households in temporary accommodation, many who've been in temporary
accommodation for many years, the NHS waiting lists and so on. There are a
number of areas where, particularly because of the COVID pandemic, there are
backlogs which need to be addressed. I think what's really important when it
comes to the small boats crossings is that these are incredibly dangerous. These
are criminal gangs and they have cost lives. And it's absolutely imperative that
we take steps to make sure that people are not making these crossings in the
first place. So I am concerned that the latest developments on the fast tracking
of particular claims can lead to this emboldening of the people smugglers and
ultimately could be counterproductive in our effort to end it. Are you
frustrated that there hasn't been a plan released by the Prime Minister yet on
dealing with this thing that he says is his priority? Well, I've met with the
Prime Minister a number of times, the Immigration Minister. In fact, I've met a
very good meeting with the Immigration Minister on Monday. So I know a lot of
work is being done across government and it is a key priority of the Prime
Minister. But the bottom line is the boats are still coming. And I think
representing Dover and Deore, people are fed up. They really want to see an end
to these boats arriving. The pressures on local services, on housing, on
education, on health care are considerable across Kent. I was in a meeting with
Kent leaders only last week. And there was real anger about the impact that this
was having on their communities right across Kent. I mean, those pressures would
ease if asylum seekers were allowed to work. Is that something that you think
that could make a difference and possibly ease some of the pressure as well
that's growing with far right groups who are gathering to campaign against
asylum seekers? Well, I think the heart of the difference that this will make is
that people will still need to be housed somewhere. And what we will see as
people go through the processing system is that their responsibility within the
home office family of accommodation will come to an end. And that will become a
responsibility where people need housing with local authorities. And that is an
area that is already causing considerable strain. Okay, but what about working?
Just in a word, are you opposed to asylum seekers working? I think it's really
important that everyone who can work does work. And I think it's very important
that we do encourage people to play a full role while they're waiting for asylum
and contributing to their communities. Natalie Alfeck, thanks very much. An
island in North Wales has been officially recognised for having one of the best
night skies in the world. We are going to come to that later, but not now
because we are. It is exactly a year after Russia's full scale invasion of
Ukraine and the United Nations General Assembly will vote tonight on whether to
demand that Russia unconditionally and immediately withdraw. It's the third such
vote in the past year and the numbers voting in support of Ukraine are not
expected to be as high as the last vote when 143 out of 193 member countries
backed Ukraine. And for many it illustrates the problem with the United Nations.
Its Security Council was created in 1945 to put an end to wars. And yet in the
face of this one, it has seemed impotent. We'll speak to Britain's ambassador to
the UN in a few minutes. But we thought it was worth casting our minds back a
year because one of the Ukrainian towns that experienced the worst of Russia's
assault is Marry-a-pol. Elena Selenko, a journalist at Ukrainian TV7 channel,
lived there with her husband and two children. And she told me what it was like
living there after Russia invaded. We intended to stay. We just hope it would be
like in 2014 it will last two or three days and the Ukrainian army will deal
with that. But 28th of February, that was the last day when we had electricity.
In the first days of March, the connection disappeared. That's when the hell
began. We couldn't call anyone. We didn't know what was happening with other
people. They turned off water as well. We had to melt snow and collect the rain.
And also we were cooking outside on the open fire and all this after heavy
shelling. As I understand it, your flat was shelled. I just managed on 16th of
March to cook food. I took it inside in the house and then I heard the sound of
plane. And we just ran to the shelter. We organized the shelter in the kids'
room with a lot of mattresses. We just managed to get there. And then I heard a
very strong explosion. And that was exactly in the same spot when I was cooking
the food. I know you have two young children. I think that's when you decided to
leave, wasn't it? It's not then when we decided to leave Mariupol. We tried to
find food everywhere where we can. Some people were looting, some people were
stealing. But there were some supplies. There were already a lot of dead people
on the streets and dogs were eating their bodies. And that was a horrible,
horrible scene. But at that point we thought we can stay. We would survive. But
on 24th of March they started shelling our area so heavily for several hours
without stopping. A lot of people in our area died. So we were really, really
scared. We couldn't manage anything like that. How did you get out? I decided me
and my kids, we needed to leave the city. My husband couldn't come because he
was staying with his ill mum. So early in the morning on 25th of March me and my
two kids, they were eight and ten then started walking on the heavy shelling.
And then we considered ourselves very lucky because we saw a minibus from Red
Cross and he was asking, oh, who is going to Berdansk? And we managed to squeeze
in there. It was already packed and there were block posts every 200, 300
metres. I could see Russian soldiers and on each checking point they asked all
men to remove their clothes. They were looking for the marks left by guns and
tattoos on our bodies. Two people didn't come back to our bus. One was a young
guy. Allegedly they found a picture of him with a gun from 2014. And the other
one was a young boy who didn't have any documents with him because his house was
destroyed. They suspected that I was a sniper because my hair was unboached and
I had short fingernails. But then I managed to persuade them that I'm a
housewife. What about your children? How are they coping now with all that
they've gone through over the past year? We lived not far from the aerodrome and
each time they heard an airplane they squeezed and looked up. It was initial
reaction. They knew they're in safety but they couldn't help it. And also they
couldn't listen or read any scary stories because they were deeply traumatised,
I would say. And once my little son told me, Mum, I was so scared when they were
searching you in Berdansk. I was so, so scared that you wouldn't get back like
those two people they took away. Elena Selenko talking to me and she said that
she hopes to go back to Mariupol in the summer. We shall keep in contact with
her to find out the chance of that. Now the United Nations was created to ensure
peace and stability in the world. But it really has looked powerless in this
conflict. Daymwab Barbara Woodward is Britain's ambassador to the United
Nations. Good afternoon, Daymwab. Good afternoon, Sarah. There is a vote tonight
on the General Assembly. However it goes, though, what difference is it going to
make to the war in Ukraine? I think the vote tonight, which will be to call for
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine, will send a very important
signal a year from Russia's invasion that the vast majority of the UN membership
wants to see peace in Ukraine, an end to the war and importantly an end to all
of the consequences that we've seen ripple out across the world, food security,
energy prices. So it will just keep Russia isolated. It will keep the pressure
on Russia to end the war. But does it, though? I mean, you've got a situation
where Ukraine's been warned they may not be able to get the vote that they got
last time, six months ago when there was a vote on the war, which was 143 out of
193. What it shows is so many countries abstaining and a few even siding with
Russia. So when we have 140, 143 countries, we had that three times last year in
three successive votes. So we've tracked support for Ukraine consistently across
the year. Russia, of course, managed to muster four votes in support. So that's
a pretty poor record for a country that calls itself a global superpower. And
then you're right. There are countries that abstain. But when you look at why
they abstain, I think it's worth remembering that there is a heavy program of
Russian intimidation here in New York and around the world. They threaten
countries and representatives with consequences. The Wagner mercenaries are
involved in a lot of countries. And so simply abstaining in some ways is quite a
courageous stand to take against Russia, which, as I say, has only seen four
countries supported in each of these votes. But it is also one of the five
permanent members of the Security Council. It has a veto on any vote that goes
to the Security Council. It's sort of once left wondering what difference the
United Nations makes and what the point of it is. I mean, the reason it was
created was to try to ensure peace and stability. And it is powerless here,
isn't it? We've certainly been very frustrated in the Security Council this year
because Russia has used its veto. But we tried to use the debates in the
Security Council to expose just how isolated Russia has been over the last 12
months, to expose the lies, the disinformation, to expose Russia's false claims
about bioweapons. So the United Nations has been very helpful, I think, in
setting out the objective truth. But worth remembering, too, that the Secretary
General has been very robust in his defense of the Charter and Ukraine's right
to its own sovereignty and territorial integrity. The United Nations brokered
the release of some of the people who were stuck in Marupol. They brokered the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, which managed to get world grain or grain out of
Ukraine, but then back to put grain prices in the world market back down again
after they spiked following Russia's invasion. So overall, I'd say that the
United Nations has played a constructive role, but it is Russia's veto, which is
blocking real progress in the Security Council. But no country supported them in
any Security Council vote. There does appear to be an increasing polarization
going on, and it's a charge that's been leveled by China and Russia. We have
this sort of suggestion from China that tomorrow we're expecting a peace plan on
the Ukraine war. Do you welcome that? And China is suggesting that? Well, I
think we're all calling for a peace plan. That is at the heart of the resolution
that we'll be voting on this evening, a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
for Ukraine. We in the UK are very clear that this needs to be based on the
principles of the UN Charter so that Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, its borders are respected. We don't go back to a right, a might is
right world. If China has got ideas on that, and I know that their chief
diplomat Wang Yi was at the Munich Security Conference discussing some of that,
and he's just been in Moscow, obviously seeing President Putin and Russian
Foreign Minister Lavrov. So it'll be interesting to see whether the Chinese have
a plan that respects Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and also
that Russia somehow can sign up to and then lead to Russian withdrawal from
Ukraine. The meetings you mentioned sort of reflect what seems to be increasing
collaboration between Russia and China. Do you think that there is a sort of
danger that the Western approach has resulted in a more polarised world, exactly
what China and Russia are charging, is part of the problem? I think that we have
seen as a consequence of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, that the West, very
broadly defined, when you look at NATO, you look at the G7, have become much
stronger and more resolute in their determination to see those principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity, Ukraine's right to exist, defended. So
that has been a very positive development. China, I think, has sat rather
ambiguously, caught between its stated support for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, Ukraine's right to exist, and there's no limits friendship with
Russia, which we saw announced just before the Beijing Winter Olympics last
year, and which they've tried to sustain in the face of quite considerable
difficulty. If China were to start selling weapons to Russia, as Secretary
Blinken suggested after his discussions in Munich, that would put China, I
think, on the wrong side of international law, it is illegal to supply weapons
to an aggressor state, as distinct from what the UK and others are doing, which
is supporting Ukraine in its right to self-defence, and that would undermine
China's status as a responsible leading country in the world. So we very much
hope that won't happen. Dan Barbara, thanks very much. Now, the legendary
football commentator, John Watson, has died at the age of 77. Known as Motti, he
had a 50-year career with the BBC working on Match of the Day, covered 10 World
Cups for BBC Sport before he retired in 2018. Here's a reminder of his
commentary and him reflecting on his career to a BBC programme called Match of
Their Day in the late 90s. What really happened was, for the first three months,
I struggled really badly, and there were people saying, well, I don't think
you're going to cut this at all. And then by fluke, my first ever FA Cup tie for
Match of the Day happened to be Herriford Newcastle. Tremendous spirit in this
Herriford side, they're not giving this up by any means. Radford, now Tudor's
gone down for Newcastle. Radford again, oh, what a goal! What a goal! Radford
the scorer, Ronnie Radford, and the crowd, the crowd are invading the pitch.
That goal by Ronnie Radford, I mean, people said it was that it was voted the
goal of the season, and for me it was the goal of my career. The point about
commentary is it is the only discipline I know in television where you are going
to be doing effectively an hour and a half or two hours of live broadcasting
without a script. Absolutely and entirely off the top of my head, I mean, I have
to react to what happens on the pitch, and there's no way that you can prepare
or predict that. Marvellous stuff. A throwback to the old days. Look at this.
There we are, Jon Mots and Mottie. Well, the sports broadcaster Clive Tilsley
was ITV's senior football commentator from 1998 until 2020, worked alongside Jon
Mots and at the BBC in the 90s. Clive, good afternoon. Good afternoon. What are
your thoughts this afternoon? Well, I've lost a friend. So, you know, my
thoughts are a little different, perhaps, from most of your listeners. But the
really outstanding broadcasters are able to forge a relationship with thousands,
millions of people that they will never meet. And so the the morning of Jon Mots
today will be felt almost as deeply by a lot of those people because of the
connection that he was able to make. And I think certain sports commentators are
considered national treasures, you know, the voice of their sport, Pedro
Sullivan, Bill McLaren, Dan Masco, maybe Brian Johnston or John Arlott. And you
won't have a voice of football ever again. Now, there's too much football on
television, too many commentators. Nobody quite knows who they're listening to.
But you were never in any doubt who you were listening to when you were
listening to one of those guys or to Jon Mots. I saw you tweet that when you
were a teenager, you just wanted to be him. Yeah. My parents were not always the
best historians and certainly of only children would tell you that I was from an
age of eight or 10 or 12 wanted to be a football commentator. And he was the he
was the commentator that, you know, perhaps I've modeled my style of commentary
on most most closely. There was a short bridge of four or five years between him
being an iconic voice in the distance and becoming a good friend, because even
in my early local radio career, I got to meet and know him. And he was very
generous with his time and with his support. So it seems strange to say that
now, but it's true when I was 15, 16, 17 years of age, if I didn't actually want
to be the husband of Annie Mots and I certainly wanted his job. And he was good
and to work with just briefly. Well, he set the standards really. And, you know,
in many respects, some of those are the names that I've mentioned before, maybe
had richer voices, richer vocabularies. But in many ways, I think Jon was the
first broadcast journalist, a commentator. He was as trusted by people within
the game, by managers with secret information, as he was trusted by the
viewership. And so never mind the sheepskin coat and all the crazy stats, we're
talking about a guy who was football correspondent of material. We must leave it
there. Clive Tilsley, thank you so much. Talking about Jon Motsen, who has died.
That wasn't long after the poet and author, John Fisano, took his seat on a
plane yesterday that he was presented with a rather unusual challenge. It was
one he told me about. Well, I got on a flight. I'm on a book tour for the
Swallows of Luneto and I've been touring around the United States. I'm from the
New York area and I'm headed to Edinburgh, where I am now, to do a few readings
and do a few events. I got on the plane, you know, it was a late, late flight. I
was a little tired and I settle into my seat and this woman sits down next to me
and we say hi. And then sure enough, she puts her little tray down and pulls out
of her bag. My book. I did not know what to do. I'm normally very comfortable in
any given social situation. I froze like a proverbial deer in headlights. I was
not quite sure at all what to do. I thought, well, this is a long flight. This
could go either way. I'd better give her her privacy. That's the beginning of
the story. But what you did do is you sort of crowdsourced the problem, didn't
you? I did indeed. My social media following is fantastic. And I knew that they
would have some at least lively solutions for me and suggestions. So I quickly,
without, of course, invading the privacy of my seatmate, I didn't capture any
part of her, I think, except a knee. I snapped a photo and I posted it on my
Twitter feed and I asked my friends there, what should I do? And I got quite a
lively response. So the upshot was what? What did you do? OK, so I thought,
well, and a lot of people suggested you'd better wait. You don't know how this
is going to go. And when she opened the book, the lovely woman beside me, she
was only on page 10. And I thought, oh, I should give her some time. Well, sure
enough, about 10 minutes went by and I couldn't contain myself. And so I asked
her, are you liking that? And she said, I think so. Which I thought, OK. I think
so. She said, have you read it? And I said, I well, about 100 times. And she
looked at me like I was utterly insane. And then I said, well, you know, I
wanted to make sure everything was all right, was correct. And very quickly she
paused. She looked at me and realized I must be the writer who has proofread the
book that many times. So we had a laugh and then we had a good chat. And, you
know, I'm doing some events in town and she's going to plan to come to one of
those. So I think it'll be great. I'm guessing that she didn't then read the
book because it must have been absolutely excruciating to read with the author
watching it. No, we had some with some banter. And then I said, you know, I'll
excuse you from the from the obligation of getting to me. She had some other
books with her. I said, why don't you go on with something else? Did she give
you a verdict on the first 10 pages beyond? No, we avoided the question
entirely. I guess you'll never know if she does hate it. I will never know. No,
I think we've entered the realm of politeness at this point. Is it something
like that ever happened to you before? No, not at all. Sometimes as a writer,
you have these somewhat strange interactions once or twice in a restaurant, that
sort of thing. But no, I think the chances are probably astronomical that that
something would happen, which is why I had to share it. Joseph Fazzano. And he
signed the book to her. Thanks for taking me on your journey. Your seatmate,
Joseph Fazzano. Well, that's it from us. Just let you know, I did start telling
you about the dark skies of Wales, Ennys, Enki, which is Bodsey Island. And we
didn't have time for it. That's my own fault for messing up timings. P.M.
though. Listen to P.M. It's a lovely lesson. P.M. is anyway, but also that item.
I'm Sarah Montague, and that's The World at 1.45. Thanks, Sarah. We'll catch it
on P.M. Studio direction was by Graham White and the editor was Rebecca Keating.
Now on Radio 4, Matthew Seid continues tracing the history of a word that
divides the world. What's your reaction when I say the word woke? Woke
multinational corporations. You're always politically woke and all that stuff.
Hoku eating. Wokorati. Drop the term into conversation and many people will roll
their eyes. It's a word that's come to symbolize an era of angry debate and
political division. I'm Matthew Seid, and in the past I've used woke to describe
an overzealous approach to identity politics. But I've come to learn that the
word has a remarkable history, stretching back over a century as a watchword for
African Americans. This is woke, the journey of a word. For this series, I'm
tracing the evolution of a term that I think can help us to understand our
polarized world. I'll be telling the stories of some of those who have written
it, who have said it, and who have been defined by it. In the last episode, we
met a woman who brought the hashtag StayWoke into the mainstream in 2014,
igniting the Black Lives Matter movement. Today's tale is about a remarkable
photo that helped to change the meaning of woke forever. It begins on the 8th of
November 2016 with the election of Donald Trump into the White House. Donald
Trump sweeping many of the key battleground states. At that time, Prisca Kim was
a young mother living in Charlotte, North Carolina. After the elections, I felt
a lot of sadness, disappointment and fear. They're bringing drugs, they're
bringing crime, they're rapists, and some I assume are good people. More than 61
million Americans turned out to vote for Trump in 2016, presenting him with a
decisive victory in the electoral college. Many, including Prisca, were
concerned about what his election meant for minority groups. When you hear
somebody being voted in and that person is attacking people who have worked so
hard for so long, you have equal rights to be heard. Trump had been accused of
misogyny during the campaign, particularly after the release of a recording from
2005, which he described as locker room banter. You can do anything. Whatever
you want. Grab them by the pussy. As he prepared for office, women were
organizing to protest against his policies and his rhetoric. What began as a
small Facebook event in Hawaii became the Women's March. The date was set for
the 21st of January 2017, the day after Trump's inauguration. Millions had
pledged to attend the marches, including Prisca. I think a lot of people were
just trying to process what happened and what led us there. For me, I think
that's what the march was for. She also saw attending the march as a way to set
an example for her two-year-old son, JJ. It was important for me to take my
whole family and my son because one of the things that I was coming into the
march was my experiences as an Asian woman. As an Asian American woman, the
stereotype and the racism that comes with that, being told to come and give me a
massage. When JJ was barely walking, we were at the park and this man walks past
us and just makes these noises at us. What he believed, that Asian language
looked down like, you know, it was mocking and inappropriate. And that was JJ's
first racist encounter. And going to the march together, when we represented
that, you know, if there's an issue that affects women, you know, it affects
everyone. At home on the eve of the Women's March, Prisca decided to make a sign
for her son to carry. She texted my sister and asked for ideas. And she's a lot
more clever than me. And she's the one who actually came up with his sign. You
know, the sign says, I love naps, but I stay woke. And I thought it was age-
appropriate because he's barely two at the time. The time of the march was
exactly like during his nap time. And so I thought that part was kind of funny.
He made like just the straps that could go over his shoulders. And so as he's
walking, you can see the sign. And then for the word woke, I used the alphabet
magnets we had. At the time, the phrase stay woke was in the cultural ether. It
was appearing in music online and it was being chanted at Black Lives Matter
protests. To be honest, I wasn't completely familiar with it. I looked into it
and I did read up on it in the background and learned that it had already
existed in black activism for a while, for a long time. When I looked up the
meaning and definition of it, I felt kind of enlightened. To me, it meant like
waking up from the narratives that we were fed and questioning who wrote that
narrative, like whose voices are missing, like being woke. It applies to
everyone. We should all open our eyes to understanding injustice. And so with
the placard made, Prisca and her family headed to the march. When we went there,
there were so many families walking down the streets together. People were
chanting, people were engaging. Go, hey! Go here! Everybody is welcome here! And
I think there were a couple speeches. There were definitely moments of that
anger and outrage, different points of the march. Across the United States and
the world, people were gathering in one of the largest single protests in
history, with around five million attendees. In Washington, D.C., the crowds
were addressed by feminist icons and Hollywood stars. Let this wait not drag you
down, but help to get your heels stuck in. Back in Charlotte, North Carolina,
JJ's sign was turning heads. There were actually a lot of people who wanted to
take pictures, and I honestly was not expecting that. And then I guess like a
local photographer took a picture of the sign as well. And that's where the
photo went viral. We were heading home. I saw on my phone that I had all these
messages, and people were telling me that they saw JJ on Twitter and all these
different places. So we were even getting messages from people across the world,
the UK, even in Korea. I think my aunt told me that her friend sent that picture
of JJ to her, and then she was like, wait, I know him. It's such a cute image.
JJ has a sign around his neck. He's holding onto a priska with one hand, and in
the other, he's carrying a balloon. Perhaps it's no surprise that people really
wanted to share it, but it soon became more than just a viral photo. Perhaps
inevitably, people saw a chance to cash in. Honestly, like within hours, I
noticed that they were t-shirts being sold with that line or the sign. And
people were selling this, and I would get texts from friends sending me photos
if they saw it in a store or if it was on a magnet to put something. I wouldn't
say that I was angry or anything about people using that line without asking for
permission, but I think I was more shocked at how quickly people will capitalize
on something that's trending and then try to profit off of it. Is this
proliferation an inevitable consequence of Woke's move into the mainstream? Asia
Romano is a culture writer for Vox.com and has investigated the movement of Woke
through popular culture. So it was very much part of Black vernacular that was
being used in a very specific way and for a specific event, the 2014 Ferguson
protests over the death of Mike Brown. But I think from there, as the internet
will do, the internet began recycling it and spreading the word around and its
usage more broadly. So you would see white people using it in this very
performative, sincere, I want to be woke about this topic, so therefore XYZ,
ways in which they were demonstrating that they were being very progressive,
very demonstratively progressive. Prisca had used the phrase stay woke at the
Women's March because it felt applicable to her own experiences of
discrimination and because she felt a sense of solidarity. White women at the
March wanted to use that term too. The Women's March took place, I believe, in
2017, about three years into the kind of advancement of Woke. So you had people
on the ground making posters and protesting, really using the language of
Wokeness in their rhetoric and in their slogans and so forth. Ideally, it was
supposed to be a very diverse march for women, right? But in reality, it was
mostly white women. And this is something that it came under fire for because
the organization of the march was seen as being not diverse enough, right? Like
almost not woke enough. So the marchers were being criticized on the one hand
for using the word woke whilst not being inclusive enough themselves, but also
on the other side for an approach to societal issues that was deemed to be
preachy and over the top. I think there's a sense that woke almost immediately
became used as a way of trying to paint people who used liberal politics to be
very shrill, hyperbolic and over the top. And so like that was wokeism. There's
also the added element of the Internet. The Internet makes anything that is
sincere immediately suspect and immediately mockable. You know, it's almost
campy and it's over the top wide eyed naivete, right? There was even this skit
from the comedy show Saturday Night Live, a program often described as on the
left, which pokes fun at the use of the term. I'm woke. Whoa. Whoa. I'm woke. So
why aren't my jeans? Now they are introducing Levi Wilkes, size list, style
neutral, gender nonconforming denim for a generation that I think the moment you
saw white people using it, it lost a lot of its cynicism, its ironic humor, it's
self-deprecating just all of this internal ironies that attach to the phrase
because it is part of black for secular. And the criticism then extended beyond
satire to the form of woke. We see most commonly today a pejorative term used to
criticize someone as extreme or zealous in their commitment to identity
politics. This usage has been embraced wholeheartedly by Donald Trump. Now we
will defeat woke radicalism and a continuation of communism. Women's March
attendee, Prisca Kim. If I were going to a march today and if I were making a
sign today, I wouldn't use that word. It's just been completely disconnected
from its original context. In hindsight, I can see how when something starts to
trend, like with, you know, I love naps, but I stay woke, that line just
reproduced over and over and over again. Just it becomes a buzzword and then
it's hard to take that word seriously. So I think that maybe inadvertently we
did play a part, but I can't say that we purposely pushed it towards that
direction. And what of JJ, the boy whose woke photo became a sensation? He does,
you know, kind of remember, like he remembers the image. He remembers the sign
because he had it. He expresses so much pride of being Korean American. And
that's not something that I honestly really experienced going up. And so it
gives me so much joy. Next time we head to Florida, the state which Governor Ron
DeSantis has dubbed the place where woke goes to die. Woke the journey or the
word continues tomorrow. The presenter is Matthew Said and the producer is Sam
Peach. You can literally go anywhere at the snap of your fingers. For 100 years,
the BBC has been making groundbreaking radio drama. Of course, a tired woman,
but you have to ask yourself what I'm tired of. The radio plays our voices in
the dark. Join me, Michael Simmons Roberts, as I explore this great dramatic
form. Just a sheer amount of possibilities. Continuing our celebration of the
centenary of BBC radio drama. There is scope for so much more to happen on
radio. Dramatic Beats on Radio 4 and BBC.