TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-13H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 It takes place on the side of a road. There is a tree in a very specific spot
upstate. BBC News at midday. The former health secretary Matt Hancock has said
the leaking of thousands of his WhatsApp messages is a massive betrayal and
breach of trust. The journalist Isabel Oakeshott has admitted breaking a non-
disclosure agreement signed when she helped Mr Hancock write his book about the
Covid pandemic, but she insisted she'd acted in the national interest. The
latest messages highlight disagreements in late 2020 between Mr Hancock and the
education secretary at the time, Sir Gavin Williamson, over whether schools
should be closed and include disparaging remarks about teachers' unions. The
general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, Paul Whiteman,
believes it says a lot about the attitude of ministers. The language used and
the emojis used, albeit I think though that the correspondents think that they
are in private, actually reveals an immature approach to trying to deal with
life and death issues at the time and actually reveals that while the rest of us
were trying very hard to grapple with these things, perhaps the level of
seriousness to which it was taken in government wasn't what it should have been.
Russia's war against Ukraine is dominating talks at a meeting of G20 foreign
ministers in Delhi, despite India's desire to focus on the needs of developing
nations. The US Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, told the gathering that
Russia must withdraw its forces. Our correspondent Barbara Pletosha is in Delhi
and was listening to Mr Blinken's remarks. His lines have been quite clear in
terms of presenting Russia as the problem and trying to rally US allies and
western countries and others to also condemn the Russian invasion and that is
really what you've seen at this G20 meeting, a hardening of those divisions. We
saw it in Bali as well last year but now here you have the US and its allies on
one side and Russia and China on the other who are becoming increasingly divided
over what's going on in Ukraine. The former deputy commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police has been referred to the police watchdog after he allegedly
described the bulk of rape complaints as regretful sex. Sir Stephen House
strongly denies making the comments. He left the force last year after a spell
as acting commissioner following the departure of Dame Cressida Dick. Our Home
Affairs correspondent June Kelly reports. During a meeting in 2022, Professor
Betsy Stanko, a Home Office appointed advisor on rape investigations, said that
Sir Stephen House described the bulk of allegations as regretful sex. He's
denied using these words. The current Met Deputy Commissioner, Dame Lynn Owens,
described the alleged remarks as wholly unacceptable and said they would risk
further undermining the confidence of victims to come forward. Sir Stephen will
step back from a review he was heading into productivity in policing. An inquest
has heard that the head teacher of Epsom College died after being shot in the
chest and abdomen at a property in the school's grounds in Surrey last month.
Emma Pattinson's seven-year-old daughter Letty died from a shotgun wound to the
head. Ms Pattinson's husband, George Pattinson, is believed to have killed them
both before turning the gun on himself. The retailer WH Smith says it's been a
target of a cyber attack. The company said hackers had accessed data including
information about current and former employees. Customer accounts and databases
were not affected. Tickets for this year's Eurovision Song Contest in Liverpool
will go on sale next Tuesday. There'll also be six preview shows that double as
rehearsals including the one watched by each country's jury. The Swedish
Eurovision winner and host Måns Zelmelo says people shouldn't be disappointed if
those are the only tickets they can get. The preview shows are so good to see as
well, especially the jury one because as an artist it's as important and you're
as keen, you're as excited, you're as nervous for the jury shows. I would
definitely recommend to see those as well. I would go to all nine shows. The
Swedish Eurovision winner Måns Zelmelo. BBC News. This is BBC Radio 4. Now it's
time for You and Yours with Winifred Robinson. Hello, welcome to You and Yours
Gap Finders. It's an interview series we do with people who see a gap in the
market for a product or a new way of doing things and decide that they can fill
that gap for themselves. Today's Gap Finder is Ben Drury. He's the co-founder
and chief executive of Yoto. It started in 2015, now employs 90 people in the UK
and others in America and in France. It's a company that makes a new kind of
audio player for children. It's for listening to audio books, musics and
podcasts. Children can make their own content with it as well and it's won lots
of awards including being named as one of Time magazine's best innovations of
2020. If you have any questions that you'd like me to ask Ben Drury from Yoto
then please email them now youandyours at bbc.co.uk or you can text us to 84844
or you can tweet us, hashtag you and yours. Ben Drury, welcome to Gap Finders.
Lovely to be here Winifred. Now tell us a bit more about this player that you
have invented, the Yoto audio player. How does it work? So it's essentially a
connected speaker for kids. The whole thing has been designed from the ground up
to be very tactile, very physical, kind of influenced by Montessori, the idea
being that kids in control, that the parents don't have to pull out their phone
or go on to another screen. The child can be really in control and the parents
can feel safe and secure that the child is not going to access any internet
nasties. How much does it cost, the little player? So we have two models. The
Yoto Mini is at £59.99 and the Yoto player, its big brother, is £89.99. Now you
use it, don't you, by putting cards in it. You have to buy cards that the child
slots into the top of the player. Correct. When we were designing this, we
really thought we needed something very tactile and physical for children to be
able to trigger the playback of the audio and we chose these cards. They're
basically very similar to the cards we have in our wallets for paying for stuff,
credit cards and debit cards and things. And they're a great technology for kids
because they're almost indestructible, which is important when you're designing
a kid's product. And kids, we also noticed when we were prototyping that kids
love to put things into things. So it's a very natural interface for them and we
felt that there was no real way, there was no real user interface for children
to access a world of audio and that's why we stepped in. Now the cards
themselves are expensive. You charge £7.99 for the Gruffalo. Now you can buy the
audiobook and play it on a smartphone for £2.99. So tell me, what would be the
advantage of paying that extra and buying this Yoto player and buying the card?
Well actually most of our pricing is very, very competitive against downloads.
If you look at pricing on say Audible and things, we're very competitive. The
advantage of Yoto is you have a physical item, you have a physical thing that is
collectible, it has resale value, it's something that the kids love to use as a
physical token. Tell me then, what was the gap then that you're spotting here?
Well I guess in a way it was a gap that emerged with a kind of decline of
physical media such as cassette tapes and CDs, which to be honest were never
great for kids anyway. Kids would scratch the CDs or ruin the cassettes. So we
just spotted this, I mean my co-founder and I, Philip, basically had children
around the same time and it was that life-changing moment which forces you to
look at the world in a very different way. And our background was working in
music and working in audio already. And it really gave us this idea that there
was a gap, that we wanted to find a way to to give children, our children,
selfishly, access to this amazing world of audio that was out there, but in a
way that didn't involve a screen, a bright screen, and didn't involve the parent
always having to do something, which is very frustrating for children, always
having to rely on the grown-up to do something. Was there a particular moment
when the idea came to you? You said it was at the moment when you and your
business partner were thinking of starting Family for Yourselves. That was
definitely a factor. It was also leaving my previous company which was a B2B
provider of digital music. We worked a lot with very large hardware companies
like Samsung and BlackBerry and people like that, so that was a factor. My kids
went to Montessori Nursery, that was also a factor. And actually I remember one
moment going to shopping in John Lewis for a for a pram and I saw one on the
market which had an iPad attachment or an iPad dock built into it so that a baby
could stare at a bright screen. And I remember just having this visceral
reaction, visceral reaction, saying this is wrong, this is fundamentally wrong.
And that was quite a key moment, I remember that. Where did the money to do it
come from? Well, we were lucky in the sense that I'd had a previous exit as a
startup. I'd taken the company public and had a bit of money from that and that
afforded us a little bit of buffer to be able to prototype and basically not pay
ourselves any salary for a good 18 months to two years. So, some of the money
came from that. And then we were lucky to attract some really cool early
investors like Paul McCartney, who came on board as an early investor. How did
he find out about you? I think it was one of those serendipity moments. There
was a guy who runs his family office who'd been working in the music industry
and we'd known from previous times and we were connected to him. And it just so
happened that that year, this is before Covid, that year, Sir Paul was coming
out with a children's book called Hey Grand Dude. And it was kind of alignment
of the planets. He expressed an interest. He apparently doesn't do much
investments into startups. He's not, you know, he has a lot of other things
going on. He's not a professional startup investor, but I had to go in and meet
him. And really, you got to meet him. What was he like? Yeah, it was one of the
most nerve-wracking, apart from being on your show, of course, it was one of the
most nerve-wracking moments of my life in Soho Square, which is near where we
are here, or where I am here. And I remember the demo because it didn't entirely
go to plan. We were showing him a very early device and it was connected to his
office Wi-Fi and it had some kind of technical issues. So some of the things
didn't work. But I remember he had some very good suggestions on what we should
do to make the product better. You're allowed to tell us how much he gave you
and how much he invested. He invested three times and it's a few hundred
thousand. Wow. Was that important to you at the time? It must have been.
Absolutely. Obviously, the name of Sir Paul McCartney, arguably the most famous
living musician in the world, was important. It was helpful. But obviously, the
money itself was also helpful at that time. You mentioned the difficulty there
in developing the prototypes. I think I'm right in saying that there aren't many
kind of new electronic products that are developed in the United Kingdom. Did
you have the skills to do that? I mean, how do you go about doing that? You have
this idea in your mind. How do you make it a thing that a child can hold in its
hands? Everyone I spoke to said, don't do hardware. It's incredibly hard. There
are almost no success stories in the UK making major consumer electronics.
There's obviously people like Dyson, but you probably can count them on one hand
or two hands. Everyone said, don't do hardware. Hardware is really hard. But I
always like a challenge. We hadn't done hardware before. We didn't have
experience there. We had experience building software and building content
services. But we went about it in a different way. We said, well, the hardware
is not the really important thing. The really important thing is the content,
the audio that kids will be listening to. So let's make the hardware fairly
simple. And that made it less daunting. And we were just very lucky. We managed
to hire a whole team of people who'd worked in this area before, who knew supply
chain and new operations. And we've relied a lot on luck. I think pretty much
every startup does to a certain extent. And yeah, it's been successful. And
we're really excited to... When you do do a hardware product, you have a unique
interface into people's lives. And you can do really cool stuff that you just
can't do with, say, a website, for example. Where are they made then, the little
players? So we make our... We have two main factories in Hong Kong and China,
which pretty much is where the world's everything is made in consumer
electronics. Didn't you want to make them here? The first version of Yotoplayer,
which was very much a prototype, which launched on Kickstarter, which is a
crowdfunding platform, we made up in Sheffield. Pretty much handmade, but we
realized very quickly that that was not scalable and it was going to be way too
expensive and take too long. So, yes. So we ask all our Gapfinders this, what
would you say has been your biggest failure in this project? The thing you would
do differently if you could start again? Yeah, I was thinking about that. So I'd
say my biggest failure overall, and not just in this startup, but overall is not
paying enough attention sometimes to physical and mental health. Doing a startup
is the hardest thing I've done, and I think most people would agree with that,
who've gone down that journey. It can be absolutely the most rewarding thing.
But there is this kind of macho culture from Silicon Valley where you have to
put out, you have to do 100 hour weeks and you have to sleep in the office and
you have to give everything. And I think that's actually rubbish. I think you
need to have a balance in any walk of life. But there's definitely times when I
haven't paid enough attention to physical mental health, not just of myself, but
also the people around me, my colleagues and things like that. People always say
that, don't they? I wonder if they really live by it. I mean, it's an easy thing
to say that you must take more time out. Yes, you really have to try to force
yourself. It's so easy just to, I've had many times myself just, you know, first
thing in the morning, you're straight on the computer and then you sit there and
work, work crazy hours. And I have done that. I have done that. That hardcore
thing. And sometimes, sometimes when you have a big launch or there's an
emergency, it is right to do it in short bursts. But ultimately, if you carry on
doing that all the time, you're going to be very unproductive. You're going to
be making bad decisions, making mistakes. And I certainly don't believe in that
anymore. There is another audio player for children, Tony's, and it came out in
2016. There'll be people listening whose children use one of those. What's
different with the Yoto? Yeah, the company Tony's has done incredibly well in
Germany. They've taken a very different approach. They've skewed a lot to a
younger audience. So they have plastic figurines representing characters like
Paw Patrol and things like that. And it plays back audio. The way, what we see
Yoto fits in, Yoto does a lot more. We support things like podcasts and radio,
which they don't do. There are a lot of customers we have, have got both and
they would have the Tony's box for the very young children, but they quite
quickly age out of that and then upgrade to Yoto. The attraction for parents in
these little machines is to try and cut down on screen time. Does it do that? Or
do you have to be willing to have the roustel and enforce the screen time in the
way you do if they're going to come off the screen and say, just read a book for
themselves or do some colouring or do some drawing? That's a great question.
We're not, as a company, we're not anti-screen time. We recognise that screens
are an important part of all of our lives. It's just what they push out though
that you worry about as a parent, isn't it? Yes. We did a lot of research around
screen time and certainly for younger children, there's some issues around
eyesight development, fine motor control, melatonin suppression. So there are
some genuine issues with screen time. But like everything, it's like a balance.
But what we realised that's really exciting about working on an audio product,
which I'm sure your listeners will agree, is that audio is the one type of media
that you can consume while doing something else. And that's really important for
children. So we went to Jake, who's fantastic, will actually describe a scene
and children will draw along. And my children often will have their meal while
they're listening. They'll play with their meal while they're listening. They'll
play with Lego. They'll do other things. I've even caught my kids reading books
at the same time as listening to an audio book. And I asked them, how can you
possibly be consuming a book? But they claim that they are and they're happy to
do that. So that's what's amazing about audio. You can do multiple things at the
same time. Whereas with screen-based content, it's all immersive. It takes over
everything. With 17 minutes past 12, you're listening to Gapfinders from the You
& Yours team. I'm Winifred Robinson. After this programme at around half past
12, Greg Foot is testing another product in his programme, Sliced Bread. This
week, he's investigating mattresses and whether some of them really will give
you a better night's sleep. If you can't listen live to Greg Foot, all the
editions of Sliced Bread are available on BBC Sounds. But here our Gapfinder
today is Ben Drury. He's the co-founder and chief executive of Yoto. Yoto's a
new kind of audio player for children. And Ben, tell us about your family
background and where you grew up. So I was born in Sudbury, Suffolk, and I grew
up in North Essex in the middle of nowhere, essentially. And I was definitely
one of those people that I started playing in bands, I started getting
interested in music and I was desperate to get to the big city. So I came down
to London aged 19 to study at university. And I haven't moved back since,
although I love to spend time with my family out there as well. Were you from a
family of entrepreneurs and business people? Not particularly. My father ran a
family business. He was the second generation of the family business. What was
that? It was a small garage in a village called Castle Heddingham, called
Tillsvie Smith, and they sold cars and repaired cars. So I grew up around that
environment. And my mother was a teacher. Now, I know that you studied physics
and philosophy of science. Called Tillsvie Smith, and they sold cars and
repaired cars. So I grew up around that environment and my mother was a teacher.
Now, I know that you studied physics and philosophy of science at university.
Yes. But you were saying that you were always interested in music and you were
in a band and so on. What did you do for work then when you left your first job?
So I was drawn to London because I was trying to make it in music and played the
whole Camden scene at the time. And so I quite quickly realised I wasn't going
to be a physicist or an academic in physics. But at the time it was the late 90s
and the internet was emerging and I was quite technical and quite used to that.
And I ended up building the first student union website for King's College
London. And as a result of that, then I got some work experience at Music Week
magazine, building a new website that they'd just launched called Dot Music. And
that's how I got into the world of tech and the world of audio and music. You
said you were playing the Camden scene. What was happening on the Camden scene?
It was just where all the bands would play around the venues like Camden Monarch
and all those venues. There was lots of indie bands and we were usually first on
on a Monday night. That kind of vibe. I know that you set up your first business
when you were only in your mid-twenties. What was that one? So I had a crazy
start to my career because it was all around the dot-com boom and then the dot-
com crash. And there was an opportunity emerged really to start my own business
in 2004, which was very early. It was a business called 7 Digital. And we
worked, initially we worked for the record labels to help them release artists'
music as digital downloads, which now sounds old hat because we're in the world
of streaming. But in those days, digital downloads was the thing that was going
to combat piracy. If you remember the world of Napster and things like that. We
worked for Coldplay, we worked for Queen, helping them release digital
downloads. Wow, so you got to meet all those people? Not so many of them. A few.
You got to meet their managers? More the labels and the managers, yes. Why did
you decide to leave that then? So I did that for around 10 years and the digital
music evolved very rapidly from downloads into streaming. And we'd done well.
We'd built some services for very large companies like Samsung. But there was an
opportunity then to take the company public by merging with another company. So
we did that and I realised at that time that I'd done my time in a way and I was
kind of itching to get started with something new. So as we went public, I
stepped down as CEO. I stuck around for a while and then left and then had
children and then started Yoto. Do you feel that everything you did before kind
of came together to help you make a success of Yoto? Yes, without question. All
of the experience. And I remember thinking that I felt quite burnt out after 7
Digital and I remember thinking, should I start another company? Should I not?
And I was a little bit reticent to start with. But I remember thinking, wow,
I've been through so much. I've made so many mistakes and hopefully learnt from
most of them. I've got all this experience. It would be a real shame if I didn't
have another go. And you were so young. Yes. What would you have done with the
rest of your life? I even started doing a little bit of advisory and sitting on
a couple of boards and I was realising this is not for me. Maybe later in my
life this would be right, but I needed to get my teeth stuck into something
else. Well, Ben, we ask all our Gapfinders who has their back and tell us who
you have chosen then as the person who offers invaluable support and words of
wisdom to you. On the auspicious occasion of a birthday as well, my darling wife
Beatriz Hernandez Campillo and it's also the birthday today of my new niece who
arrived just a few hours ago. Oh, wow. My sister-in-law. So it's a bit of a
crazy day today. Beatriz, happy birthday. How did you both meet? Oh, thank you.
Well, we met at a friend's birthday party. Ben approached my friend and I and
his determination was very clear from the beginning that he was really keen on
talking to me. And well, after that he was really successful and 18 years on, we
are now married and we have two little boys who have grown up with Yoto. Yes, I
was going to ask you that. Do you feel that Yoto is Ben's thing or do you feel
that somehow it belongs to you all? Oh, it definitely belongs to all. We have it
at home. The kids are constantly listening to it and we have also discussed
about since the idea was born. Tell me what you yourself have contributed. Well,
I think I would like to say that we have contributed a lot. But if something
specifically is more about we discuss potential new Yoto features and the kids
have been continuous testers. Also, the idea of having blank carts to create
your own content because the kids are playing instruments. And so we always have
our own carts to help the kids practicing the music. But you're a teacher,
aren't you, Beatriz? Yes, indeed. So you must, I'm guessing, have been able to
contribute what you know about children and what they like and how they learn.
Yes, that's right. Although I'm a secondary school teacher, so it's a different
type of field. But yes, I mean, normally when I have an idea, I tell Ben and
say, yes, we've already thought about it. So, OK. So tell me how you help him in
a personal sense, how you have his back when times get tough. Well, I'm
obviously here to support and I listen to what's going on in his mind. And I
just try to let him carry on with his business and not trying to influence him
because that's his business, not me. Do you worry about him at all? I do. I
mean, I don't worry that much about him anymore. With his previous business, I
used to worry as I could see how much time he spent on the business as he was
facing big challenges and competing with the big ones such as Apple. So I was
worried about him getting the right work-life balance. And in those days, we
didn't have a family. Now, I don't worry so much as he has created a fair
balance between our family, his hobbies and work. But obviously, as Yoto grows,
that sort of worry is still there, him not having enough time for the family.
Beatriz Hernandez-Campillo, thank you so much. Thank you for coming on. Ben,
using your own children, they never lie, do they? I mean, if this idea had been
a dud, you would never have been able to persuade your own children to play with
this Yoto thing, would you, if they didn't want to? That's absolutely correct.
And children are brutally honest. And that's really important. When we were
testing it with our own kids, they would call us out if something didn't work or
something was poor. And then we also then expanded quite early on to other
families to make sure that we weren't guilty of what's called positive
reinforcement, where you see what you want to see, that kind of thing. I know
that you launched the second generation of these Yoto audio players just as the
pandemic hit. That must have been hard. Yes, that was a tough time. We launched
in February 2020. So it's just had its third birthday and that had been delayed
already. And I remember being in the office, putting things into boxes just as
Covid was breaking. We didn't even have a fulfillment partner or warehouse at
that point. And we were initially quite scared. We hadn't raised a huge amount
of money. We didn't have a huge amount of runway. So I remember we all took a
pay cut, temporary pay cut, which we were able to pay back quite quickly after
that. And it was a slow start. The first few months, it was such a difficult
time for everyone. We didn't know whether this is going to work. But an around
about, we somehow managed to launch it in the US in June 2020 as well. And then
shortly after that, we started to see the numbers really spike up, really do
quite well. And I think parents were looking for alternatives to screen time in
that time because they were, children were doing Zoom lessons for several hours
a day and then they wanted TV time. So there was definitely a demand emerging at
that point. Were you worried that sales might tail off after the pandemic when
children had more options? We weren't worried, but certainly some investors that
we'd spoken to were worried because they'd seen other companies that had
experienced a massive pandemic boost and then faded away. We weren't concerned
about that because we just could see through our data that that wasn't the case.
And actually our sales have increased more since we've all come back to work and
things like that. Does Yoto make a profit yet? Yes, we are profitable as of the
second half of last year. So last year was a tough year for tech in general.
There was lots of scary headlines and companies struggling and we decided to
focus on becoming profitable probably earlier than we originally planned. So we
managed to achieve that. So we're now profitable. What would you say then has
been your biggest success with this project to date? I think just getting it out
there and actually also being able to release the second product, which is Yoto
Mini, which is now doing incredibly well. I'd say also launching in the US. I
think the US is a tough market, has been a tough market for UK companies or any
company. And the fact that we managed to launch there not that long ago and it's
now our biggest market and it's our fastest growing market with a really small
team and an incredible team that we've hired in Brooklyn, New York. And most of
them we hired during the pandemic, so we didn't actually get to meet them until
much later. So yeah, I'd say the success we've had in the US is the biggest
achievement so far. You've discovered some families don't just use it for
children. They use these blank cards to make content for older relatives. Tell
us about that. Yeah, one of the wonderful things that we've done, I think, is
what we call make your own cards and you can link them to podcasts or radio or
record your own content. And so we've had lots of anecdotes of people using them
in different ways for elderly relatives with say dementia or who don't get on
with modern smartphones, which are incredibly complicated even for myself. Wow,
that's a great idea. So it's just easy to use the card. Yes, so they're
recording their favourite stories or they're recording their favourite music or
even a way to listen to Radio 4, for example, and all the person has to do is
put the card in. So it's such a simple thing. It's way simpler than a
smartphone, for example. Now we've only got half a minute left, so you won't
have to give too much away. But what is next for you then? You've done this as
your second big business venture. You're still very young. Is there another big
idea inside you? I was discussing that with my wife the other day and I said
probably not. I think it takes a lot of energy. It really, really takes over
your whole life. So I think no, I think this is my last one. Ben Drury, co-
founder of Yoto, thank you for being our Gapfinder today. Today's producer was
Catherine Earlham. Studio production was by Amy Brennan. Next, Slice Bread with
Greg Foot. He's looking at whether buying a different kind of mattress would
give you a better night's sleep. Hello, I'm Greg Foot and welcome to the show
that cuts through the advertising hype to find out whether a whole heap of
wonder products really deliver on their bold claims. This week's suggestion
comes in from Stephen Quirk in Kent. Hello, Stephen. Hi, Greg. How are you
doing? Very good. Thanks for sending over your email. Great programme. Oh,
appreciate it. Yeah. You want me to investigate mattresses on your behalf, I
believe. Yeah. I had an old kind of memory foam mattress. It was a massive
price. It was about a thousand pounds 15 years ago. So it was a real investment,
a bit of an indulgence, a midlife indulgence to a certain extent. And now it's
become a sort of late life necessity. I use it for a bit. It's OK, slightly
cloying. I mean, it's meant to kind of support you well, etc. And it did do
that, but kind of over warm and a bit too cloying. But yeah, mattresses in
general would be good because I suffer with back problems. It'd be great to know
if there's a great mattress out there that could solve or at least alleviate
some of the pain. OK, gotcha. So you had a memory foam mattress 15 years ago.
Your email says you've got something different now. What's that? I think it's
like the kind of generic pocket sprung thing that you'd pick up at a local
retail park. And it does no worse than anything else. Oh, interesting. So what
would you like me to focus on? Would it be worth, for example, reinvesting in a
memory foam? No doubt the price has gone up, but maybe the technology has too.
It's a pretty important part of life. It's a third of your life. I'd like to try
and get it right if possible. So really your question is, is memory foam worth
it if you're thinking of changing again? Totally. That's it. Well, leave it with
me, Stephen, and I'll see what I can discover over the next week. Thanks, Greg.
All right. Great stuff. See you. Bye. Cheers, Greg. Bye bye. If you have a
wonder product you would like me to investigate, please do send it over to
sliced.bread at bbc.co.uk. We've had a lot of emails in on mattresses, I tell
you. Most listeners asking the same question as listener Stephen just did. Is
memory foam the best thing since sliced bread or is it marketing BS? Well, I
want to start by hearing about the range of mattresses on offer and their
relative pros and cons. So who better to speak to than the National Bed
Federation? I'm calling up their spokesperson, Simon Williams. Hi there, Simon.
Hi, Greg. I'm surprised that you're not in a showroom surrounded by beds. We
don't actually have any beds here. No sleeping on the job. We don't. No, too
tempting. All right, Simon, loads to get through. Could you start with giving me
a quick list of the different types of mattresses available? I sort of
categorize it as there's basically two types of mattress. So there's sprung
types and non-sprung types. So if you look at the sprung types, you have open
coil, springs, continuous coil and pocket sprung. And then on the non-sprung,
it's basically foam. So you have standard foam, memory foam and latex foam. Just
to confuse matters, of course, then there's a hybrid versions. They contain
different combinations of the different foams and springs that I've just
mentioned. OK, so what are the pros and cons? Let's start with the sprung. OK,
well, if we take coil springs, the pros of them is the fact that they are less
expensive than pocket springs and they tend to be lighter to move. The downside
of those types of mattresses, open coil and the continuous coil, when you move
or your partner moves, they are more likely to disturb the other person in the
bed because there's no independent springs moving. So it's almost like either
one continual spring or springs that are connected. So pocket sprung offers
independent support, smaller pockets in sort of little fabric cases and
obviously less disturbance for your partner if you're moving, if there's two
people in the bed. And the other thing, I suppose, that coil springs, they tend
to wear out slightly quicker than a pocket sprung mattress, not least because
they tend to have fewer layers of fillings over the top of them because of their
cost. So therefore, most of the work is being done by the springs. So it sounds
like if you were going to go for a sprung mattress, you would be recommending a
pocket sprung over the open or continuous coils. Yep. It's generally accepted
within the industry that a pocket sprung mattress is a better quality. I did
actually spot that Witches' best budget mattress in their 2023 list of mattress
best buys is a pocket sprung from Ikea. Less than £300 for that one. And their
overall best pocket sprung is one from Silent Night that I saw on sale for about
£560. That does have a foam layer on the top, but we'll get to foam in a second.
Because I want to know, is it a case that the more springs you have, the better
it is? Because I've seen some mattresses with four to 500 springs and some with
one to 2000. The answer to that is not necessarily. If we look at, for example,
pocket spring mattresses, anything less than sort of 800 pockets in a king size
mattress is unlikely really to offer sufficient support or longevity of the
mattress. So general advice would be to go for something that's certainly a
thousand springs or more. However, many brands now are using layers of mini
springs. And by doing that, obviously it increases the overall spring count. So
you can see mattresses on the market, you know, with sort of 15,000, 20,000
springs advertised. It's actually relatively new concept having these layers of
really, really small mini springs. And they are a very good comfort layer. I
always remember the advice to turn your mattress over every now and again. Why
is that? The vast majority of sprung mattresses now have been designed as a
single sided sleeping surface. The manufacturers would say the spring
technology's improved, the fillings technology's improved. Therefore you only
need to sleep on one side of that mattress. However, the better quality pocket
sprung mattresses, i.e. the traditional type of mattresses that maybe our
grandparents might've slept on are made to be two sided. So they have identical
layers of fillings on the top and on the bottom. The reason that you need to
turn them on a regular basis is when you sleep on them, those fillings tend to
sort of pack and settle down where the most weight is, i.e. in your shoulder
area, in your bottom area, et cetera. So occasionally you then have to flip the
mattress over for gravity to take its place. Those fillings recover and you
sleep on the other side. Am I right in thinking that with a foam mattress, the
advice isn't to turn that over, but surely that's also getting squashed? Foam
mattresses, generally speaking, foam mattress doesn't necessarily need turning
over. You can just sleep on the one surface. However, not all foam mattresses
are single sided. There are plenty of foam mattresses out there that are
designed to be slept on both sides. Interesting. What are the pros and cons then
of foam mattresses? Standard foam versus memory foam? Okay. So standard foam is
polyurethane foam. In essence, the sort of cheapest type of foam to manufacture,
good supportive material and reasonably long lasting. Memory foam is known as a
viscoelastic. So it's had some additives put into the process. So the foam
reacts slowly to weight and body heat, molding slowly to the shape of the person
lying on the mattress. When that person then moves, the foam very slowly
recovers to its original shape, hence memory foam. Now, I know everyone talks
about the fact that it molds to your body shape, it can be more supportive, but
surely if it's formed the shape of you say lying on your side and you roll over
onto your back, isn't it therefore indented with your side profile and it's
going to take a bit of time until it's comfortable lying on your back? Yes,
you're right. That's probably one of the downsides of memory foam mattresses and
memory foam mattresses are possibly the Marmite of the bed industry. And memory
foam mattresses I think are ideal for people who don't need to move much during
the night. Listener Stephen said that his memory foam mattress he felt was a bit
hot and a bit cloying. So in other words, enveloped him a little bit too much.
By the very nature of that mattress molding around you means that, you know,
that heat finds it harder to escape. So hence, that's why memory foam mattresses
have been known as a warmer type of sleep. What I would say is that, again,
technology has improved a lot to make the foam more breathable, temperature
regulating, and with the addition now of things like smart fabrics that wicks
away moisture. So that helps with regulating body heat and temperature.
Fascinating. So a hybrid that is your combination of your foam and your spring,
is that the best of both worlds? I did see, which is best overall mattress in
their 2023 list of mattress best buys is a hybrid of springs and foam. The Eve
Premium Hybrid Mattress costs £1,300. The manufacturer says it contains quote
over 1,400 full-size pocket springs and a whopping five layers of next
generation foam. Is it the best of both worlds? Yeah, I think it's probably
taking the best materials and combining them. A well-known brand of memory foam
mattress is Tempur. They've got a very interesting history, which I'd love you
to tell me about, but they've also got some of the biggest price tags. Their
original is £2,500. I've seen one on their website go for almost another £1,000
on top of that. Where does that high price tag come from? Well, it was
originally designed to cushion astronauts and then was further developed
actually into medical products, specifically for pressure relief in hospitals,
et cetera. It was only later that they then decided to launch a, if you like, a
commercial consumer brand of mattresses. Where does the high price tag come
from? Well, at the end of the day, they are the market leader. They clearly
spend a huge amount of money on R&D, on research and development, and they do a
lot of marketing. They also say that their ingredients and their engineering
process is a, quote, patented industry secret. It's a secret formula that only a
handful of highly trained scientists know. Do you know what's inside one of
their mattresses? Not exactly. I would liken it to Coca-Cola. So, you know,
there are other brands of cola. So you can't cut it open and have a look? Yeah,
of course. I know that the competitors have done so. But they certainly have a
unique feel to them. I'd like to get your take on bed-in-a-box mattresses,
because they're all over social media, aren't they, Simon? These are ones that
get delivered rolled up or folded up. They're often vacuum packed. You can carry
them upstairs, then you open them and they kind of expand. I'm guessing you
couldn't do that with springs. So are they foam based? Well, originally they
were all foam. But again, spring technology has improved again. And now you can
have the bed-in-a-box mattresses that actually have pocket springs within the
mattress. So they have been designed to be specifically rolled. Right. So
they're hybrids? Yes. Any pros or cons of those compared to hybrids that
wouldn't be able to go into a box? Well, they tend to be a mid-market product.
So they tend not to be at the very top end of quality and price, but they're
very good products. What I found interesting about the bed-in-a-box brands is
they were the disruptors of the mattress market. Their sort of raison d'etre was
buying a bed is too confusing. Buy this mattress, fits all, and you just buy it
online, deliver it in two days, 100 nights to sleep on it. If you don't like it,
we'll come and get it back and get your money back. Amazing how that's developed
now, because these brands, they now have a range of mattresses that they sell
rather than just one. And as well as selling direct to consumers, they're also
now selling via retailers like John Lewis, Furniture Village. Listen, Stephen
heard that you should keep a mattress for seven years. I've heard 10 years. I've
read six years when doing research. If you've paid hundreds, if you paid
thousands of pounds, you want to keep it for as long as possible. What's the
advice? You're using your mattress seven or eight hours a day, if you're lucky.
No other product you have in your house comes under that much hammer, and it's
bound to gradually deteriorate. It's also going to absorb body moisture and
sweat and that kind of thing over the years. So it becomes fairly unhealthy as
well. So from a health point of view, you need to think about replacing your
mattress, certainly sort of every seven years, seven, eight years. Thanks,
Simon. Cheers for now. Bye. Bye. Bye. There's some really neat sounding mattress
tech that's entered the market in the past couple of years. From mattresses
where you can adjust various air chambers to change how hard or soft it is on
each side, to smart mattresses that adjust their temperature through the night.
I'm not going to be able to get into those though today. This episode is going
to stick with the types of mattresses that Simon just explained. And I want to
turn now to listener Stephen's questions about back pain. I saw a blog on the
NHS England website that said that back pain is the largest single cause of
disability in the UK, with lower back pain accounting for 11% of the total
disability of the UK population. To find out whether a mattress could help
alleviate that, I'm going to speak to a consultant in sleep and respiratory
medicine at Royal Infirmary Edinburgh, Dr. Renata Ria. And rather apt for this
episode, I feel, it's a late night call because she has just finished her shift.
Good evening, Renata. Hi. Hi, Greg. Okay, let's dive in before we both fall
asleep. When you are picking a mattress, you not only need to decide if you want
a sprung or a not sprung one and what type of those you want, you also need to
choose how firm you want that mattress to be. Now, are some people more suited
to a softer mattress and others to a firmer one? What does the evidence say? A
lot of the studies that have been done on mattresses are rather variable and
there's no standardised format for actually not only measuring the spinal
curvature occurring when we sleep, but there's also no really good standardised
way of measuring the firmness of the mattress. And a lot of the studies that
have been published are based on people's subjective interpretation of the
firmness of the mattress. I mean, there have been plenty of studies and some of
them have actually been conducted very well. And recent meta-analyses of those
studies published in the last sort of 10 years or so have suggested that a
medium firm or a medium hard mattress is ideal. If the mattress is too firm, it
doesn't let your shoulders and your neck sink into the mattress. And if it's way
too soft, you can get problems with your hips and shoulders because they sink
too far into the mattress. And probably pillows can play a role there as well,
but that is also very dependent on the individual. So it sounds like it's all
about the position that your spine is in while you sleep so that you're
supported just the right amount, essentially. And it also depends on your body
shape and the position that you normally sleep in. So for instance, there are
studies that suggest that people who sleep on their side, either on their right
or on their left, habitually, are better on a foam type mattress, whereas those
who are heavier and perhaps sleep supine or prone, so on their stomachs, are
better on a spring mattress. Okay, so studies suggest that side sleepers have
better spinal alignment when they sleep on foam mattresses, whereas people who
sleep on their back or their front are better on sprung mattresses. That's super
interesting. And what would the advice be then for people like listener Stephen
who have back pain? A lot of the studies and the trials that have been done
using different types of mattresses, they're often done with normal volunteers
with no back pain. And there are other studies where they do take people with
back pain, and they give them a different type of mattress. And there are very
few of those that have been done in a proper double blind, randomised,
controlled fashion. In fact, the best one that I could find was published in The
Lancet in 2003, where they assessed 313 adults with chronic non-specific low
back pain, and they randomly assigned them firm mattresses or medium firm. And
they found that medium firm mattresses had better outcomes for pain. And I think
this was probably a sprung mattress. But again, they were really just looking at
the firmness of the mattress rather than the actual make of the mattress per se.
And that is one of the, you know, better studies that has been done. And
sometimes just changing a mattress can make a big difference to people. And
whether that's then a placebo effect is is then questionable. I think that if
they have an old saggy mattress, that really needs to be changed. They should
definitely look into the best possible mattress that they can afford. Is it
worth going for a mattress that is labelled as orthopaedic? My understanding
from just looking at the medical literature on this, no. The term orthopaedic is
unrestricted and can be applied by the manufacturer irrespective of whether it
is truly designed to help with orthopaedic problems or not. So any manufacturer
then can label their mattress as orthopaedic without it needing to provide
specific proven support. Gosh, talking of support, you mentioned earlier that
our pillow can play an important role in keeping our spine aligned. I was
reading that if you have back pain, putting a pillow between your legs can help.
Right. So when we have patients in hospital, it can be very useful to put a
pillow between the legs to just take the weight off the hips to some degree and
can be useful for controlling pain. Whether you use that with a standard pillow
or with a specially designed one, I think is irrelevant. In hospital, we just
use standard pillows and that can be sufficient so that it can cause a little
bit of relief in the pressure that may be affecting the spine because the
pressure when you're lying down, gravity tends to flatten the spine in that
position. Damn gravity. It's always causing us issues. Final question then
Renata, when it comes to mattresses, listener Stephen wants to know, is memory
foam the best thing since sliced bread or is it marketing BS? The results of my
reading suggests that if Stephen lies mainly on his side, memory foam might be
useful. If he mainly sleeps on his back or prone, then would probably suggest an
inner coil spring mattress and also their pillow height can play a role. So if
he, for instance, sleeps on his tummy most of the night, he should have a
flatter pillow. If he sleeps on his back, we need to retain that sort of C
curvature of the upper spine. And again, the filling of the pillow is
irrelevant. It just needs to be comfortable to give that neck appropriate
support and maintain that arch in the neck. Thank you so much. Great to speak to
you. Thanks for staying at work late for me. No, thank you. It's a pleasure to
meet you. I put the same question to Simon Williams from the National Bed
Federation. Final question, Simon, when it comes to mattresses, is memory foam
the best thing since sliced bread or is it marketing BS? I don't think we could
say it's the best thing since sliced bread. It's certainly had a major impact on
the mattress market in the last 20, 25 years and is a very, very well respected
product. Is it better than a pocket sprung, say? It's different. If you were
going to be giving advice to someone sprung, non-sprung, hybrid of the two, what
would it be? I mean, you could say hybrid is the best of all worlds when it
comes to mattresses, really. Yeah, you take the best of the spring technology
and take the best of the foam technology and put them together and hey, presto.
Sounds like that gets your vote then. Right, time to ring back listener Stephen
then and share what I've learned. Good morning again, Stephen. Hi, Greg. How are
you doing? Very good. Yourself? Yes, I'm very well, thank you. Good stuff. What
I'm going to do is I'm going to talk about mattresses first and then come to
what might help your pain or what might help prevent your pain. So let's first
run through your menu of mattress choices. Okay, so your biggest decision is
going to be between sprung or not sprung. If you go for one with springs, then
you're going to need to decide whether you go for a mattress with coil springs
or pocket springs. Then there are two forms of coil springs. You can either have
one single looped wire, that's called continuous coil, or individual springs
fixed together by one wire, that's open coil. So those are your two types of
coil springs. Or you can go for pocket springs, which get their name because of
the fact that each spring is in its own little fabric pocket. Now coil spring
mattresses are the cheaper option, but you may feel that it's worth paying more
for a pocket sprung if you share the bed with someone because having those
individual springs in pockets isolates any movement in the bed. You essentially
get more of a wriggle wave moving through the bed with coil springs compared to
pocket springs. The pocket seems to me to be an attractive one because as you
said, each individual one is enveloped in its own area, its own pocket, and that
would give me greater flexibility. It also sounds like you should look for a
mattress with more than a thousand full-size springs. Greg, that's good, but my
first question was about memory foam mattresses. What about them? Are they off
the menu? No, they're very much on the menu. You can go for standard foam, which
I'm told gives good support and lasts well, or you can upgrade indeed to a
memory foam that has added additives in it, which makes it essentially
temperature sensitive. So it molds to your body, which on one hand is great
because it offers more snug support, you know, but as you said to me, that can
make it feel warmer. It was too warm and almost too cloying. And also, yeah, the
indentation would seem to last longer than you'd want it to do. Yeah. I mean, I
was told that if you move around a lot in the night, then maybe a sprung would
be better than a memory foam because of exactly that. Yeah. When you see these
kind of recordings of people's positions over a night, people are kind of
flipping all over the place. And of course, that wakes you up and that brings on
the pain. So something which helped you not to move or made you feel not
uncomfortable means you're waking up less, therefore in less pain, etc. So,
yeah, I think I'm just kind of slightly done with the memory foam mattresses and
trying to move on to the brave new world of sprung. There is a third option,
Stephen, a hybrid mattress. And hybrids actually come out top in a lot of
consumer tests. One of the experts I spoke to said they could offer the best of
both worlds. It's essentially a spring base with a foam top. This is sounding
expensive. So the mattress that actually topped which is best mattresses 2023
list, best overall was a hybrid mattress. That one was around £1,300. Now you
can get other hybrids around £800. So, you know, again, there is a broad range
depending on how many springs you want, how much foam you want, how deep it is,
etc. The hybrid sounds very interesting to me. When you think about it in terms
of investment, about seven or eight years investing in your back, investing in
your health is important. So bottom line health wise for me is, you know, what's
your advice in terms of pain reduction or general health going forward? Yeah. So
long story short on this one, I'm going to quote a 2015 systematic review of
multiple studies to you because why not? It says a medium firm mattress is
optimal for promoting sleep comfort, quality and spinal alignment. And then
similarly, quoting from a 2021 review now, oh yes, a medium firm mattress offers
more advantages to subjects with non-specific low back pain and reduces the risk
of developing low back pain. So it looks like a medium firm mattress could be
the best for low back pain. Excellent. Well, that's sort of advice that I need
to be honest. So I'll start doing some research unless you want to save me a
whole lot of trouble, Greg, and send me over your research annotated. Do you
want to go through my 50 page research pack? I don't. I'm just going to go for
medium firm hybrid and see how I get on. I'm going to be researching ASAP.
Thanks Stephen. Great to chat to you. Yes. Great. Thanks an awful lot. Take
care. All the best. That is it from me this week. Next week, sticking with the
theme of sleep, I'm going to be investigating sleep remedies. Can sleepy teas or
herbal tablets or special sprays really help us drift off quicker? I will be
finding out. See ya. Sliced Bread was presented by Greg Foot. The producer was
Simon Hoban. Well, we are making our way towards the world at one with Sarah
Montagu in just a moment. But first, let's stop by the BBC Weather Centre and
Ben Rich can tell us how it's looking out there this Thursday lunchtime. Hi,
Ben. Hello, Ron. Thank you. Good afternoon. All this talk of sleep. I hope this
weather forecast doesn't send you to sleep. That said, there isn't a huge amount
going on right now. What's on the way next week, though? Well, that may wake you
up a little. But let's start with what's going on right now. We've got a lot of
dry weather out there. The best of the sunshine through the rest of this
afternoon will be found across parts of southern England, the south of Wales,
the south Midlands, parts of East Anglia, further north, north Wales, the north
Midlands and then across northern England, Northern Ireland and Scotland. It
will stay largely cloudy. There'll be a few brighter spells, but equally just
one or two mostly light showers. Not particularly windy today and temperatures
about where they have been all week, between seven and ten degrees north to
south. And then through this evening and tonight, we will tend to see more cloud
rolling its way in across England and Wales, Northern Ireland staying quite
cloudy, southern Scotland as well. Some clear spells across the northern half of
Scotland and for a time across west Wales and the far south west of England. So
those are the areas most likely to see a touch of frost to take us into Friday
morning and then for Friday, another relatively quiet day with a lot of cloud
for England, Wales, Northern Ireland and southern Scotland. Perhaps the odd
light shower. Central and northern parts of Scotland have the best chance of
some sunshine, although the northern isles will see some showers and it will be
quite breezy. Now as we head through the weekend, colder air is going to start
to seep its way southwards across the UK. There will be one or two showers which
could start to turn wintry over high ground, particularly as we get into Sunday.
But it's as we head into next week that we see a surge of colder air from the
north. It will be cold enough for snow in places, but quite where that snow will
fall is still a little uncertain. We will keep you up to date, Ron. Ben, thanks
very much. A year on from the invasion of Ukraine, Radio 4 has been hearing from
people forced to flee their homeland. I could not imagine that I would stay here
for such a long time. Olga is one of the thousands of Ukrainians offered
sanctuary in British homes after the outbreak of war. Every day I listen to news
from Ukraine and I hope to hear some good news. A year on and facing an
uncertain future here, she's going on a search for answers to the question,
where next? I am happy to be more independent now. I'm ready. Questions in
Britain, where next? On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.