TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 seen on Wednesday mornings at nine. BBC News at six o'clock on Sunday the 5th
of March. This is Alan Smith. Good morning. After 15 years of talks, members of
the UN have reached a landmark agreement to safeguard the world's oceans. The
treaty will create protected areas covering 30% of the high seas or
international waters by the end of the decade. As our climate reporter Esmée
Stallard explains, the announcement that a deal had been struck came after a
final 38-hour push at UN headquarters in New York. The ship has reached the
shore. It took almost two days of back-to-back negotiations, but countries from
around the world finally came to an agreement on how to protect the high seas.
These are the waters that sit beyond any country's jurisdiction. They cover two-
thirds of the world's oceans and play host to most of our marine life. Until
now, all countries had a right to fish, ship and do research there. This has
left the animals and plants living in the high seas at risk from threats,
including climate change, overfishing and shipping traffic. Rishi Sunak has said
he's committed to ensuring that people who come to the UK illegally are removed,
as the government prepares to unveil new legislation this week to try to address
the issue. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has suggested the British
people are sick of inadequate action on migrant crossings. But charities say the
proposals are vindictive and extremely concerning. Simon Jones reports. The Home
Secretary, like her predecessors in the role, is talking tough. Enough is
enough. The British people want this solved, she told The Sun on Sunday. New
legislation is expected to place a duty on her to remove to Rwanda or a safe
third country anyone who arrives on a small boat as soon as reasonably
practicable. The message was reiterated by the Prime Minister, who told the Mail
on Sunday that people coming to the UK illegally would not be allowed to stay.
But the pledge is not straightforward. No migrants have been sent to Rwanda and
plans to do so are currently on hold, facing legal challenges, and there is no
returns agreement in place with the EU. The former Health Secretary, Matt
Hancock, is facing claims he wanted to use scare tactics to force people to
comply with coronavirus lockdowns in the latest leak of WhatsApp messages from
The Sunday Telegraph. In one conversation, he describes how the announcement of
a new variant of Covid would frighten the pants off everyone. Mr Hancock has
described the leaks as partial, biased account to suit anti-lockdown agenda.
Here's our political correspondent, Helen Catt. The exchange published by The
Sunday Telegraph took place on the 13th of December 2020, by which date the
World Health Organization said that more than a thousand cases of the so-called
Kent variant of the virus had been detected. Mr Hancock and an aide are seen
discussing when to announce its existence. The aide seems to suggest rolling the
pitch for a potential lockdown in London with the new variant. Mr Hancock
replies, we frighten the pants off everyone with the new strain. A former
advisor to the Health Secretary, responding to the publication of the own
messages, told the BBC that promoting caution had been basic common sense.
Regulated rail fares in England and Wales are rising by up to 5.9% today, adding
hundreds of pounds to the cost of many annual season tickets. The increase is
above last year's 4.8% hike, but well below the current rate of inflation. Train
operators said fares needed to be set at an appropriate level for the rail
industry. China has announced a reduced economic growth target of about 5% at
the start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing. The gathering is being
used by President Xi Jinping to further consolidate his power, as our China
correspondent Stephen Macdonald explains. At the Great Hall of the People in
Beijing, Premier Li Keqiang told nearly 3,000 delegates that China overcame
great difficulties last year and that it succeeded in maintaining an overall
stable economic performance. However, the government here has been criticised
for prolonging strict measures as part of its zero-Covid approach that hit large
sections of business and smashed the livelihoods of ordinary people. Over the
next nine days, this gathering will place a range of Xi Jinping loyalists into
senior government roles, sparking fears of an echo chamber where China's leader
won't receive the fearless support of the people. The UN's nuclear watchdog has
said meetings will take place very soon with Iranian officials, after Tehran
agreed to give inspectors greater access to its nuclear sites. The deal will
involve the installation of monitoring equipment such as surveillance cameras.
There's been fresh international concern because of the discovery of uranium
enriched to near weapons-grade level at an underground site. Iran denies trying
to make a nuclear bomb. And it's been confirmed that pubs, clubs and bars in
England and Wales will be able to serve customers for an extra two hours on the
weekend of the King's coronation in early May. Licensing hours are being
extended to mark the occasion. The British Beer and Pub Association said it was
a timely boost for the industry in an acutely challenging period. BBC News. This
is BBC Radio 4. Dragons are a creature familiar to us all, appearing as they do
in mythical form in books, films, computer games and of course as a staple of
the tattoo parlour. While they do exist in real life too in the form of the
Komodo dragon from the Indonesian island of the same name, in half an hour the
naturalist Brett Westwood will be contemplating what the Komodo dragon means to
us in natural histories. Before that on Radio 4, something understood and Samira
Ahmed reflects on what being part of a crowd means to us as individuals. If you
count the number of passenger journeys made through the ticket gates of London's
Waterloo station, it's the busiest in the country. More than 97 million a year.
Mostly commuters and I'm usually one of them. But today I'm up on the balcony
under the grand station clock looking down and savouring the motion and the
patterns of all those figures as I sip my coffee. The apparition of these faces
in the crowd. Petals on a wet, black bough. Ezra Pounds in a station of the
Metro. Why do I love watching the crowds that come through a station like this?
Maybe it's the way they become different tribes through the seasons. Cheery
groups with flags heading for the rugby at Twickenham. And then in the summer,
peacock couples off to Royal Ascot. The women in feathered fascinators and
heels. Their gentlemen in top hats and morning suits. But most of the time I'm
part of the army of commuters with suits, eyes down on smartphones and laptops.
All strangers disgorged from crowded trains and yet sharing the same identity
and mission. Once we heard the shouts of police chasing a suspect running down
the concourse straight towards us. The crowd suddenly froze. I saw two male
commuters make eye contact with each other and wordlessly agree to trip him up
with their umbrellas. A tumble, an arrest. And the two smiled, shook hands. An
unexpected crime-busting partnership with a total stranger. And then they merged
back into the throng. Walking through the city, the crowded old city. Thousands
of faces, the quiet, the proud. How long, how long will it take you? Yes, to
find my face in a crowd. I take my spectacles off before the ink lines of his
limbs emerge from the crowd. Before the smile closes his eyes. Below the clock
at Waterloo. Halfway between a Giacometti and a Meissen Chinaman. He stands so
thin and waits. Yet I am the fragile, the much suited one. This time shall we?
His question bleeds into the departure of the 142. For fear of being early, I am
the one who is late. Who takes the last few steps like someone who hasn't walked
before. But how are you? I ask. And hold his hand for a moment. In what I hope
feels like a handshake. We do not touch. Thereafter, we do not touch. Wesna
Goldsworthy on that moment when you find the face you are seeking emerge from
the crowd. And blues singer Brownie McGee. That combination of individuals and
then the dynamism of them gathered in these places as if conducting an elaborate
masquerade or minuet is something I find very beautiful. And I'm not alone in my
love of crowd watching. The Edwardian writer Arnold Bennett loved the bustle of
the modern metropolis, London and especially Paris. Thursday, December 8th,
1910. As it was pouring with rain this afternoon, I went to the Gare d'Orsay and
had tea on the platform terrace of the café and walked about for two and three
quarter hours and really worked excellently at the first book and was moreover
all the time amused and diverted by the phenomena of the terminus. This is a
most excellent dodge for wet days. December 17th. I went into Saint-Sulpice
again this morning to look at Delacroix and came across a great ordination
service. Dozens of young priests in party coloured capes, etc. Drinking the
sacred wine with elaborate ceremonies, music, etc. They were all or nearly all
tonsured. A startling mummery right in the middle of Paris. Crowds of women. I
like the way Bennett's journal entries record his fascination with the different
crowds he encountered on his travels, observing the hierarchies of workers who
staffed the grand hotels and train stations, overhearing bits of conversation
and imagining their stories, as in his most famous book, The Old Wives Tale. He
felt especially at home in France with what he saw as the greater passion and
openness in how they expressed themselves in art and emotion. Edith Piaf's take
on the crowd, La Foule, is certainly passionate and open. Caught up in a heaving
mass of revellers, she finds herself thrown against a man and feels an intense
love at first sight. But just as quickly, she is pulled away from him by the
very crowd that pressed them together, that exciting, random possibility of
love, cruelly snatched away. La Foule, the crowd in French, is feminine, and it
has often been labelled irrational, fickle, hysterical, easy to manipulate,
especially by men in power. But fear of the mob is strong. The dawn of the
Industrial Age brought riots and revolution over inequality and oppression, and
over challenging the old ways of worshipping. John Wesley, the founder of
Methodism, was regarded as a dangerous revolutionary and had his own terrifying
encounter with a mob raised to lynch him in the black country town of Wednesbury
in 1743. To attempt speaking was in vain, for the noise on every side was like
the roaring of the sea, so they dragged me along till we came to the town. We're
seeing the door of a large house open. I attempted to go in, but a man, catching
me by the hair, pulled me back into the middle of the mob. They made no more
stop till they had carried me through the main street from one end of the town
to the other. I asked, are you willing to hear me speak? Many cried out, no, no,
knock his brains out, down with him, kill him at once. Others said, nay, but we
will hear him first. I began asking, what evil have I done? Which of you all
have I wronged in word or deed? And continued speaking for above a quarter of an
hour till my voice suddenly failed. In the meantime, my strength and my voice
returned, and I broke out aloud into prayer. And now the man who just before
headed the mob turned and said, Sir, I will spend my life for you. Follow me,
and not one soul here shall touch a hair of your head. Remarkably, John Wesley
managed to calm the mob who'd been baying for his blood and was freed. As he
said in his journal, God brought me safe to Wednesbury, having lost only one
flap of my waistcoat and a little skin from one of my hands. All for a thousand
towns to see, my great Redeemer's praise, my great Redeemer's praise, the
glories of my God and King. The triumphs of His grace, the triumphs of His
grace, the triumphs of His grace. How oft amid those overflowing streets have I
gone forward with the crowd and said unto myself, the face of every one that
passes by me is a mystery. Thus have I looked, nor ceased to look, oppressed by
thoughts of what and whither, when and how, until the shapes before my eyes
became a second sight procession, such as glides over still mountains or appears
in dreams. What say you then to times when half the city shall break out full of
one passion, vengeance, rage or fear, to executions, to a street on fire, mobs,
riots or rejoicings? William Wordsworth viewed the city's crowds with a kind of
awe. Perhaps that's not surprising, as he was writing amidst a time of
revolution. The old figure of a man on the other side of the wall, the old
figure of a man with a spirit of unity, the old figure of a man on the other
side of the wall, the old figure of a man. The old figure, of course, in all I
cross a bridge. The old figure, I'm bound to love by sight and gait. The old
figure, I'm bound in evil, I think I will. The old figure. The power and harmony
of a Welsh male voice choir, a crowd of individuals creating a wall of sound,
rich with warmth, solidarity and pride. One of my earliest assignments as a BBC
Radio News reporter was in 1992. I spent the day on the streets of London with
the estimated 150,000 people who'd come to protest the government's planned
closure of most of the nation's coal mines. Marching behind banners and colliery
bands, the camaraderie intensified the emotions of that day. The pit closures
went ahead, a way of life all but died, but if you were there, the power of that
day still echoes. The crowd expressing a group emotion. They can express rage
too. The American writer James Baldwin witnessed the 1943 Harlem riots in New
York City. An eloquent observer of white racism against African-American
citizens, he reflected on the deep-seated malaise that saw rioters vent their
fury on white-owned businesses in their own neighbourhood. Along each of these
avenues and along each major side street, bars, stores, pawn shops, restaurants,
even little luncheonettes had been smashed open and entered and looted. Looted,
it might be added, with more haste than efficiency. The shelves really looked as
though a bomb had struck them. Cans of beans and soup and dog food, along with
toilet paper, cornflakes, sardines and milk, tumbled every which way, and
abandoned cash registers and cases of beer leaned crazily out of the splintered
windows and were strewn along the avenues. Sheets, blankets and clothing of
every description formed a kind of path as though people had dropped them while
running. I truly had not realized that Harlem had so many stores until I saw
them all smashed open. The first time the word wealth ever entered my mind in
relation to Harlem was when I saw it scattered in the streets. But one's first
in Congress impression of plenty was countered immediately by an impression of
waste. None of this was doing anybody any good. It would have been better to
have left the plate glass as it had been and the goods lying in the stores. It
would have been better, but it would also have been intolerable, for Harlem had
needed something to smash. To smash something is the ghetto's chronic need. Most
of the time it is the members of the ghetto who smash each other. And
themselves. But as long as the ghetto walls are standing, there will always come
a moment when these outlets do not work. That summer, for example, it was not
enough to get into a fight on Lennox Avenue or curse out one's cronies in the
barbershops. If ever, indeed, the violence which fills Harlem's churches, pool
halls and bars erupts outward in a more direct fashion, Harlem and its citizens
are likely to vanish in an apocalyptic flood. Stephen Reicher is professor of
psychology at the University of St. Andrews. He has studied crowd behaviour for
many years, spending time on football terraces and with pilgrims at religious
gatherings. When you look at change in our world, it tends to come about through
crowds, through collective action. Whether we talk about the civil rights
movement, the women's movement, it's through crowds that the powerless can have
a voice and can change society. We have this view of the crowd and the
revolutionary mob as something very negative, don't we, through history? The mad
mob is a way of discrediting people. So when people challenge the status quo,
those in power who on the whole are those who write history, tell them not that
they have a legitimate point of view, they tell them they're just plain mad,
they're just out of control. Imagine that you get into a train carriage and it's
crowded. Physically, there's a crowd of people, but psychologically, you very
much think of yourself as an individual. And then the train goes off and after a
while, it comes to a halt and there's a long gap and then there's an excuse. And
then something happens. People begin to think of themselves not as individuals,
but as aggrieved commuters against the train company. People start talking to
each other. People start smiling at each other. And it illustrates that profound
psychological difference between being in a physical crowd, but thinking of
yourself as I am being part of a crowd where you think of everybody as we. And
that sense of we-ness, of shared identity transforms one's experience of the
crowd. And I think is at the root of the crowd being a very positive experience
in many cases for many people. The Kumbh Mela, it's a huge Hindu festival, what
many people call the greatest show on earth, the largest crowd on earth, which
happens every year in northern India. Up to 100 million people attend over the
month of the event. It's incredibly crowded. We're told that crowding is bad for
us. It's remarkably noisy. The average noise levels are those which, according
to international standards, should harm you after about 10 minutes. And people
stay there for a month. Not to find a point on it, with only rudimentary sewage
and sanitary facilities, it's fairly dirty as well. So it's everything you might
think to be bad for us. And we've been studying the pilgrims, the so-called Kulp
Vasis. And when they describe the experience, there's a word they use time and
again. It's a word in Hindi, anand. And effectively it means bliss. It is
blissful. In the Mela, because people are there together with a common
understanding of what they're about, that they support each other in reaching
that goal, then they can truly live out the life of a good Hindu. I'll have to
take Stephen's word on the bliss of the Kumbh Mela. If a genuine terror of the
toilets keeps you away from Glastonbury and all the other music festivals, as it
certainly does me, you may have to as well. I'm thinking again about the
different tribes of a crowd I see come through Waterloo Station, especially
sporting tribes. It's easy if you're not part of it to not care or even to
sneer. But the sound of a cheering crowd in a stadium is humanity formed into a
sound wave. It sweeps over you and penetrates your heart and lifts you. Even
walking outside the stadium, just listening to that wave rise up can have the
same effect. It's easy for those born into a secure identity to forget that
joining such a tribe can be a vital initiation into a new life. Poet George
Surtees came to England in 1956 as an eight-year-old refugee after the crushing
of the Hungarian uprising. Here he is reading his poem, Preston North End.
Tottenham Hotspur versus Preston North End. Finney's last season, my first, and
my dad with me. How surprisingly well we blend with these others. Then the
English had the advantage, but today we feel their fury, sadness, and pity.
There were some bad years in between, a lot of down-at-heel meandering. For me,
though, the deep blue of Preston was ravishment of a more genteel, poetic kind.
They were thrashed five on, it's true, and Finney was crocked by Mackay. Preston
went down, hardly to rise again. But something got through about Finney, the
plumber, Lancashire, the crown, and those new days are coming. The crowd
dissolves, but we are off the crowd, heading into town under sodium
streetlights. This year Wolves will win the title, then Burnley. I will see
Charlton, Law, and George Best. The world revolves around them, and those voices
on TV reading the results. I'm being bedded in. To what kind of soil remains a
mystery? But I sense it in my marrow, like a thin drift of salt blown off the
strand. I am an Englishman, wanting England to win. I pass the Tebbit test. I am
Alan Lamb, Greg Rusecki, Viv Anderson, the boy from the corner shop, Solshar,
and Yap Stam. I feel no sense of distance when a tannoy plays Jerusalem, Rue de
Britannia, or the National Anthem. I know King Priam. I have lived in Troy. Spem
in Allium, Hope in Any Other, by Thomas Tallis. A 40-part Renaissance motet
composed around 1570, written for eight choirs of five voices each. We talk a
lot about crowds now. Crowdsourcing, getting strangers only connected through
social media to fund films, art projects, even medical research. These are
virtual collaborations between people, crowds of people, who won't ever meet,
but who go about creating something which is often greater than the sum of its
parts. Would you rather be more than the things I just said? Just be the words
that you sing to yourself in your head when nobody's around? Or would you rather
be a part of the crowd or just a single sound waiting to be heard? Do you know
what I mean? Well, you could be one of the lovers of liars, hiding all the
things they do on the back of their heads. Well, it's just you and me. Cos
everybody's got a little wrong in all the right places. Just depends on where
you are. Why you hanging around? Patrick Watson's song Quiet Crowd seems to
offer the listener the choice of being quietly on their own or part of a crowd.
Pulitzer Prize-winning American composer David Lang explores what it means to be
part of a crowd in his new piece for A Thousand Voices, Crowd Out. I'm
interested in the things that we lose when we are in this crowd. So I went to
the internet and I did a search on the sentence, when I am in a crowd, I feel.
And I compiled the autocomplete of that sentence so that I could just find the
things that maybe were universal, about things that we all might have to remind
ourselves we were worried about when we lose ourselves in a crowd. And then I
made a giant text out of it. So the experience is all of these people coming
together to perform this piece, but what they're talking about is the things
that they themselves are losing individually by coming together in that crowd. I
made this piece so that it would have an element of community outreach. I made
it specifically so that it wouldn't need trained musicians to do it. There are
four different strands of music which go on simultaneously, four different
strands of instruction. And each of those strands has 250 people in it. They
talk together or they talk separately. There are some tunes that they have to
learn. And sometimes everyone, all thousand people, are supposed to sing one of
these lines together, and sometimes they're supposed to sing them individually.
The autocomplete gave me all of these incredible options. It begins, I draw deep
breaths. I feel more confident and calm. I lost it all. I do not waste my words.
I hate for all eyes to be on me. I start to panic. I feel so alone I could cry.
I start to sweat. I can fully submerge myself. I am always alone. I am alone. I
am most alone. And they came up in order, and I thought, you know, that's really
what this piece is about, about all of these people coming together and shouting
together one thousand strong, I am alone, which just seemed really funny to me.
But it also seemed like the reason why we have things that bring us together in
the first place. We want opportunities to come together because we are terrified
of being by ourselves. I am always alone. Always. Alone. Alone. An excerpt from
David Lang's new work, Crowd Out. It's easy to judge a crowd when you're outside
it. A mob, a swarm, a horde of screaming fans. When we're on the inside, we
might prefer to see ourselves as an audience, a union or a congregation. I
realise the positive power of a crowd isn't just about the power of numbers.
It's about sharing a love, a passion, a belief. And even though there are
elites, crowds within crowds, they are in the end all about finding somewhere to
belong. I'm in with the in crowd. I go where the in crowd goes. I'm in with the
in crowd. Dobie Gray ending this week's edition of Something Understood. The
presenter was Samira Ahmed, the readers were Maggie Mash and Fraser James. You
can of course find full details of the music and readings featured on the Radio
4 website. The producer was Caroline Hughes and it was a Whistledown production
for BBC Radio 4, originally broadcast in 2013. Welcome to the Spock. When we're
in the midst of it, we're going to make decisions that are different than the
decisions that we would make if we were looking from the outside in. Bold
thinking for a better world. We struggle to recognise or remember that these
inequalities come from somewhere. That sense of human connection can save a
life. I'm Helen Lewis with a new series of close up conversations. More big
thinkers with big ideas bidding to change our world and hearing some of the
personal reasons behind them. Probably one of the best decisions I've ever made
in my life was making that step. The Spock starts this Tuesday morning at 11 on
Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. We also on Radio 4 Natural Histories and Brett Westwood
comes face to face with the Komodo Dragon, myth, monster and reality. For me,
1971 was the year of the dragon. It's when I first read The Hobbit. Uncoiling
the book's dark heart was the dragon to end all dragons, Smaug, whose love of
riches was only exceeded by his hatred of elves, dwarves, men, whoever stood in
his way. Smaug is no more real than the dragon that fought St George or Puff the
Magic Dragon. And yet dragons do appear on maps. Here be dragons. Where do you
find them? You find them everywhere. You find them in the ancient myths, Greek
and Roman mythology for instance. You find them in the Bible. You find them in
the mythologies of old Norse culture, Celtic mythology and of course in the Far
East, in Asia, India, China, Japan. Dragons there are epidemic. The famous
Chinese dragon dance, performed in San Francisco's Chinatown. The question
arises then is why? Why are dragons global? What is it about the human mind that
needs this creature? And that's the question I'm interested in as well. My
name's Martin Arnold and I'm the author of The Dragon, Fear and Power. This has
been a book I've been researching for, well, cracking on five years. I attempt
to find out what the dragon actually means in the human mind. Which is the point
because dragons are everywhere. In books, myths, flags, zoos. I'll just slip
that one in because I'll be seeing one later on. Plus of course tattoo parlours,
computer games, those mighty TV dragons in Game of Thrones and even opera. In
Wagner's opera, the dragon's role is to teach Siegfried what fear is. A clue
perhaps to the role they play in our own imagination. There's a sign with a
baleful eye on it and it says next to it, enter the dragon's lair. There's even
a quote from King Lear, come not between the dragon and his wrath. Through the
doors, I think. Earlier I said that they aren't real and yet there is a place
where myth and reality do come together. A distant Asian island, introduced here
by actor Peter Jones. For centuries, the Chinese tales of great, scaly, man-
eating monsters with fiery breath were thought of as nothing more than myths and
fanciful imaginings. Old sailors would tell of them and would write, here be
dragons, on their maps when they saw a land they didn't at all like the look of.
And then, at the beginning of this century, a pioneering Dutch aviator was
attempting to make a dragon out of a dragon. In the early 19th century, a
pioneering Dutch aviator was attempting to island-hop his way along the
Indonesian archipelago to Australia when he had engine trouble and had to crash-
land his plane on the tiny island of Komodo. When he went searching for water,
he found a strange wide track on the sandy shore, followed the track, and
suddenly found himself confronted with something that he also did not at all
like the look of. It appeared to be a great, scaly, man-eating monster, fully
ten feet long. What he was looking at was the Komodo dragon lizard, which is now
widely thought to be the true origin of the Chinese dragon myth. That was Peter
Jones reading the introduction from the Komodo Dragon edition of Last Chance to
See, a brilliant radio series loosely based on the style of The Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy. This was because it was the idea of the author, Douglas
Adams. Thirty years ago, he and zoologist Mark Carwardine travelled the globe in
search of creatures they thought might be on the point of extinction. Mark made
the same trip 20 years later with Stephen Fry, but it was that first journey
with Douglas I wanted to know about. Mark, harking back to that first visit to
the island of Komodo, how did you feel as you approached the island, what you
were going to see, the spectacle before you? Well, I think the honest answer is
we had a feeling of trepidation. You know, Komodo, 30 years ago, my first visit,
was very poorly known outside that region. And our first sight, I remember, it
was in the dry season, and it was very dusty and brown, and they used to say,
when we went, there were three kinds of animal on Komodo, highly venomous,
mildly venomous, and big, scary, and drooling. And it sort of sets the scene for
this extraordinary place. And I think, why are we visiting? What's happened is
the Komodo dragons have attacked one of our chickens. When you first arrived at
the island, you had a bit of an encounter with one immediately. Well, in those
days, you had to take your own food. There was nothing else to eat. And we were
advised to take live food to keep it fresh, so we had these poor four chickens.
Douglas used to say he can never eat anything he's met socially. And we decided
by the time we got there, we weren't going to eat them anyway. And while we were
signing in at the National Park Office, there was this great commotion. A dragon
had come out from the bush and grabbed one of our chickens. The dragon's made
off with one of our chickens. With the other three chickens tied to the first
one, being dragged along behind it. Remember, we, I was going to say we chased
after it, but we were a bit nervous because we didn't really know the dragon at
that point. So we carefully chased after it. And finally, the other three
chickens broke free and belted off into the forest. And they reckon there was
one near the sort of National Park Centre that was 12 feet long. I think that's
possibly a bit of an exaggeration. We're talking about a 10-foot long lizard at
least. And when it stands up, it's more than waist high. And it's got the most
extraordinary skin. It's folded up. It looks like the skin's too big for the
body. And the idea of that, of course, is the dragon can then eat loads in one
sitting. It can eat almost its full body weight. It expands into the skin. It's
like a concertina. It's a bit of a baptism of fire, not just for the chickens,
but for you really. I mean, you've been around the world and looked at lots of
wildlife in lots of places. Where does the Komodo dragon sort of sit in terms of
expectations or thrills? Well, it fulfilled all expectations. Why, the whole
world will pay to see this! No chains will ever hold that. We'll give him more
than chains. He has always been king of his world, but we'll teach him fear.
We're millionaires, boys. I'll share it with all of you. Why, in a few months
it'll be up in lights on Broadway. Come, the eighth wonder of the world! Did you
know that Komodo gave rise to King Kong? Me neither, but film critic Antonia
Quirk, she knows all about it. All right, the public wants a girl, and this time
I'm going to give them what they want. I don't know why you're going to get her.
The whole movie has an atmosphere of a fable. This could be Aesop. This could be
Wagner. Skull Mountain, the wall, everything just like on my funny map. So much
of the original story was inspired by the friendship between the man who made
it, Merian Cooper from Florida, and an adventurer who'd gone to Indonesia to try
and capture Komodo dragons and bring them back to New York. And so many elements
from Burden's account of that trip made it into the movie. In fact, some of the
best sequences in the film use lizards and T-Rex, and of course this whole idea
of an island full of oversized monsters that had never been imagined, let alone
brought back to the West. Even the K in Komodo, you know, it's such a hard
sound, it's an irresistible sound, that Kong. The man who inspired the film was
William Douglas Burden. He was a rugged explorer type and he travelled to Komodo
in 1926 to bring back live dragons to the Bronx Zoo. What's more, his wife went
too. Later, many people said she was the inspiration for Fay Wray in King Kong.
Ahh! Douglas Burden had taken his wife, a very beautiful socialite called
Catherine White, out to Indonesia with him, and of course the film's famous for
the relationship between the giant and the girl. And even though Cooper always
had in mind a supersized gorilla as his star, Kong is part of a whole world of
terrible and mysterious, distant wonder. I mean, the 1930s, you've got to
remember, this was a time when there were deserts that had yet to be crossed,
mountains that hadn't been scaled, and when Burden and his wife came back to New
York, they actually created a Komodo mania. But just like with King Kong, the
dragons they brought back, huge attraction at the zoo, but died soon after. In
fact, I think they were stuffed. Now, here's a dragon that isn't stuffed. I'm in
the Komodo dragon house at London Zoo, looking at my very first Komodo dragon.
I've never seen one of these animals in the flesh before, and it's looking
rather regal and haughty. It's peering out at me. He's chest forward on a huge
log, massive great forelimbs, tipped with very, very long claws, the eye rimmed
with yellow, looking every bit as majestic as I'd expected a Komodo dragon
would. And with me is dragon keeper, Joe Capon, who's the keeper of herpetology
here at London Zoo. Joe, does he have a name? He's called Ganass. That means
ferocious in Indonesian. Ganass. Well, he doesn't look that ferocious, I have to
say, at the moment, but he's very impressive. The neck, you can see the muscles
in the neck and that huge pouched throat. Really very, very powerful. So they
are, they're a very, very powerful animal. They're shredded. They have muscles
from their head to their tail. And the biomechanics of their jaw is
unprecedented. So their bite pressure, the force of their bite, is probably less
than your average dog, but they don't need a strong bite because their teeth are
so sharp. 60 recurved serrated teeth, and the biomechanics of how they bite,
they grip and they rip, so they tear out chunks of flesh. While you've been
talking, Joe, he's just emerged from his den, and we're getting a head-on view.
He's having a good waddle. It's a very, very deliberate gait as he moves from
side to side. And he's flicking out this very pale tongue, just touching the
ground. It is enormously long. How long is that? It is really long. I mean, I
couldn't tell exactly, but at least a foot long. Now, we give him quite a lot of
deer and pig. Now, in the wild, Komodo dragons, depending on what island they're
from, they will eat a lot of deer and pig. So when Dutch settlers went in the
1600s, they brought with them horses and water buffalo. So they're not actually
native, because 90 million years prior, they were only eating pigs, deer, birds,
crocodiles, snakes, lizards, all sorts of other things. So they're a very
adaptable, successful predator. I'm just looking at the size of his claws as he
moves forward. They really are massive claws. Do you have to look after them in
any way? Does he get a manicure? Luckily not. I mean, no. Our enclosure allows
him to behave naturally and increase his repertoire of behavior. So he can
basically wear them down himself with a lot of digging. And I hide food for him.
I can hide food 2 meters underground, and he'll dig it up. So we keep them
healthy like that. But if we did need to trim them, that's why we train him. So
he would go into his crate for a manicure, but he doesn't need to. They kill
people, of course. They don't kill them very often, but they do attack people.
And I've got this theory there's a sort of unreconstructed species prejudice at
work. So we don't like being eaten by things like lions and tigers and what have
you, but we feel it's OK because they're mammals, they're one of us. We don't
actually resent the very idea. But the idea of being eaten by a lizard seems to
make it feel much, much worse. Mark Carwadine digesting the very real
implications of meeting a dragon on Komodo. And they're not always where you
expect them. The second visit, literally a week before, one of the rangers had
been in his office, and he didn't realize there was a Komodo dragon under the
desk, and it grabbed him by the foot and attacked him. And by the time we went
to see the office a week later, it looked like a scene out of a Quentin
Tarantino movie. There was blood everywhere, and this guy had managed to get
away and hid on the top of a filing cabinet until help came. And we met him, and
he survived. But you hear these stories all the time, and I think the thing that
struck me more than anything was there's this village of people living on Komodo
who are and who are expected to live alongside these extraordinary, dangerous
animals. Ah, the tongue just flickered out. Beautiful long tongue. It's not
fiery, not orange, so it isn't breathing fire, but it is a very pale, almost
pinkish-orange colour. That's a typical colour, is it, or does it vary between
individuals? The tongue is pretty much the same. What does vary between
individuals is the slight colour difference. So Ganas here is from Flores, and
he will be slightly tan-brown, and on Komodo Island, they're kind of that iconic
dragon. They're jet black, so that's where they have a slight variation. The
tongue is pretty much the same, though. How long is Ganas? He's nearly seven
foot long. So bear in mind, Ganas here, he's ten years old, he's a sub-adult. He
is about 45 kilos. An average adult male Komodo dragon will be anywhere between
90 to 130 kilos, and up to ten foot long. I would just like to note as well,
just for you guys, you can see here, this is a healthy Komodo dragon. He's got a
flat stomach, his tail is off the ground, his muscles are defined, and it's easy
to overfeed dragons, but we're very strict with our diet. Because of our link
with Attenborough, you know, we've got data going back to 60 years on their diet
and their climate data, so we ensure that they eat properly. And these dragons,
Komodo dragons, kind of gorge feed, so it's within their metabolism and
digestion to have large meals. So I essentially feed them twice a month. But
while these dragons may not breathe fire, they do pack a punch. Their bite is
venomous and eventually deadly. I'm Matt, and my journey to Komodo was long.
Matt was a researcher on the epic BBC series Life. I didn't really know why I'd
been chosen to go, really, because I was an almost ginger-haired vegetarian. And
so suddenly being asked to go to film this sequence of one of the world's best
predators in a really hot environment was quite a surprise to me. The sequence
he'd been asked to put together with cameraman Kevin Flay was of a Komodo
buffalo hunt. This was something that had never been recorded on film before,
perhaps because it takes so very, very long. Every day there's this kind of
pregnancy of this moment that's going to happen at any time. And in the
waterhole there's the buffalo, which is very kind of resigned to its fate in a
way. It needs to go there for this water, but it knows it's surrounded by these
dragons. And you kind of get used to this almost happening, but you never know
when it was going to happen. And then all of a sudden there was one day when
things in the waterhole were just that little bit more, a little bit more
heated, really. There was a dragon that was there every day, and this dragon had
like a tick in its armpit. And so we used to follow this one all the time, and
it was the one that was the bravest dragon, really. This bravest dragon, one day
the buffalo got up and it just had that extra bit of determination. And it just,
you know, and it bit it. One of the problems with motor dragons is you don't
want to get bitten because they drool saliva. And this saliva at the last count
had a mixture of 57 different varieties of bacteria in the saliva. And what they
do is they prey on quite big animals, deer and pigs and goats, but anything up
to the size of a buffalo. They bite it and then the bacteria does its work. The
buffalo leaves with just a limp. The dragons appear to have failed. The other
thing, of course, is Komodo dragons we now know are also venomous. And they have
venom glands inside their mouths, which produce a venom that's almost as potent
as many of the most dangerous snakes in the world. So you've got this great big
creature that's venomous and all these bacteria. So being bitten is not a good
idea. The buffalo started to go downhill and you're all just kind of sat waiting
for this thing to happen. So all of a sudden you're in this emotional
relationship. It's quite hard every day really, watching this creature die. And
the dragons are constantly testing, is this buffalo still dangerous? Which it
was, the buffalo could still turn around and scare them off. But at the same
time, you want the dragon to feed. And at the same time, you also want the
sequence to work and you want to go home really. In the end, Matt had to wait
for weeks for the buffalo to die from its nasty dragon bites. So while we're
waiting too, here's a bit from me about these beasts. They eat dead things and
each other. In fact, baby dragons spend their first year or so up trees to avoid
being eaten by their relatives. About one in five meals for Komodo dragons is
another dragon. And females don't always need males to reproduce. They
originally have evolved from large monitor lizards in Australia. Plus they can
swim. Imagine coming face to face with one of these while diving in Indonesia's
pristine seas. I remember that they've got these necks that are just huge and
they do this like this. They've got almost like a power of breath with them.
George Bush Jr. was given a Komodo dragon as a gift when he was still in office.
He shipped it off promptly to a zoo. Then there's a tale of Sharon Stone's ex-
husband. That's Sharon Stone, the actress. She took hubby Phil to see the Komodo
dragon at Los Angeles Zoo. A Father's Day surprise. Some surprise. The keeper
had asked him to take off his white tennis shoes, saying the dragon, a mere five
footer, could mistake them for rats. So Phil took off his shoes, but the dragon
bit his foot instead. He'd never seen one, said Sharon Stone later. It's the
closest to a prehistoric creature we can still see. Well, Sharon Stone, the
well-known zoologist, would know. Luckily Phil didn't die. But Max Warbrick's
buffalo did. She really just gave up on us, you know. She just sat down and her
flop in the waterhole became heavier. I guess at that point she's probably got
all sorts of issues in her blood system and she's probably feeling pretty awful
inside. You could see that. You can communicate and talk to them. And we did.
And you sit there and you're like, well, I'm sorry for what's going to happen.
Normally on the way there each morning there was dragons. Because you walk up
this riverbed and the riverbed's got lots of dragons just laid as you walk past
them each morning. But this morning the pattern was different. And so when we
got there, there was just this feast taking place, really. Tearing off pieces of
this buffalo. And I remember there was one dragon which had basically taken a
whole leg in its mouth from the foot, really, all the way up the shoulder. And
it was just trying to fit the whole leg in its mouth. And it couldn't do it. It
just wouldn't fit in. And so there was this really kind of like heavy, heavy
kind of scented scene going on. But at the same time, at one side there's this
dragon which is just running repeatedly at this rock, trying to force this bone
into its mouth. It was never going to fit. And actually all day long, through
filming the whole thing, there was this ridiculous distraction of this dragon at
one side just running at this rock repeatedly, trying to convince this bone to
fit into its mouth. You felt like you were watching, it was something like a
Jurassic scene, really. I think we gave the monitor lizard a huge boost when we
dubbed it a dragon. And the wonderful variety of mythical dragons will always
appeal to me more. But listening to the scene we've just heard suggests the old
warning, here be dragons, shouldn't be taken lightly. Especially if you're
taking a dip off the coasts of the Far East. This edition of Natural Histories
on the Komodo Dragon was presented by Brett Westwood and the archive producer
was Andrew Dawes in Bristol. Well, we've been hearing all about Komodo Island
later today on Radio 4, the story of another island, this one famous for its
cheese. Halloumi is now ubiquitous in our supermarkets, but its significance in
Cyprus, from where it hails, is bigger than you might imagine. More on that on
the Food Programme at half past twelve. Time now though to check in with the
weather prospect, Darren Bett has all the details for us. Morning Darren. Good
morning Ron. It's chilly enough already out there, but things are going to be
colder for next week and there is some snow in the forecast still. Today though,
it's another one of those chilly cloudy days. Not much sunshine around at all
today. And if anything, we're going to find more showers than we had yesterday.
Already got some coming in across Northern Ireland and across Northern Scotland.
We'll see a few more showers coming elsewhere into Scotland and the showers in
Northern Ireland will continue and then run over the Irish Sea into Wales and
the South West. And there'll be a few showers coming into some eastern coastal
areas of England as well. If there is any sunshine, it's more likely to develop
across mid and southern Scotland and then later perhaps into the far north of
England, but I may be clutching at straws there. There will be a lot of cloud.
The winds are going to be light. It's going to be quite chilly out there. We
could make temperatures of 8 degrees in Western Scotland and Northern Ireland,
but 4 to 6 is going to be more like it elsewhere. So a little bit chillier than
it was yesterday. Overnight tonight, we're going to find more cloud. We're going
to find some more showers as well, but a couple of things will change. We're
going to find a weather front bringing a band of rain, perhaps with some sleet
and snow over the hills, southwards across Scotland into Northern Ireland by the
end of the night. Following on from that, we get colder air and snow showers
following into Northern Scotland. But also ahead of this weather front and this
band of wet weather, we're going to find the cloud breaking up in eastern
England. So here and across Northern Scotland, there'll be a frost overnight,
the threat of some icy conditions. Tomorrow, that band of rain moves southwards
across England and Wales. Sunshine follows to the north, but snow showers
continue in Northern Scotland. The winds coming in from the Arctic will
strengthen. It'll feel cold here, with 8 degrees a top temperature in southern
England. Darren, thanks very much. William Crawley will be here with today's
edition of Sunday in around 10 minutes. That's after the latest news and a look
at the front pages with Alan Smith. Next. BBC Sounds. Seven years ago, I was
filming at East London Mosque when the story broke. The three schoolgirls from
the area had gone missing. They were heading to Syria to join the Islamic State
group. Breaking news this morning, three British schoolgirls are reportedly
missing. Shamima Begum was the only one of the girls to emerge from the ashes of
the so-called caliphate. I've retraced her steps from the UK through Turkey and
into Syria to find people who knew her and to investigate the truth of her
story. What do you think people think of you? As a danger, as a risk, as a
potential risk. From BBC Radio 4, the Shamima Begum story, series 2 of I'm A
Muslim.