TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-23-21H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 night at eight. After the news, the briefing room. BBC News at eight o'clock.
Police in Northern Ireland are questioning three men in connection with the
attempted murder of an off-duty police officer. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell was shot outside a sports complex in Omer in County Tyrone. He remains
in a critical condition in hospital. The dissident Republican group, the new
IRA, is the main focus of the police investigation. The former First Minister,
Dame Arlene Foster, witnessed the attempted murder of her father in an IRA
ambush in 1979. It is a throwback to days that we all thought had gone. And to
hear the details of what happened and the fact that not only John's son, but
many other young people were around when this happened, is really, really awful
to think about. It's the lowest of the low. Labour has accused the government of
breaking the immigration system after official figures showed that 166,000
asylum seekers are waiting for a decision on their case. Of those, 110,000 have
been waiting more than six months. Greg Hans, the Conservative Party chairman,
says ministers have a laser-like focus on finding solutions. New official
figures show the number of students in England regularly missing school is
double the rate before the pandemic. The government report says around 25% of
pupils missed at least 10% of classes in the last term. That's compared with 13%
for the same period in 2019. In the past hour, the disgraced Hollywood film
producer Harvey Weinstein has been sentenced to 16 years in prison by a judge in
Los Angeles. He was convicted of rape and sexual assault after a trial last
year. Mr Weinstein told the court the allegations were a set-up. The sentence
will run at the same time as a 23-year term he was already serving. The Football
Association says John Matson's voice will always be synonymous with football
following his death at the age of 77. The commentator covered 10 World Cups and
29 FA Cup finals during his 50-year career with the BBC. BBC News Nearly a year
on, how can peace be restored in Europe? This will end when there is enough
progress on the battlefield by Ukraine. A war that has to be won or a brokered
peace. This is James Nokti, and in Europe and the United States I've been
talking to negotiators about the lessons from the past. You've had a 70-year
armistice in Korea, but what you've not had is 70 years of a quiet, calm border.
Every war is different, so how might understanding old conflicts help Ukraine
where both sides speak of nothing but victory? How wars end on BBC Radio 4,
available now on BBC Science. As we heard in front row earlier, artificial
intelligence now has the ability to write magazine articles, not to mention
novels, songs and works of art. So how should businesses respond to the
evolution of AI? Evan Davis and guests discuss its potential for creating new
products and increasing efficiency in the bottom line in half an hour. That's
after this week's edition of The Briefing Room with David Aronovich. The Russian
invasion of Ukraine is a year old, and the brutal war has spawned two
innovations – the mass use of small munition-carrying drones and the mass
deployment in a conventional conflict of a private army – the Wagner Group. So
what is the Wagner Group, and what do we know about its leader, Yevgeny
Prigoshin? And could Wagner be as much of a threat as an asset to Vladimir
Putin? Step into The Briefing Room and together we'll find out. As we often do
on The Briefing Room, let's start with some history. How and why was the Wagner
Group created? Andrzej Rats is Senior Research Fellow of the German Council on
Foreign Relations in Berlin. Andrzej Rats, when did Russia start using private
military companies? The first time Russia created something resembling to a
private military company was in 2013. That formation, called Slavonic Cokes, was
put in action in Syria, but due to the lack of experience, due to the lack of
elaborated operational standards, it blatantly failed. It failed because the
cooperation mechanisms with the Syrian army were not yet established. There was
not proper intelligence provided. There was no proper weaponry provided. So
after one skirmish with Syrian resistance fighters, the Russian private military
company Slavonic Cokes was defeated, and the survivors were actually taken back
to Russia. And Russia thereafter learned a lot from this mistake. And
thereafter, a year later, around 2014, they established the so-called Wagner
Group. We imagine that Wagner and private armies is something of a uniquely
Russian phenomenon. But is that really true? Before setting up the Wagner Group,
Russia actively studied how the West has used private military companies in
Afghanistan, in Iraq, and in other places. For example, Wagner learned a lot
from how the US relied on the private military company Blackwater during the
operation in Iraq. And the Russians also studied the tasks and operations of
several other private military companies as well. They set up first the Slavonic
Cokes, and thereafter the Wagner Group, based on the lessons they learned from
Western private military companies. However, Wagner has a number of very
particular characteristics which is not present in other Western private
military companies. The most important one is that Wagner is extremely closely
integrated with Russia's military, particularly with the military intelligence.
It looks like that Wagner is more a proxy force of Russia's military
intelligence than a real private company. To give you one example, Wagner is
using a joint facility with Russia's military intelligence in volcano in
southern Russia. I couldn't name a single other private military company which
shares any facility with a given country's military intelligence. Second, Wagner
is actively relying on supplies, logistics, intelligence, operational planning
on Russia's regular military. So Wagner is not self-reliant. Wagner is not
independent. Wagner functions basically as an arm of Russia's regular military.
Third, while conventional private military companies are indeed able to conduct
high-intensity operations, this is not their main profile. However, Wagner's
main profile is high-intensity operations. And fourth, Western private security
company works for a wide range of clients. Wagner does not have a single such
client that would be independent from the Russian state. When we go back to
Wagner's origins, was it partially based on the Russians looking at private
military contractors being used by other countries and thinking, we'll do that?
And then it significantly developed a different approach. Indeed. While the
West, the use of private military companies has been dominantly motivated by the
intention to spare some money for Russia, the most important motivation was
ambiguity. To project state power in a covert way. Is Wagner the only private
military company currently engaged by Russia? Has it now got a monopoly, if you
like, on the private military company industry? Definitely not. But Wagner is
definitely the biggest one. However, there is an important particularity here.
According to Russia law, private military companies are illegal. So Wagner is
not registered in Russia as a private military company. Wagner didn't even exist
until very recently as a single entity. Instead, Wagner is a composition of
dozens, if not hundreds of shell companies. So Wagner is not a single entity.
Wagner is more an intellectual construct and the brand or an umbrella under
which there are several smaller organizations. We've heard in the news that
Wagner has also been operating in other continents, including Africa. And the
question that you immediately ask yourself is how can one company be active in
so many places? Is the answer to that the one you've just suggested, which is
that actually it's incredibly diverse? Yes, it's very diverse. And it's also
fairly large. Before the February 2022 escalation in Ukraine, Wagner had around
six to 10,000 operatives. And several operations it conducted in Africa were in
terms of size, relatively small, deploying a few dozens of people, deploying a
few hundred people. So Wagner was able to maintain and run more than a dozen
operations in Africa and in other countries at the same time. Wagner also made
an action in South America in Venezuela. It was actually the Wagner group, which
saved the president of Venezuela, Maduro, from being removed by the Democratic
opposition. What was the Russian interest behind that? Russian state oil
company, Rosneft, had more than $12 billion investment in Venezuela. And Moscow
was afraid that should the Democratic opposition win, this investment would have
been endangered. What would a typical Wagner operation in Africa look like and
who would actually be paying for it? Wagner is able to operate only in such
places that the state power is weak. Wagner is offering a wide range of
services, ranging from just training local soldiers to guarding facilities,
providing VIP protection, or in some cases, doing the actual fighting. Now
stable regions tend to be short of cash. So in many cases, Wagner operatives get
paid in kind in natural resources. For example, in Syria, Wagner's work in
liberating oil fields was paid in concessions that give an oil field. There were
cases when Wagner was offered a 25% share in each and every oil well they
liberated. In some African countries, the concessions are in mining concessions
or a diamond trade-related concessions. In terms of international law, is what
Wagner does in these countries, is it legal? The legality of the operations of
private military companies often tends to be somewhat shaky or somewhat
ambiguous ground. It's not always easy to define what exactly is legal, but
there are many cases when the operations of Wagner have been documented being
outright illegal and violating international humanitarian law. There have been
cases when Wagner operatives committed crimes against humanity, committed actual
war crimes. So if I would need to give a binary answer, whether it's legal or
not, my answer would be that in most cases, it's more illegal than not. British
rats with the origins and scope of the Wagner group will spend the rest of the
programme now looking at the group's role in the war in Ukraine and the
implications for the Russian leadership of having such a force recruited by and
operating under the command of a private individual, Yevgeny Proghosin. Joining
me now are Marina Myron, postdoctoral researcher at the Department of War
Studies at King's College London, Samantha De Bendon, associate fellow at the
Royal Institute of International Affairs, Chatham House, and Joanna de Deus
Pereira, senior research fellow at the Royal United Services Institute Europe,
based in Brussels. Samantha De Bendon, let's talk a bit more about Wagner's
lead, Yevgeny Proghosin. Who is he? Well, he's an absolutely fascinating
character and I think one day Hollywood will pay millions to do a Netflix series
about his life. It really is out of the movie. He was born into a modest family
in St. Petersburg and St. Petersburg is important because that is also a
Vladimir Putin's town. He was a petty criminal. He's actually been in prison for
armed robbery. And when he came out of prison, which was just about the same
time the Soviet Union was collapsing and private property and private
enterprises allowed, he became a hot dog seller. And he really began to make a
fortune that way. Now, the way St. Petersburg was in the early 90s, you could
not make a fortune unless you were involved with organized crime. And also you
had to have some kind of link with the Leningrad, then St. Petersburg
government, which Vladimir Putin was part. And it looks as though his links of
Putin really cemented in the early 2000s, but he'd known him for a while since
the whole murky world of St. Petersburg crime and government mixed up together.
And Progosion really made his really big fortune as a caterer to the armed
forces and to Russian schools. These are, of course, state contracts. So the
whole concept of a private businessman who made most of his money on government
contracts, again, showed the interlinking between government business and crime
in Russia, which is why he epitomizes, in a way, everything that is wrong with
the Russian system and the way capitalism developed in Russia. So, Mantha, I
first came across in when there were those revelations about these troll
factories in Russia, which were pushing out fake news and propaganda around
about the time of the American presidential election in 2016. What was
Progosion's role in all that? Well, he claims that he founded them. Again, these
are Progosion's claims. I don't know whether he actually founded them or not,
but the troll factories are seen as an inherent part of Russia's hybrid warfare
arsenal, that information warfare is integrated into the whole Russian military
doctrine, in fact. What we see here is that the ultimate multitasker, chef,
military leader, that claims he's founder of troll factories, all of these are,
of course, duties that are also ones that the Russian government wants to
pursue. Now, at some point or other, he bought into Wagner, which had already
been set up. What do we describe him now as? Is he CEO of Wagner? Is he
commanding officer of Wagner? He is seen as being the leader of Wagner, and he's
definitely seen as being the commander of Wagner. He's been out there on the
terrain, commanding his troops. And this is a stark contrast to any of the
officially Russian military. You don't see Sergei Shogu, the Russian minister of
defence. You don't even see Vladimir Gorashimov, the chief of general staff. You
definitely don't see Putin with the troops on the ground in the theatre of war,
the way Progosion is. Marina Myron, can we establish when Wagner started
operating in Ukraine? I mean, were they there back in 2014 when Russia annexed
Crimea? Well, after the annexation of Crimea, allegedly, the Wagner group was
deployed to train the opposition in eastern Ukraine. So those were the little
green men, which didn't have any insignia on their uniform, so nobody kind of
knew to whom they belong. And it was also that time when Putin would deny any
sort of connection, even existence or knowing about the existence of the Wagner
group. And we have seen a kind of similar behaviour in Syria when the Wagner
group was used in Syria to do all the dirty work for the Russian armed forces
there. And so it is plausible to believe that that's when Wagner's operations
started in Ukraine. Right, so that's when it started. Were they subsequently
involved in the lower level fighting that's been going on in eastern Ukraine
ever since, do we know? I would assume that they were indeed, because they also
needed to train the units, the resistance units. And so according to some of the
reports that I have read, also the Russian side is denying any kind of
involvement. So we have to take everything with a grain of salt from what we
know. But it would be plausible to say that indeed they were involved in combat
operations. Joanna D'Desh Pereira, let's go back a year to the beginning of the
current conflict in Ukraine. Were Wagner involved from the start, as far as we
know? There were indications that several battalion groups were moved from
Africa, from Mali and Central African Republic, before the invasion of Ukraine.
Obviously, there are several indications and proofs that they were moving six
months ahead of the invasion. Is it your impression, Joanna, that because we
know that not many people were informed about the imminent invasion of Ukraine,
that one of the people who might have known that it was going to happen is
therefore Prigozhin? Yes. Samantha, where has Wagner recruited the soldiers that
it operates from, the ones who are on the ground? I presume that some of the
initial ones were people who had been fighting in Africa and so on were trained
soldiers, but subsequently? Yes. So initially he was using his trained soldiers,
but there were many deaths. So he had to get more soldiers. So he went to
Russian prison. And this was a very interesting episode because he turned up in
late August, early September, and recruiting soldiers in prisons and offering
them amnesty if they served the six months in Ukraine. Now under Russian law,
only one person can offer amnesty, and that is the president. Parliament can
sometimes also offer amnesty to prisoners, but there's a whole lengthy legal
process. This was just announced and Prigozhin managed to recruit some of the
figures that British intelligence has come up with around 50,000 prisoners. And
the first batch of prisoners who survived, because the figures also point to
about an 80% death rate within those Wagner troops, the first batch of prisoners
was actually pardoned in January. Again on what legal basis? At some points,
journalists were asking the prosecutor general, what is the legal basis for
these pardons? And the prosecutor general couldn't answer. In the end, Dmitri
Peskov and the Kremlin spokesman and later Vladimir Putin himself said these
pardons are perfectly legal, but there are just some secret decrees. So again,
we have this opacity of how he was recruiting. Now he is no longer allowed to
recruit in prison. Surely you don't get good soldiers out of prisons. Marina.
Well, it depends on what you need them for, right? So Defense Minister Shoigu
gave Prigozhin a card blanche to recruit from prisons, because as we have seen
during the so-called special military operations, the Russians have seen they
have manpower shortage. It wasn't a bad idea. It was something that is
politically acceptable to the general population because you don't care if
prisoners die on the battlefield or if they die in the prison. Because of
people, it's important that their sons do not die because Russians are still
suffering from the Soviet Afghanistan syndrome. So it was quite an interesting
and smart move, both politically and kind of in operational and tactical terms.
Joanna, do you agree that in effect, the Wagner forces have proved to be more
effective or created more effectiveness for the Russian forces than the Russian
forces had managed on their own? Well, yes, I think they were more effective
than the Russian army, but this will never be recognised by the official
channels. Well, that's very interesting because I believe that there was some
boasting by Prigozhin after the capture of a town, the town of Soledad. Firstly,
the suggestion is that it actually was quite militarily significant, that
capture. Yes, I think this is actually one of the points of contrast between
what Prigozhin says and what the Ministry of Defence and the Kremlin officially
are trying to pass to the media and to the Russian themselves. And this is a
point of clash as well between Shogu and Prigozhin because when Prigozhin came
and his appearance in the media escalated over the last weeks regarding his
victories, the role of Wagner in the conflict, the role of his men gaining
terrain, this was not recognised. This was not recognised by the Kremlin. And
this is not recognised by the Kremlin because Prigozhin officially doesn't have
any formal standing. He is not recognised as a politician. He is not recognised
as an official voice of the Kremlin. He was until September last year a tool for
the Kremlin and for Russia. But now this tool has become visible and visibility
in the eyes of the Kremlin is not a very positive thing, especially when you
know it in control of it. I wanted to add something to what Joanna said about
the performance of the Wagner Group on the battlefield. And I think we should be
very cautious when we're trying to compare the performance of a group which has
a completely different, much more flexible structure to that of the Russian
military, which is much more rigid and has many echelons of military hierarchy
in terms of when it comes to decision making. And so upon the first glance, and
this is what Wagner and specifically Prigozhin is benefiting from, is the fact
that he can deliver results because they have some sort of unity of effort. But
in terms of command and the command structure when it comes to Wagner, it is
completely different. So we have to be very cautious by what metrics we're
trying to compare the performance of the Wagner Group versus the armed forces on
the battlefield because there are some different underlying issues from which
the military is suffering. And I think that Prigozhin has been kind of trying to
lead by example and to introduce more flexibility and to introduce more kind of
decentralized decision making at the lower levels. And Samantha Dabenden, when
Prigozhin was claiming this sort of great victory and it's not being recognized
by other people in the Kremlin, how did the ordinary Russian people get to know
about it? Well, the Russian government has actually told all official Russian
news outlets stop mentioning Yevgeny Prigozhin and the Wagner Group. But most
Russians are getting a lot of their information from informal information
channels such as Telegram. For those who don't know Telegram, isn't it, is a
messaging system a little bit like WhatsApp. Yes, Telegram has become a very
important tool both for the far right radical pro-war faction and also for
anybody who wants to express a different opinion and all the anti-war factions.
So Prigozhin's, really one of his big ways of communicating is through Telegram
and it is hers. But the fact that the Russian government has now basically put a
moratorium on talking about him in official channels shows that they are trying,
well Putin and the MOD are trying to distance themselves from him more and more.
There was a very interesting letter that was made public a few weeks ago. It was
a response by Valeria Gerasimov, the chief of staff, to a group of people who
had asked for information on their loved ones who had been in the Wagner Group
and who had disappeared. And this letter basically said that the Wagner Group is
not part of the Russian armed forces and we cannot give any information on the
whereabouts of anybody who was enlisted in Wagner. So yeah, the Russian people
are relying mainly on Telegram for information on Prigozhin and Wagner. Joanna,
given those conflicts, do you think that Prigozhin sees himself as a rival to
Putin or as a rival to the armed forces? In other words, I suppose what I'm
asking you is what are his ambitions? I think he has political ambitions and he
has been trying to build up his political persona over the last months, at least
since September. On Tuesday, he was claiming that he was in the battlefront and
he was not receiving ammunition. And actually he appealed in a very emotional
speech that his men were dying. So first he put outside a voice message, then he
put on Twitter and on Telegram two photographs of their men lying on the floor
dead and also a small short video of another group of men, of Wagner men,
aligned in a kind of morgue and saying, please do not mess with us and help us.
And what happened today, this morning, he published on Telegram that he is going
to receive ammunition and that he's very happy for the support he received from
the Russians and all the people that pressured the government. How do you think
Putin now regards Prigozhin? No, I think at the beginning he saw him as a tool.
Now he sees him as a competitor. I think now we have an emotional problem again
and the battle of emotions is a battle that is being played amongst Russian
citizens. So you have on one hand the leader of your country that doesn't
recognize Wagner officially, doesn't want to have any official connection with
Prigozhin. And on the other hand, you have the doer. But because to the eyes of
the Russians, the doer is now Prigozhin. And this makes him a competitor rather
than an ally. Can I ask both Marina and Samantha, do you broadly agree with that
analysis that Prigozhin has made powerful enemies inside, at the top in Russia
and therefore his position is both powerful and precarious? Samantha. I agree
completely with the analysis and all the public overtures he's been making the
last few days are the man of the people. He's the man who's on the ground, he
sees what's happening, he's relating the reality of the soldiers. This will not
go on their feet in Russia. This may seem a little bit heretical. He actually
reminds me a bit of Donald Trump, the sort of anti-elitist millionaire, except
Prigozhin is actually on the ground and saying all these things that they're
going to have resonance. And so, even with the powerful enemies, there have been
video cyclating of Wagner troops practicing firing, doing firing practice with
the photographs of General Lapin and Valeri and Gerasimov as targets. Very
interesting. Marina. In terms of kind of his political ambitions, he might be
aiming to replace Sergei Shoigu as a defence minister who's been in that post
for over a decade now together with General Gerasimov. He would be a threat if
he was to assume any kind of official political position in the MOD because if
you look at the background of those in the kind of higher echelons of Russia's
military establishment, they are for Mkhg, FSB, GU. So not a lot of them are
career military officers and there is a good reason for that because Putin
doesn't want any sort of possibility of a military coup and that has been a
concern since the Soviet times when you had KGB kind of looking at what the army
is doing, like one or two agents would be assigned to each battalion to ensure
that they don't turn against the government. Samantha, a brief last question to
you and it sounds a bit macabre, but this was a thrill. There's absolutely no
way that Progosib wouldn't end up exiting a top floor window in a higher
building. Do you think he will actually survive? Well, I don't know. I mean, it
will be very interesting if he does survive. I mean, the advantage is right now
he's in Baku, where there are no windows left. I think if I were him, I'd
actually stay there because it's probably safer. But he was definitely a price
on his head. I think he's making a lot of enemies. And if that's worth thriller,
I think the focus would be on the on the hitman who's trying to catch him.
Samantha Dabenden there with Marina Myron and Joanna Dadej Pereira. My thanks to
them and to my other guest, Andrash Rats. So what do we take from all that?
Well, I think principally that this is a rather perilous way to fight a war.
We'll be back next week. The Briefing Room was presented by David Aronovich. The
producer was Daniel Gordon. Radio 4's Lent Talks for 2023. Six reflective
moments taking inspiration from the Lord's Prayer, with meditations on
forgiveness, fatherhood and finding heaven on earth. A collection of personal
stories from the man who forgave his brother's killers, to the writer escaping a
war zone, to facing despair but finding hope. Having experiences on faith,
humanity and how the words of the Lord's Prayer have impacted people's lives.
Lent Talks. Begins next Wednesday evening at 8.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. On
Radio 4, the bottom line, which this week is asking how businesses should
harness the growing power of artificial intelligence. Here's Evan Davis. Or is
it? Welcome to the Bottom Line, the programme where we explore the biggest
jabber and challenges facing businesses today. What the heck? Who is that? In
this episode, we'll be discussing the exciting and rapidly evolving field of
artificial intelligence or AI and its jabber potential to transform the business
landscape. Alright, well I'm definitely going to intervene here because that was
not me, nor indeed did I write those words, but I have with me Bottom Line
producer Simon, who will tell us what's going on here. So Evan, this is an
episode about AI obviously, so I thought I'd take the unenviable challenge of
creating an AI Evan. So what I did was use a chatbot called chatgpt that we're
going to hear about in the episode to write part of the introduction to the show
and then another piece of software to essentially mimic your voice. I think if
listeners were listening carefully, they would have noticed the word jabber.
It's not a word that often comes up. Why did AI refer to jabber? Yes, jabber. So
the piece of software I used to mimic your voice was a free edition, which only
came with a certain number of words to get the full gamut of the English
language you had to pay. And so yeah, there is the occasional jabber. It puts
jabber in as a placeholder. Well, let's hear a bit more of what it thinks this
program is about. As companies across industries increasingly invest in AI
technologies to streamline operations, personalize customer experiences and gain
a competitive edge, the opportunities for innovation and jabber are seemingly
endless. It's not entirely wrong that last jabber was meant to be growth.
Obviously, work in progress because there are many well-publicized defects
emerging, but it is undeniable that there have been some pretty striking
advances in AI. And as this is a technology, perhaps like electricity or
computing that has as many different applications as there are different
businesses, we'll look today at what it means for companies, not just those in
tech, but companies beyond, car makers to car washes. And I'm joined in the
studio by three guests to talk us through it. And first up is Priya Lakhani,
founder of Century Tech. It is a teaching and learning platform. And Priya, this
is a company that is using AI. Tell us what Century Tech does. So at Century,
we've built a platform where imagine you're a learner anywhere in the world, any
subject, any language, and you have those digital courses, digital content on
our platform. We track the mouse movement of every student. We use AI to
understand how they're learning. So we've blended AI with neuroscientific
theory. So Evan, when does something go from your short term to long term
memory? When does the system need to remind you of something? Are you struggling
in kinetic energy and physics actually because you can't solve equations in
maths? And then the system will predict how you're going to behave before you
behave and then provide you with that little nugget of content to solve gaps in
knowledge to stretch you further. And it's in use with over a million students.
So it's a teaching aid. Is it just saving the teacher's labour? Yeah. Because
you wouldn't have enough teachers to personalise for everything? So it's solving
a key problem in the delivery of teaching and learning. And that is that we
don't have enough teachers. So yes, I think if you had a one to one teacher or
maybe a two to one, that's the sort of experience that you would be receiving.
But when we have class sizes of 25 to 35 children and that's only getting
bigger, we need to use technology to try and augment the teaching and learning
experience. So you're the student you can log in and it will provide you with
recommendations. It will fill in those gaps. But because it uses big data, it
analyzes data and provides the teacher, this really powerful person in the
classroom with all of the insights. So that's a very, very difficult task for
any human to do. So not just figure out people are struggling in my class, but
why are they struggling? And AI can do that with precision in less than a
second. I haven't even heard of this product until we got you on the programme.
And you say a million people are using it worldwide. Yeah, over. Yeah. And are
they paying for using it? Yes. Yes, absolutely. It is. I mean, we do provide it,
it's a social enterprise at heart. So there's a school in Malindi, which is an
orphanage in Kenya that's using it. Obviously, that's Probano Malawi. We've
launched it in Malawi with the Alan Turing Trust. But predominantly, it's used
across British schools and international baccalaureate schools. All right. Well,
there's one application in teaching. My next guest is Scott Petty, who's chief
technology officer at Vodafone. Scott, are you using AI at Vodafone? Yeah, we
certainly are. I think most importantly, actually inside the business, looking
at how we drive productivity, we have masses of anonymised data inside our
network. And we can use that data to better plan our changes in the network to
make sure that we can cope with outside adjustments. A great example of that
would be during a train strike. With flows of people around London change in
those periods, and we need to make sure we've adjusted our capacity in the
network. We can take lots of data sources and make predictions about what's
going to happen in our network today and adjust the network parameters to cope
with that. We started by focusing on creating what we call a data ocean, taking
all of that data and putting it into one place, bringing in data sources from
lots of different places, and then building machine learning and AI models that
sit on top of that to help us with our predictions. Really simple things,
predicting when equipment's going to fail before it fails so that we can send a
maintenance engineer to replace that equipment to avoid a failure. Do you employ
your own programmers to produce the software that analyzes the data in an
intelligent way? We do. Or do you just buy that off the shelf? No, we've had a
big focus on building our own software engineering capability. Across our
Vodafone footprint, we have 11,000 software engineers today, and we plan to add
a few more thousand over the next couple of years. We really see our ability to
understand our data and build those models with our own data scientists as
probably a competitive advantage. See, I think I have, as in fact, a customer of
your company, I think I have encountered AI when trying to get customer service
being given access to a chatbot thing in the corner of my laptop screen. That is
AI, isn't it? It is, yeah. Lots of companies, we use a chatbot. It's called
Tobii. We're really upfront about it being a chatbot and that you're using it.
We use it to help us with customer service, particularly what we call the low
end of the pyramid, the tasks that people ask us about every day that allows our
contact center agents to deal with more complex tasks. It also plays a role in
our sales journey, so predicting the right promotion to give you as a customer
when you're interacting with us. Oh, okay. It's got a sales brain as well as
just a customer service. It can, yes. Okay, well, look, my third guest is Colin
Murdoch, Chief Business Officer at one of the world's biggest AI developers,
DeepMind. Colin, we should say DeepMind, a British-originated company. That's
right. It's bought and now in Alphabet, which is the bigger parent of Google. So
you're part of the Google empire. That's exactly right, Evan. And actually, my
job with DeepMind is to take AI out of the lab and put it to good use in the
world. I sometimes joke it's a bit like running a dating service. So let me give
you a concrete example. Yeah, let's have some examples because I want this whole
program to be about actual applications. So data centers, I think when they add
amounts of compute that is being put into data centers these days, it's quite
mind blowing. And guess what, if you just leave computers to their own device,
they get very, very hot. For that reason, data center owners have developed
really complicated systems to try and keep data centers cool. We were able to
take an AI system and plug it into one of these data centers and reduce the
energy required to keep them cool by 40%, which I think is completely mind
blowing. When you begin to 40% reduction, how does DeepMind work? So do you
basically sell your ideas to the parent companies at Alphabet and then they take
them? How do you actually work as a business unit? So we operate through this
matching process. So we developed the AI solutions and breakthroughs. And then
my team is responsible for taking those ideas and scouring Google and Alphabet
for various problems that we can solve with this technology. And then we work
with the teams at Google to incubate those ideas. And if it works out, it
doesn't work every time. Then we go ahead and launch them. What has failed? Give
us one that hasn't worked. The first version that we did of a battery saving
solution. So one of the biggest requests for Android, which is an operating
system or phones used by billions of people around the world, is improved
battery life. We were trying to predict based on users past usage, which apps
they might use next and which they won't. Through that, we can then use that
information to help optimize the Android's battery systems so that we can extend
the battery life. So the first time we tried to do that, it didn't work out. But
we came back with an alternative technique and in the end it worked out. And
it's actually brilliant. It's rolled out all around the world now and saving
lots of people, hopefully, anxiety about their batteries running out. OK. Look,
we've got where you're all coming from. And Priya, we should say you're also on
the AI Council, which is what? So the UK Government's AI Council is a body
working with the Office of AI in UK government to advise on the national AI
strategy and the rollout of the roadmap for the UK. So we've got the kind of the
broad picture. Someone tell me what has happened recently. It feels like chat
GPT is why there is so much sudden conversation about AI. What has actually just
happened? I can have a go at that, Evan. I think what's surprising actually is
that the technology that underlines chat GPT has actually been around for a
number of years. What's happened in the last few months and years is that these
systems have been really scaled up. And by that, I mean trained on very large
amounts of data and examples. That's done two things. The first is these new
systems can work on tasks they've not been trained on before. The second thing,
which I think is possibly more important, is why you've maybe encountered it, is
that they've been trained on what we call natural language. So the way you and I
would normally converse, they've been trained on that so they can interact with
you in a natural language way, which makes them very accessible. And it can do
incredible things out of the box, like summarise a document for you or draft an
email for you or write some marketing copy. I think we're really just beginning
to explore what's possible. It can do a lot more than that, though, right? I
think the reason why it's exploded is they released it. What OpenAI did was they
released this and they made it available to the masses. People are trying it
out. They're seeing how it works using natural language. I mean, I've been
talking about AI for over a decade, Evan, and thinking, you know, people aren't
listening as to how this is going to affect huge sectors and create disruption
and transformation. Yet in one morning, ChatGPT is released and there's all
sorts of use cases. People are using it to create games. They're saying to
ChatGPT, are you familiar with a particular game and the strategy involved in
that game? Can you now create a different game? They're using it for risk
management, which is extraordinary. You know, can you outline the risks if I
were in X business at, you know, Y time? And then it's producing these risk
management tables for them. There's a bit of caution because some of what it
does, it makes up. I think that's right. We'll come to that. Just rush over the
facts and talk to you. Yeah, it does, it's hold, I think one of our maths
teachers, the Battle of Hastings, was not won by William the Conqueror and he
was really upset. It made up quotes on Othello and then it actually makes up its
own sources to the quotes, which means that it's actually quite difficult to
detect by anti-plagiarism software, which is, I think, what most parent
listeners here are sitting there fretting, thinking, is my child using this to
do their homework? But actually, it's pretty extraordinary on the AI journey.
Scott, do you use it at Vodafone? Did you look at it and think this is exciting?
Yeah, we did. ChatGPT is interesting. We're using it in software engineering to
predict what code a software engineer is writing. It will present the next
functional, the next best information to help them be more productive in the way
they write software code. Traditionally, they would have gone and searched on
the internet. They would have looked up a textbook for a particular function.
Now, CodeBase can do that for them as part of that process. We're also using it
as a summarization engine because you can take the hundreds of thousands of
chatbot interactions that we have, then it will summarize all of those hundreds
of thousands of interactions and then give you recommendations. Now, for humans
to do that, that's months and months of work going through and analyzing that
information. I think at this point, we should just talk about, and Colin, sorry
to sort of dump this on you, but the Google versus Microsoft battle here because
Microsoft is in bed with OpenAI and they're the people behind ChatGPT and they
are putting it into their search engine. Suddenly seem like, my goodness, this
is the first real threat to Google's domination of search for decades. Just give
us the inside story then. I think it's important to note that the innovation
that underlies these technologies actually originated at Google and DeepMind.
That T for transformer came from researchers in Google in 2017. It had Bard,
which was its equivalent of ChatGPT for search and was going to be built into
the Google search engine. Then Bard made a mistake, quite a basic mistake about
what the James Webb telescope had discovered. And Alphabet share price really
reacted. Subsequently there have been so many mistakes discovered in ChatGPT.
I'm not sure the playing field is not very level on all of that. One of the
reasons I think at DeepMind, we're very careful about this and we don't just
roll it out to the world and make it accessible just like that is because we
believe it's really important to be bold, but also responsible with this
technology. There are these inaccuracies that can arise in them. One way you can
help with that is through using human evaluators to work with these models to
give them feedback. AI is really too big and too important to move fast and
break things and that's very important to the way we operate. Okay. And we'll
come on to some of those things. But look, firstly, just some vocabulary that
people might need to know. There's AI, there's generative AI. Is that what
ChatGPT is? What's the generative? Generative, it's creating text, media, images
using those language models. Gotcha. And you have to be confused with artificial
general intelligence, which is what? Yeah, ChatGPT doesn't understand the
concepts it's talking about, has a large language source that it's leveraging
and it can accurately predict, in most cases, what you thought was going to come
next. And that's why it feels human-like. It doesn't actually understand what
it's saying to you. It doesn't understand the words. It understands how one word
sits in a sentence with another set of words, but does it understand the word?
Yeah, artificial general intelligence is something that would actually
understand what it's doing in much deeper words. An artificial general
intelligence, as we define it in DeepMind, is a system that can perform well
across a whole range of different tasks at the same level as a human being. And
we're really just at the very early stages of that. Okay. Just answer me this. A
business tool that has emerged in the last, well, it emerged in the 1980s with a
company called Lotus, is the spreadsheet, right? And for listeners who don't
know spreadsheets, it's really just a ginormous blank table that you can put
numbers in and then you can manipulate those numbers and add columns together
and turn them round. And it's a ubiquitous business tool. You can put your
cashflow and accounts in there. You can trace the numbers of people watching
your film. You can look at whether a solar panel is worth installing. You can
create anything you want. Is AI a business tool like that? Is it as big as the
spreadsheet? So in a spreadsheet, the human is inputting all of those numbers.
The human is then having to decide the relation potentially between one column
or one row and another cell somewhere else in the spreadsheet and then creating
maybe visualizations of the correlations between one and the other. Now imagine
all of those numbers filling up in a spreadsheet, but you're actually using
unstructured data. So when a human inputs those numbers, you've got that bias,
haven't you? Because you're thinking of all of the different data fields that
might relate to one another. With an AI, you're using big data. You're using
data that potentially you have no idea whether one column would relate to a
different column or a different row. And you can then use algorithms and you can
train models upon all of that unstructured data to then come up with predictions
and analyses that would, as Scott was saying earlier, take months if not years
for a human to come up with. So it's like a spreadsheet on steroids. It's a
super powered spreadsheet. The best way to think about it, a spreadsheet can
have hundreds of thousands of data points and you can use it to help you analyze
and write. And I can have bazillions of data points from many, many different
sources and make much better predictions in the areas that can help you in your
business. Well, look, okay, I'm going to quiz time now. So I'm going to name
some businesses and I want you to give me some ideas as to how AI might be
useful. I run a car dealership. I'm listening to these three people who
definitely drunk the Kool-Aid and get it. Give me the kind of things I should be
asking myself as to how I might be thinking about this new suite of stuff that's
rolling in. First of all, you have to work out where is my data and how am I
going to get that data in a place to help make those predictions? And that's the
biggest problem for all companies to solve is how do I get it out of my
financial management system, my spreadsheet, all of those things. How do I get
into a place that these models can apply to sit on top of that? And what
external data sources could I have that could help me? So if I'm a car dealer,
how do I connect into the manufacturer of those cars to get their data about the
supply chain, the features of the car, I need all of those data sources to be
able to apply whatever AI or chatbot models I think about on top of that. So two
of your biggest issues as a car dealer, right, is that you have to ensure that
you've got the right cars at the right time. Right. So you could use artificial
intelligence to start tracking who's coming in, what's the demographic of these
customers, what's their income levels, how much have they purchased in the past.
And then you can start to use artificial intelligence far better than a human
would be able to to predict which cars do I need at what point in the year. The
second thing is let's say you're a really large car dealer, right? You then have
connections to your entire supply chain. And we obviously know with cars in the
last few years, the issues they've had with supply chain. Now, if you had
historical data on the supply chain, let's say there is a pandemic and there is
a regional shutdown, you'd be able to predict in advance the disruption to your
business and be able to then create processes in your business to mitigate the
impact of that disruption. I'm a car dealer. I'm not a tech person, big data
handler type person. Is someone going to produce a piece of car dealer software
that all car dealers will buy? Is there going to be a piece of generic software
where you kind of tailor it to your business needs? How do you see this
evolving? I mean, because clearly the car dealers are not going to personally
hire programmers to kind of get into big data analysis. I think we're going to
see a couple of things. The first is I think AI will get integrated into the
tools that car dealers already used. And going back to our discussion earlier
around generative AI, what's one of the amazing things around that is it's very
easy for anyone to just pick up and use. I think as the technology evolves, it
may also be able to do really interesting things like send an image to the
customer about how the car might look with their minutes so they can begin to
experience the car they would like to buy before they've arrived at your
showroom. The other thing that's going to happen is large providers of AI
systems will make their AI available through cloud services, which will allow
other businesses with expertise in the car dealership industry to build AI
systems that are relevant and useful to you as a car dealer. Should a window
cleaner be thinking about this? Is that something which is don't be useful? Do
you want a scalable window cleaning company? It's the question that I would ask
you. I mean, you're managing your own business. You may well be using AI right
now. Say for example, if you're using accounting software to help you do your
bookkeeping, so invoice, marketing software in the local town, it depends if
you're using technology for that, then you might have the sole trader who's not
interested in looking at a screen because they've got enough panes of glass in
front of them every single day. Well, we've talked about some specific
applications, very helpful to hear about actual examples. Tell me what are we
going to use AI for and humans for? Really humans are going to have a place in
all of this for the foreseeable. I mean, do you think about that Scott? What is
the AI doing and what's the natural intelligence doing? We do. What AI is really
good at, if it has the data sets and the models is prediction. In our case,
changes in traffic patterns, failure of equipment, the question that someone's
going to ask us on our chatbot, you have to balance that with how accurate is
the answer that it's giving. Are you sure of the traceability of the data
sources that it's coming from? Are you sure that it's not biased in the way that
it's creating those answers? Are humans curating and deciding whether that's a
good answer to give to humans or not? Those are things you need to think about
on the ethical side. Presumably Toby gets cleverer because it evolves as it
goes. It does. We keep training it and we keep focusing on how do we improve
those journeys. Some are just too complex. The technology is not good enough
today to solve those, but it solves a huge percentage of the things that
customers want to interact with. That's something we measure every single day
and it's in the high 70s to low 80%. On the AI generated chatbot because most
customers' problems are fairly regular problems that other customers have gone
through as well. Yeah, and they're asking things about their account that are
really easy for the chatbot to answer. Evan, in the education sector, this is
the key question, right? What are we actually educating young people for in the
future? It's really important to differentiate the H.I., the human intelligence,
and the A.I. What's really, really shocking is the UK comes top. We won the gold
prize for the country where memorization strategies is the key to passing any
assessment. Now, what we all know from... I mean, just learning stuff, right?
Recall and regurgitation, rote learning. In exams. In exams. And so the problem
with that, of course, is that we've all seen with chat GPT, well, it can do that
pretty well and it's only getting better every second anyone's on that system.
It's being trained further. So in education, we need to separate that H.I. and
A.I. And so there's been so many reports over the past couple of decades,
whether it's the World Economic Forum, whether it's OECD saying it's about all
of those skills, so with collaboration, leadership, kind of all the skills that
we actually learn often in sport, drama, music, all of those subjects that
actually have become less important in the English curriculum. And what I think
what we do need to do is have a dramatic shift from our current education system
where it's currently focused to one that can augment A.I. to superpower the
human intelligence. And we over invest in getting people to do calculations
mentally if there's calculators ubiquitous. Yeah, exactly. It's how to use the
technology, how to apply it. You do want people to understand the calculations
they're doing on the calculator, but not necessarily to be as fast as the
calculator. And we still need our researchers. We still need our scientists. We
need our innovators. So it is about having a breadth of curriculum that can
teach us all of these different types of knowledge and skills together. Another
example is in drug discovery. It's impossible for the human to imagine all the
different molecules that could be important to solve a disease. There are more
molecules than there are atoms in the universe, way, way, way more. So it would
take a human way too long to explore that space on their own. But with an A.I.
tool to assist them, they were able to produce a drug more quickly that will be
more effective to treat disease. As Colin was saying, actually, one of the most
phenomenal advances of artificial intelligence is to be that teammate, say, with
diagnostics and screening in health tech, which we haven't talked too much
about, it can be absolutely phenomenal where you don't have enough staff. So
think about radiographers. How many radiographers do we need and how many do we
have? Brilliant. This is a brilliant application. Absolutely. So I do know that
DeepMind have been working in this area, obviously. And then we have amazing
companies like Pyron that have Mia, which can buddy up with a radiographer who
might look at, for example, breast cancer screening. I've actually got a good
friend who's a radiographer called Mike and I've had this discussion with him. I
remember having the discussion a few years ago and he was sure that actually it
wasn't going to change the way he worked, but it has actually, because the
system he's now used has been trained on millions and millions of different
images. It's like having an expert radiographer sit by you. And so now what
happens is the AI system can surface examples to Mike and his friends and they
can then much more quickly identify what might be wrong and what might not be
wrong. Yeah. I suppose it does take you to a world where the humans do the kind
of the interesting stuff and the machines do the more routine. One of the, this
is a fascinating example for me as we think about a kind of cleaner and greener
energy future. There are people trying to build nuclear fusion reactors for many
years. It's like building a mini star on this planet so we can generate cleaner
and greener energy. It's very, very difficult to control that mini star. It's
very unstable. If it touches the sides of the reactor, it breaks down
immediately. And there are very clever people that have spent a lot of time,
humans this is, human intelligence trying to develop algorithms to control these
plasma stars. And very recently we've been able to develop an AI system that's
been able to control the plasma and a nuclear fusion reactor at a much greater
level than has ever been possible before. And it worked fantastically well. And
I think that is an incredibly exciting application of AI. Look, we've had a good
conversation about some of the applications. Let's just think about the
businesses in the business of AI itself briefly. And interestingly, there are
some quite sticky intellectual property. IP issues aren't there about who owns
the data on which they've been training the AI. Priya, talk us through that.
There's a recent case of Getty and stability AI. There's a class action suit in
the USA as well. And so if you don't know Getty Images, they essentially are an
aggregator of images. A massive, massive library of photos. It's huge, like one
of the biggest players in this area. And if you want to buy an image off Getty
Images, you have to pay Getty Images and then they obviously have a model with
the creatives that originally created the images. So there have been
allegations. This is by Getty to stability AI, which is create a stable
diffusion. So they're creating generative AI and images have trained on the
Getty image sets. And Getty have said, well, if you have done that, then you owe
us the license for your applicable royalties. Now the generative AI companies
are saying, well, it's fair use. And so what we have to do is separate what is
the data trained on? What's the input to create these generative AI images? And
then you have to separate that from the output. Now I thought your outputting is
an image that is exactly the same sort of image, which is very, very
significantly similar. Then there is typical sort of trademark and copyright law
over the outputs of that image and its similarities. And the controversial area
is the input. You know, what are you allowed to mine in order to create your
generative AI technology? And that will differ across different jurisdictions.
But the difficulty with artificial intelligence and technology is that it's
global. It's a minefield. Colin, is this a big issue, a deep mine? Yeah, I'm not
an IP expert. So I'm not going to speculate on how exactly it works. But
intuitively for me, it feels like there should be room for agreement because as
humans, we learn and develop and we do things inspired by the people's work. And
as long as we, if we reproduce some other work, we recognize that then I think
it's generally accepting society that that's OK. I think there's a really
important area that builds on this that all businesses should think about. And
that's related to privacy. And they're far more likely to get on the wrong side
of the line related to privacy than to IP law. Do you have permission to use the
data that you're using to train the models that you're now using within your
business? If you're taking your customers data, have they explicitly given you
permission to use that? I think what another area, Evan, that's really, really
important here is if you're a consumer of these images of this media, did you
know that it was developed by a generative AI? The technology that I know that
some companies are trying to develop is watermarking technology. Very much like
a bad note. It hopefully wouldn't impact the aesthetic of the image or the text,
but somehow there would be a watermark embedded in that. So you could tell it
was generated by an AI system. Well, look, I hope at least we have stimulated
our audience to think about the multiplicity of different things that AI can
bring. Thank you to my guests, Priya Lakani from Century Tech and the AI
Council, Scott Petty from Vodafone, Colin Murdoch from DeepMind. Thank you for
listening and we're going to be back next week. Do join us then. Evan Davis, the
real Evan Davis. The Bottom Line was produced by Simon Chullet and you can
subscribe to the series on BBC Sounds. Hello, this is Sharon Horgan and because
this is radio, you can't see me, obviously. But if you could, you'd probably be
wondering why I'm sat in a wheelbarrow from Monty Don's Garden wearing Graham
Norton's jacket holding a winner's trophy from Pointless. Well, there's a good
reason because these are just some of the iconic BBC items that you could win
this year as part of Red Nose Day. Oi, you haven't finished with the wheelbarrow
yet. To enter, find out more or donate to Comic Relief, go to bbc.co.uk forward
slash rednoseday. We'll find the terms and conditions and privacy notice. You
must be 18 or over to enter. The giveaway closes at 11.59pm on Saturday, 18th.