TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 On 92 to 95 FM, 198 longwave and digital radio, this is BBC Radio 4. Beeping
Hello and welcome to The World at One with me, Sarah Montagu. The government
defends its new asylum plans. It's clear what we stand for, Mr Peatgoat. We're
doing what's right. We are acting with compassion, we are acting with fairness
and we are acting to respect the laws and borders of our country. We are
delivering what we said. We'll hear the case from the Immigration Minister.
We'll also ask if Match of the Day host Gary Lineker was right to tweet his
criticism of the government policy. I think it's good that he should speak out.
He's a very important person, he's well known to people in this country and he
has an influence, so good for him. The Labour peer Lord Dubs is a supporter. But
the BBC Director General insists on impartiality. We'll speak live to former BBC
broadcaster John Humphreys. Also this lunchtime, protesters have clashed with
police in Georgia's capital over a draft law which critics say could limit press
freedom. Crowd noise We'll hear live from Tbilisi and... Ladies and gentlemen,
this year's nominees for Actor and Actress in a Leading Role. We'll have the
latest on how white the Oscars are. The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols.
Rishi Sunak has defended his plan to reform the UK's asylum system, saying it
shows his government is on the side of the British people. The proposed
legislation would ban people who arrive in the country on small boats from
claiming asylum, returning to the UK or seeking British citizenship. Speaking at
Prime Minister's Questions, the Labour leader Sakir Starmer called the plan a
gimmick and accused Mr Sunak of being absolutely deluded. Our political
correspondent Damien Grammaticus followed the exchange. Conservative MPs cheered
as Rishi Sunak said his plan to detain and deport those arriving in the UK on
small boats reflected the people's priority. In a clear sign of the way Mr Sunak
hopes to capitalise politically, he said the Labour leader was on the wrong side
of this issue, calling Sakir Starmer just another lefty lawyer standing in our
way. Sakir's approach was to say that this was the fifth Conservative Prime
Minister with the sixth plan and the seventh Home Secretary and all have failed
to tackle the issue. While the SNP leader Stephen Flynn asked Mr Sunak who he
was taking inspiration from, Nigel Farage or Enoch Powell. What a load of
nonsense, Mr Sunak replied, claiming he was acting with compassion and fairness.
Gary Lineker has said that he will continue to try to speak up, following
criticism by some Conservative MPs of comments he made on social media about the
government's new asylum policy. The Match of the Day host tweeted that the
government's language around the proposals was similar to that used in 1930s
Germany. The BBC has said the star will be spoken to about his remarks. Our
media and arts correspondent David Siliteau reports. It's understood a very
frank conversation is about to take place. Gary Lineker's comments yesterday on
Twitter, describing a statement by the Home Secretary as beyond awful, has once
again raised concerns about whether such a high-profile presenter with the BBC
should express such views. The Director General Tim Davie has in the past spoken
to him about the issue and in October a complaint about a comment made by Gary
Lineker about the Conservative Party and Russian donors was upheld by the BBC.
But Mr Davie wouldn't be drawn on what exactly he'll say to him today. I
wouldn't reveal anything in terms of... I think it's totally appropriate that we
speak privately to members of the team. And while Gary Lineker has been
criticised by Conservative MPs and some members of the public, others have
rallied to his defence. Mr Lineker tweeted today that he'd never known such love
and support and said he would continue to try and speak up for those who have no
voice. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Antoni Guterres, is holding
talks with President Zelensky in Kiev about extending an agreement which allows
Ukraine to export grain. The current deal, brokered last July, brought an end to
a total Russian blockade of Ukrainian Black Sea ports, which had led to soaring
grain prices. It's due to expire in ten days' time and Moscow has signalled it
could allow it to run out. German investigators say they've searched a ship
suspected of transporting explosives used to sabotage Russia's two Nord Stream
gas pipelines in the Baltic Sea last September. US media has quoted anonymous
intelligence officials suggesting a pro-Ukrainian group had carried out the
attacks. Kiev denies any involvement. Fresh protests have broken out in Georgia
in opposition to legislation that would label many media outlets and rights
groups as foreign agents. The draft law was given initial approval by Parliament
yesterday, leading to demonstrations, which the authorities broke up using water
cannon, tear gas and pepper spray. From Tbilisi, Rehan Dimitri reports. Anger
against the proposed law is still very real among Georgians who fear their
freedoms will be eroded. They'd taken to the streets on Tuesday after lawmakers
from the governing Georgian Dream Party backed its first reading. In a
statement, Georgia's Interior Ministry said that 50 of its officers had been
injured in last night's protests. 66 demonstrators were arrested. Among those
detained was one of the leaders of the opposition, Zurab Djaparidze, who was
reportedly beaten. The opposition says the Russian-style law marks a shift
towards authoritarianism and would damage Georgia's chances of joining the EU.
Thousands of people are taking part in protests in Greece as anger continues to
grow after last week's rail crash, which killed 57 people. Public sector and
transport workers are staging widespread strikes to demand safety improvements.
Greece's new transport minister has repeated a government apology for failing to
prevent the crash and promised significant upgrades to security, staffing and
training. A parole hearing has been told that one of the UK's most notorious
prisoners developed post-traumatic stress disorder while in jail. A psychologist
who'd been asked by Charles Bronson's lawyers to assess him for the parole board
hearing said he'd been subjected to brutal and unacceptable treatment in prison.
Our Home Affairs correspondent Daniel Sanford reports. The psychologist has not
been named and was giving evidence from the end of a polished wooden table in a
meeting room at Woodhill Prison. Bronson himself was sitting a couple of metres
away, facing the parole board panel that has been asked to decide if he should
be released. Journalists and the public were watching the hearing on a video
link at the Royal Courts of Justice in London. The psychologist said that while
Bronson's PTSD might have been to a degree self-inflicted because of his own
behaviour, his violence had exacerbated whilst in the prison system. She said he
felt like the whole system is about humiliating and degrading him. The
psychologist concluded that the perfect environment for him now would be an open
prison but that he'd need a stepped process to get there. Snow and freezing
weather conditions are causing disruption across much of the UK. More than 100
schools in South Wales and all schools in Shetland have been closed. At least 27
flights from Bristol Airport were suspended due to snow with several incoming
flights diverted to Birmingham Airport. The airport has now reopened. Caroline,
thanks. The government has spent the morning defending its new asylum plan.
Under the proposals, anyone arriving in the UK seeking asylum would be detained
and deported within 28 days either to their home country or to another safe
third country like Rwanda and they would be blocked from claiming British
citizenship in future. The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, raised the issue at
Prime Minister's Questions in the last hour. After 13 years, small boat
crossings, higher than ever, claims unprocessed, the taxpayer paying for hotel
rooms, criminal gangs running all the way laughing to the bank and an asylum
sister utterly broken on his watch. This is their fifth Prime Minister, their
sixth immigration plan, their seventh Home Secretary and after all this time,
all they offer is the same old gimmicks and empty promises. I don't agree with
the Home Secretary on very much but when she says that the Tories are all talk
and no action, she's spot on, isn't she? Well, this was the Prime Minister's
response. Mr Speaker, illegal immigration enforcement, up. The amount of people
processing claims, up. The backlog is down. The number of returns agreements is
up. Hundreds of people returned to Albania and now new laws to detain and deter
illegal migrants. It's clear what we stand for, Mr Speaker. We're doing what's
right. We are acting with compassion, we are acting with fairness and we are
acting to respect the laws and borders of our country. We are delivering what we
said and it's crystal clear, listening to this, Mr Speaker, that it's going to
be the Conservatives and only the Conservatives that stop the boats. Well, the
Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, has said that the number crossing the channel
this year could double to as many as 80,000. I spoke to the Immigration
Minister, Robert Jenrick, and asked whether he can promise by the next election,
which must take place by January 2025, that small boats crossing will no longer
be a problem. Well, we've made that promise. We've said that we will stop the
boats because the public are rightly angry and frustrated at what they see. We
think that this system that we have created and outlined in this bill will act
as a major deterrent on people making this dangerous journey, putting themselves
at the behest of evil people smuggling gangs. There was a previous bill which
set up Rwanda as a place that people would be deported to and it didn't happen.
That didn't appear to act as a deterrence. Do they know that will happen and do
you need to actually remove people, more people, before the deterrence works?
Well, I think there's a reason to believe that deterrence, even in taking
forward this piece of legislation, will have some impact. The true impact will
only happen once we've operationalised it. Until we do that, I suspect we will
continue to see more people crossing the channel. You have seen already the
fruits of the work that we've done. If you look, for example, at Albania, where
we reached an agreement with the government there and we are now returning
hundreds of people every month to Albania. The early signs suggest that the
numbers coming from Albania are very significantly reduced as a result of the
action that we're taking and the deterrence that people are seeing. I think what
the public will judge us on is the actual result, but also the intensity of
effort. And they want to see that the government is doing absolutely everything
to tackle this issue. OK, but when to hear an answer like that, people might
start thinking cynically and thinking this is all about showing intention with
no expectation it can actually be delivered. Well, I hope that they won't say
that because that isn't our intention. You expect this to be delivered. So when
do you expect the first people to be removed? Well, at the moment, the Rwanda
policy is about to go before the Court of Appeal, who will hear the case in
April. And so as soon as we leave the domestic court, we will proceed with that
policy. And I hope that this bill will obviously give us a further framework to
move forward. And on your time frame, when would you expect people to be
deported to Rwanda? Or when do you need people to be reported to Rwanda in order
to create the deterrence to solve the problem by the end of next year? Well, I
will operationalise this policy as soon as we possibly can. The government has
made much of talking of people coming via safe and legal routes. The Home
Secretary was asked about this by the chair of the Home Affairs Select Committee
who was asked again on the Today programme this morning about somebody who is an
orphan in an East African country, 16 years old, wanting to come to stay with
family here and what their route to claim asylum in the UK is. Can you walk me
through what they should be doing? Well, we today have family reunion schemes.
There are routes for you to apply for close family members to be reunited with
you. We also have UNHCR approved and operated schemes to enable people to
resettle in the UK from any country in which the UNHCR is operating, meaning
those countries where the need is greatest. It is likely that there is a route
to the UK for the hypothetical case that you raise. But I don't think in
general, as a general point, the UK has to offer asylum to absolutely anyone,
anywhere in the world, who wants to come here. It is right that we focus our
finite resources on those people who are in the greatest need and to whom we
feel we have the greatest geographical, historical or moral obligation. And
you've seen that with the work that we've done for Ukrainians, for Hong Kongers,
for Syrians and the Afghan interpreters who supported our armed servicemen and
women during the conflict. Indeed, but it's outside those three countries.
That's what I think a lot of people are sort of thinking. Well, I think I've
just answered your question, Sarah, that there are schemes like that today. And
in addition to that, the bill that we've just laid before Parliament makes clear
that we're going to establish a broader safe and legal route, working with the
United Nations and others, so that people can come here. Local authorities at
the moment are struggling with the Afghan refugees that they're hosting in
hotels. So would you expect the cap to be lower than the current numbers who are
here? Well, we will have to consult with local authorities before deciding at
what level to set the cap. Most local authorities today feel the system is
overwhelmed and they have little, if any, spare capacity. And so we will have a
sensible conversation about the true number of people that we can take as a
country. That was Robert Jenrick talking to me earlier. Well, Catherine
Stubberfield is a spokesman, spokesperson for the United Nations High Commission
for Refugees. Good afternoon. Good afternoon. You will have heard Robert Jenrick
there. And in fact, you may have heard the Home Secretary, Suella Braverman,
this morning, insisting that somebody, and we use the example of a young person
from Africa with family ties here, that they could seek asylum legally through
existing routes. Is that true? Certainly, it's the case that UNHCR looks very
closely, works very closely with the UK government on both asylum procedures
here in the UK, enhancing those and on resettlement pathways, safe and legal
routes for refugees to come here. Those pathways, and they are absolutely life-
saving, are extremely limited at the same time. So the UK resettlement scheme
with UNHCR has allowed us to refer refugees directly to the UK. And last year,
for example, that was around 100 refugees arriving per month. As of today, for
this year, UNHCR is able to refer an additional 2,000 Afghan refugees under the
Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme. And of course, the UK has taken in
separately to UNHCR more than 160,000 Ukrainian refugees. But those safe and
regular pathways are open to a tiny majority. They're not a substitute for
asylum itself, and it's for that reason we're so concerned about this new asylum
ban. OK, the UK, but just on the routes, there are safe and legal routes. You
would like them to be open to more, but we're talking, what, 100 a month. And
the family reunion scheme that was mentioned there, that's open to anyone?
Family reunion is also open to refugees, but as I said, in extremely limited
circumstances. It's not simply a matter of raising your hand, indicating that
you have a relative in the UK and that you have refugee status. The pathways are
far more limited than that. And in fact, when we look at people arriving over
the Channel, who they are, the nationalities that they hold, you know, in the
top 10, you have half of people, half of the nationalities, with a refugee
recognition rate of over 80%. These are people who are likely, under the Home
Office's own procedures, to be recognised as refugees. Last week, for example,
the Home Office introduced very welcome accelerated procedures for five
particular nationalities with grant rates of over 95%. This week, under the new
bill, those very same people in need of sanctuary and protection would have no
way of even presenting their claim. That would be barring them. OK. So, I mean,
you make the point that I think it's about 75% of application, the approval
rate, in the UK. Actually, it's 64% it was in 2021, 64% approval rate, which
actually is pretty high compared with Germany, 45%, Greece, 45%. So, there is
the approval rate in the UK is relatively high. Is that true? The approval
rates, obviously, for different nationalities vary. And one of the ways in which
we have worked with the Home Office to try to clear the backlog of asylum cases
is to decide some procedures, some cases on a more accelerated basis. So, for
example, people who have come from Syria, from Afghanistan, from countries where
it's quite evident they're likely to be refugees, can be decided quickly without
a second interview, on a paper basis. So, it's the backlog that's making it look
higher because more are being affected, I mean, not exactly waved through, but
speeded up. Can I ask on this question of, you have concerns. The government has
said that they believe their new law is compatible with the UN Refugee
Convention. The UN High Commission for Refugees has said it's not. How do we
establish who's right on this? How are we likely to establish that? Well, our
finding as the UN Refugee Agency is that this bill does not comply with the UK's
obligations under international law. Fundamentally, the bill in its current form
extinguishes the right for people in need of protection to seek it in the United
Kingdom, no matter how compelling their claim might be. In practice, they would
be left in limbo, they would be subject to detention, unable to establish their
status and access the protection to which they are entitled under the Refugee
Convention. Catherine Stubblefield, thank you very much. The BBC says it is
having a frank conversation with Gary Lineker after the presenter of Match of
the Day said the government's language on asylum policy was not dissimilar to
that used by Germany in the 30s. Although he's a sports presenter, he has a
profile thanks to his BBC role and is obliged to follow impartiality guidelines.
Yesterday he posted on Twitter that the government plans were immeasurably cruel
and said there's no huge influx, we take far fewer refugees than other major
European countries. The Home Secretary, Suella Braverman, told the Today
programme she was unhappy with the comments. I'm obviously disappointed that he
should attempt to equate our measures with 1930s Germany. I don't think that's
an appropriate way of framing the debate. The Telegraph Mail led on the backlash
to his comments. He's also received significant support and tweeted his thanks
for that. One of my colleagues has voiced his words up. I've never known such
love and support in my life than I'm getting this morning. England World Cup
goals aside, possibly. I want to thank each and every one of you. It means a
lot. I'll continue to try and speak up for those poor souls that have no voice.
Cheers all. The BBC Director General, Tim Davie, was doorstepped about it this
morning and said he hadn't yet spoken to Mr Lineker. I wouldn't reveal anything
in terms of... I think it's totally appropriate that we speak privately to
members of the team. How many strikes will someone like Gary Lineker get writing
on social media? Well, again, I wouldn't talk... Specifically about... It's been
a couple of times, though, now, hasn't it? I don't think it's right. I think the
BBC absolutely puts the highest value on impartiality and that's clearly
important to us. Thanks very much. So what should we make of Gary Lineker's
comments? Lord Dubs, Alf Dubs, is Labour member of the House of Lords. In 1939,
he arrived in the UK from Prague as a child on the Kindertransport. I asked his
view. I think Gary Lineker has consistently supported the cause of vulnerable
people, including refugees. This is not a newfound comment on his part. He's
been consistent over the years and I think it's very good. I think it's good
that he should speak out. He's a very important person. He's well known to
people in this country and he has an influence. So good for him. The fact that
he compares what the government is doing with language that is not dissimilar to
that used by Germany in the 30s. Are you comfortable with that? Well, I wouldn't
have made that comparison. I don't like comparisons with Germany in the 30s. I
think they push it too far. So I wasn't comfortable about that bit of what he
said, but I was delighted with everything else he said. OK, so on balance,
you're glad he said something rather than nothing. I'm glad he said something.
And look, he's a person of influence. He's an important individual. He's well
known to millions of people in this country. He's a great football commentator,
a great football enthusiast. So this is important. And he has an influence on
people. And the language that's being used about refugees is so awful. He has
the right to counter that. He's also, though, employed by the BBC. And there is
a feeling that he's breaking rules by being so opinionated. Well, he's employed
by the BBC for football. He's not a political commentator. If you were making
such comments, not to personalise it too much, then I would understand. But he
is hired by the BBC, employed by the BBC, because of his football skills, his
football knowledge, his football experience, and his great ability to comment.
And I think that is a long way away from refugees. He's surely allowed to have
comments about other issues, which are in the forefront of the news. I'm asking
you, of course, about what Gary Lineker has said. What about what the Home
Secretary said yesterday and the language she used? What are your thoughts on
that? Well, I think the difficulty is when people, senior politicians, make
hostile comments about refugees, then the public does sometimes take its cue
from that. And I think it just builds up an atmosphere where local communities
are going to find it harder to support refugees. I don't think that's the way to
go. People have gone through terrible ordeals, and I think we should support
them on the grounds that, you know, we're a humanitarian country, or we used to
be. I hope we still are. And I think it is right we should do that. There is an
argument that actually you'd support refugees better if you have a better system
of control of the borders, so they don't need to have dangerous crossings of the
Channel. Well, of course, the crossings are dangerous. And yes, we should do
everything we can to catch the people smugglers. We haven't been very good at it
so far, we in the French, and I think we've got to do much better, particularly
as it's believed that some of the traffickers are actually based and operating
from within this country. But look, I understand the Prime Minister and the Home
Secretary are going to France at the end of this week to discuss with the French
government. I would have thought if we want better cooperation with the French,
we should have delayed publishing this bill. We should have said to the French,
this is what we're seeking to do. How can we best cooperate? That is the way to
deal with it. There have been protests against those who are staying in hotels.
Do you think that the language that politicians have used, not least the Home
Secretary, has contributed to that environment where there are protests? Yes,
absolutely. I think we've got to be very careful indeed about the language we
use. And when the Home Secretary talks about invaders and so on, it is
calculated to make people feel uneasy, to make people feel insecure, and to make
them feel hostile. Over many, many, many decades, we've been very welcoming of
refugees to the country, but we won't be so welcoming if senior politicians
regard them as invaders rather than as victims. So you draw a direct line
between the Home Secretary's words and the protests? There's certainly a
connection, yes. I do believe that. Lord Dubs talking to me earlier. Well, the
Prime Minister's spokesman has said this lunchtime, it's obviously disappointing
to see someone whose salary is paid by licence fee payers use that sort of
rhetoric and to dismiss legitimate concerns. I'm joined by John Humphreys,
former Today programme presenter, well-known broadcaster, and of course someone
who has written columns for the newspapers over the years. John, good afternoon.
Good afternoon, Sarah. I didn't like the newspaper columns after a certain point
when I was working for the BBC. They stopped me. Indeed. Quite right too. Well,
OK, well, let's get on to that because we have a situation where Gary Lineker
has said that he will continue to try to speak up. So what should the BBC do? I
don't know, but I do know that it must have a very clear policy. What Tim
Davies, the Director General, said the other day when he was talking to MPs,
being questioned by MPs, was this is a work in progress in terms of where to
draw the line. Well, I rather think they've had long enough now to decide where
to draw the line. And this is a pretty clear case, isn't it? Now, look, I am not
going to say Lineker shouldn't have said what he said. We have free speech in
this country. It is the absolute cornerstone of any democracy. And he was
exercising his right to free speech. So the question for the BBC is not whether
he should have said it. The question for the BBC is whether he should have said
it and or whether he broke the rules about what you can and cannot say on social
media. And I don't know exactly, and I suspect you don't, Sarah, where that line
is to be drawn. OK, well, let me put one argument, which is it's one thing. I
mean, it's obvious that somebody in my position, as Lord Dubs says, shouldn't.
You better keep your mouth shut. He's a sports presenter. Why does it matter?
Because it's the BBC who made him very, very famous. Now, that's not true. I
think he was quite a good footballer as well, wasn't he? And that probably
helped. But it's about 30 years. I'm not a great football fan. It's about 30
years, I think, since he was a mega football star. And it is the BBC that's
given him a platform to become even more famous. Now, you could argue that
that's neither here nor there. He can do with that platform what he likes. But
that's a question the BBC has to answer. Where do you look? It's a question of
where you draw the line, isn't it? And that's what Tim Davies said. He doesn't
know where you draw. I mean, what if, for instance, Linacre said, I think this
government is a shower. I won't use the language that he might use. And we
should vote Labour, vote Labour at the next election, says Gary Linacre. Now, do
we say, well, yeah, nobody would listen to him too much if he wasn't as famous
as he is. And who made him famous? The BBC made him famous. And they are
allowing him to say it now. Are they allowing him to say it? They're not
providing a platform because I suspect. Well, I don't know. You can answer this
question for me. Have you invited him to come on the programme? We have, of
course. Yeah, of course you have. And he declined. Right. But did you forgive me
for doing this to you? This is we're turning it around. I'm asking you
questions. I know it should be like that, isn't it? But have you been told you
shouldn't be interviewed? No. And you know what would happen if anybody did say
that. We wouldn't really take any notice of it. You would say go and yes, quite.
Or give us a very good reason why not. Precisely. No, but he makes the comments
on Twitter. It's got nothing to do with his BBC platform. He's got a very large
following. I think it's about nine million, up to nine million. So, but you're
clearly uncomfortable and I'm picking up that you think he might have crossed
the line with this. Well, I don't know whether he's crossed the line. You can't
become much more offensive to a particular section of, well, indeed, the world,
the civilised world and say they're like Nazis. He didn't use the word Nazis as
we know, but nonetheless, he said that, you know, not dissimilar to that used by
Germans in the 1930s. Well, there could be only one interpretation of that. You
cannot be more verbally violent than that. It is the ultimate evil. Nazi Germany
perpetrated the ultimate evil. So you've gone an awfully long way in that
direction, haven't you? But as I said, the cornerstone of a democracy is free
speech and he's allowed to say it. Should the BBC defend the saying? Look, John,
a quick word, just about Marcus Rashford. Well, John, we've got a second. In
fact, we're over. So we should probably. Oh, forgive me. I should never do that.
Should I? I'm not going to. Anyway, he has to make a decision. That's what it
comes down to. John Humphreys. Thank you very much. Now, then there are hopes of
breakthroughs in some of the pay talks going on at the moment. The RMT unions
called off a network rail strike next week after receiving a new pay offer.
Other rail strikes, they will go ahead. Talks with the health unions are
ongoing. Ambulance strikes in England were called off this week because of
progress in pay talks. Unison and GMP unions suspended their action after what
they called a huge shift in the government's position. So what is moving? What
is afoot? Zoe Conway is our BBC employment correspondent. Zoe, where are we at
with all the strikes at the moment? Where should we start? With the trains?
Let's start with the trains. The RMT represent people operate signals. They
represent guards. They represent ticket office staff. The bit they have called
off represents is the strike for people who operate the signals and the points.
And why is that significant? Well, actually, it's very, very hard to operate a
railway when you haven't got any signal staff. So this is important. What we
think they're being offered, and this has literally just been coming through in
the last few minutes in terms of this deal, is that what they were being offered
in terms of pay rise has been backdated by three months. So they're going to get
their hands on their pay rise sooner than they expected. We think that's what
shifted things. Now, what are the RMT going to do in terms of selling this to
their membership? That's the bit we don't know. They've paused the strike.
They're going to put this out to a referendum. We don't know if they're going to
recommend it to the membership to accept it. So that's important. However, let's
remember the last time they put this to a referendum in December, a deal, they
didn't recommend it. However, 40% of their membership backed it. So given the
fact that we've got a shift in what the pay deal is, we've got the promise of a
referendum, even if they don't recommend the membership back it, this really
could be very significant. We've got less than a minute. So on to health. What
can you tell us? Lots of positive mood music, appetite on all sides to get a
deal, goodwill in the room. But forgive me for stating the obvious, it's all
about the numbers, because let's remember, this isn't just about whether you can
get the union leadership on board. You've got to get the membership on board.
And there is a hell of a lot of anger amongst some health workers, for example,
ambulance workers. You've got to get them on board. So it really is about the
numbers. But there is a lot of goodwill in these talks, I'm told. Zoe, thank you
very much. Well, let's stay with ambulance workers, because it has been a very
hard winter for the NHS, as we know. And the GMB unions say that their survey of
ambulance workers shows eight in ten have considered leaving for a less
stressful role. They found more than half had witnessed a death because of
delays in getting to a patient or discharging them at hospital. Channel 4
documentary Dispatches Tomorrow Night features secret filming by an emergency
medical technician, Daniel. He started his job in May 2020. He's since left
because he says he couldn't continue because of the conditions. I spoke to him
earlier and asked what sort of things he'd seen. Well, I had patients who
unfortunately died due to delays in us getting there. Colleagues who were going
to patients who had called 999 and when they got there, the patient had died.
You know, because they'd called for low oxygen saturations and they were
struggling to breathe. They had their own pulse oximeter. They put it on their
finger. It showed that their oxygen saturations were low. And when the ambulance
crew got there, they died in the chair and were still holding, you know, still
had the ox probe on their finger. Patients just being left really undignified in
the corridor, patients who are end of life care, not receiving any of that care.
You know, distressed family members who are begging staff to help them. I mean,
are there particular cases, particular families, individuals that stick in your
mind because of what they went through? Yes. We had a patient who was having a
heart attack, had previously had a heart attack the year before. They called
999. The delay was about an hour, not even a huge delay compared to what we have
been seeing. And within about 10 minutes of us being there with the patient, he
went into cardiac arrest just as we were sort of getting ready to go. And
unfortunately, he did die. And we were only 10 minutes from hospital. If we were
there within the time frame that we should have been, he would have been
hospital, potentially having that clot removed before he went into cardiac
arrest. And that would never have happened. You know, he was in his, you know,
late 50s. And unfortunately, he died. And that, for me, was probably a big
motive behind what I decided to do. Right. I mean, I can see you're affected now
as you think about him. Yeah. At the end of a shift like that, what do you do?
You go home. You know, you don't have the support that possibly you would expect
to have. And that's not due to anything other than that is the job. You know,
you go home at the end of the day and you try to shake off whatever happened
throughout that shift. And then you go back in the following morning and start
again. I've heard a lot about the difficulties this winter, but do you think of
it as just three years of increasingly difficult? Well, it's hard. I mean, I
started in May 2020 and there were, you know, various peaks due to Covid waves
where, you know, where I started and then it started to get busy. And when I
came back from my clinical training to become an emergency medical technician,
that's when I really saw the first winter that I worked for the service. So that
was December 2020. And of course, we were facing extreme pressures due to Covid
and due to the regular winter pressures that we face. The anticipation was that,
you know, the winter would come and go and then we would have this period in the
spring and summer where things would ease back to normal. But of course, that
didn't happen at all. The staff who worked for the hospitals, for the NHS, for
the ambulance service never got any breathing space to have that moment to, you
know, go back to a normal working pattern. And then on the back of that busy
summer, we were hit with, you know, winter pressures again. So it's relentless.
I feel that I couldn't continue in the job role because the effect it was having
on my mental health, my physical health, you feel helpless and you feel like you
can't continue in that job role. What does it mean, do you think, given that if
you feel like this and presumably many of your colleagues do, what does it mean
for the strikes and the negotiations to end the strikes? I think it's, you know,
a very difficult situation. I feel like the strikes are necessary. I think it
always comes down to patient safety. We are losing staff members all the time.
We end up with a very young and, you know, recently graduated workforce due to
losing skills out of the ambulance service and the NHS where people can't stay
in the job long term. So unless the career becomes one that people can stay in
for much longer than they are, then we have an issue there. Daniel talking to
me. Now, then, there were huge protests in Georgia's capital Tbilisi last night
with demonstrators clashing with police. The protests were over Parliament
voting in favour of a draft foreign agents bill. Critics say it would limit
press freedom and suppress civil society. Rehan Dimitri is the BBC's
correspondent in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi. Rehan, tell us about this law.
Why is it so important? Well, just the type of this law, transparency, influence
of foreign agents, the relation with the law that exists in Russia. In the
Russian party's law back in 2012, it's... Rehan, I think we're going to stop you
Rehan because the line is, it makes it very hard to hear. We're going to try and
re-establish that line. We'll just move on though for a moment to another story,
which is that it's been eight years since Oscars So White was trending in
Hollywood and around the world. Since then, the Academy's worked to expand its
ranks, inviting a younger, more diverse and more global group of artists to what
was an exclusive club. Now, a new study shows that it's paying off, that there
have been more nominations for people of colour at the Oscars, even though the
industry is still disproportionately white and male. The BBC's Sophie Long
reports from Hollywood. Black Panther Wakanda Forever showcases black culture.
Not only was it a box office hit, it also has five Oscar nominations. For Angela
Bassett, who's nominated for Best Supporting Actress, the recognition from the
Academy has been a long time coming. Did you just think, oh, that's wonderful?
Or did you think a bit more like, about damn time? I would say a little bit of
both. No, no, no. Absolutely wonderful. It means the world to me, especially a
little girl who came from Florida looking for representation in the industry,
looking toward others in the industry that look like me, that gave me the idea
that, you know, that I could have a place in it. But the omission of actors like
Viola Davis for her role in The Woman King was seized upon by critics as
evidence of the Academy failing to acknowledge black talent. What's your excuse,
though? How you treat friends, your family? Only six of the 20 nominees in the
main acting categories are people of colour. Among them is Brian Tyree Henry.
He's nominated for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Causeway, which
explores the impact of physical and mental trauma. I was inducted into the
Academy in 2020. I was a class of 2020, so I was able to vote, which was truly
incredible. Very diverse of a class that I was inducted with. But there's still
work to be done. Disappointment has led you here to this moment. Everything,
everywhere, all at once. A time travel, multi-universe adventure, ultimately
about love, has been sweeping up awards. It has a mostly Asian cast, with
Michelle Yeoh in a good position to win the Oscar for Best Actress. Ke Hui Kwan,
who plays Yeoh's husband in the film, was a child star with roles in The Goonies
and Indiana Jones. But his career stalled for decades because there were so few
roles for Asian men. I didn't think any of this was possible after stepping away
from acting for more than 20 years. And to have the first movie back like this,
the way it did, all the attention that we have gotten so far, it's just
incredible. The president of the Academy, Janet Yang, told me they're moving as
fast as they can. We are doing everything we can to diversify our membership, to
create mentoring programs, to really inspire more women to enter the business.
And also we have now a new program for mid-career women and just
underrepresented groups. So we are not the industry. We cannot dictate hiring,
but we're doing everything we can to try to level the playing field. There has
been progress. New research by the Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, led by Dr.
Stacey Smith, shows the hashtag OscarsSoWhite, and the movement it created eight
years ago, has had a clear impact. 8% of nominees before OscarsSoWhite, the
eight years before, the eight years after, 17% for people of color. That's
notable, right? I mean, that's not a bad shift. It's nowhere near what it needs
to be, which is 40%, which reflects the US population. That's the percentage of
underrepresented racial ethnic groups in the United States. And that's where
that number should be in 2023. Sophie Long reporting. Well, let's return to
Tbilisi and Rehan Dimitri, who we've got the line up again with the protests
there. Rehan, you were telling me about the new foreign agents bill that's
caused these demonstrations. That's right, Sarah. Sorry about the line before.
So why is it so controversial? Because just the title of this law, foreign
agents law, brings immediate association with a similar law in Russia. Russia
introduced the foreign agents law back in 2012, but over the years it's
strengthened and it really became the main tool in Vladimir Putin's Russia to
silence independent media, to silence non-governmental organizations. And here
in Georgia now, people are seeing it that it's the same kind of attempt by the
ruling Georgian Dream Party to impose more and more control on civil society.
And basically to kill Georgia's democracy. Georgia has a very vibrant civil
society. It has independent media. And according to this law, any organization
that receives more than 20 percent of its funding from abroad will have to label
itself as a foreign agent. So for those who are opposing the law and it's right
right here, you know, I'm outside parliament. A lot of young people, students,
they're saying it is about stigmatization. But also, most importantly, for.
Sorry, sorry, you want to ask? Well, I was going to ask about just another sort
of aspect of its significance, because the EU is currently considering whether
Georgia should have candidate status. Does this is this the sort of seen as a
possible pivot because of the pull between facing the EU or facing Russia?
Absolutely. This is the turning point. And for many, it's it's kind of crossing
the red line because this country, I mean, the people who live here, they do not
want to go back into Russia's embrace. They've been fighting against Russia.
Let's remind listeners that there was a war in 2008 when Russia invaded Georgia
and it now occupies 20 percent of its internationally recognized territory. So
this is a big no, no for Georgians. They're saying our future is in Europe. That
pledge is enshrined in the country's constitution and they are prepared to
fight, fight against this law. And they're saying they'll be standing here
protesting until the government reverses its decision. Rehan Dimitri there with
the sounds of those protests and demonstrations in the background. Just to
remind one headline before we go, the prime minister's insisted the government's
on the side of the British people after being accused by Sakhir Starmer of
introducing gimmick legislation to deter migrants from arriving in small boats.
Evan will be looking at the budget in a week's time when he's PM at five
o'clock. I'm Sarah Montague. That's the world of 145. Studio direction was by
Nathan Chamberlain. The editor was Jonathan Harvie. Later this afternoon, Inside
Health asked whether the new weight loss drug available on the NHS heralds a new
era in tackling obesity. That's at half past three. But now on Radio 4, we take
to the skies once more for Flight of the Ospreys. Today we join the migrating
birds as they make landfall in the tropics. Floating on thermals high above West
Africa, Britain's Ospreys have crossed the Sahara and the arid Sahel. Catching
the light beneath them is a broad strip of freshwater and tropical forest.
They've reached the Gambia River. The bird life is incredible. The sounds are
spectacular. All the way along, you'll find Osprey populations amongst the dense
mangroves. It's early November and the biologist and adventurer Sasha Dench has
spent the last three months following Britain's Ospreys on their annual
migration. She's been investigating the threats they face and meeting local
people working against the odds to protect them. Our crossing into Gambia, we
actually thought as an ex-British colony it was going to be a really fast one,
but actually getting across the border was one thing. It only took about an
hour, which was great. But once you get across the official country border, you
then have to cross a river. And the traffic jam trying to get the single ferry
that was working across the river was extreme. So we watched ferry after ferry
come and go without us being put on it. Various VIPs, there's a VIP lane. One of
the presidential candidates had come through. He did come and say hello and
apologize for the fact that he was getting in front of us. But we were met by
two fabulous conservationists from Gambia, a lady called Awa and Fah. Awa is one
of the few female conservationists in Gambia and spoke to us about how
challenging that was. Even something as simple as walking around wearing birding
clothes, so trousers and I can't ask because it's a photography jacket with a
few pockets for various things and binoculars around your neck, was a
challenging thing for even her parents to come to terms with the fact that she
wasn't wearing typical Muslim attire. But in order to go out birding and to be a
conservationist, often needed to dress like that. As being a young female in
conservation, I do live with a lot of challenges and I can say like culture is
one of them. Religion is one of them. Parental control is also one of them. And
society also tends to judge you. Challenges can be there, but if we are very
strong women in conservation, that can be a big goal. And also being a young
person, what I always say is even if I have to bear children in future, they are
going to be conservationists. She was a bit of a force for nature. So as we were
spending those many hours waiting for our ferry crossing, we were surrounded
constantly by kids asking for either for a football or trying to sell us
something. And she turned it into an opportunity for education. So the whole
side of our vehicles are decorated with pictures of the Osprey, Osprey tagging,
the migration route, etc. So she managed to get them thinking and talking about
everything from climate change to migration to what they wanted to do with their
life. And I was wondering how that was going to go down and eventually a couple
of kids turned up having found a piece of paper from somewhere, asking for a pen
so they could take notes and then go back to tell their parents or their other
friends or to tell their school. We're trying to create a theme to educate the
world that this is how conservation is and how vulnerable it is in Africa and
more specially, I can say, in the Gambia. And people tend to bring culture to
conservation. We are very strong women in conservation and fight against that.
Having the belief that you have to be in the house, bearing children, doing
housework, you don't raise your voice on issues that are affecting people and
conservation. That one is also another problem. Awa isn't the only
conservationist raising her voice in the Gambia. There's a fight on to save some
prime bird habitat. It's pretty stunning. You look out on an area that's mixed
tree species growing, some open areas, some areas where you can see what looks
like rice paddies, but they are still absolutely full of wildlife. This area is
known as the Koto Creek. It's the only green belt in the KMC region. Yahya Barry
is a local guide and president of the Gambia Bird Watchers Association. And why
is it so important to you to keep it? This area, you know, you could take
nearly, you know, 100 different species, you know, just around this area. You
can take nearly four to five different kingfishers here, whereby in the whole
South America, you only have four kingfishers. So this is better than all of
South America. So the, and other areas like this have been lost along the coast,
haven't they? Because people want to develop in beautiful natural areas with
beachfront. Yes, we have a problem by, you know, the encroaching of land at the
moment, you know, within the combos around here because of the development, the
housing development. And there's a big demand coming up with the tourist
development. So these are the areas left around the coast here. If we don't act
quickly, we will lose this area. And these sorts of sites are also important for
migratory birds, aren't they? Absolutely. You know, like the other part of the
creek, you know, is a wetland. You have a lot of migratory birds coming in. And,
you know, in fact, a few years ago, we have some birds like the Terek sandpiper.
We have the, you know, the American whistling ducks been around here. The golden
plover has been seen here. So if this area is lost, we will, you know, not have
this migratory birds where to be. As we walked up towards it, we met a woman
called Fatou. So she and others use this greenbelt area for basic food
production, but it's done on such a small scale and organically. So it's still a
haven for wildlife. I'm making rice here. One day I'm walking here. One, two man
come. They greet me. They say, how are you? I say, fine. They say, we are coming
here to fence the place because the government, they sell the place for the
Chinese people. The tractor is coming. The tractor? Yes, the tractor is coming
to destroy anything here. I say, but that is not right. There was no warning
whatsoever. Yeah, actually, there was no warning according to Fatou and
according to some of the conservationists. So how did you feel? I'm crying. I'm
crying. I'm still crying. She turned up one day and suddenly found someone was
not only digging a ditch, but also building a wall to start the construction of
a hotel right in the middle of it. A woman like her basically got together with
others and the local birding association and they began to protest. And this was
the first time that the local community and the birders had got together to
really try and fight the rapid development that's happening on the green spaces
along this area. I remember the day when we were told that they are building a
hotel on our famous Koutou Creek. You know, I cried because, you know, this is
where we make our living. Animals we see here, including monkeys and other
things, if they build all these areas, you know, it will come our future
generation will not know even what a monkey is or will not know, you know, even
what the kingfisher is. Because if we lost all the nature, we will not have what
we are looking at here today. And then without the green belt, you have no fresh
air, you have no life. If there's no nature, there's no life. The protests
worked. The building works stopped. And Fatou and Yaya are working together to
get legal protection for Koutou Creek. These places are under threat, but what's
inspiring is that when people take a stand, when it's not just conservationists,
who often have a pretty small voice in these issues when you're coming up
against a developer. But if you've got conservationists and you've got the local
community getting together to protest, then it really can work. Good luck. Thank
you. As Sasha drives south, she's outpacing some of the migrating British
ospreys. Three young males were fitted with satellite tags in the Tweed Valley
this summer. The three brothers at the nest all migrated on the same day. Diane
Bennett of Forestry and Land Scotland has been plotting the progress of Kirk,
Tweed and Glenn. They set off on migration and they were really sort of neck and
neck with each other. Tweed was the stronger of the birds and he headed across
and headed down to Portugal. He was doing so well there and then sadly his
tracker came to a stop at his roosting site. It was clear from his tracker that
something had happened. Sadly, they found his remains, the tracker, and feathers
and some bones. It was thought that somebody who monitors the site, monitors the
duck population there, had made an observation of goshawks that were very
prolific in the area feeding on ducks. They had also predated on buzzards
locally in the area. His brother, Kirk, was following a very similar direction.
Kirk turned back and was finding conditions going too hard. He landed at Cork
and then he suddenly took off very, very rapidly, very high, in quite fast wind
conditions and went west. Instead of going south, he went directly west out to
the Atlantic Ocean. Then his tracker just literally stopped. Two of the brothers
haven't made it, but Glenn seems to have a stronger instinct for survival.
Exhausted on his sea crossing from the UK, he spent the night on board a
freighter before taking off and heading for the rich fishing grounds of northern
Spain. The next time after that he'd reached the very tree-lined valley, lovely
freshwater river, fast flowing from what we can gather, taking out trout
familiar to what he'd been feeding on in the Tweed Valley. But then he just
suddenly took off right the way down to Portugal and the last tracked parts was
just north of Lisbon at a fruit farm. It's just quite a worry because the
tracker is not sending back any information and the tracking device has been
very strong up until this point. Immediately prior to that area there's a big
train line, lots and lots of electric fences, cables and pylons. Just worry, has
he been predated or has he injured himself? It's a bit of a nail-biting wait.
We'll keep our fingers crossed for Glenn and check in on that Portuguese fruit
farm next week. Gambia is basically a long, thin country, a tiny strip of land
really on either side of the Gambia River. So we can follow the river all the
way upstream and all the way along you'll find osprey populations amongst the
dense mangroves. So we took a long pierog journey in through the mangroves where
there were ospreys every 50, 100 metres. It was really beautiful. Mangrove
habitat is critical for migrating birds. The roots around the mangroves in the
tidal zone are critical areas for juvenile fish. So if you lose that mangrove
network, you lose the juvenile fish. Dreadful for the people, it's dreadful for
the ospreys. So we went into a tiny village built on the edge of the mangroves
and the chief who is young, is he only 27? I think he thinks he might be the
youngest village chief. He has big plans for it. So here what people do here is
only fishing. Fishing is their main occupation. Women will go for oyster
fishing, crab, all seafood. And that grows on the roots and around the roots of
the mangroves? Yeah, you have oysters attached to the roots of the mangroves. So
that's what they do and it's like a seasonal thing. Augustus Sanyang is the head
of his village, which relies on the mangroves growing at the riverside for food,
wood and protection from floods. But the ports here are expanding and concrete
is gradually closing in on the community. All around this area mangroves have
been damaged a lot and most of the Banjo land has been used by many, many, many
businessmen for their own purpose and we have seen that mangroves have been
damaged. The villagers don't intend to see their environment degrade any
further, so they've come up with a solution. They're planting their own
mangroves. It's a big project. I like that project because when we were walking
one day with my brother, my brother told me, don't you think this place can grow
mangroves? I said, yeah, you're right. I believe growing mangroves around this
area will protect the land because these mangroves are not only here for oyster
fishing or other stuff, but we know what importance is plants. So having this in
abundance will help. In next week's episode, we join Sasha in Guinea in search
of an osprey from Rutland that's reached the end of its journey. We got to the
first point in the river. He wasn't there. Did the first kind of bend towards
point number two. Still no osprey there at all. We were moving towards the main
channel again and as we looked across, somebody just yelled, osprey! Flight of
the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight and Alistair Cross. And next week,
Gordon Carrera is here. In March 2003, bombs started to fall on Baghdad. All the
night I hear the fighters coming on the sky. In a new series, I examine the
reasons to go to war. You have to decide, are we with America or not with
America? Hearing from decision makers. There was a disagreement between the US
and the UK in terms of intelligence assessment. And I look at the war's legacy
on trust, politics and Iraq today. How on earth do you go about working with
people when you are a foreign invader? Shock and war, Iraq 20 years on, with me
Gordon Carrera. On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds, next Monday to Friday afternoon at
1.45. Off to Ambridge after the news, where Lily has something to tell
Elizabeth. And Helen has something to tell me.