TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Chris Aldridge. The world has been marking the
first anniversary of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine. President Zelensky
said his people remained resolute in the face of Moscow's aggression. In
tonight's bulletin, we'll reflect on how the date has been marked in Ukraine and
Russia and consider the response of the international community. We'll also hear
from young Ukrainians forced to flee their country. A fifth man has been
arrested in connection with the shooting of a senior police officer in Oma.
Junior doctors in England are to strike for three consecutive days next month.
Health officials in the UK are drawing up contingency plans for a possible bird
flu pandemic. And Sir Bernard Ingham, Mrs Thatcher's fourth-right and devoted
press secretary, has died. President Volodymyr Zelensky has said continued
Western backing for Ukraine will make victory over Russia inevitable, as he
marked exactly a year since the full-scale invasion of his country began. Mr
Zelensky said the Ukrainian people had endured 12 months of pain at the hands of
what he described as Russian terrorists, but that there was a sense of
invincibility as the war entered its second year. Ceremonies have been held in
cities and towns across Ukraine to mark the anniversary of Europe's biggest
conflict since the Second World War. Our first report tonight comes from our
chief international correspondent, Liz Dusette, who's in Kiev. A single trumpet
sounded for every soldier's death. In a solemn ceremony on a stone plaza in the
heart of Kiev, Ukraine's President Zelensky joined government ministers and
military officials to honour the fallen in Ukraine's war against Russia. Glory
to Ukraine, the Ukrainian leaders shouted, in what is now the greeting of this
war. Glory to heroes, they replied. It's not clear how many soldiers lost their
lives this past year, but the numbers are certainly high among Ukrainian and
Russian forces. But today Ukraine also marked a year of survival against the
might of Russia's military, an achievement secured by Ukraine's effective fight,
but also its formidable support from allies around the world. On this day a year
ago when Russian warplanes screeched across Kiev, when plumes of dark smoke from
explosions blackened the skies, many believed it would be a short, sharp war,
that Ukraine didn't stand a chance against a far superior force. Now with this
one-year mark, many are asking, how and when will this end? President Zelensky
was asked at a press conference in Kiev if he was ready to negotiate an end to
these hostilities. This was his message to Moscow. Please respect our right to
live on our land, get out of our territory, stop bombing us, stop killing
civilians, stop killing our infrastructure, our energy sector, our drinking
water, stop the bombardments of villages, cities and towns. And then we will
tell you, in word format, we shall diplomatically put an end to it. Every
Ukrainian I've met this week still says this is a war Ukraine can and will win.
And now they also add, echoing their president, that victory will be theirs this
year. But President Putin is also vowing with single-minded resolve to fight his
way to victory. And on this cold winter's day in February, on this date seared
in memory, all the talk now is of new offensives by both sides in the spring.
Twelve months on from the start of the invasion and Moscow remains defiant
despite military setbacks, international criticism and sanctions. Our Russia
editor, Steve Rosenberg, has this analysis. In Russia, the first anniversary of
the war was not headline news. The bulletins on state TV did give an update on
Russia's offensive in Ukraine. But they didn't focus on the anniversary and they
glossed over the fact that President Putin's special military operation had
failed to achieve what the Kremlin had expected a year ago, a swift victory.
Quite the opposite. Over the last 12 months, the Russian army has suffered heavy
losses. A few days ago, a talk show host on state TV admitted that a huge number
of people had been killed. There was no end in sight, she said, to the conflict.
And what of the man who ordered the invasion? What is Vladimir Putin thinking?
What is he planning? Well, from the speeches he's been making, the Kremlin
leader seems to think that although the invasion went badly wrong, Russia has
the resources and the staying power to ultimately secure victory over Ukraine
and over the West. Many Russians still support him and believe the Kremlin's
false narrative that Russia is not the aggressor and that the West is out to
destroy Russia. And so Mr. Putin is planning to push on and is ready to
escalate, if necessary, to achieve his goals. No sign of any Kremlin U-turns.
This Russian president isn't for turning. In the UK, there was a minute silence
led by Rishi Sunak on the steps of Downing Street to mark the anniversary. The
Prime Minister said it was important for the country to reflect on the courage
and bravery demonstrated by the Ukrainian people. Here's our correspondent,
Richard Galpin. Across the UK, events have been held to remember the tens of
thousands of people who've been killed and injured, and those that have been
forced to flee their homes. People came together to show support and solidarity.
In a message to the Ukrainian people, the king said they had suffered
unimaginably. But he also highlighted their remarkable courage and resilience.
At the Ukrainian church in Manchester and in churches elsewhere in the country,
there have been vigils. But there's also been some controversy with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, and his thought for the day here on
Radio 4, warning against overly punishing the Russian regime when the war
eventually ends. Truthful but not hating the oppressor, there must be a future
with a just and stable peace, a free and secure Ukraine, and the beginning of a
generations-long process of healing and reconciliation. Meanwhile, ambassadors
based in the UK have marked the anniversary of the invasion in a very different
way. They've been swimming in the comparatively cool water of the Serpentine in
London's Hyde Park. The Estonian ambassador Viljor Luby described it as a show
of resilience needed as the war grinds on. Allies of Ukraine have pledged their
continuing support. The first of the tanks promised by Western countries have
arrived in Ukraine from Poland. The US, EU and the UK have also announced a new
raft of sanctions against Russia. Questions remain about China's role in the
conflict, but President Zelensky said tonight that he wanted to meet President
Xi Jinping. With the fighting at a stalemate, our diplomatic correspondent Paul
Adams considers what factors may determine the shape of the war in the months or
years ahead. The West's response to the war has been remarkable, unlike anything
seen in recent times. Without it, Ukraine would not exist today as a democratic,
independent state. Each step has been marked by protracted debate, sometimes
creating the impression of division and doubt. But from anti-tank missiles to
sophisticated artillery systems and heavy armour, vital weaponry keeps coming.
Today, Poland said it had already delivered the first four leopard tanks, and
Sweden added ten more to a growing list of promises. The debate moves on to the
much more complex issue of jets. Here, the government says it doesn't have any
of its own to send, but the defence secretary Ben Wallace said Britain could
help others to send theirs. That is definitely always on offer. Let's put it
that way. If a country approaches us and says we'd like to do that, the United
Kingdom would be very happy to either backfill or indeed cover with things like
extra deployment of our aircraft to cover for air policing or protect that
country. It's already been happening, it's been happening for the last, nearly
for the last eight, nine months in other countries across Europe. The strain is
showing Western countries have used up their own stocks of ammunition in a
frantic effort to keep up with the pace of the war. The head of NATO, Jens
Stoltenberg, said Ukraine's allies still had a lot to do. We are working hard to
both increase the volume, but also the speed we are delivering support. In
addition to delivering the specific weapons systems, we need also to be able to
deliver all the different stuff we need to sustain, meaning ammunition, spare
parts, fuel, maintenance. So it's a huge effort. In the meantime, the West
continues to impose fresh waves of sanctions on Russia, conscious that so far at
least they do not seem to have dented the Kremlin's ability or desire to wage
war. Today, Britain added banks, aircraft parts, radio equipment and electronic
components. The United States added metals and mining, as well as efforts to
counter rampant sanctions evasion around the world. But in recent days, all eyes
have been on China. Washington has warned that Beijing is thinking of providing
weapons to Russia. If that happened, the effect could be immense and the crisis
could get a whole lot deeper. China says it has its own peace proposals, the
details of which have not been released. President Zelensky said the fact that
China was talking about Ukraine was not bad, but he needed to know more. I want
to believe, he said, that China will side with the idea of peace and fairness
and will not supply weapons to Russia. More than eight million Ukrainians are
now refugees in Europe. Many of them have no idea when they'll be able to return
to their homes and to the lives they left behind. Our reporter Kalim Tully has
been speaking to a number of young Ukrainian music students who are now living
in the UK. A year after the invasion, life looks very different for young
Ukrainians in the UK. Are you happy here? Yeah, of course I'm very happy. Irina
is 20 and lives in temporary accommodation with her mum and sister. We organised
our choir and we're seeing, yeah, we're seeing in Christmas. So you're still
able to follow your dreams in the UK? Yeah, of course. I'm a musician, I'm a
vocalist and a guitarist. Andre is 21 and was a music teacher back in Ukraine.
In the night, for example, I lay on my bed and think about young guys, sometimes
younger than me. And they fight on the front and I think, oh my God. Nikita is
23 and is a top violinist. Most men over the age of 18 aren't allowed to leave
Ukraine, but Andre and Nikita were given military exemptions so they could
continue their careers at the London Performing Academy of Music. The one of my
friends, he was near my opal in March and he was a prisoner of Russians, the
prisoner, and now I really don't know if he's alive or not. Despite everything,
they still have big dreams for the future. You think you're going to make it as
an opera singer? Yeah, I think so. I've seen your videos, they're very good.
Yeah, thank you. I cannot fight, I cannot be with a weapon, but my weapon is my
violin, so with this weapon I can do something. I can tell the people we are
Ukrainians. We're not the part of Russia. Yeah, we are not the part of Russia,
we are Ukrainians. Police in Northern Ireland say they're now treating the
shooting of a senior officer as a terrorist incident and their main line of
inquiry is focusing on the dissident group the new IRA. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell was shot on Wednesday night while off duty in Omer. A
fifth person has been arrested in connection with the attack. Earlier political
leaders in Northern Ireland met the Chief Constable in a show of unity. Our
Ireland correspondent Chris Page reports. The nature of the attack on John
Caldwell has added to the sense of public anger. The Detective Chief Inspector
had been coaching an under-15s football team. He was looting equipment into his
car when two gunmen opened fire. Mr Caldwell's son was close by. Dozens of other
children were also at the sports complex. Northern Ireland's Chief Constable
Simon Byrne said his colleague had been very seriously injured. John remains in
hospital where he is critically ill and heavily sedated. Last night I had the
chance to speak to John's wife and his son. They are clearly heavily affected by
what they've gone through but want to pass on their thanks both to the people
that rendered first aid and care at the scene but also in terms of the
outpouring of support from across the community. Mr Byrne was speaking at a news
conference alongside the leaders of the five biggest parties at Stormont.
Michelle O'Neill of Sinn Féin said the symbolism was significant. It is so
important in moments like this that we stand united as one voice in our
condemnation against this horrific attack on a police officer. And the
Democratic Unionist leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson had this message. I would also
say to the evil people who carried out this heinous attack, you are not the
future of this place. We stand against you. The police said their enquiries were
confirming their initial belief that the shooting was carried out by the new
IRA. It's thought to be the largest of the dissident Republican groups which are
opposed to the peace process. The Chief Constable indicated the organisation had
become more active in the last few months but he said officers were working
round the clock to deal with the threats. Junior doctors have announced three
consecutive days of strike action in their pay dispute starting on the 13th of
March. The walkout will affect both routine and emergency care. The Union, the
British Medical Association said doctors had been left with no choice but to
take action, claiming the health secretary had refused to attend a meeting to
negotiate on pay. Junior doctors say their wages have seen a decline of 26% over
the past 15 years after failing to keep pace with inflation. Here's our health
correspondent, Catherine Burns. At the heart of this is pay. The British Medical
Association says members are angry, demoralised and no longer willing to work
for below inflation wages. This strike is not small. Junior doctors make up 40%
of the medical workforce, everything from recent medical school graduates to
doctors with up to 15 years of experience. It's not short either. We can expect
tens of thousands of doctors to stop work at 7am on the morning of Monday, March
13th and not to restart until the Thursday morning, including Dr. Hena Shakur.
We're hoping to make it clear what our value is and how much we actually
contribute. It's through our absence that we can demonstrate that, I think, so
it's only through striking and striking for a significant period of time that I
think it will really be obvious how important we are to the workforce. Junior
doctors also went out on strike in 2016, although not for three days in a row.
At the time, more senior doctors were called in to cover for them, especially in
key areas like A&E. Matthew Taylor is chief executive of NHS Confederation,
which represents managers. He's worried it might not be so simple this time
around. I think this action will be extremely difficult for us to manage. The
problem is that consultants themselves are having an indicative ballot, and so
it's very unclear the degree to which consultants will necessarily be willing to
fill in. The government says the strike is disappointing and that doctors have
had an 8% pay rise over four years. One of the smaller unions involved in the
long-running rail dispute has voted to accept a settlement deal with train
companies. The Transport Salarids Staffs Association, or TSSA, said its 3,000
members had accepted an offer, including a two-year, 9% pay deal. Health
officials in the UK have begun drawing up plans for a possible bird flu
pandemic. An 11-year-old girl has died in Cambodia after contracting the H5N1
strain of the disease. The UK Health Security Agency said that while very high
levels of transmission in wild birds presented a constant threat, there was no
evidence the virus was getting better at infecting humans. Our medical editor,
Fergus Walsh, reports. Not another pandemic might well be the exasperated
response of many to talk of the risk from bird flu. A new sub-strain of the H5N1
virus emerged in recent years and has been causing record numbers of deaths
among wild birds and poultry. It has also infected mammals, raising concerns.
Thankfully, it does not spread easily from birds to humans, but when it does,
H5N1 kills about half those it infects. The death in Cambodia was the first
since 2014. The Health Security Agency stressed there was no evidence of an
imminent threat to humans, but said it was important to remain vigilant, urging
people to stay away from sick wild birds they might encounter. Professor Peter
Openshaw from Imperial College London said it was vital to increase
surveillance. We absolutely need to watch this one like a hawk. When it does
infect people, it can be very nasty indeed. I think the good news at the moment
is that there's no evidence of human to human spread. Just as they did with
Covid, scientists have begun modelling scenarios of how a bird flu pandemic
might have an impact in the UK and looking at whether lateral flow devices could
be used to test for H5N1 in humans. Three candidates are to take part in the
contest to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader and Scotland's first minister.
After nominations closed at midday, it was confirmed that Kate Forbes, Hamza
Yousuf and Ash Regan had all received the required number of 100 nominations
from 20 local branches of the party. The result of the vote will be revealed on
27 March. Ms Regan formally launched her campaign this morning in North Queens
Ferry in Fife, from where our Scotland editor James Cook reports. Ash Regan
opened her campaign with a blunt take on the independence movement, calling it
divided by petty differences and personal agendas. She promised to restore
harmony by using an election at Westminster or Holyrood to advance her cause.
You have said that you will explicitly declare in your manifesto Line 1 that
should you achieve a majority of seats and votes that on day one of being in
power you would open negotiations. Absolutely right. With whom? With the UK
Government. On day one? Yep. And if they don't come? Listen, we have got to move
away from this point where we are asking permission from the UK. This is about
Scotland and it is about Scotland expressing its views on how it wants to be
governed. So we are going to get away from that and this is my attempt to move
us forward, move that conversation forward. The concept of an negotiation
obviously requires two parties. If they refuse to turn up, my question is what
would you do then? So we are going to be getting international recognition
obviously for the fact that Scotland has made a democratic choice in this case.
In a general election? Yes. All week, the other candidates have been dealing
with questions about how their faith influences their politics. Kate Forbes, who
is a Christian, came under fire for her opposition to gay marriage. Hansa
Yousuf, who is a Muslim, denied that he dodged the final vote on the subject for
religious reasons. Sir Bernard Ingham, the long-serving press secretary to
Margaret Thatcher when she was Prime Minister, has died after a short illness.
He was 90. Sir Bernard's son described him as a formidable operator in the
political and white-hole jungles as well as a fantastic family man. Our
political correspondent David Wallace Lockhart looks back at his life. For
almost the entirety of Margaret Thatcher's time in number 10, Sir Bernard Ingham
was the key link between the Prime Minister and the media. A surprising career
zenith for a former Labour election candidate. The bushy eyebrowed Yorkshireman
started out in newspapers before joining the civil service, serving Labour
ministers like Barbara Castle and Tony Benn in the 70s. He may have seemed an
odd appointment for Mrs Thatcher when the Conservatives came to power, but
previous political leanings deserted him as he embraced her ideology. He
reflected on his ability to capture her voice on desert island discs in 1995. I
came to have very considerable sympathy for her political views, but I think
that it was the fact that here I had a Prime Minister who had a clear
philosophy, knew what she wanted to do, had worked out the implications and
wasn't going to change her mind. I mean, that made me blessed among press
secretaries as I told all my colleagues when I retired. A controversial figure,
Sir Bernard's press briefings could irritate Cabinet ministers, but the Prime
Minister stood by him. The backroom operator flirted with becoming the story
himself on occasion. Millions watched on TV as he elbowed reporters aside before
Mrs Thatcher addressed the press during a leadership challenge. His position
that the Hillsborough disaster was caused by tanked up yobs, which was not the
conclusion of a public inquiry, diminished him in the eyes of many. He left
Downing Street with Mrs Thatcher, but he never left politics, his regular
newspaper columns as recently as last month, testament to this. It's been
announced that the presenter Vernon Kay will be stepping into Ken Bruce's shoes
as the host of Britain's most listened to radio programme, the weekday mid-
morning show on Radio 2. He'll take over in May after Ken Bruce, one of the
station's longest serving presenters, announced his decision to leave last
month. Our Arts correspondent David Silatoe reports. Vernon Kay, the presenter
of TV programmes such as All Star Family Fortunes and the celebrity diving show
Splash has a long radio pedigree. Radio 1, Radio X and in recent months he's
been a regular stand-in on Radio 2. That's the boss, good morning, it's BBC
Radio 2, Vernon in for Zoe. No pressure burn, but yesterday's show with Gordon
was the best ever, says Jacqueline Brighten. I think we've raised the bar. The
dizzy heights that we might not be able to reach ever again whilst I'm here
anyway. And he presents his own dance sound show with its Back to Bolton cheesy
bangers. We celebrate the cheesy hits that would have never ever been heard. Now
he's been announced as the replacement for Ken Bruce as the voice of mid-
morning, which is at the moment Britain's most listened to radio show with more
than 8 million tuning in each week. Are you ready? And it's also a generational
shift. 72-year-old Ken Bruce has been a fixture in the slot for more than 30
years. Of course, when he began, he was rather younger than his 2023 replacement
48-year-old Vernon Kay. And as he left work today, Ken wished him well. Vernon's
a lovely bloke and I wish him all the better best. Ken Bruce's last show will be
on March 3rd. Vernon Kay will take over in May for what he says is a dream come
true. Coast guards have stood down their search for two people believed to have
been on board a tugboat when it capsized off Greenoke on the west coast of
Scotland. The alarm was raised just after half past three this afternoon. In the
city, the 100 share index ended the day down 29 points at 7,879. On Wall Street,
the Dow Jones closed down 337 points at 32,817. On the currency markets, the
pound is trading at $1.19.5 against the Euros. Sterling is at 1 Euro 13.1. Now
for a look at the morning papers. Several report that Rishi Sunak is on the
verge of announcing a new Brexit deal. The Guardian says the so-called Windsor
agreement would overhaul post-Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland.
The day Telegraph reports that a legal text could be presented to Parliament on
Monday. According to The Times, Downing Street is preparing to face down Tory
Eurosceptics in a clash that could define Mr. Sunak's premiership. The Financial
Times leads on more sanctions being announced against Russia and says there are
mounting concerns about the role of China in Moscow's war economy. A mother's
plea for her daughter's killer to be blocked from leaving prison is the main
story for the Daily Mail. The paper says the man is due for automatic release
after serving half of his jail term for manslaughter. The Daily Express credits
the Queen consort with forcing Roald Dahl's publisher to announce that his books
will be printed in their original form. The paper says Camilla was dismayed
about the removal of portions that could cause offence. The jersey worn by the
Welsh rugby legend Sir Gareth Edwards when he scored one of the sport's greatest
ever tries has sold at auction for world record £240,000. Sir Gareth wore the
black and white striped barbarian shirt in the 1973 match against New Zealand,
as our correspondent Thomas Morgan reports. It's now 50 years since Cardiff
Almers Park witnessed one of the most epic games of rugby ever, as the
barbarians, a group of makeshift internationals from around the world, came
together to defeat New Zealand's All Blacks by 23 points to 11. The star of the
show in 1973, playing at his home ground, was Wales' legendary Scrum half who
scored a wonder try, a try that has consistently been voted the greatest of all
time. For years the jersey he wore that day had been kept in a box under a
snooker table. At auction that same shirt was described as a priceless piece of
rugby memorabilia and was sold for a world record fee of £240,000, £60,000 more
than the previous record and the highest sum ever paid for sporting memorabilia
in the UK. The headlines again. Detectives in Northern Ireland have arrested a
fifth person in connection with the shooting of an off-duty police officer in
Omer. Junior doctors in England are to walk out for three days from March 13 in
their pay dispute. UK health officials have begun drawing up plans to cope with
a possible bird flu pandemic following the death of an 11-year-old girl in
Cambodia. And finally we return to our main story, the first anniversary of
Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Our international editor Jeremy Bowen has spent
much of the past year reporting from Ukraine. He considers the cost of the war
on the country and its people. Speak to Ukrainian soldiers and medics on the
front line and you will hear their horror at the number of comrades who have
been killed as well as civilians back home who have died in shelling and missile
attacks. The government here does not release precise casualty figures. Most
estimates have killed and wounded are in the tens of thousands. As for the
physical cost, all front line towns have been badly damaged. Some are in ruins.
Many towns away from the fighting are not damaged. Kiev is remarkably intact.
The railways have brought in presidents and prime ministers and knit Ukraine
together. Russia has targeted bridges, junctions and stations, but more than 90%
of trains arrive on time. The war's balance sheet does have a positive side.
Fighting Russia has united Ukraine as never before and transformed its armed
forces. But as the war goes into its second year, strains are likely to emerge.
Stan Zelensky has criticised Ukrainians of fighting age who have left the
country. The burden of fighting and dying falls almost entirely on men from
their late teens to their sixties, mostly volunteers. As casualty figures mount
in what is looking to be a long, attritional war, more individuals will be asked
what they did when Ukraine needed them, and the government might be forced to
tighten the rules on conscription. That's our international editor Jeremy Bowen.
BBC News And the news was read by Chris Saldridge. Now let's take a look at the
weather forecast. Here's Chris Forks. Hello, good morning. High pressure is
firmly in charge of our weather, not just through the weekend, but actually into
much of next week as well. But one thing that will change day by day is the
amount of cloud that we'll see from place to place. Right now we're seeing a lot
of cloud in the North Sea and the winds that are blowing that cloud longer are
north-northeasterly winds. So those winds are actually going to blow that cloud
sheet in across northern and eastern areas of Scotland and a good part of
eastern England overnight, with the cloud probably running right up to the
eastern slopes of the Pennines, probably into the east Midlands, parts of East
Anglia too. So as that cloud cover comes in, temperatures will actually push
above freezing, typically around 3 or 4 degrees Celsius by dawn, whereas across
the western side of the UK, for western England, Wales, Northern Ireland and
western Scotland, we're looking at a cold night with clear and starry skies.
Temperatures getting down well below freezing and probably lows down to about
minus 4 in the very coldest spots. So we get something of an east-west split
with the weather forecast for tomorrow. Across eastern and northern Scotland,
down the eastern side of England, I think there will be a lot of cloud around
and that cloud thick enough to give occasional light showers from time to time.
The other feature of the weather for these eastern areas is there will be quite
a strong, gusty north-easterly wind and it's that wind that will make it feel
chilly. Now temperatures on the face of it will actually be a little bit below
average, 5 to 7 degrees Celsius, I've not said that very often this mild winter,
but if we factor in the strength of those north-easterly winds, it really will
feel quite chilly, particularly towards some of those north-sea coasts, whereas
further westwards across western England, Wales, Northern Ireland and west
Scotland, that's where we'll have the best of the day's sunshine. It will stay
predominantly dry, the wind's a little bit lighter for these areas, but still a
little on the cool side, temperatures of around 7 degrees. But in the sunshine,
probably not too bad. We've got more of the same to come on Sunday really, with
that area of high pressure hanging around it means it's another largely dry day,
but probably quite cloudy at times again across central and eastern parts of the
UK, the best of the cloud breaks across the shelves. And that's the latest
weather. Thanks Chris. Now ready for Catherine Rundle's biography of the
infinity merchant John Dunn concludes. His illicit marriage has destroyed his
financial prospects and finally he turns to the priesthood. Blake Ritson reads,
Super Infinite. Dunn's marriage to Anne without the blessing of her father ended
all possible preferment at court. Losing his employment with Sir Thomas
Edgerton, they began married life in a small cottage near Woking in Surrey,
provided by a young cousin of Anne's. Money was tight. Dunn had no obvious
employment and though children quickly followed, several died in infancy. In
1612 he was befriended by Sir Robert Drury after writing a funeral elegy for his
daughter, and was installed in a house in Drury Lane. Dunn was now in the very
heart of London, no longer having to make the long journey on horseback to and
from his family, and it was alive with bite and noise and possibility. More
children came. Little Nicholas arrived in 1613. Money grew tighter. Dunn had to
give up his horse and beg or borrow one whenever he needed a mount. His friend
and biographer Walton paints Dunn in these days as caught between two desires.
He had been living for so long in expectation of estate employment that the hope
was ingrained, but in him other different desires were growing strong, appallate
him to work for God's glory in holy orders. Dunn was urgently aware always of
the fleeing time. From 1607 to 1615 he hesitated. His hairline began to recede,
and he knew himself to be stepping into middle age. A decision had to be made.
Slowly in both doubt and hope, Dunn's eyes turned towards the church. One
reading of Dunn's turn to the priesthood is that it was an expediency, a second
best. Many people looking over his life have believed that his heart and
ambition lay always with the court. The church was a compromise, a road to
public respectability and reliable money, and a way to finally scrub out the
stain of what Walton called the remarkable error of his marriage. And there must
have been some truth in that. He had always known himself to be rare, and he
wanted his talents to be recognised. But the idea that Dunn chose the church
only because his ambition had failed elsewhere elides one fact. Dunn had to
fight to get there. There was a tenacity in his desire to reach the church,
though it was not straightforward. It had grit in it. What changed and pushed
Dunn to navigate the last steps to the pulpit? In part, the deaths of two of his
children, Mary aged three in May 1614, and Francis aged seven in November, acted
as a knife and a spur all at once. They galvanised him into both misery and more
urgent action. On the 3rd December we find Dunn on his way to Newmarket to
discuss his purpose with the king in person. There he met with as good allowance
and encouragement as he could have longed for. He promptly began to prepare for
priesthood. In the bleak middle of winter, 23rd January 1615, Dunn went quietly
to St Paul's Cathedral to be ordained. He was forty-two. Very swiftly he was
appointed to be a chaplain in ordinary to the king. James was, in comparison to
Queen Elizabeth, an addict of the pulpit, and had doubled the number of sermons
the monarch heard preached every week. Renaissance sermons were long, often
upwards of an hour, some up to three, but they were heard hungrily. They had
breaking news in them, politics, entertainment, theatre. People gossiped about
them and picked over them in the week that followed. Dunn preached without a
text in front of him. He would write the sermon out in full, take notes, and
memorize it. For the first time, Dunn unleashed his charisma upon live, reactive
audiences who could eat in full and demand more. His fame spread fast. In the
summer of 1616, he was made priest in charge of seven oaks in Kent, a cynic year
worth perhaps eighty pounds. In a year of his ordination, he was offered
fourteen different clerical positions. At last, his prosperity was growing fast
enough to meet the needs of his family. But as his fortunes rose, tragedy rose
alongside. Anne died, and it was a baby that killed her. On the 10th of August
1617, she gave birth to a stillborn child. The labour, her twelfth, was too long
and too hard. She survived less than a week before mother and child were buried
in the same grave. They lie in the graveyard of St. Clement-Dane's amid the rush
of buses going down the strand towards the West End's theatres. Seven of her
children lived to mourn her, aged from fourteen-year-old Constance to little
Elizabeth just reaching her first birthday. It was for Don an irreversible end.
He would not take another lover. She was his last. He wrote in a poem, My Good
is Dead. If pain takes the precise shape of the love you have for the dead, then
his heart in those days must have been complicated and terrible. Finally, in
1621, the king sent for the forty-nine-year-old Don and asked him to arrive at
dinner time the next day. According to Walton, when his majesty sat down before
he had eaten any meat, he said after his pleasant manner, Dr. Don, I have
invited you to dinner, and though you sit not down with me, yet I will carve to
you of a dish that I know you love well, for knowing you love London, I do
therefore make you Dean of St. Paul's. The deanship was a heavy responsibility,
carrying with it the imperative to stir the hearts and mind the souls of the
whole of London, but it was also a fantastic piñata of a job, hit it, and perks
and favours and new connections came pouring out. The installation took place on
22 November 1621. Don was ushered into St. Paul's like a bride, presented to the
bishop and processed up into the cathedral and to the altar. A te-deum was sung
under the high echoing ceiling. Don prostrated himself upon the stone ground. He
kissed the altar and rose to stand in the church that was now his own.
Technically, Don was bound to preach only three times a year, Christmas, Easter
and Ascension Day. But he was a man who preached like others eat meat, hungrily.
To read the full text of a Don sermon is a little like mounting a horse, only to
discover that it is an elephant, large and unfamiliar. To modern ears, they are
winding, elongated, perembulating things, a pleasure that is also work. If you
are a scholar, they offer notes to an A to Z of Renaissance religious
flashpoints. Aquinas, bishops, kazuistry, divine right of kings, arastianism,
Gnostics, heresy, incarnation. But they can also be mined by those reading for
other, less erudite and more unpindownable reasons. You could turn to Don's
sermons for meditations on the Gospel as the bedrock of faith. It's John, the
man who trafficked in powerful metaphors, Christ as true light, Christ as the
word whom Don loves best. That, and wholly unsurprisingly, the Psalms. The whole
frame of the poem, he wrote of one, is akin to a beating out of a piece of gold.
You can also find him in the sermons at his most authoritarian. There are places
where he is harsh, where his audience would have expected joy. At the wedding of
Lucy Goodyear to the supremely handsome diplomat Francis Nithersoll, he
declared, marriage is but a continual fornication sealed with an oath. Sex, he
bemoaned, had overtaken all else in marriage. We rise poorer, ignoble, weaker
for every night's sin than we lay down. We sin and sin and sin. It's a long way
from the gleeful rakery of his youth. Anne was dead, he was older and in
physical pain, and his thinking about sex had taken on a flinty quality. What
Lucy and Francis thought of being sent in such funereal tones to their marriage
bed is not, alas, recorded. But Don is at his most remarkable when he speaks
about how very hard it is to seek God at all. More than anyone else, he
acknowledged the way that the human heart darts about like a rat. His body, he
found so readily present in desire for other humans, betrayed him when he sought
the same intensity in prayer. I throw myself down in my chamber and I call in
and invite God and his angels dither. And when they are there, I ignore God and
his angels for the noise of a fly, for the rattling of a coach, for the whining
of a door. I talk on. Sometimes I find that I forgot what I was about, but when
I began to forget it, I cannot tell. A memory of yesterday's pleasures, a fear
of tomorrow's dangers, a straw under my knee, a noise in my ear, a light in my
eye, and anything, and nothing, a fancy, a chimera in my brain, troubles me in
my prayer. It is his lifelong quest and lifelong disappointment that we cannot
be struck daily by lightning. This is the same Don who, in the holy sonnets,
seeks a force so great that it will sweep away doubt, exhaustion, distraction,
and leave something stripped back and certain. Enter my heart, three-persand
God, for you, as yet but knock, breathe, shine, and seek to mend, that I may
rise and stand, o'erthrow me and bend your force to break, blow, burn, and make
me new. It's not possible, of course. It doesn't happen for him. He remains
relentlessly embodied and therefore relentlessly distractible. And for all his
bitterness and furies, he was insistent on joy. When David danced and leaped and
shouted before the ark, if he laughed too, it misbecame him not. Not to show
that joy is an argument against thankfulness of the heart. That is a stupidity.
This is a contempt. The idea resonated through his life. He had written years
before to Henry Goodyear, Our nature is meteoric. We respect because we partake
so both earth and heaven, for as our bodies glorified shall be capable of
spiritual joy, so our souls demurged into those bodies are allowed to partake
earthly pleasure. We do wrong if we deliberately bury ourselves in dull monastic
sadness. Later he wrote, Heaven is expressed by singing, Hell by weeping. He
knew, as Dante did, that there is a special place in Hell for those who, when
they could laugh, chose instead to sigh. It's in his sermons as it was in all
his work. Don was able to hold two conflicting truths ever in front of him, a
kind of duck rabbit of the human condition. Humanity as he saw it, was rotten
with corruption and weakness and failure, and even so it was the great light of
the universe. He gloried in mankind. If the inner world of each human was
extended outwards, he wrote, man would be the giant and the world the dwarf. Few
people would turn to Don's poetry or prose with its twisting logic and
deliberate difficulty for solace, but you might turn to him to be reminded that,
for all its horror, the human animal is worth your attention, your awe, your
love. Blake Ritson was reading the final episode of Super Infinite by Catherine
Rundle. The abridger was Richard Hamilton and the producer was Allegra McElroy.
As we slip into the weekend, the last item on our weekday agenda is the shipping
forecast and that's coming up in just a minute. BBC Radio 4 now. The shipping
forecast is sued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and Coast Guard
Agency at 0015 on Saturday 25 February. There are warnings at Gales in Viking,
North at Sira, South at Sira, Forties, Dogger, Fisher, German Beit and Biscay.
The general synopsis at 1800. Low, Biscay 1003. Expected East Fitzroy 1007 by
1800 Saturday. High, 50 miles west of Rockall 1025. Expected West Fair Isle 1029
by same time. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours. Viking, North at Sira,
South at Sira, Forties. Northerly 5-7, occasionally Gail 8 at first. Decreasing
4 at times later. Wintery showers, moderate or good, occasionally poor at first.
Cromartie 4th, North 4-6 veering North East 325 later. Showers good. Tyne,
Dogger, Fisher, German Beit, Humber. North 5-7, occasionally Gail 8 at first.
Except in Tyne and Humber. Veering North East 4-6 later. Showers moderate or
good. Thames, Dover. North 4-6 veering North East 5-7 later. Showers good. White
Portland, North East 5-7. Showers good. Plymouth North Biscay. Easterly or
north-easterly 5-7. Occasionally Gail 8 in North Biscay. Showers good,
occasionally moderate. South Biscay, cyclonic, becoming north-easterly later.
4-6. Rain or showers, perhaps thundery at first. Good occasionally poor at
first. Trafalgar, West or North West 4-6, becoming cyclonic 3-5 later. Rain or
thundery showers, good occasionally poor. South Fitzroy, northerly 4-6, becoming
cyclonic 3-5. Rain or thundery showers, good occasionally poor. North Fitzroy,
sole. North-easterly veering easterly 5-6, occasionally 7 in East, decreasing 4
at times in West. Showers good, occasionally moderate. Dundee, fastnet Irish
Sea. North East veering East later 4-6. Showers good. Shannon, North East
veering East or South East 4-6. Showers good. Rockall, Malin, East or North East
veering South East later 3-5, mainly fair. Good. Hebrides, North or North East,
veering South East later 3-5. Showers and fair, good. Bailey, variable 2-4,
becoming South or South West 4-5 later. Showers, good. Fair Isle, North 4-6,
becoming variable 2-4 later. Thunder showers and fair, good, occasionally poor
at first. Fair Rose, northerly 5 at first in East and Southwesterly 5 later in
North, otherwise variable 2-4, mainly fair, good. And South East Iceland,
southwesterly 2-4, increasing 5-7, occasional rain, good, occasionally poor. On
now to the weather reports from coastal stations for 2300. Tyree, automatic,
North East by North 5, 19 miles, 1022, rising slowly. Stornoway, North 3, 7
miles, 1022, now falling. Loeck, North by West 4, 19 miles, 1018, rising slowly.
Wick, automatic, North 4, 11 miles, 1020, rising slowly. Aberdeen, North, North
West 4, 15 miles, 1019, rising slowly. Lucas, North by East 2, 30 miles, 1012,
rising slowly. Boomer, North by West 4, 1017, rising more slowly. Riddlington,
North 4, 1014, now falling. Sandeti light vessel, automatic, North 6, 11 miles,
1012. St Catherine's Point, automatic, East 1, 1014, rising. Jersey, North East
by East 3, 5 miles, 1012, rising slowly. Channel light vessel, automatic, North
East 4, 1013. Silly, automatic, North East by North 5, rain, 9 miles, 1014,
rising slowly. Milford Haven, North East 4, 32 miles, 1016, rising slowly.
Aberporth, East by North 3, more than 38 miles, 1017, rising. Valley, North East
3, 16 miles, 1018, rising. Liverpool Crosby, North East by North 3, 7 miles,
1018, rising. Valencia, North East 3, 16 miles, 1019, steady. Ronaldsway, North
by West 2, 1019, rising. Malinhead, North East by North 5, 7 miles, 1012, rising
slowly. And Macrahanish, automatic, East, South East 1, 19 miles, 1,020, rising
slowly. On to the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, valid for the following 24 hours, issued by the Met Office at
2300 on Friday 24th February. The general situation, high pressure currently
centred to the west of Scotland, will drift slowly eastwards towards Scotland
during the next couple of days. On Saturday the resulting north to north-
easterly airflow will bring further showers to eastern and southern areas of the
United Kingdom, whereas most western and northern parts will be dry. Paper off
to Rattery Head, including Orkney. Northernly, or north-easterly, 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 at first in East, and 3 in West, becoming variable 2 later.
Showers becoming fair later. Good. Rattery Head to Berwick-upon Tweed,
Northernly 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first in North and in far South, decreasing
3 at times in Firth of Forth. Showers good. Berwick-upon Tweed to Whitby, North
5 or 6, veering North-east 4 or 5. Showers good. Whitby to Gibraltar Point,
North 5 or 6, veering North-east 4 or 5 later. Showers good. Gibraltar Point to
North-foreland, northerly 4 to 6, veering north-easterly 4 or 5 later. Showers
good. North-fallen to Selsea Bill, northerly veering north-easterly 4 or 5,
occasionally 6 in East. Showers mainly in East. Good. Selsea Bill to Lime Regis,
North-east 4 or 5, occasionally 6, except close and shore. Mainly fair, good.
Lime Regis to Lands End, including the Isles of Scilly. North-easterly 4 to 6,
occasionally 7 in West later. Showers mainly in West. Good. Lands End to St
David's Head, including the Bristol Channel. East or North-east 4 to 6, mainly
fair. Good. St David's Head to Great Ormhead, including St George's Channel.
North-east 4 or 5, occasionally 6 at first, decreasing 3 at times later. Fair,
good. Great Ormhead to the Mall of Galloway, North-east 4 or 5, occasionally 3
later. Fair, good. Isle of Man, North-east 4 or 5, occasionally 3 later. Fair,
good. Lock foil to Carlingford Lock. North or North-east 3 or 4, veering East or
North-east 3 to 5. Fair, good. Mall of Galloway to Mall of Kintyre, including
the Firth of Clyde and North Channel. Easterly or North-easterly 3 or 4,
occasionally 5 at first in South, becoming variable 2 at times in Far North.
Fair, good. Mall of Kintyre to Ardnemuckham Point. North-easterly 3 to 5 at
first, in North. Is variable, mainly easterly 2 to 4, veering South-easterly
later. Mainly fair, good. Ardnemuckham Point to Cape Roth, North-east 3 to 5,
veering East or South-east 2 to 4 later. Showers, then fair, good. And finally,
Shattle and Dials, North 5 or 6, decreasing 3 or 4. Entry Showers, then fair,
good. Occasionally poor at first. And that completes the shipping bulletin. The
next here on Radio 4 will be at 5.20 in the morning when we return. And that's
because of course we're about to hand over to our colleagues at the BBC World
Service. They'll be here in just a minute at 1 o'clock, taking us right through
the night until we're back. And don't forget a range of listing options for you
across the BBC networks, including our sister station, Forextra, with comedy,
drama and documentaries. Now though, on behalf of everybody here at Broadcasting
House, this is Andrew Crawford wishing you, wherever you are, whatever you're
doing, a very good night. Good night. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds.