TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-01H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at midnight. This is Mark Forrest. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it
everything to secure a new deal with the EU over Brexit trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland. We'll report on the latest negotiations and the crucial role
the Democratic Unionist party will play in any agreement. Students are being
counted in Nigeria, where three candidates are vying to be the next president.
Managers working in social housing in England will need to get professional
qualifications under government plans to raise standards in the sector. In
sport, England have triumphed in their Six Nations clash with Wales in Cardiff
and will have the latest from the second test in Wellington. The Prime Minister
has said that he is giving it everything to get a new agreement with the
European Union on post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. In an
interview in the Sunday Times, Rishi Sunak said there was unfinished business on
Brexit and he wanted to get the job done. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadka,
said the talks were inching towards a conclusion and there was a possibility of
a deal in the next few days, but it was by no means guaranteed. The current
agreement means Northern Ireland still follows some EU laws and goods arriving
from Great Britain are subject to checks. Our political correspondent, Ian
Watson reports. A deal is tantalisingly close, but it's not there yet. The Prime
Minister has said that promising progress has been made, but work is still to be
done and he's taken to the pages of usually conservative supporting newspapers
to reassure critics in his own ranks that any deal won't be a sellout. In the
Sunday Times he declares that he's a conservative, a Bregge-de-tier and a
unionist and that any deal he does will tick all those boxes. Much of the heavy
lifting with the EU appears to have been done already. It's widely expected that
checks on goods travelling from Great Britain to Northern Ireland would be
reduced or eliminated. The Irish Prime Minister, Leo Varadka, was optimistic
that an agreement was moving closer. We're not quite there yet, but there is
ongoing engagement involving the UK government, involving the European
Commission and of course the Irish government has plugged into that. I think
it's fair to say we are inching towards a conclusion and there is the
possibility of agreement in the next few days, but by no means guaranteed. But
getting a revised deal with the EU on trade won't in itself convince Northern
Ireland's DUP to return to a power-sharing government at Stormont. A former
Conservative cabinet minister told me that if the DUP were to give their thumbs
down to any deal, then all the political capital and the issues soon like had
invested in reaching an agreement with Brussels would have been futile. As we've
been hearing, the reaction of the Democratic Unionist party to any deal between
the government and the European Union will be key. Our Northern Ireland
political editor Ender McClafferty has this assessment of the choices facing the
party. The moment of truth is fast approaching for the DUP, but don't expect a
quick response once the deal is published. The party will want to study the
legal text to see if it meets their seven demands. Though open to interpretation
in parts, these demands deal with removing trade barriers across the Irish Sea
and restoring Northern Ireland's sovereign place in the UK. Fixing what they see
as the democratic deficit will also be key. Expect to see a beefed up role for
the Assembly when it comes to deciding what EU legislation will apply in
Northern Ireland. But will it simply amount to more of a say in the decision
making process stopping short of a veto, which the EU insists it will not allow?
That will be key and may require some constructive ambiguity to allow both sides
to sell the deal. Crucially, the new legal text which will overlay the previous
legislation will allow the DUP to claim the protocol has been replaced. Though
the EU will argue the protocol remains intact with its original legal text
unchanged. The party will also consult those businesses struggling under the
burden of the protocol. If it works for businesses on the front line, then it
adds more pressure on the DUP to say yes. Rallies have taken place in County
Tyrone in support of a police officer who is critically ill in hospital after
being shot earlier this week. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell was
attacked on Wednesday night at a sports centre in Omer when he was off duty.
Tonight, police have arrested a sixth man in connection with the shooting. The
71-year-old was detained under the Terrorism Act. Julian Fowler has spent the
day in Omer. John Caldwell was coaching an under-15 football team when he was
shot and critically injured. Around 1,000 people gathered at his club, Bearer
Swifts, to march in a show of solidarity for him and his family. They were led
by young people from the club, some of whom witnessed the attack and were joined
by members of sporting organisations from across the community, including the
local Gaelic football club. So when there's an attempt, like on Wednesday
night... A rally was also held in the centre of Omer, a town that is all too
familiar with the violence of the Troubles, 25 years after 29 people and unborn
twins died in a dissident Republican car bomb. This was a demonstration of unity
by ordinary people against the new IRA, who police believe carried out the
shooting. A demonstration that those who oppose the Good Friday Peace Agreement
have little public support and that the overwhelming majority do not want to see
a return to the violence of the past. Votes are being counted in Nigeria, where
three front-runners are thought to be in a tight race to become the country's
next president. Almost 90 million people were eligible to vote, but some polling
stations opened late, many saw large queues and there were isolated incidents of
violence. Our West Africa correspondent, Mayeni Jones, sent this report from
Lagos. In a polling station here, voters are frustrated. No electoral officials
have shown up and they can't cast their ballots. It's not clear whether this was
due to poll management or a deliberate attempt to suppress the vote. The level
of engagement in this election has been unusually high, particularly from young
people. They're desperate to choose a government that will address the country's
ailing economy and rising insecurity. 25-year-old Amara says no officials from
the Independent National Electoral Commission, or INEC, showed up at her polling
station. I've stayed here since past 10 and this is past 3 and they're not here,
we've not had anything. We've tried to call them. I have a Twitter account, I've
been trying to tag the INEC officials. So, and this is past 2, the election ends
by 2pm, 2.30. So, a lot of people left and it was the right thing to do, to just
leave because there was nobody responding to us. So, I think this is wrong.
Nigeria is Africa's most populous country and is projected to have the third
largest population in the world by 2050. Whoever runs the country for the next
four years will determine whether its young people will thrive within its
borders. Already, thousands of educated Nigerians have left the country. The
number of Nigerians granted working visas in the UK has tripled since 2019. It's
a brain dream the country can't afford. Finance ministers from the major G20
countries who have been holding talks in India have failed to agree a closing
statement because of differences over the war in Ukraine. The host, India, said
Russia and China had objected to parts of the document condemning Russian
aggression. Our political correspondent Leila Nathu has sent this report from
Bangalore. India has been determined to use its presidency of the G20 to
champion the needs of developing nations. In his opening address to finance
ministers and central bank governors who'd gathered here in Bangalore, Prime
Minister Modi urged delegates to focus on the most vulnerable citizens of the
world. India wanted to discuss debt burdens, food security and sustainable
growth. But the conversation became dominated by divisions over the war in
Ukraine. India has remained neutral on the conflict, but the UK and US came to
the meeting to reaffirm their support for Ukraine, to strongly condemn Russia
and to push for economic sanctions. But Russian and Chinese delegations objected
to any reference to the war being included in a final statement. India said the
two countries believed it wasn't for finance ministers and central bank
governors to get into political issues. So no jointly agreed document was
published. Instead, India issued its own summary of the event, saying most
members strongly condemned the war and demanded Russia's withdrawal from
Ukraine. Turkish officials say they're now investigating more than 600 people in
connection with buildings that collapsed during major earthquakes earlier this
month. Tens of thousands of people died in Turkey and neighbouring Syria.
Orlanda Teil reports. Turkey's Justice Minister, Beqia Bostar, outlined the
scale of the investigations during a visit to an earthquake coordination centre
in the southeast of the country. He said that of 612 suspects under judicial
investigation, 184 were already in jail, including construction contractors and
building owners. More than 50,000 people are known to have died in the quakes in
southern Turkey and northern Syria, and experts believe poor construction
standards played a significant role. Opposition parties have accused President
Recep Tayyip Erdogan's government of failing to enforce building regulations.
The former Labour MP, Luciano Berger, has accepted an invitation from Sakhir
Stama to rejoin the party, after she left four years ago due to concerns about
anti-Semitism. At the time she accused the Labour leadership of attempting to
brush complaints under the carpet. Ms Berger stood for the Lib Dems in the 2019
election but did not win a seat. Sakhir Stama said he was delighted she'd return
to the party. Thousands of people working as managers for social housing
organisations in England will need professional qualifications as part of
government plans to drive up standards in the sector. The rules are being
introduced following the case of two-year-old Awab Ishak, who died of a
respiratory condition caused by exposure to mould at his family home in Rochdale
in 2020. Our Business Correspondent, Esseil's Car, reports. Social housing
managers who inspect properties and oversee repair and maintenance programmes
will have to gain certain minimum qualifications under new legislation. It's
part of efforts to address the significant concerns raised by the Grenfell Tower
fire and the death of Awab Ishak. Officials say these requirements will bring
professional standards in the sector more in line with other front-line jobs,
such as social work, health care and teaching. Under the plans, around 25,000
people working in social housing will need to gain certification equivalent to a
foundation degree. Any landlords that don't comply could face being fined by the
regulator. These changes are in addition to plans already announced for Awab's
law, which will mean social landlords have to address mould and damp problems
within strict time limits. Police searching for the crew of a tugboat that
overturned off Greenakin in Vaklide yesterday have recovered two bodies. They
are understood to have been the only people on board when it capsized. The
search operation had involved divers, Coast Guard units and the R&LI. Sport now
and England's cricketers have been in action on the third day of the second test
against New Zealand. With more on that and the rest of the headlines, here's
Mike McCarthy. England remain in charge of the second test in New Zealand.
England bowling the hosts out for 209 on day three. They're asking New Zealand
to follow on. It is the first time New Zealand have been asked to follow on at
home since 2010. England bowlers wrapping up the New Zealand first innings well
before lunch. That is where play is a few moments ago. New Zealand 40 without
loss. Victory for England over Wales, keeping their six nations title hopes
alive today as well. But the misery for Wales goes on. England's 2010 winning
Cardiff means Wales have lost all three matches. It's their worst start to the
tournament since 2007. Head coach Warren Gatlin was proud of his players efforts
but says they need to improve. We turned the back over and the ball back over on
too many occasions and we dropped a couple of high balls and that was pretty
frustrating. A couple of penalties as well. Yeah, it's still for us. There's
work to do but I thought there was some improvements in some areas. Warren
Gatlin. Meanwhile Ireland fought off a spirited Italy to seal a 34-20 bonus
point win in Rome the Grand Slam for Ireland remains on. There's no change in
the Premier League title race after the top two both won. Manchester City
hammered Bournemouth for one. That was after Arsenal secured a 1-0 win at
Leicester. Arsenal remaining two points clear. New league Gini Mike McCarthy.
And now for our first look at the Sunday papers. I'm the PM who will get Brexit
done is the Sunday Times headline. It reports that Mr Sunak is prepared to take
on Eurosceptics in his party and unveil a new deal with the European Union on
post-Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland with or without the explicit
endorsement of the Democratic Unionist party. In what it describes as a snub the
Sunday Telegraph says Mr Sunak is poised to scrap Boris Johnson's Northern
Ireland protocol bill but that he's facing a growing rebellion. The paper says
the Northern Ireland minister and prominent Brexiteer Steve Baker is on
resignation watch after being frozen out of negotiations. The Mail on Sunday
says Rishi Sunak has been accused by some senior Tories of entangling the king
in what it calls toxic Brexit politics by sending him on a forthcoming tour his
first as monarch to as the paper puts it schmooze EU nations. Finally the Sunday
Telegraph reports that Ian Fleming's James Bond novels have been rewritten to
remove a number of references to race. It says ahead of their reissuing this
spring the books have been subjected to a review by sensitivity readers.
Conservationists in West Africa say their efforts to try to save the world's
biggest frog are finally paying off. The Goliath frog which can grow up to 32
centimetres in length has returned to the Mount Blonaku reserve in its native
Cameroon. Our sounds correspondent Helen Briggs reports. The Goliath frog lives
up to its name growing to the size of a large cat. It can jump up to 10 feet for
the world's biggest living frog which is found only in Cameroon a neighbouring
equatorial Guinea is threatened with extinction and is classed as endangered.
The amphibian has been pursued by hunters for its meat and for the pet trade.
Its habitat in the rainforest is being fast destroyed. But five years ago
conservationists in Cameroon set out to save the species by encouraging local
people to stop hunting the frog and report sightings of it instead. They
suggested snail farming as an alternative food source. Their scheme appears to
be working and new nesting sites have been discovered in rivers and streams. The
headlines again. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it everything to secure a new
deal with the EU over Brexit trading arrangements for Northern Ireland. The
Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar said the talks were inching towards a
conclusion but a deal was by no means guaranteed. A sixth man has been arrested
by police investigating the attempted murder of a senior police officer in Oma.
Votes are being counted in Nigeria where three candidates are vying to be the
next president. Managers working in social housing in England will need to get
professional qualifications under government plans to raise standards in the
sector. England are triumphed in their Six Nations Rugby Union clash with Wales
in Cardiff. BBC News Read by Mark Forrest Now with details of the weather here's
Chris Fox Hello, good morning. High pressure will continue to dominate the
weather picture not just for the second half of the weekend but for most of next
week as well. So certainly in the midst of a quiet spell of weather with not
much rain around at all. Now at the moment we've still got a feed of north-
easterly winds blowing cloud into eastern Scotland across northern England, the
north-middlelands north Wales and Northern Ireland too. These areas will largely
avoid a frost with temperatures holding just a few degrees above freezing and
the north-easterly winds will continue to bring a scattering of showers in to
areas near to the North Sea coast. Those showers will be quite light and
fleeting. Clear skies elsewhere though, notably across parts of southern
England, south Wales and especially western Scotland will allow a widespread
frost for these areas. Lowest temperatures getting down to about minus five in
western areas of Scotland. Looking at the weather into Sunday it's a day where
it's going to be largely dry but the amount of cloud you see from place to place
is going to vary quite a bit. I think we're going to continue to see cloud
feeding into the east coast of Scotland throughout much of northern England,
probably the north-middlelands and north Wales for much of the day and I
couldn't rule out a few passing light showers especially towards north-sea
coast. However, I think across parts of east Anglia, southern England and
probably the south-middlelands southern Wales area we should see much more in
the way of sunshine compared with yesterday and I suspect northern Ireland will
have sunny spells coming and going. Should be fairly sunny as well for western
areas of Scotland too. Now whether it stays cloudy where you are or whether you
get the sunshine it won't have much of an impact on the temperatures. Typically
we're looking at highs of around seven to nine degrees Celsius. The winds not
quite as strong as they were on Saturday so probably not feeling quite as chilly
if you're out and about. Now looking at the weather picture into next week, well
the high pressure is going to stay with us through Monday, probably a little bit
more cloud around, similar kind of temperatures and again the winds not
particularly strong so around seven, eight, nine degrees Celsius for a high.
Tuesday sees some subtle changes, most of the UK again having dry weather but
there's probably some slightly thicker cloud working into the southern half of
England and Wales and that could bring a few passing patches of light rain but
essentially for most of the week there will be a lot of dry weather. That's the
latest forecast. Chris thanks very much. Now on Radio 4 considering the
consequences of high levels of unemployment is Tim Harford. Welcome to
Understand the Economy, the podcast that takes you back to basics to explain how
economics affects our everyday lives. And today we're talking about jobs. You
either want one or you have one or you've already had one and you've thought
that quite enough of that thank you very much I'm going to retire now but that
all raises a question. If you have a job, you're employed, that's easy enough.
So if you don't have a job, are you unemployed? Is a student unemployed? What
about a retired person? This sounds like a job for the director of economic
statistics production and analysis at the Office for National Statistics.
Unfortunately he agreed to explain it all to us. Here he is, Darren Morgan. So
unemployment covers all those who aren't in paid work but who are available for
work and are actively looking for it. Employment means basically you are in paid
work and that's where the full time or part time. What about those who aren't in
work and also aren't looking for it? There's something called economic
inactivity which basically says those not working but they are not actively
looking for it either. Inactivity has been falling over a long period of time
with the main reason more and more women have been joining work. At the start of
the pandemic, that trend inactivity quickly changed though and rose sharply.
That made sense, didn't it? As if you lost your job, there was little point in
looking for a new one when the economy was closed. However, it has continued to
rise even though the economy has reopened and a key feature has been in those
over 50 who have left the labour market either due to retirement or ill health.
Darren Morgan of the Office for National Statistics. I'm delighted to be joined
again by Richard Davis, Professor of Economics at Bristol University, Director
of the UK's Economics Observatory and the author of Extreme Economies. Hello
Richard. Hello. I wanted to pick up on something else that Darren Morgan told us
which is the economic inactivity started to rise and has continued to rise since
the pandemic. These are people who not only don't have jobs, they're not looking
for jobs. They're out of the labour force completely. So there might be
students, might be retired people, full time parents. There are all kinds of
reasons why. But it is very puzzling that there are so many economically
inactive people now. Do we understand that puzzle? There are lots of parts to it
and if we look at what happened during the pandemic, I think it gives us some
big clues. So two important ones. Darren set out the different categories of
economic inactivity are people that have decided to retire early or to not go
back to work. This is people over 55, let's say, and we've seen rising
inactivity there. And that may be because people have reevaluated what's
important in their lives. The country's been through this incredible shock. Many
people have lost relatives, been through stress and so on, and they've
downplayed the amount they're going to work. The perhaps even more concerning
side of it is that people do end up long term inactive when they are not seeking
work because they're sick because of long term disability or because of long
term mental health difficulties. And both of those things are obviously going to
rise after a pandemic. Richard, as we speak in late 2022, there's a bit of a
puzzle going on in the UK economy. Unemployment is incredibly low and yet
everybody seems to agree that things aren't actually going very well. So real
wages are in decline. The government can't seem to collect enough tax revenue to
fund basic public services. And so how can things be going badly when so many
people who are looking for work have found it? The answer lies in productivity.
So you're right, unemployment is really low. It's 3.5%. And on top of this, we
have a vacancy rate, which is really high. So when unemployment is low, that
means there aren't as many other people out there looking for jobs that could
replace me if I threatened to quit. And so that gives me bargaining power with
my employer. So if you're in a job, you're able actually, because your
bargaining power is pretty high, you're able to kind of bid up your wage and to
ask for a pay rise. So what's happening is we do see people getting pay rises
and actually quite strong pay rises. The problem is that prices are going up
much faster. Inflation is running at around 10%. And so the inflation adjusted
value of people's wages is going down. And so this is the kind of big picture
reason why the economy is kind of in ill health. Why can't people get even
higher wage rises? Well, that's because wage rises are justified, not just
because of your bargaining power, but it's also justified by a more fundamental
reason, which is, are you becoming more productive over time is your output in
any given period going up? And that's what hasn't been happening in the UK. So I
mean, to put it in simple terms, if I can only produce £20,000 worth of value
for my employer, my employer would be an idiot to pay me £21,000. I can have all
the bargaining power I like, I can demand £21,000, but the employer would rather
not employ me at all than pay me more than I'm producing, which is what ties it
back to productivity. Yes, that's right. And that's the sort of fundamental
reason that any business from a small business to a massive conglomerate has a
justification to give its workforce more pay and can do so without harming its
bottom line. In the situation you outline in which you're not becoming more
productive over time, but you're asking for ever higher pay rates, well, then
something has to give maybe the company has less profit, or it has to cut back
on investment, but it's not sustainable in the long run. So the UK has its fair
share of economic problems, even though unemployment is near record low levels.
But if you really want to see an economic catastrophe, look at a time of high
unemployment. Here's Dr Victoria Bateman of the University of Cambridge with the
story of a time when unemployment reached appalling levels. On the 5th of
October 1936, 200 men from Jarrow, together with their local MP, Ellen
Wilkinson, set out on a hunger march. Their plan was to walk by foot all the way
from Jarrow in the northeast of England down to London with a petition. These
men were angry. Unemployment in Jarrow had reached as high as 70%. The northeast
was reeling following the big recession in the early 1920s and then the Great
Depression on top of it in the late 1920s and through into the 1930s. By 1934,
the local shipyard, Palmer's Shipyard, and the local iron company had closed
down, creating serious job loss. And families were literally starving. Families
were hungry. They wanted to draw politicians' attention to the fact that there
was such a lack of work in the area that people were being pushed into poverty.
And so they took to the roads and they spent the best part of a month walking
town by town all the way to London to present their petition to Parliament. So
initially the marchers felt ignored. They felt neglected. They felt that their
demands and their month-long walk all the way to London was being ignored. But
actually this Jarrow march has gone down in history and helped to draw attention
to the plight of the north of England, which was suffering really heavy job loss
at the time. In the 1930s, in the north of England, unemployment was about 29%.
In Scotland it was about 28%. Whereas in London, further south, it was about
14%. And so that north-south divide that lives on today can be traced all the
way back to the 1920s and 1930s. Hello Victoria Bateman. Richard Davis, we've
discussed our problem in the UK now. It's not very high unemployment. It's very
low productivity. So that means that individual workers are just not producing
much of value per hour. So why is productivity in the UK low? Which just to
remind everybody is the explanation for why wages aren't going up. It's the
explanation for why we can't all seem to make ends meet even though there are
lots of jobs around. We do face this kind of unique British productivity puzzle.
I think there are a few things going on. In the early years following the
financial crisis, let's say up to the period, maybe 2015, one of the key
culprits was the banking sector. We had this problem of the credit supply to
companies. And that's one reason people thought that productivity was down. So
everything from small businesses to medium-sized companies were unable to access
credit. And the UK's investment levels during that period are not particularly
high. So low investment means fewer newer computers, fewer newer machines in
factories, and that's going to prevent your economy from growing. Right. So
that's the story up to 2015, though the banking sector particularly hard hit,
very concentrated, very big banks, and they're not loaning money to businesses
who could then invest that money in growing their businesses and buying new
equipment. So come to any point in 2016, everything should be fine, right? Yeah,
the puzzle is why has it continued? Does the fact that the UK is very reliant on
services make a difference? I mean, just to explain myself, when I think of the
typical British economy job, I'm thinking insurance, I'm thinking legal, I'm
thinking advertising, the creative industries, computer games, film, there are
so many things that the UK economy does well that are services. And then I think
about say South Korea, or I think about Japan, or Taiwan, or Germany. And I'm
thinking making cars, making computer chips, making the computers, making the
phones, also very high value activities, but a different kind of thing,
manufacturing, physical stuff, rather than providing services. Does that shed
any light on this productivity question? I think it does. I think it's important
to realize that there's going to be a spectrum of industries in which it's, in
some sense, almost natural than in some you don't get productivity rises. So the
economist that gave this idea to us was called William Beaumol. And the example
he used was of a string quintet. So five people playing violins and playing
Mozart's music to a known length of piece. There is literally no way that you
can make that more productive. You need the five people, you need the five
instruments, and you know how long the piece is. And so he set out this idea as
a reminder to economists that some things in the economy are going to find it
really hard to improve in productivity. And the issue is that lots of the things
that the UK does now, but also we think are going to become more important, are
sort of down towards the end of that scale. So think of the care sector, for
example, if somebody needs a carer, they need an actual human being certain
number of hours to be that carer. Well, that's highly tailored individual care,
it needs to be one to one, it's very close to the Mozart quintet example, you
can't suddenly ask that carer to be looking after two people at the same time,
and expect the same quality of care. So this is why something like the care
system is going to be very difficult to increase productivity without
diminishing on quality. And very different at the other end of the scale to your
example, let's say Samsung in South Korea producing flat screen TVs. And it's
the only thing that we can do to improve productivity. So in an economy like the
UK, as we've discussed, the principal input actually is people. It's people
showing up for work and doing their jobs. And so the simple answer to your
question is we need to do everything we can in the economy to get people doing
their jobs as well as they can. And that means investing in them. So it's
everything from training for people, it's the machines they use in terms of
computers, those in the service sector, where we do still have manufacturing,
and the UK still does have some very high end technical manufacturing companies,
we need to get them investing in bigger, faster, better machines. So it's doing
everything you can to get people as they're going to work to be as productive as
they can be. Richard Davis, thank you very much. So you might think everyone
having a job is a good thing and I suppose it is, but it turns out that even
though lots of people have jobs, our wages still won't rise unless we make twice
as many things or just speed up that Mozart string quintet. And the economy was
presented by Tim Harford and produced by Phoebe Keene. Now on Radio Four, a
short story set in the workplace. The young manager of a bowling alley struggles
to relate to his older female employee in tonight's new short work as read by
Keelian McCarthy. Menopause by Karen Quinn. My philosophy is always to be kind
to everyone and be a good listener and if you feel like someone is ready to dig
your grave, make sure to say nothing at all that gives them access to a shovel.
And while I always keep this in mind with most things in life, for some reason,
while I really am a good guy, I am hated by a good-hearted menopausal woman. I
think it's best for me to start from the beginning. My name's Joe Jr, son of Joe
Sr and the proud owner, technically the CEO, of Joe's Big Balls, our wee local
bowling alley. Two generations of Joe's have managed this business and I hope
another wee Joe will come along to keep the tradition going someday. Yes, my
little JJJ, Joe Jr Jr. I'm not thinking about pro creating right now though. I'm
in my mid-twenties, a Gen Z and I don't need that kind of content on my
Instagram right now. And let's face it, managing a bowling alley is not easy,
especially when you have a diverse set of employees. A couple of noteworthy
workers were hired during my father's reign. They're my second generation
boomers, people that are, as I like to call, emerging pensioners. Yes, this
particular group can be a handful. They've no sense of how to make Joe's Big
Balls even bigger. They don't understand what a hashtag is and they think TikTok
is me rudely telling them to hurry up when they ask about marketing strategies.
And if I'm being completely honest, I know they're ready, but not quite ready to
leave work. You know what I mean? They're driving solidly in the slow lane,
spending extra time in the tea room discussing legal gardening equipment, the
local football clubs and tidy towns. And then, of course, there's Madge Doyle.
And she's a whole new dimension of stress. She's not slowing down. Despite being
on the early stages of emerging pensiondom, no, in fact, she's quite high key.
Always on the go. Anxious and spending a lot of time in my office discussing her
hot flushes and puddle-like brain. You see, Madge is going through the menopause
and, fam, I cannot relate. It all started when she read a magazine called
Holistic Woman. Apparently she came across an article called Loud and Proud
where the writer was encouraging menopausal women to speak out about this
transitionary period of their lives and in particular let their bewildered
bosses know about it. Loudly and proudly. Honestly, it's sort of like menopause
positivity on heat. It's the hot topic on everyone's lips. And because Joe's Big
Balls is mostly led by a powerful bunch of fantastic and, at times, scary women,
I'm starting to feel a little outnumbered. And let me tell you, Madge has been
well and truly spilling the tea, telling everyone about her experiences. Now,
don't get me wrong, I'm all for my staff being extra. The quirkier, the more
memorable, the more follows we get on the socials. However, this is a magnitude
of extra I find hard to handle. Mainly because there's absolutely nothing I can
do that is not offensive to my team. For example, one day I said to her, you
have a glow about you today, Madge. Now, seriously, all I meant by that was, you
look happy, Madge. You know, because she was smiling. But no, that's not how she
took it. Cue a moment of stunned silence. Madge walking off into the tea room
because, you know, apparently nobody works anymore. And then she wailed. And I'm
not being dramatic. I mean Madge proper. Wailed. Like she was attending the
sudden tragic funeral of a loved one and she was wanting to scare the ghost of
the departed away from this life and on to the next. It was that level of
wailing. So, naturally, I went to see if she was okay. However, I was soon met
by a human shield of angry women. Give her the space she deserves. They say,
allow her to redirect her negative energies. And here I am, ready to open
another two lanes for a party of ten tipsy teenagers with absolutely nobody
apart from 70 year old Louis Parnell with a bad hip willing to work for me. But
I couldn't say anything, could I? Because Madge is an emergent pensioner with a
lot of failings. Failings I can never understand. But, damn it, I like Madge.
And I know my dad would chew my ear off if he thought I was disrespecting our
big balls legend. So, that's when I started to do some research. And,
apparently, men back in the day were a bunch of shit. When I started reading
about Classical Medicine's view of the menopause, I honestly wasn't sure if it
had been written by a person with a brain or if it was some sort of dystopian
fiction novel where women were told to jump off a cliff once they reached 50.
So, I guess instead of an emergent pensioner in previous generations eyes,
menopausal women were emergent corpses. However, I am not one of them. I am
woke. I know stuff. Well, basic stuff. Reading about what happens to a woman
during the menopause made me a bit sick. But I'm mostly woke and I want to make
a difference. I want to be a proper manager. A good one. Even that the women who
keep our alley number 36 in the 37 best places to visit in Northern Ireland list
respect. I want to be the best male managerial feminist out there. I want to be
an advocate for women who have naturally malfunctioning organs and let them know
that I know that's okay. That's the kind of manager I want to be. And it all
starts with making Madge's life a little bit better. So, naturally, I thought a
good old fashioned hip workout would do the trick. I read that menopausal women
feel happier after a bout of exercise. So, I thought I needed to raise the roof
a bit. Now, of course, I was thinking about our looey and his bad hip too. So, I
bought a bunch of those inflatable space hoppers and got everyone to bounce
around the alley for about 15 minutes. Initially, I thought this was a good idea
until Madge said that she felt hot and I responded with a very enthusiastic yeah
you do queen. This didn't go down well. Because apparently those flushes do not
make women feel attractive in any way. Then after that, Louie fell over and had
to spend a night in hospital. He's grand now, but that was a bad day. After
that, I bought a bunch of electric fans and placed them all around the alley.
However, the strength of the fans started to blow over some of the pins leading
to a local hashtag trending called hashtag big balls tornado that showed endless
footage of the pins blowing over to the chorus of MJ's earth song. And if that
wasn't bad enough, Madge then made a complaint herself. She said that the noise
of the fans were making her headaches worse. Headaches that I never even knew
were a thing. And this led to a bunch of her colleagues telling me that I was
not considering her a list stick well being. I felt like saying nobody was
considering my well being either. After all, there was no managing menopause for
manager's manual ever handed over when my dad retired. After that, I turned my
attention to the uniform. As a team we needed to glow up. We've been using
synthetic fibres for decades and now I know that those fibres wreak havoc on the
well flushed menopausal woman. So I opted for a quality green soft cotton and
presented the team with their new kit. Initially, it worked a treat. Everyone
was commenting on the soft fabric and even Madge seemed a bit lighter on her
feet. The next day proved to be a different story though. The new cotton did not
wash well. With everyone showing more of themselves than they probably would
have liked. As I was checking the vibes with the rest of the team I overheard
Madge saying that she looked like a granny smith apple. I was devastated. Weeks
of trying to make Madge happy only resulted in me making her feel like a piece
of fruit. I went to my office. I needed to decompress, have a herbal tea, use
headspace and quote some affirmations in the mirror before I faced the big balls
world again. I was feeling utterly miserable. Might I never struggled with
managing people, but so far I had hospitalised one staff member, bravely
insulting another and sent the rest after me with metaphorical pitchforks.
Honestly, I didn't want to return to work. I knew as soon as I left my office I
was a dead man walking. I could already see the crossed arms, the bitter glares
and the biscuit tin snapping shut in the tea room. To them, I was the enemy. I
was not woke. I was no ally to the woman of my team. To them, I was the male
chauvinist melter. Then there was a knock at the door. At this point I was ready
to hide in a cupboard. I mean without even answering. I knew who it was. Of
course it's Madge. She's been a frequent visitor ever since she read that call
to action article. She was getting ready to come in here, take a seat, have a
complimentary tea caramel and list off all the things I had done wrong. And
let's face it, it was going to be a damning catalogue of prat-worthy
condemnations. I took a deep breath and opened the door. Lo and behold, there
she was, green and apple-like. Our Madge, ready for the next round of scoldens.
I invite her in and she takes a seat. We stared at each other for a while. Her,
chewing her caramel. Me, chewing my tongue. Try to think up an excuse to explain
my behaviour. Things like a bad batch of cotton shirts and unexpectedly powerful
electric fans. I looked at her. If this was a game of chess, she was waiting for
me to make the first move. So as my head was spinning with menopause quotes and
facts and stupid fitness recommendations I decide to blurt out the first thing
that comes to mind. I look at her straight in the eyes and say, Madge, things
are changing beyond my control. There's silence then. She looks at me for a
moment, still chewing her caramel. Then, after taking two decades to eat the
thing, she swallows, takes a breath and says, Dear, that makes two of us. And
that's when I saw hope. On the way out of the meeting she grabbed my arm and
threw me a wink. I'm over the moon. Why? Because in that moment I knew I could
read books, attend talks and interview Perry Prime and post-menopausal women and
I still wouldn't have a clue about what was going to happen next. And you know
what? That's okay. Madge just needed me to listen. And I just needed her to see
me try. I took a bite of a caramel. Well done, Joe Jr. I said to myself. Keep
trying and failing and trying again because that's how you put the men in
menopause. Menopause was written by Karen Quinn and read by Keelan McCarthy. It
was produced in Belfast by Michael Shannon, a BBC Audio Northern Ireland
production for Radio 4. The shipping forecast is next. This is BBC Radio 4, now
the shipping forecast issued by the Met Office on behalf of the Maritime and
Coast Guard Agency at 0015 on Sunday 26th February. The general synopsis at
1800. High Hebrides 1028 expected Cromartie 1036 by 1800 Sunday. Low Southeast
Fitzroy 1007 losing its identity. The area forecasts for the next 24 hours.
Viking. North early four or five occasionally six in east. Showers later, good.
North at Sierra, south at Sierra. North early four to six. Showers later, good.
Forties, north four to six. Showers, good. Cromartie, north three or four
becoming variable two or three. Fair, good. Fourth, north three or four, showers
at first, good. Tyne, dogger, north or northeast four or five. Showers, good.
Fisher, north early four or five occasionally six later in west. Fair, good.
German Beit, north or northeast four or five occasionally six at first. Fair,
good. Humber, north or northeast four or five occasionally six at first.
Showers, good. Thames, northeast four to six. Showers, good. Dover, white,
Portland, Plymouth. Northeast five to seven. Showers, good. Biscay, northeast
five or six occasionally seven later. Showers, good. Trafalgar, cyclonic three
to five occasionally six at first and far southwest. Showers, good, occasionally
moderate. South Fitzroy, cyclonic three to five becoming easterly or north
easterly five to seven later. Rain later and far west, good occasionally
moderate. North Fitzroy, sole. South Fitzroy, four to six occasionally seven
later. Showers, good. Lundy, east four or five occasionally six at first. Fair,
good. Fastnet, east four to six. Fair, good. Irish Sea, east or northeast three
to five. Fair, good. Shannon, east four to six veering southeast five to seven
later. Showers, good. Rockall, south easterly four to six increasing seven later
and west. Fair, good. Mallon, southeast three to five. Fair, good. Hebrides,
variable two to four becoming south three to five later. Fair, good. Bailey,
southerly four to six occasionally seven later and west. Showers, good. Fair
Isle, variable becoming northwest two to four. Fair, good. Fair Rose, west three
or four backing southwest four or five. Fair, good. Southeast Iceland, southwest
early five or six occasionally seven and far north. Showers, good occasionally
moderate. We turn now to the weather reports from coastal stations for 2300.
Tyree automatic, southeast four, 16 miles 1029 rising slowly. Stornoey,
northwest by north one, 16 miles 1029 rising slowly. Lerwick, north northwest
two, 27 miles 1028 rising slowly. Wick automatic, west two, 12 miles 1029 rising
slowly. Aberdeen, northwest three, 16 miles 1028 rising slowly. Lookers, north
by east three, 24 miles 1028 rising more slowly. Boomer, north northeast four,
1026 rising slowly. Bridlington, north northeast four, 1023 rising slowly.
Sandeti light vessel automatic, northeast by north five, 11 miles 1019.
Greenwich light vessel automatic, five miles 10120. St Catherine's point
automatic, northeast two, 10120 rising more slowly. Jersey, northeast by east
five, 14 miles 1018 rising more slowly. Channo light vessel automatic, northeast
by east six, 1019. Silly automatic, east northeast five, 15 miles 10120 rising
slowly. Milford haven, northeast three, 27 miles 1024 rising. Aberporth, east
northeast four, 22 miles 1024 rising more slowly. Valley, north east three, 14
miles 1026 rising. Liverpool Crosby, north two, seven miles 1026 rising.
Valencia, east by north two, 27 miles 1024 rising. Ronaldsway, northeast by
north three, 1027 rising. Mallonhead, southeast by south three, seven miles 1028
rising slowly. Macrahanish automatic, east one, 32 miles 1028 rising slowly.
Here's the weather forecast for the inshore waters of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland valid for the following 24 hours issued by the Met Office at 2300 on
Saturday the 25th of February. The general situation high pressure will remain
centred close to Northern Scotland throughout giving a strong northeasterly flow
in the south. Cape Wrath to Ratrihed including Orkney. North becoming variable
one to three. Fair, good. Ratrihed to Berwick-upon Tweed. North three or four
occasionally five at first. Showers at first, good. Berwick-upon Tweed to
Whitby. North or northeast four or five. Showers, good. Whitby to Gibraltar
Point. North veering northeast four or five. Showers, good. Gibraltar Point to
North Forland. Northerly veering northeasterly four or five occasionally six and
southeast. Showers, good. North Forland to Zelsibill. Northerly four or five
veering northeasterly five or six occasionally seven later in Strait of Dover.
Showers at first, good. Zelsibill to Lime Regis. Northeast four or five
occasionally six offshore. Fair, good. Lime Regis to Lands End including the
Isles of Scilly. Northeast five or six occasionally four in Shelter. Showers at
first in West, good. Lands End to St David's Head including the Bristol Channel.
East or northeast four or five occasionally six at first. Fair, good. St David's
Head to Great Armhead including St George's Channel. Northeast four or five
occasionally three in Shelter. Fair, good. Great Armhead to the Mull of
Galloway. Northeast three or four occasionally five at first. Fair, good. Isle
of Man. Northeast three or four occasionally five at first. Fair, good. Lock
Foil to Carlingford Lock. East three or four occasionally five at first. Fair,
good. Mull of Galloway to Mull of Contire including the Firth of Clyde and North
Channel. East or Northeast three or four occasionally five at first. Fair, good.
Mull of Contire to Ardnamurcan Point. East or Southeast two to four. Fair, good.
Ardnamurcan Point to Cape Wrath. South or Southeast two to four becoming
variable one to three later. Fair, good. And Shetland Isles. West or Northwest
three or four. Fair, good. And that completes the Shipping Bulletin. Explore the
world of arts and culture on front row. The atmosphere changes, the hair starts
to stand up on the back of your neck. The biggest news and interviews. It was an
absolute dream of mine to perform on a stage. Alongside live discussions,
debates and the latest reviews. A series of contrasts which I thought were quite
fascinating. I loathed it. I can't recommend it enough because it's so
thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for front row.
You are a national treasure. No. Live every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio
Four at 7.15 and you can listen to past episodes on BBC Sounds. Joanna Lumley
and Roger Alham are back. It's been three years since we've had one. At what? A
day without an argument. In a comedy capturing the ups and downs of 40 years of
marriage. You just don't like being told what to do. Don't tell me what I like.
There it is. They're passionate about life. Do men ever entirely grow up? I
think you know the answer to that one. And each other. I do hate dancing but I
love you. Oh. The new series of conversations from a long marriage. Your 6.30
comedy for Wednesdays on Radio Four and BBC Sounds. And of course you can find
the first three series on BBC Sounds as well. Well worth looking back for that.
Well that brings us to the end of the day here at Radio Four. Over on our sister
station there's drama first broadcast in the 1990s when a TV star appears on the
London stage. A fan decides to get much closer. A movie starring me by David
Edgar is about to start on Radio Four Extra. On Radio Three among the selections
coming up shortly on Through the Night, Johannes Bram's Cello Sonata, No. 2 in
F. Jonathan Swain will be presenting from one o'clock. Here on Radio Four as
ever we'll be handing over to the BBC World Service to take us through until 20
past five when we'll be back with the latest shipping forecast and of course
news briefing as well. Thanks for listening. From me, Ron Brown, my colleague
Mark Forrest reading the news for us throughout the evening here on Radio Four
and indeed the whole team working at Broadcasting House in London do have a very
safe and peaceful night. Good night. We are making changes to the way BBC live
streams are distributed via third party services and platforms and the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid 2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message please contact
the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile this service is available
to stream on BBC sounds.