TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-05H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 The newsroom is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio station.
Another round of violence and death between Israelis and Palestinians in the
West Bank. This time though it came after talks between officials from both
sides on how to calm the clashes. Huge protests in Mexico over government plans
to slash funding for the body which organises the country's elections. Children
among dozens killed in Italy's deadliest shipwreck in years. This type of
tragedy should have been avoided, not lived how we're having to live it today
and how we will live it again in the future. A middle-aged Chinese immigrant who
saves the universe is the big winner at the Screen Actors Guild Awards in
everything, everywhere, all at once. And in English football, Manchester United
win the League Cup with a 2-0 victory over Newcastle. We have a chance to go and
try to win more trophies this season. I think the mentality of the team is a
winning mentality, so we're in the right direction. Let's enjoy the moment. This
is Alex Ritson with the newsroom. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News.
Palestinian homes, businesses and cars have been set ablaze in a community in
the occupied West Bank. And a Palestinian man has been shot dead nearby as
Israeli settlers rioted. They were reacting to the earlier killing of two Jewish
brothers in the same village. Yusuf Taha has this report. The violence took
place in the village of Hawara, just south of the city of Nablus. The
Palestinian Red Crescent said it was treating nearly 350 people, many of them
from smoke inhalation, but also gunshot wounds and stabbing. Residents have
accused the Israeli security forces of helping the settlers carry out the
revenge attack and preventing ambulances from reaching the scene. Video footage
shows many properties completely engulfed in flames, which are dispelling the
night darkness. Last Wednesday, Israeli forces launched their deadliest West
Bank raid in nearly 20 years, which left 11 Palestinians dead in Nablus. The
latest West Bank unrest follows a rare meeting between Israeli and Palestinian
security chiefs in Jordan. They discussed measures to quell the current wave of
violence, and the Israelis said they would stop approving new settlement
outposts for six months. But within hours, the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu tweeted there would be no freeze on settlements. The Palestinian
militant group Hamas called the summit worthless. Tens of thousands of people
have taken part in protests across Mexico. They're unhappy at government plans
to slash funding for the National Electoral Institute. Here's Will Grant. Tens
of thousands of demonstrators turned out in the capital Mexico City and
descended on the main plaza, chanting their opposition to the measure. Smaller
events were held in other cities around the country under the slogan, Don't
Touch My Vote. Critics of the reform are worried that the bill, approved by the
Senate last week, would undermine one of the few trusted public institutions in
the country and place it under presidential influence. Many fear a return to a
period in which the biggest and most powerful party wielded undue control over
the electoral body. Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say that a Russian
military plane has been damaged in a sabotage attack in Belarus. They've
attributed it to what they call anti-government partisans. Charles Haviland has
this report. Drones are said to have caused two or three blasts at the airbase
near Minsk, damaging a Russian A-50 military surveillance plane, its avionics
and radar, and taking it out of action. BIPOL, a grouping of former law
enforcers now opposed to the autocratic government of Alexander Lukashenko, says
it was responsible and that its operatives are now safely out of the country.
It's not possible to confirm the Belarusian opposition's account of what
happened, but this reported attack's also been highlighted by Belarusian
journalists. World News from the BBC. The investment bank founded by a Chinese
billionaire who was reported missing ten days ago says it's now aware that Bao
Fan is cooperating in an investigation being carried out by the authorities. His
disappearance sparked fears of a renewed crackdown on the country's finance
sector. The United Nations Human Rights Council begins a mammoth five-week
session in Geneva starting on Monday. The council promotes human rights
worldwide. More from Imogen Fowkes. Alleged war crimes in Ukraine or Ethiopia,
the brutal suppression of women in Afghanistan and Iran. The UN Human Rights
Council has a packed agenda. Western diplomats are promising to keep the
attention on Russia, but there will be in-depth reports on Myanmar and South
Sudan, North Korea and Belarus. China, despite a damning report from the UN
Human Rights Office suggesting Beijing had committed crimes against humanity
against the Uyghur community, is not on the agenda. Member states rejected a
plan to debate that report last year. An Australian firm has bought the defunct
battery-making company Britishvolt, which collapsed last month with the loss of
200 jobs. Britishvolt had plans to build a $4.8 billion battery plant in
northern England. The new owner, Recharge Industries, is a novice startup. Its
chief executive told the BBC it would focus on batteries for energy storage
rather than the desperately needed batteries for electric vehicles. The Oscar-
winning film producer Walter Mierisch has died at the age of 101. He was best
known for overseeing the production of classics such as Some Like It Hot, West
Side Story and In the Heat of the Night. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
Sciences described him as a true visionary. That's the latest BBC World News.
Hello, this is Alex Ritson with the Newsroom. Amid already rising tensions
between Israel and the Palestinians, Sunday saw one of the worst outbreaks of
violence in the occupied West Bank this year. After two Israelis were shot dead
in the village of Hawara, just south of Nablus, Israeli settlers set fire to
Palestinian properties. A Palestinian man was killed. The unrest came a few
hours after a rare meeting in Jordan between Israeli and Palestinian authority
officials to try to restore calm. There was some progress, including an Israeli
commitment to stop discussing new settlement building for four months. But
there's also been criticism. So where does that leave the negotiations? That's a
question I put to our correspondent Yolande Nell, who's in Jerusalem. It's very
difficult to say because you have the Palestinian authority, which controls only
parts of the West Bank, which sent its officials along, both political and
security officials. And of course, there is this big division because it's the
Palestinian group Hamas, which governs Gaza. And then within the Israeli
government, you do have these these different streams, even within the
coalition. And it underlines how this could cause trouble for the prime
minister, for Benjamin Netanyahu. He's leading one of the most right wing
governments in Israeli history. And as much as he has committed to making these
announcements, particularly on settlements, these are key issues for some of his
ministers. The finance minister, Bezalel Smotrich, came out. He actually has
responsibilities over Jewish settlements in the West Bank. And he was basically
saying he would not abide by an agreement. He said, I have no idea what they
spoke about in Jordan. He wrote that on Twitter. He said, one thing I do know,
there'll be no freeze on the building and development and settlements, not even
for one day. Nonetheless, it is quite a statement to make this joint commitment
to make immediate steps to end a surge in violence. What happens next? Is it is
it more meetings or will there be concrete action? There is a plan for another
meeting to take place in Shamashech in March. We assume that lots more has been
decided, a lot of detail, perhaps behind the scenes at this unusual summit
that's not being put out there in the public domain at this stage. But I mean,
as the international community knows very well, we are heading now into a very
sensitive period when the Islamic holy month of Ramadan starts. That's at the
end of March. This year, it's going to overlap again with the Jewish Passover
holiday. And that looks set to raise tensions here in Jerusalem. I mean,
generally there are tensions during Ramadan around the Al-Aqsa mosque in the
occupied old city of Jerusalem. This is a bitterly contested holy site for Jews.
It is Temple Mount, and you can guarantee that more Jewish visitors will want to
go there and that will cause problems during Ramadan. Yoland Nel in Jerusalem.
Up to half a million people have taken to the streets of Mexico. They're
protesting against reforms backed by President López Obrador that they say are
an attack on democracy. I spoke to our correspondent in Mexico City, Will Grant.
Well, they were very large. There's some debate, as you can always imagine,
between the two numbers put out, the city officials who are aligned with
President López Obrador, suggesting that somewhere in the region of 90,000
people. But the organizers saying it could have been as many as 500,000. I
imagine the truth is somewhere in the middle of all of that. But certainly they
shut down the center of Mexico City, turned out wearing pink and white in
support of the electoral body, which is facing kind of root and branch reform
from President López Obrador's party. It's already been passed by the Senate,
and it's now expected to come into force on Monday. And that change involves
slashing its budget, closing scores of local offices, and those protesters were
turning out under the slogan, leave my vote alone and don't touch the vote. They
truly suspect that there'll be sort of presidential influence on the voting
process. Yeah, that's the fear that the president is ultimately trying to exert
control over future elections. What does he say about that? Well, he has simply
dismissed that idea. He believes and argues fervently that, you know, the entire
body is biased, that it's made up by vested interest over the years aligned to
the traditional parties. And it's, you know, in need of genuine reform from top
to bottom. Now, those who don't believe him point to the fact that he's had a
longstanding argument with the INE, as it's called, the Electoral Authority,
dating back to 2006, when he narrowly lost the election, the presidential
election, by a question of, you know, thousands, tens of thousands of votes at
most, and has always sort of had a problem with them since then. The truth of
the matter is that no matter how many people took to the streets, not just in
Mexico City, but across the country, this is now going to enter into force.
These changes will take place. Mr López Obrador has all but signed it, and it
will certainly be appearing on the books later this week. Will Grant in Mexico.
The great and the good from the world of film and television have attended the
29th Screen Actors Guild Awards, the SAG Awards, in Los Angeles. It's the only
ceremony where actors honour actors, and the event is widely regarded as a
reliable bellwether for the Oscars in two weeks' time. Entertainment journalist
Jeanne Wolfe has been watching the show, and she joins me now from Los Angeles.
Jeanne, who were the big winners tonight, and were there any surprises? Well,
the big winner tonight was Everything Everywhere All at Once. Four prizes. It
made Screen Actors Guild history, and as you mentioned, people watch the SAG
Awards and every award nowadays to see how they can predict the Academy Awards.
So right now, the people who make odds and who guess all these things are saying
that perhaps Everything Everywhere All at Once will win the Academy Award. We'll
see. We'll see. Michelle Yeoh beat out Cain Blanchett for Tar. Jamie Lee Curtis
beat out Angela Bassett for Wakanda. So Everything Everywhere All at Once was
the big announcement of tonight. Jamie Lee Curtis, that's the daughter of Tony
Curtis and Janet Leigh, and she made jokes about being a nepo baby, meaning
nepotism. There's been a big issue here about sons and daughters and relatives
of movie stars. Sally Field was honored. I don't know if you saw that, but what
a great lady. The montage of her films reminded us of how many fabulous parts
she's played over the years. Jessica Chastain won for George and Tammy. This is
the second year in a row she won. The show aired on YouTube, and for once, there
were no commercials. Now, remember, we can't count on that for the future,
because award shows make their money off of commercials. I have to say it was
kind of comforting not to have anyone played off with music. Briefly, Jeannie,
it feels as though there's an Oscar buzz in L.A. already. Oh, well, you know,
they always talk about the Oscars in reference to everything else. Everybody
wants to win every award, but what they really want is for their resume forever,
their biography forever to say, Oscar winning, blah, blah, blah. Briefly, what I
want is to be a nepo baby. You've introduced me to a new word. Thank you for
that, Jeannie. Oh, I've just got to keep you up with everything. Thank you. So
good to talk with you. Entertainment journalist Jeannie Wolfe, this is the
newsroom from the BBC World Service. A search and rescue operation is continuing
after a boat carrying people trying to reach Europe sank off southern Italy on
Sunday. Nearly 60 people are known to have drowned, including children. Those
who did survive came ashore on the Calabrian coast and are being helped by Red
Cross workers. John Donison reports. Another tragedy in the Mediterranean. The
migrant boat broke up in rough seas just off the Calabrian coast. Rescue workers
struggled in the conditions to recover bodies from the water. It's thought
around 150 people were on board. Dozens, including a baby, are known to have
drowned. The regional governor visited the scene. Calabria is a region that
welcomes people. Last year, we welcomed 18,000 migrants, but we can't be
abandoned by the rest of Europe. This type of tragedy should have been avoided,
not lived how we're having to live it today and how we will live it again in the
future. And reacting to today's loss of life, the head of the European
Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, said altogether EU countries must redouble
their efforts to tackle the migration crisis in the central Mediterranean.
Around 80 people were brought ashore alive, among them migrants from Iran,
Pakistan and Afghanistan. Despite the dangers, Italy is one of the main landing
points for people trying to reach Europe in small boats. Almost 12,000 migrants
have already arrived by sea in Italy this year. In 2022, more than 105,000
successfully made the crossing, with over 1,300 dead or missing. Although high,
those numbers are way down on the 2016 peak, when there were over 180,000
arrivals by sea. The government blames people traffickers and has pledged to
stop the boats. At the Vatican, Pope Francis expressed his sorrow for the latest
loss of lives, which he said included many children. He said he was praying for
the dead, the missing and those who survived. And those survivors, like hundreds
of thousands before them, face an uncertain future. Under the white sheets
behind them, those who didn't make it. John Donison. Britain's decision to leave
the European Union created what has been an impossible conundrum for the British
province of Northern Ireland. That's because it shares an island and therefore a
long land border with the Republic of Ireland, which is still in the European
Union. Any attempt to put in place border checks would be enormously
controversial and previously were a factor in years of inter-communal violence.
The Northern Ireland Protocol, which is part of the Brexit deal, effectively put
a border in the sea between Britain and Northern Ireland. But it's run into
difficulties. Now there's hope of a solution as the British Prime Minister Rishi
Sunak meets the head of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, later on
Monday. Rob Watson told me more. So the Northern Ireland Protocol was arranged
as a way of trying to prevent there being a hard border between Northern Ireland
and the Republic of Ireland, and there would be a focus of attacks for
paramilitaries. And so essentially what it said is let's treat Northern Ireland,
if it was still part of the European Union, at least its single market, in terms
of the trading of goods to avoid any checks. And essentially what the protocol
did, therefore, was to say, right, let's have Northern Ireland sort of stay
inside the European Union's single market for goods. In other words, for
Northern Ireland to be treated somewhat differently to the rest of the UK. And
we think what this deal will try and do is to just sort of soften the edges of
that way in which Northern Ireland is different to the rest of the UK, and to
make trade easier, at least when it's just trade from Great Britain into
Northern Ireland. And if it goes well for the British government and the
European Union, you would see an improvement in relations between the EU and the
UK. You would see Rishi Sunak, the prime minister, no doubt try to claim that he
sort of cleared up the mess left by Boris Johnson when it comes to Northern
Ireland. And the hope would be on Northern Ireland that it sees a return of
power sharing between those parties that essentially would rather have a united
Ireland and those that want to see continued union. That's mainly the Democratic
Unionist Party, which up until now has refused to share power because of its
opposition to the protocol, to post-Brexit arrangements, which it has felt has
made Northern Ireland less British. So from what you're saying, an awful lot of
the problems which Brexit has left behind for the UK and to a lesser extent for
the European Union could be sorted out in this meeting between Rishi Sunak and
Ursula von der Leyen on Monday. But I did hear what normally is a massive danger
word at the very start of what you said, and that was the word if. If. So I
guess you've got the on the one hand, the classic on the one hand, on the other.
On the one hand, if things go well for Rishi Sunak, I think you would hope that
this would begin to see putting Brexit as an issue to bed in UK politics. Not
completely. Now, it is a big if, because on the other hand, I mean, it is
possible that hardliners within the governing Conservative Party and in the
Democratic Unionist Party, which wants continued union between Northern Ireland
and the UK, will say, you know what? Northern Ireland is still being treated
differently to the rest of the UK. It remains in the European Union's single
market for goods. It is being treated differently. We won't have it, in which
case you could potentially see a return in British politics to the kind of
absolute chaos we saw over many years in the post Brexit period. Rob Watson, the
age at which someone can get married in England and Wales is being raised from
16 to 18 today to try to stop vulnerable teenagers being forced to marry. Under
the new rules, adults who facilitate the marriage of anyone under 18 could face
up to seven years in jail and a fine. Rajdeep Sundu has more. The Marriage and
Civil Partnership Act makes it an offence to enable a child to marry or enter
into a civil partnership under the age of 18 in any circumstances, removing the
need to prove the child was forced or coerced into it and also ending parental
consent for 16 and 17 year olds. The change also applies to religious or
cultural marriage ceremonies that aren't legally recognised. Campaigners hope
the threat of jail time, if the law is broken, will act as a deterrent. Paisy
Mahmood, who was married at 16, says the law could have changed her life. We
have put something in place that protects children. I think this is going to
have a really positive ripple effect in neighbouring countries and potentially
globally. It's a really, really emotional day. There are those with concerns.
Mihai Beaker from the Roma Support Group said in his community the word married
could be used to describe a boyfriend and girlfriend relationship. He said he
was worried about potential cultural misunderstandings. Rajdeep Sundu, the man
with the greatest voice of them all. Neil Nunez has some other stories from our
news desk. The first results have been announced from Nigeria's tightest
election since the end of military rule in 1999. The governing party candidate,
Bolotinibu, won in one of the party's strongholds, the south-western Iquitas
state. More results are not expected until later on Monday. The authorities in
the Brazilian state of Sao Paulo say the death toll from the floods and
landslides that ravaged the south-east of the country last week has risen to 64
and that 18 of the fatalities were children. Most of those killed lived in and
around the coastal town of São Sebastião, where more than a month's worth of
rain fell in 24 hours. And later on Monday, Chile will deploy troops to patrol
its borders with Peru and Bolivia in an attempt to control the entry of
undocumented migrants. Military units will be posted to northern regions with
power to detain anyone passing through unauthorised border crossings. Neil,
thank you. Time for the sports news now and Paul Serres is with me. It's been a
while, Paul, but Manchester United at last have their hands on some silverware.
Yes, they do indeed. They beat Newcastle United 2-0 in the final of the English
League Cup at Wembley Stadium on Sunday, Alex, to win their first trophy since
2017 when they won the Europa League under Jose Mourinho. They're still in the
FA Cup too. They're into the last 16 of this season's Europa League after
beating Barcelona last week. And they're up to third in the English Premier
League too. So an excellent first season so far under Eric Tenhaak. This will
bring us confidence, but it's not business as usual. You have to fight for it.
You have to take effort in it. So invest in it. You have to sacrifice, you have
to suffer, and not only on the game day, but every day on the training pitch.
And if we do that, yeah, then it's possible that we will be successful. There
was one game in the English Premier League on Sunday too, Alex. More woe for
Chelsea and for their manager, Graeme Potter. They were beaten 2-0 by Tottenham.
And disappointment too for South Africa in their first ever cricket World Cup
final. Yes, that's right. They've never been in a World Cup final before, men's
or women's cricket, T20 or one-day internationals, until the one that took place
on Sunday. Unfortunately for them, they came up against the juggernaut that is
Australia, the reigning champions. They'd reached eight of the last nine World
Cup finals and have dominated the sport. They won it by 18 runs at a packed
Newlands in Cape Town. Here's what the Australian all-rounder Ashley Gardner had
to say about that win. It's certainly pretty special. What we set out to do at
the start of this tournament was to win. And we've come away as champions. We
haven't had everything our own way. And just to look at the fight that we showed
throughout that semifinal, and even today we were in some interesting
predicaments. But we showed our character and we showed the way that we fight as
Australians. And when our backs are up against the wall, we find a way to win.
And in tennis, Alex Britton's Cameron Norrie beat the world number two Carlos
Alcaraz to win the Rio Open. The juggernaut that is Paul Serres, thank you.
K-pop has swept the world in the shape of the boy band K-BTS, as has K-drama.
Think of the survival series Squid Game. But is Korean reality TV about to
become another entertainment success story? Our Seoul correspondent, Jean
MacKenzie, has this report. This is one of the most defining moments of Physical
100. Female wrestler Jang is spurring on her team as she struggles to drag a one
and a half ton ship through sand and upper ramp. On paper, they're the weakest
team, but miraculously, they complete the task. Think of this as the real life
Squid Game. Except nobody dies. It's become Netflix's most popular non-English
program around the world, making it the first reality TV show ever to grab this
top spot. The show has been such a surprising success that they have cobbled
together an event for fans at the last minute along the river here in Seoul, and
50 of the contestants have turned up. Pulling that ship was the hardest thing
I've ever done, says Jang. Her fellow contestant, Joe, praises her. It was only
possible because of you, he says. I know that one thing people really did love
about the show is how nice you all are to each other. Yes, people cheered each
other on and comforted each other. I think our foreign fans found these moments
beautiful. It's the Korean way, says Joe. All afternoon, the contestants
entertain their fans, removing their shirts to flex their sizeable biceps. Why
do you like the show so much? Oh, because there's a lot of hot people. Yeah, me
too. I think it's a great show. I think it's a great show. Oh, because there's a
lot of hot people. Yeah, me too. Everybody knows Korea. It's really cool. I love
it. The industry here is now watching the success of Physical 100 with
excitement. Last week, Amazon Prime brought its first Korean reality TV show,
Jinny's Kitchen. Want to come to our restaurant? It features a group of
celebrities attempting to run a street food restaurant in Mexico. It's been made
by one of Korea's biggest entertainment companies, CJ. Sebastian Kim is their
sales director. We have around 200 producers. These 200 producers are scratching
their heads to make a better show every day. This opens a great opportunity for
them. If these kind of shows can travel outside Korea, that means more funding
coming in from that show. That gives them more freedom to produce a bigger show,
a better show. If K-pop and K-dramas show the polished side of Korea, K-reality
offers fans the chance to see the unvarnished side, what sits at the heart of
the culture that they've grown to love so much. Gene McKenzie in Seoul. The main
news this hour. Israeli settlers in the occupied West Bank have been torching
Palestinian homes and businesses, killing a Palestinian man after two Israeli
soldiers shot him. After two Israelis were shot dead in their car. Thanks for
listening to The Newsroom. This is the BBC World Service, and here's Harriet
Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France
to talk about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pigtails.
When it was published in 1996, it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist
pamphlet. It's a feminist book, it is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I
hope. It's the story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands
of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change,
growing more and more like the body of a pig. At some points she is very animal,
at some other points she is very human. She oscillates according to the level of
aggression against her. She's not stable. Nobody... It's a story of that, you
know. World Book Club with Marie Dariasek. Saturday at 12 GMT. It's Oscars
season, and on The Conversation I'm joined by two Academy Award nominees from
Scotland and Canada. Lesley Paterson co-wrote the screenplay for All Quiet on
the Western Front, which has received nine nominations, including Best Adapted
Screenplay and Best Picture. And Wendy Tilby is a Canadian director, animator
and illustrator. Her short film, The Flying Sailor, is up for Best Animated
Short Film. They'll discuss what it took to bring their work to life on screen
and the themes explored in the stories they tell. BBC News with Neil Nunes.
Palestinian homes, businesses and cars have been set ablaze in the occupied West
Bank, and a Palestinian man has been shot dead nearby as Israeli settlers
rioted. They were reacting to the earlier killing of two Jewish brothers in the
same village. The United Nations Human Rights Council begins a marathon five-
week session today, Monday, but its 47 member states have already decided not to
discuss China's alleged crimes against humanity, said to have been perpetrated
against the Uyghur minority. Tens of thousands of protesters have marched on the
presidential palace in Mexico in protest at a planned reform of the country's
electoral body. The measure would close many of the agency's local offices and
slash its annual budget. Exiled Belarusian opposition figures say a Russian
military plane has been damaged in a sabotage attack inside the country. They
say anti-government partisans carried out the assault. The European Commission
chief will meet the British Prime Minister later near London today. There are
signs that London and Brussels are on the cusp of an agreement that would solve
the problem of post-Brexit trade involving Northern Ireland. The investment bank
founded by a Chinese billionaire who was reported missing 10 days ago says it's
now aware that Baofan is cooperating with an investigation being carried out by
the authorities. Shares in the bank had plummeted after it was unable to contact
Mr. Bao. Brazil says 64 people are now known to have died in last week's floods
and landslides in Sao Paulo state. A month's worth of rain fell in 24 hours.
England and Wales have raised the legal marriage age from 16 to 18. The change
makes it a criminal offence to facilitate the marriage of anyone younger than
this. That's the latest BBC News. A warm welcome to The Conversation, the
programme that amplifies women's voices. I'm Kim Chakanetza. It's Oscars season
and it all leads up to Hollywood's big award night, an evening of speeches,
occasional surprises, gowns and glamour. Today we're with two award-winning
creatives who've made it onto this year's nominees list. Leslie Patterson co-
wrote the screenplay for All Quiet on the Western Front, which has nominated for
nine Oscars, including Best Actress. Leslie is also a five-time world champion
triathlete. And Wendy Tilby is a Canadian director, animator and illustrator.
The short film she co-directed, The Flying Sailor, is nominated as Best Animated
Short Film in this year's Academy Awards. Welcome to you both and
congratulations to you both. Thank you. It's lovely to be here. Now, first of
all, Leslie, this is your first Oscar nomination. What were you doing when you
heard? Wow. Well, actually, I was on my bike. So I have a stationary trainer
where I can sort of do it at any time of day. And of course, the Oscars were
announced at 530 in the morning here in Los Angeles. And so I promptly woke up
at 2 a.m. because, of course, I couldn't sleep. I was very nervous and so
thought I would burn some of that energy on my bike. So here I was pedalling
away, nervous as all get out. And I couldn't even walk. I was just so nervous. I
had to wait for someone else to watch it and tell me. And when you heard, what
was your reaction? Blown away. I mean, we were right on the cusp. We thought we
had a good chance, but you never know. And it's just one of those things where
it's like I've been dreaming about this for a long time. And when it finally
happens, you're overwhelmed. Because this is your first big film project, isn't
it? It is. Yes. Has it sunken full yet? I don't think so. It's been six years. I
don't think so. It's been so busy since. It's been an absolute whirlwind. So I
think in the next few weeks it probably will. Wendy, this is your fourth
nomination, which is incredible. What was it like for you when you found out?
Well, we had been shortlisted, so we knew we had a chance. But we by no means
thought we were a shoe-in at all. The film was produced by the National Film
Board of Canada. And they had requested that we, heaven forbid, film our
reaction, which was something that we dreaded. I don't know if you didn't do
that. I didn't do that. I kind of wish I had, but at the same time it was
like... We said, no, don't do this to us, because if we're not on it, you're
going to see our reaction. So we decided to do something stupid. We were in a
hotel room, kind of a crummy hotel room, and we were, Amanda Forbes and I, she's
my co-director, and David, our producer, and our publicist, Nadine, all got into
the bed and pulled the covers up. And then as it was announced, we just... But
it was a very genuine eruption of shouting and waving our arms around and
jumping around. But it's a great feeling. It's wonderful. You're really on
tenterhooks, though, and you don't sleep too much the night before. No. Now, on
Oscar night, are you going in with a little speech prepared, Wendy? How do you
do it? I think you kind of have to. Even if you think you don't have a chance,
you better not go up there and stumble if you have to get up there. Yeah, I
haven't thought about that yet, though. Leslie, will you scribble a few words
down? Yeah, I think, as you say, I think you have to, right? Because you don't
want to make a total idiot of yourself. Now, Wendy, you've been at these
ceremonies, surrounded by your peers and people you admire. It must be really
thrilling being there. But have there been any sort of pinch-me-I'm-dreaming
moments where you've sort of met somebody whose work you really admire? Well, at
the Oscar lunch, we did manage to get a nice photo with George Clooney. Oh,
nice. So that was a coup. And he was very sweet. Leslie, any people you've met
or looking forward to meeting? Yeah, I got to meet Steven Spielberg, which was
obviously a huge one for me personally, and probably for most people. We won the
National Board of Review for Adapted Screenplay, so I actually had to make a
speech, which was very nerve-wracking, because in the front row was Steven
Spielberg. And his Schindler's List actually inspired the opening of our film,
and so I was like, damn it, I'm going to go up and tell him this, you know? So I
just went up, and he's like, oh, you're the all-quiet writer. I was like, oh, my
God, he knows who I am! This is amazing! He hadn't seen the film at that point,
but I'm hoping he has now, and I'm going to go up to him for sure in the next
few weeks. Yeah, tap on his shoulder if I can get to him. Brilliant. We'll talk
about your work in a moment. Wendy, you thought you were going to become a
documentary filmmaker, but you said you were seduced by animation. What was it
about animation that appealed to you the most? The solitude, for one thing, and
the fact that you do have control. It's a very uncomplicated way to make a film,
because you're not working with large crews, you're not bossing people around.
It's an extraordinary amount of work, animation, there's no instant
gratification, but it's so satisfying, because it just touches on all these art
forms. You're writing, you're drawing, sometimes it touches on music and dance,
and you're acting, you're an actor as well when you're making characters. So
it's intensely satisfying as an art form, but very difficult. I'm still
interested in documentary, though. That might still happen. Lesley, I mentioned
that you're a five-time world champion triathlete. Your background is in sports,
but you actually studied acting and dramas. How do you think your professional
athleticism, being a professional athlete, helps you with this project?
Massively, to be honest, because the endurance, overcoming adversity, stick-to-
it-ness, mastery of craft, focus on excellence, all of those attributes that I
think I now have because of years in sport transfer wonderfully across to the
film business, and specifically screenwriting, because it can be a very ethereal
process that's difficult to define sometimes. And then you obviously hit a lot
of roadblocks when you're trying to get a film off the ground, and this one
especially, because it's taken us 16 years. And then on the sporting side, I
think I listen to a lot of movies, I really come up with a lot of my ideas when
I'm actually training. I think just because it has a meditative quality about
it, and it releases a part of your brain that allows you to access that deeper
sort of inner creativity when you're training. So I think one helps the other
for sure. Well, Lesley, as someone who has run and won a triathlon with a broken
arm, what is harder to do, to win a triathlon with a broken arm or to get a film
made in Hollywood? Because any one of those things took 16 years to do. It's
true. I'd definitely say making a film in Hollywood. You know, it's a very
tangible thing when you're competing. You're either good enough or you're not,
and you take the steps towards getting better. Yeah, it can foster bad behaviour
sometimes, being a top athlete, you become quite obsessive-compulsive. So, you
know, there's good and bad in everything. I understand you used your winnings
from the triathlon to help fund this project. I did, I did. So this is a
specific race. Obviously, when you're optioning material, you have to spend so
much money every year, every time that you re-option it. And so we had to come
up with the money ourselves, my husband and I. And so I decided that the only
way to find the money that specific year was to do a race and get the race
winnings. And the day before the race, I broke my shoulder. So I ended up
competing with one arm. Oh, gosh. So it was pretty traumatic, but I got through
it. We decided, OK, I could swim with one arm, I'm good at the one-arm drill,
and then let's just see what happens. So I came out 12 minutes down and then
rode up to second place and ran into first and got the money to keep the option.
So, I know. My jaw is dropping. You won a triathlon, you swam with a broken
shoulder. I did, yes. So literally, the other arm was down by my side, and I did
it kind of as a, it was almost like a butterfly stroke in a way. Like, I got
some movement from my hips, but of course came out of the water absolutely
exhausted. So it was pretty bananas, but luckily I did win it, and we kept the
option of the book, and here we are. You must have been motivated. I was very
motivated. Either that or completely stupid, so maybe a bit of both. You first
read All Quiet on the Western Front when you were at school. What drew you to
that story? I think World War I in general is such an epic landscape to
investigate really, you know, trauma at its greatest. And I think for me it was
the telling of it from our enemy. What that says is a bigger message. That war
was about the everyman, dealing with the upper brass, calling the shots and
putting millions of men to their death. And then really the theme of the
betrayal of that youthful generation, that really struck a chord. And why years
later did you decide to make a film about it? This is really our first film, and
I work exclusively with my husband, Simon Marshall. Yes, so we optioned the
rights to the novel 16 years ago, adapted it, and then it really just took that
long to get off the ground, because certainly 16 years ago the landscape of film
was different, and getting a German film off the ground was near impossible,
especially at a sort of bigger budget. So it took us that long to find the right
director to have the right vision, and for the landscape to allow for this type
of film to be made. Wendy, The Flying Sailor is also set in the same historical
period, World War I is the backdrop to the story. What is the story about? The
story is based on a true story. It happened in Halifax, Nova Scotia, which is on
the eastern coast of Canada. And it's a story that Amanda and I ran across about
20 years ago, so a similar gestation time. But we happened to be at the Maritime
Museum there, and a section of the museum is dedicated to the explosion. And the
explosion, what happened was two ships were in the narrows there, and it is
literally a narrow spot in the harbor, and weirdly one of them was in the wrong
lane, and one of the ships was absolutely loaded with explosives, and they had a
little fender bender, but it was enough that sparks flew, ignited the ship, and
it blew up basically the city. And it was to that time the largest explosion the
world had ever seen. So when we were in the museum, we were reading accounts,
firsthand accounts of survivors, and one of them was of a sailor named Charlie
Mayers who happened to be on the dock when the ship blew, and he was launched,
and he flew for 2 kilometers in the air and found himself naked except for one
boot 2 kilometers away. And we were astonished. We thought, wow. And it struck
us as an interesting idea for an animated film because what we were interested
in was his trip. We thought that we're going to make an existential transcendent
experience, and so that's what we did, and we did read a lot of accounts of near
death. And what's interesting is that they're a lot the same. When people have
these experiences, it doesn't matter what culture or religion they're from, they
often describe that sense of time slowing, fragments of memory, your life
passing before you, even the dead relatives, the loved ones who beckon you, the
feeling of weightlessness, your body becomes seamless with the universe, and
that's what we wanted to depict. And I think that people who go through this
sort of thing, and all of us really, it doesn't even have to be something
traumatic like that, but just there are these pivotal moments in life where
we're changed, and it puts things into a different perspective, and we were
interested in that, but also in what is it that composes our lives, you know,
when the sailor has his memories, and they're not meant to be groundbreaking,
important, greatest hits memories. It's more these little tiny small moments
that the sailor himself is remembering, but we wanted to suggest that they go
with you, but yet they are very profound. They're profound to us, and yet it's
also insignificant in the grand scheme of things. Life is profound to us, and we
need to make the most of it, but we also need to put ourselves in perspective.
Lesley, All Quiet on the Western Front is a devastating, unflinching look at
war. It has a very powerful sequence in the beginning, which you wrote, where
the uniforms of the dead soldiers are being laundered and are given to the new
recruits. Why did you pick that moment? So we really wanted to open the film in
the world of the battlefield, to hook the audience in and to give them a sense
of that landscape, and, you know, the foreboding of what was to come, but
equally we wanted to start with our main character, Paul, back in the home
front, being riled up by his headmaster and patriotic fervor, and set that kind
of landscape too. So we weren't quite sure how to start at the front and get
back to the home front, and that's when I came up with the idea of following the
uniform as a representation thematically that the uniform means more than the
man. I mean, obviously, given the war in Ukraine, it's incredibly timely,
unfortunately so, but I think people are a lot more open now to understanding
about other cultures and the history behind things. Who do you think needs to
watch this film right now, Leslie? The younger generation, for sure. If we can
get that younger generation to strike up a conversation about these things, then
that's a really positive thing. Politicians? Politicians as well, and in fact
they're showing it now in schools in Germany. We hope that they show it in
schools everywhere, and hopefully the parents of those children will be
politicians, and that will strike up a conversation too. But in fact there was a
wonderful piece in The Telegraph where they were talking about young men in the
Ukraine trenches that have been watching this film. So hopefully it will get
word and be passed around. You're listening to The Conversation, and today we're
meeting with two of the nominees for this year's Academy Award. They are Wendy
Tilby, who co-directed and animated a short film called The Flying Sailor, and
Leslie Patterson. She co-wrote the screenplay for All Quiet on the Western
Front. Wendy, in previous interviews you've said that animation is often seen as
an esoteric career choice, that you struggle to be taken seriously. Well, it's
interesting. When you meet somebody somewhere on the street, whatever, at a
party, and they say, what do you do, and you tell them, and they say, oh, you
make cartoons, and you say, well, no. That's okay. And I don't want to diminish
cartoons either, but it's just that it's all lumped into one umbrella term of
animation. And then we say, well, no, it's actually, say, a short film and might
be 10 minutes long or 8 minutes long, and it takes years to make. It's moments
like this when it gets an Oscar nod that people get excited about it, and then
they say, oh, okay, now I'm interested in what you do. And in the context of
film festivals, we've often joked that short films are at the kids' table of the
festival, and then animation is even, you know, we're in the basement or
something. We're kind of, you know, we're taken even less seriously. But in the
world of animation, and it's a very small and interesting world, when we go to
festivals, people know everybody. I mean, it's kind of, it's quite a lovely
community, and we all kind of get it, why we do this. So I mean, I don't, I have
no complaints about that. Leslie, have you ever struggled to be taken seriously?
Oh, yeah, all the time, especially because I'm 5'2", blonde hair, big smile,
funny accent, you know. It's interesting, actually, when I walk into a meeting
with my husband, who's 6' tall and a man, they often will address him and not
me. And then, of course, I'm often the one that comes up with the goods, so then
they quickly revert. But luckily, I've grown up in a very male-dominated arena
in terms of sports, so I know how to handle myself, and I just have a lot of
confidence. And at the end of the day, I know that the work speaks for itself,
so that's what I focus on. In terms of your confidence, I believe you have an
alter ego called Paddy. Tell me about Paddy. Who is Paddy? Oh, my gosh, you guys
have done your homework. So, yeah, I have an alter ego called Paddy McGinty, and
Paddy is an MMA fighter. I have this secret thing that I've always wanted to be.
Mixed martial arts, make you say. Yeah, mixed martial arts. I've always wanted
to be a mixed martial artist. But ultimately, the alter ego was about embodying
elements of my personality I felt I lacked. And so I was watching Conor
McGregor, who's a famous MMA fighter, Irish, and he just has this unbridled
confidence. And I started to kind of imagine walking like him and holding a
posture like him and notice it's a man, but I didn't sort of distinguish whether
it was a man or a woman. I just specifically liked this one guy, and so I
created this character around it. Once you strike these physical poses and once
you have these behaviors, yeah, I've kind of adopted some of those. To be
honest, I have different alter egos depending on which career I'm in, and I'm
now sort of developing my own one as a filmmaker, so I'm looking around, so
watch out. So will you be taking Paddy along to the Oscars? Oh, definitely. I've
got to get Paddy out, especially with Colin Farrell's there, right? I'll have a
wee drink with him. If you get to meet him, you've got to introduce him to me.
You're not kidding. We'll both go up like total loveys, make complete idiots of
ourselves. Now, Wendy, in the US, women make up a large majority of the
animation student body, but there aren't many women at the top. What do you
think has helped you succeed in the industry? Having gone to art school in
Canada and having the National Film Board dangling as a carrot in front of me,
that was a road that I saw directly ahead of me, and there were women making
short animated films at the NFB at that time who were amazing. And so I have
never felt in any way hindered in that realm as a woman. I have enough
perspective to know how privileged that is because I see it and I've been in
other situations. But I do see that in the more commercial animation world, for
example, in the US, and in, say, feature filmmaking, it's quite a different
thing. And a funny illustration of that was a few years ago we were at the Annie
Awards, which is the animation awards, and we wanted to use the ladies' room,
and we just sort of walked into it. And then we saw in the hallway, snaking
around the hallway, was a line up to the men's room. And we realized, oh, the
animation industry is still male-dominated. But we are seeing more women
directors. There's at least one nominated for Turning Red. There's a feature
film that's nominated this year. But I think there's still a lot of that boy
thing where boys seem to gravitate to the comic books as kids a little more.
Graphic novels have changed that a bit. Speaking for myself, I'm very
opinionated creatively, but I don't like being bossy. For me, the idea of
commanding a set and controlling what a lot of people do to carry out my vision
is uncomfortable for me. And that might be a characteristically female thing. I
don't know. That's a me thing. But I suspect that there are women sometimes are
more reluctant for that same reason. And I don't like to admit that about
myself, but it's true. And I don't know if that's why women have a harder time.
What you're saying, when your husband gets taken a little more seriously
sometimes, people react to women a little differently. And that needs to change.
And I think it is changing. I think it is changing. In your capacity as an
executive producer, are you happy? I mean, you have to crack heads and move
things around, get people doing things, right? Are you comfortable? I'm very
comfortable because I don't know everything. I've got a lot of misgivings in my
own personality. I'm very self-reflective. But I know I have a lot of strengths
too. So I'm a big collaborator. I love bringing people in that know more than I
do and that I can learn from them. I love having mentors. So I think if you're
just kind of you're humble and you know you're willing to learn, then people are
going to take direction from you. I'm quite a strong character. I've been around
the block a lot in my sport. I've been at the very top and I've been at the very
bottom. And I know what it feels like to fail. I know what it feels like to
succeed. And I know what it feels like to want help and not get it. So I'm
really determined to help other people. And I just like to make people happy.
So, you know, if I can do that along the way, that's a big goal as well. Now you
write with your husband. How has that changed your relationship? Yeah, you know,
it's great because we've been married for 20 years. So I think it's just added
something fresh to the relationship. And it's so exciting. You know, we're now
discovering all these different worlds. We have a project in Ghana. We have a
project in Ireland. We have one in Scotland. And he's from a background of
academia. He was a professor of psychology. So he just absolutely loves to delve
into all of that stuff. He's a big researcher. And obviously being a
psychologist is wonderful for character development. But we have very different
roles, how we work. I'm very much story architecture. I'm big picture, character
arcs, thematic essence of stories. He's a nitty gritty. He really gets in the
weeds of things, which is wonderful because we have very complementary skills.
And so far we haven't had too many big arguments. Not yet. That's a bit strange.
Not yet. Wendy, you also work in a duo with Amanda Forbis. What makes your
collaboration so successful, do you think? Well, we've known each other since
art school. Yeah, we've been working together for 28 years. We'd both done solo
works before that. But it definitely, we're much better together than we are
individually. And like Leslie and her husband, we do have complementary skills.
And I would best describe that as Amanda is much better at the actual drawing
and painting and animating. And I'm a little bit more big picture, kind of like
you, architecture. But every step of the way we're collaborating, we talk about
everything. So it mostly works, you know, I mean, it 100% works. But I mean, it
doesn't mean there are no bumps. Sometimes we disagree, but we just hash it out
till we come to a consensus. And neither of us wants to win out over the other
without it being agreed upon, like it has to be. And it works really well. We
spend so much time together. It's ridiculous. People don't understand how we
could possibly do that. But we wouldn't have it any other way. And then you can
have some real lows when you're stuck and it really helps to have someone sort
of say, no, no, here's a way out. We can do that. And then at times like this,
when you're having something to celebrate, you get to do that together too. So
it's much less lonely. I'm keeping fingers crossed for you both on Oscars night.
But what are you most looking forward to when it comes to the awards? Leslie?
Meeting my idols for sure. So we said Colin Farrell. Who else? That's right. Oh,
gosh, there's so many. Maybe bump into James Cameron. I wonder if Tom Cruise is
going. All the big names. That's terrible, isn't it? What are you most looking
forward to, Wendy? Well, we have friends who, you know, we practically have a
checklist. They say, well, OK, if Tom Cruise is there, you've got to. But our
main goal is Bill Nighy. Oh, of course, Bill Nighy. Talk to him if we can. It's
funny, having been there before, it's really hard to tell yourself, just relax,
have a good time. This is fun. It doesn't matter. It's a lark. You get, I don't
know if you feel this way, but you get on this wave and you can't help but be
swept along in this. It's tense. There's that possibility. You have to get up in
front of a billion people. And having been there and lost three times, not lost,
but didn't win. I know that there's a mixture of disappointment, but also great
relief. And, you know, I think we're just going to try to enjoy it and just have
a little fun with it and not get too worried about what to wear, even though I'm
worried about what to wear. Leslie, given your success, are you ready to hang up
your running shoes? I don't know if I'd ever do that, to be honest. I love the
little local races. And if I feel good, I'll jump into something. So I never
like to draw a line in the sand. Let's put it like that. Thank you both very
much, Wendy and Leslie. Thank you. Oh, it's been lovely to talk to you. Thank
you. I was talking to screenwriter Leslie Patterson and to the director and
animator Wendy Tilby. I'm Kim Chakaneta. The conversation will be back next
week. Thanks for listening..