TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-04-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 So who did it and why? This is the BBC World Service, the world's radio
station. On the fifth floor today, anger and fear in Iran at the wave of school
poisonings affecting hundreds of students. Students are demonstrating outside
schools, shouting their rage at the authorities. At this school, a mother is
screaming, my child is dying. A man comments with the name of the school and the
report of a gas attack there. I'll be discussing these mysterious attacks and
how the BBC is investigating them with Soroush Pakzad from BBC Persian and Alia
Farzan from BBC Afghan, who remembers similar cases in Afghanistan several years
ago. More on that after the latest BBC News. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow.
More than 80 people taken hostage by protesters in the south of Colombia have
been released. These were police officers who'd been trying to clear a road that
had been blocked for three weeks. Leonardo Rocha reports. The group was detained
by community leaders after a disastrous police operation on Thursday night in
which two people were shot dead. The protesters were demanding that an energy
company exploring for oil in the region fulfil its promises to improve
conditions on the road. President Gustavo Petro has promised to visit the area
in Colombia's Amazon rainforest region to hear the demands of local residents.
The speed in which the incident was resolved is a big boost for Mr Petro. The
former left-wing rebel came to power last year, promising to resolve problems
through dialogue. The head of the African Union has congratulated the winner of
Nigeria's presidential elections, Bolotunubu, as his defeated rivals challenge
the result. Bolotunubu received 37% of the vote, but a court has given the two
runners-up, Atiku Abubakar and Peter Obi, permission to access materials to
prepare for a possible legal challenge. Simijol Osho reports. All legal
challenges of an election in Nigeria must be filed within 21 days, but until
then they have to gather enough evidence that proves what they're trying to say.
This is going to be a behemoth of a task, to collect evidence from 176,000
polling stations and more than 8,000 collation centres from across the country,
and then again the two parties, the PDP and the Labour Party, they might file
separately. So one cannot really say whether the tribunal will reach a decision
before the 29th of May, and that's the date that Mr Tinabu is due to be sworn in
as president. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has promised to take steps
to deal with its history of child sex abuse in response to a highly critical
report last month. But the bishops also said that compensation should be paid by
individual abusers and not the church. Victim support groups say the measures
aren't enough. Trade unions in Sri Lanka have warned of further strikes in
response to the announcement of steep tax rises and public spending cuts, and
Barasan Ethirajan reports. Sri Lanka is struggling to come out of its worst ever
economic crisis since independence from Britain in 1948. The government has
announced a series of measures to fulfil conditions set by the International
Monetary Fund for the loan. The backing of the IMF would facilitate the Sri
Lankan authorities to approach other international lenders to get additional
financial assistance. But the decision to increase income taxes to up to 36 per
cent has triggered anger among public sector employees who say they are already
struggling to manage the escalating cost of living. World News from the BBC. The
head of the United Nations' nuclear watchdog is preparing to meet senior leaders
in Iran after his inspectors detected uranium enriched to near weapons-grade
level in the country. Rafael Grossi is expected to meet Iran's President Ebrahim
Raisi on Saturday. Tehran says its nuclear programme is peaceful, with
enrichment limited to 60 per cent purity. Officials in the Indonesian capital
Jakarta say that at least 17 people are known to have died in a huge fire at a
state-run fuel depot. Dozens more were injured, many with severe burns. The fire
broke out on Friday evening at the depot in the north of the city and engulfed
nearby houses. Local media say two children were among those killed. The White
House says President Biden had a cancerous skin lesion successfully removed from
his chest last month. The President's doctor says no further treatment is
required. Our North America correspondent Peter Bowes has this report. After his
annual physical examination last month, President Biden was declared to be fit
for duty. At the time, the White House said a lesion had been removed from his
chest, which has now been confirmed to be basal cell carcinoma, a form of cancer
that doesn't normally spread to other parts of the body. Mr Biden had several
non-melanoma skin cancers removed before he was elected president. His son,
Bowes, died from brain cancer in 2015. Mr Biden has long been an advocate for
fighting and curing the disease. One of the first black officers in the US
Army's special forces has received the nation's highest military award, nearly
60 years after he was recommended for bravery in the Vietnam War. But General
Paris Davies disobeyed orders and risked his life to rescue wounded troops in
1965. His recommendation for the Medal of Honor was lost by the military at the
height of the civil rights era. At a ceremony in the White House, President
Biden described Davies as an incredible man. BBC News. Thank you Azizullah Khan
from BBC Urdu for opening up this week's Fifth Floor Programme, where the BBC's
language service journalists help us make sense of the stories making headlines
in their parts of the world. I'm Farhana Kaami-Diand. A little later in this
half of the programme, we'll meet the women who are shortlisted for the BBC's
Indian Sportswoman of the Year award. But I would like to start with a story
that I have been busy covering all week as well as a women's affairs journalist.
The mass poisoning of schoolgirls in Iran. The wave of poisoning started in
November. And so far, Iranian newspapers report 58 schools in 10 different
provinces have been affected by a mysterious gas. Pupils report feeling dizzy,
nauseated, and in some cases, paralyzed. A few years back, similar incidents in
Afghanistan caused widespread panic. So I'm going to bring in Soroush Pakzad
from BBC Persia's Persian social media team and Alia Farzan from BBC Dari, who
can share memories of what happened in Afghanistan. Thank you both for being
with me here in the studio. Soroush, I'm going to start with you. Take us back
to November when the first incident happened. Paint a picture of the atmosphere
back then in Iran and what was happening there. In November, it was just a few
months after the beginning of the protest to death of Mahsa Amini, a woman in
police custody, which the society was very tense. And we already we have seen
pictures and videos of schoolgirls in the school taking off their headscarves
and showing that their objection to the current situation in Iran. Back in then,
it was that all those news were coming out. And in one school in Qom, the girls,
many girls felt some poison, some gas in the school and they all fell ill. And
but it was after two weeks that first images surfed on social media that we saw
the big bus in front of the school. It was a scary situation when you were
seeing the picture, the videos of the girls sitting on the floor, rubbing each
other's legs, because some of them, they felt that they couldn't walk anymore.
So it was in November that we saw the hysteria that you would see in those
images and people screaming. So and the government and the news media inside the
country, they started to follow up the news and taking it seriously. But when
did it actually become a big story? Because for a while it was just reported as
just random incidents. It was reported as a random incident. Let's talk about
the situation at the time where the Internet was not working properly. And also
all these incidents happening in school where the children, many of them, they
don't have any mobile phone. They can't bring their mobile phone there. So
everything is all depends on the words on Twitter, on Instagram, what they're
saying. But gradually, when we went further, there were like more schools in
mostly in several regions where nothing in capital was going on at the time
until this Tuesday, which we saw a huge wave of poisoning in all around the
country. So 26 schools were attacked in one day, weren't they? Maybe more, even
maybe more. So far, it's been reported that more than 26 schools and more than a
thousand students were affected. And you know, the story became rapidly started
growing and it's become more widespread, these attacks. But I've also been
trying to cover it. It's been such a challenge to get verified information from
inside Iran. Tell us about some of the challenges and how your team is working
on this story. Well, in general, Internet has been limited in Iran for years and
years. But people had access to WhatsApp and Instagram. But since the protests
started in September, October, they blocked WhatsApp as well. So one of the ways
that we get content from people inside Iran is through chat apps like WhatsApp
and Telegram. So we have that limited. So only people with VPN can be able to,
if their VPN works, be able to send content to us. And also on the other side,
it's, you know, many of the parents, they are too worried to talk to media
outside the country. Many of these schoolchildren, they are within this trauma
and they don't want more problems happen to them. So it is very challenging and
it's very difficult to verify the story and make sure which one is fake, which
one is right. And if this happens or not. And many of the school teachers and
school principals are also hesitant of even maybe reporting what is happening in
the school, if the school has had such an incident. Ali, I'm going to bring you
in. You are sitting here patiently and nodding. You remember similar incidents
in Afghanistan. Take us back to what was happening then and when was it? Yeah,
thanks for having me here. The official reports say that this incidents happened
in 2012. But back when I was in secondary school in 2007, 8 or 9, we had the
same similar cases back then. But I don't know why the media didn't pay any
attention or didn't cover it. In my time, we had some cases that it wasn't, we
didn't use social media at that time. We didn't use Facebook or Twitter or
anything. But we heard from other students from other schools that the same
cases had happened and they all have like this feeling of unconsciousness and
also the feeling of like crying, screaming, or even some of them were taken to
the hospitals. But back in 2012, when a case happened in Tahar and affecting
almost 700 students. So it came to the media and BBC also had the report about
that. And later on, another case happened in 2013 back in Tahar and also the
other in Khost, Helmand, Herat, Bamyan, and also I think in some provinces in
the north such as Balkh in Mazar-e-Sharif. We had some different cases. But as I
spoke to some teachers who were teaching back then, they said that all of them
had the same symptoms. It means that it wasn't just random cases. It was like
they are all about to target girls with a specific formula. And also, Alia, all
these years later, do we know what happened? Do we know the source of those
poisonings? Not yet. We don't find any proper investigation or any proper report
about this. But back then, the authorities said that it was not poisoning. It
was. It was what? It was some kind of mental health condition. They reported
like this. So it's mass hysteria. Maybe, yeah. But we don't have any proper
investigation about this. As Soroush, three months has been passed since the
first incident in the city of Ghom, any kind of explanation as what is happening
in these cases? What is the government saying? Well, the most, I think the most
important explanation that we had the health minister that says that this is
intentional. But after all these reactions, he said that this is not our job to
comment about if it was intentional or not. But what we are seeing that we
suddenly we are seeing that some reports from like the media, you know,
connected to the government, to the state media, I can say that they are kind of
like reporting that, for example, in one case, it was a pepper spray. Some
student wanted to make a joke. And the other side, in the latest one, they are
like interviewing a tanker driver that they are saying that this tanker, which
was contained some chemical substances, were around this school and this caused
this poisonous. But people, they don't, you know, they don't buy these things.
And also they don't have trust on the state media and state TV about these
things. And also, you know, one thing that I have to remind us that in seven,
eight years ago, we have this series of acid attacks against women in Isfahan,
which at the time it was allegedly after one Friday, Imam, you know, talked to,
asked about his followers to do the job themselves. People they know that those
attackers were never found. To take action against women with... With, yeah,
with loose hijab, we can say, or the people who, the women who don't cover
themselves properly. And Alia, you were nodding as Soroush was talking about
these things. Back then, did people actually believe the official narrative that
this is just mass hysteria? It seems that they believe, because a few days ago I
was like arguing with some of our colleagues and said that we were wanted to
cover the poisoning in Iran. And he kind of said that the authorities in
Afghanistan have said that it's kind of mental health problem. And it seems that
people believe that. And also back then in my time, my mother used to say that,
oh, don't sit with those kind of people and don't argue with them. Don't talk
with them. Maybe it's like you will get the same thing. It's a little bit like
not realist, really. But it seemed that people believed him. Maybe that's why
that they do not talk about that anymore. And they have kind of forgotten about
this because it kind of happened randomly year by year, but no one took any
serious action against this. It means that maybe the authorities have like
convinced people that it's not poison, but it's a mental health issue or a
condition, mental health condition. You have, you're also nodding Soroush. What
do you have to say about that? Well, this is very complicated. We are talking to
doctors, you know, within the whole of the BBC to see if there is a chance to
find this gas because students are saying that they are feeling some orange
smell around it. So there are some physical, there's nothing visual, but some
physical things that they understand about this. But the reality is this could
be hysteria added to something that was happening. And it shouldn't be like
mistaken. You know, the way that the wave that we are seeing, we saw on Tuesday,
that was big and it cannot, in Iran's case, I don't think that the government
can say that it was hysteria. Thank you very much. Thanks to both of you. Alia
Farzan from BBC Dari and Soroush Paksad from BBC Persian. And now a change of
tune with a story about the celebration of women's achievements in sports in
India. Members of the public were able to vote for their favourite female
athlete for the fourth year of the BBC Indian Sportswoman of the Year Award.
That will take place actually in Delhi this weekend. The five nominees are
featured in a series of videos showing their lives and the challenges they have
faced. Divya Arya takes us through the highlights, starting with the champion of
weightlifter Mirabai Chanu. She comes from the northeast of India, from a really
remote village, from really humble beginnings. She told us that she used to work
with her brothers in the hills and they had to carry firewood and water from the
hills to their home. Her brothers used to carry the wood in multiple trips, but
her strength was so much that she would carry all the wood in one go. She had to
travel a long distance from her village to do her training. And for that she
used to hitchhike with truckers. That is almost unheard of in India because it's
considered really unsafe. An only girl travelling at 4 am in the morning. The
training arena was 24 kilometres from her home and since there was no money,
while her parents were supportive, they basically left her to her own means.
When she started winning medals, she actually met some of those truckers,
touched their feet and took their blessings for having such an important role to
play in her even accessing trainings. An amazing thing about Mirabai is how
small she is. I think she's only 4 foot 11. That's about one and a half metres.
That's about my height. You're petite, a very petite girl. Well, petite, yes.
It's the height that really hits you when you see her lift those weights and
it's a real wow thing about her. And a lot has been written about how she trains
and how she builds her core. And there is some argument that in fact the short
height helps her to some degree. In Farsi we have an expression, we say, don't
judge a peppercorn by how small it is. Crush it and see how hot it can be and
burn you. I think that's a very apt. That actually suits Mirabai. Yeah, yeah,
exactly. And did the five nominees have anything in common when it comes to what
motivated them to take up their sport in the first place? I think it was
different things for different people. Also they're coming from different
sports. They have different trajectories. Some of them are from sporting
families. Some have no sporting background whatsoever. Some saw it as a way to a
better life, to more exposure, to a more meaningful life. Most of them, except
for one, come from really humble backgrounds. And therefore, for them it was
also a route out of the limited options that a woman has when her family is also
economically underprivileged. So let's move to another nominee, Sakshi. She made
history at the Rio Olympics in 2016. But then it seemed like she was history.
What happened to her? So Sakshi Malik is a wrestler and she comes from one of
the sporting families that I was just mentioning. Her grandfather was a wrestler
and he inspired her to take up the sport. Her husband is also a Commonwealth
Wrestling Medalist. So there was a lot of support within the family. And she is
one of those early winners. She won a bronze at the Rio Olympics in 2016, the
first female Indian wrestler to win an Olympic medal. But then as luck would
have it, she hit a losing streak. Then there was COVID, which threw a lot of
sportspersons across the world out of gear. But she speaks about how she kept
training and she didn't let those setbacks hamper her career trajectory. And
then just last year, she made a stunning comeback, winning gold in the
Commonwealth Games. Wow. And there is another wrestler in the nominees. Her name
is Vinish. Her uncle wanted to train all the girls in the family as wrestlers.
Tell us about her story. You know, this is the subject of a very popular
Bollywood film called Dangal. Dangal being a wrestling match in Hindi. And all
the daughters in the family were trained into wrestling. It's their story and
it's the story of that uncle as well. And it's interesting that the state that
she comes from, Haryana, is a North Indian state. And it is mainly in news for
killing of female fetuses even before birth for a very poor child sex ratio. And
it is from that state, which has a really strong wrestling culture, that these
girls have come up, including Vinish. It kind of shows how these change makers
are coming from sort of individual effort. And here again, they have a male
ally, their uncle. And he was, you know, the driving force which helped these
sisters, including Vinish, take up the sport and build a really successful
career in it. Really incredible, you know, going totally against the tides. Also
their uncle was really, really strict with training them. Can you tell us about
some of the training programs they had? Yes, Vinish said, I can't even imagine
it. She said there were no weekends, no picnics, no holidays. And that her uncle
said, if you want to win an Olympic medal, you have to forget fashion. Just
focus on training, diet and sleep. So Vinish also pays tribute to her mother
because she had to fight against all the pressure around her to marry her
daughters off as soon as possible. Yes, and that the reason for that was also
because Vinish lost her father really early. So in Indian society, a single
mother bringing up daughters is seen as vulnerable. And there's a lot of
pressure on such single mothers to marry off their daughters. So while there was
support from her uncle, there was also her mother, who's a very traditional
woman. She was very strict and she said, I realized after the initial setback on
losing my husband that I have to work hard and make sure and stay firm so that
my daughters don't live the limited life that I'm leading. And Vinish won a gold
medal at last year's Commonwealth Games. Has her recent achievement and her gold
medal changed attitudes towards the kind of work she does in her village and in
her community? Yes, absolutely. I mean, not just her, like I was mentioning, her
cousins, Geeta and Babita, have also won Commonwealth golds. And the success of
these sisters has really changed attitudes in the village. Earlier, people used
to question, what are you making the girls do? You know, you're making them wear
shorts and so on. But today, they themselves put their girls into wrestling. And
now when a girl is born into her village, she says that villagers say, it's not
a problem. We'll make her a wrestler. Wow, true trailblazers. Tell us about the
badminton player, Peevi Sindhu. Her story is a bit different. Yes, it is,
because she comes from a big city, the city of Hyderabad in southern India. And
both her parents played volleyball at national level. So there was that kind of
exposure within the family. And she does have, well, we could call it a high
profile. In India, not many sportswomen are widely known, but she is. She even
gets advertisements. She promotes various sports brands. Again, those
opportunities are mainly with the male players in the country. And one reason I
think she shot to fame was back in 2016, when she won her first Olympic medal, a
silver. And she came back, she was greeted in a public display. You know, she
was taken around in an open truck. And in fact, she talks about how special that
memory is still to her. People like love me so much. People support me so much.
And that is when I thought, you know, damn, like, I still get goosebumps. Like,
seriously, it's an amazing, yeah, it's an amazing feeling. And the fifth nominee
is a boxer, Nikhat Zarin. She had great success last year. Tell us about that.
Yes, Nikhat Zarin is a 26-year-old, and she's had great success by winning
flyweight gold at the World Boxing Championship in Istanbul. Then she won gold
at Commonwealth Games in Birmingham. And she won a gold medal at the National
Boxing Championships in India. She also has a lot of family support. It was her
father who introduced her to the sport. You know, she talked about how he wanted
her to channelize her energy because she was this very energetic, vibrant young
girl. And that's a theme we see with all the sportswomen, not just who've been
nominated this year, but even earlier. They talk a lot about family support. And
in some ways, it makes me reflect, Faranag, that when we hear about male
sportspersons, we don't get that sense. Of course, families play such a huge
role because of the intense training and hours and focus that sport training
requires and the small time span in every sports player's life, those golden
years when they have to perform and do their best. But the way women will credit
parents is just something else, which means that those are the real barriers to
be broken. There's one thing about infrastructure, government support, the
importance given to sport in a country, etc. But the key thing, it seems, that
overrides all of this is if their family is standing next to them. Divya Arya
speaking to me from Delhi about the nominees of BBC Indian Sportswoman of the
Year Award. I will put a link to that story with videos of the five nominees on
our website. We have to take a short break for the news right now, but don't go
away. Plenty more to come here on the fifth floor after this latest BBC News.
This is the BBC World Service, where Natasha Loder is examining the challenges
we face from long COVID. COVID's trail of destruction to human health is only
gradually becoming fully apparent. At first, when I got COVID, I thought I'd be
back after 10 days. Then it was a month. Then I started to think, three months.
I'll be hearing from scientists trying to unravel a condition with around 200
symptoms. Long COVID is a health crisis. And finding out what the latest
research on some sufferers is showing. When we exercise participants and we walk
them up and down just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the end, their
blood looks like they've run the London Marathon. Depression, psychosis, sleep
disturbances are mostly reported by women. The long haul of long COVID. Tuesday
at 9.30 and 20 GMT. Still to come on the fifth floor, what happened to the men
who wanted to cooperate with investigators after the Crimea Bridge explosion?
All of these men willingly cooperated with these investigative services. They
all expected that once the questionings are over, they could be free to go.
After like probably two or three days of paying out their pocket for their
accommodation, they were all detained and arrested. More on this story coming up
after the news. BBC News with Gareth Barlow. The Colombian government says more
than 80 people who were taken hostage by protesters in the south of the country
have been released. The police officers and oil workers were held following
deadly clashes near an oil field in Kakata. The protesters want an energy
company that's exploring for oil in the region to improve local transport
infrastructure. The head of the African Union has congratulated the winner of
Nigeria's presidential elections, Bola Tionobu, as his defeated rivals mount a
legal challenge to the result. The Roman Catholic Church in Portugal has
promised to take steps to deal with its history of sexual abuse, child sexual
abuse. But follows a highly critical report that found that nearly 5,000
children had been abused by clergy since 1950. The head of the United Nations'
nuclear watchdog is preparing to meet senior leaders in Iran after his
inspectors detected uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level in the country.
Officials in the Indonesian capital Jakarta say that at least 17 people are
known to have died in a huge fire at a state-run fuel depot on Friday. The White
House says President Biden has had a cancerous skin lesion successfully removed
from his chest last month. The president's doctor says no further treatment is
required. One of the first black officers in the US Army's special forces has
received the nation's highest military award nearly 60 years after he was
recommended for bravery in the Vietnam War. Colonel Paris Davis' nomination for
the Medal of Honor was lost twice by the military at the height of the civil
rights movement. Some researchers say that they found the earliest evidence of
horse riding by humans dating back some 5,000 years. They say that damage to the
vertebrae of five skeletons from the ancient Yamnaya people in Europe identify
them as the oldest known horse riders discovered to date. And from London,
that's the latest BBC World News. And that was Oyku Altintas of BBC Turkish,
landing us back on the fifth floor, where the news comes in Farsi, Marathi,
Russian, Portuguese and many, many more. I'm your host Farinak Amedi and still
to come on this half, escaping an arranged marriage to become a BBC journalist,
we'll hear the story of how Halima Omar Saleh succeeded against the odds. But
before that, let's go back to October last year, when an explosion on a key
bridge linking Russia to Crimea was all over the headlines. The bridge was
opened in 2018, four years after Russia's annexation of Crimea, so it has a
symbolic and strategic importance. But there are still question marks over who
was behind the attack. The Russian Federal Security Services, the FSB, have made
arrests, but for BBC Russian journalist Nina Nazarova, the case is far from
being solved. I met her in Riga, where she is now based, and she started by
telling me about the moment she saw videos of the explosion on social media. I
remember it very vividly, actually, because it was early in the morning and I
checked my phone notifications and my initial thought was that it was a fake,
because it looked like screenshots from a blockbuster. It was like a huge, huge
blast. And then I learned, no, it was for real. And it was clear to me that it
was a huge blow to Putin personally, because also it happened early morning
after his 70th birthday. So it was a blow personally to him and to this whole,
like, occupying strategy of Ukraine. So as you said, it was quite a symbolic
thing, the explosion, but how big of a deal was it practically as well? It was
also a very tactical blast to cut at least some supplies from Russia to Ukraine
territory. And what was the news coverage of this explosion like? I think that
in Russia, most media labeled it as a terror act. So Ukraine never took
responsibility for this blast. But the head of Ukrainian security services, he
somewhat hinted that Ukraine might be responsible, obviously, for this blast.
For some people, this explosion has really impacted their lives. You decided to
actually follow the stories of people who are in prison, accused of allegedly
this terrorist act. Why did you decide to do that? Nobody was interested in the
view of the accused. So the main version was that the explosives were hidden
inside some cargo in a truck. And they basically arrested everyone who had any
relations to this truck. Eight people were arrested in the first week after the
blast. I talked to six of their lawyers. Two lawyers declined to comment. And
what I learned was very different from what Russian media told us. They showed
me official indictments, like preliminary indictments for these arrested. It was
clear to me that actually the Russian special services are not clear yet whether
it was this truck or what exactly exploded. A lot of details is yet unknown. But
it was presented as if the crime was already almost solved. Like eight people
are already in jail with probably possibilities, prison terms of up to 20 years.
The lawyers have read that it would be way easier just to put these people to
jail and to pretend that everything is under control now. So what did you find
out about these people, these men who've been arrested? All of these men
willingly cooperated with these investigative services. They all expected that
once the questionings are over, they could be free to go. But they, after like
probably two or three days of paying out their pocket for their accommodation,
they were all detained and arrested. And for two men it was especially brutal
because one man actually, he saw the blast in the news and he is a head of a
logistic company. It dawned on him that the truck which exploded was the truck
he filed the papers for. So he himself, he phoned the FSB and said, I could have
some vital information for you. Then he literally walked there on his own will.
He persuaded them to question him. He gave them all the details, his phone, all
the papers, whatever they wanted. And they thanked him and let him go. And he
went back to his absolutely normal life for five or six days. So I mean, it's
not like a regular terrorist behavior, I would assume. And after these five or
six days, the same investigator, he asked in court for him to be detained for
like months. Came as a huge shock to him because he was like, I was there at the
beginning, like, what do you like, why? Like, why? Have the officials put any
motives forward for the attacks? Yeah, I mean, like, according to like official,
the main motive is to stop the war in Ukraine, to influence Russian authorities
to stop like this special operation in Ukraine, how they usually put it. But
what I see are that just families torn apart by this sudden catastrophe for
them. Tell me about the families. I know that you followed the story of the wife
of one of these men, and she's been going back and forth in her life has
completely been affected by this. Her husband is a farmer from Kherson region,
who was again, he was contacted and asked to come for some questioning. And he
very willingly drove his way to the questioning and spent some days in a hotel
and then he was arrested. It's like insane situation for her because their home
is in Kherson, in the Kherson city. And the city was liberated by Ukrainian army
some time ago. And her husband now is in prison in Moscow. So she cannot just
stay at her home in liberated territory, but she has to travel all the way to
Russia and back. And I mean, like, you cannot just travel via the front lines.
So she takes like a route via Poland, Baltic states, all the way to the north of
Russia. And then all the way back. Basically she has to travel and to operate in
countries who are at war with each other. So it's very difficult for her
mentally and very dangerous for her. She's scared that some authorities could
grow suspicion of her because she travels a lot. It's probably the most mentally
draining situation for her. Does she think that this is going to be going on for
a long time? Well, they are preparing for a long marathon. It's the reality that
don't on them that they should be ready for a long, long process of trying to
fight for their husbands. Nina Nazarova from BBC Russian speaking to me in Riga.
Now to a series inspired by the recent centenary of the BBC. One of the ways it
was marked was by asking our journalists to go to go into schools and share
their life experiences and challenges with the next generation. Today we hear
from Halima Omar Saleh from BBC Hausa and the Nigerian capital, Abuja. When I
was a teenager, I almost got myself trapped in an early and forced marriage
because of someone who is old enough to be my father, but he wanted to take me
as his third wife. And he started expressing that when I was 13 years old,
sending me some gifts, some presents, but because I was not old enough to
understand what he meant, I thought it was all because I was a very good friend
to his daughter. And when he finally told my family and I was told about it, I
was amazed to hear that story. And that was the beginning of my problems. I had
a dream of becoming a journalist because there were some people that I admired
that time they were working with BBC Hausa service. So I always dream of
becoming like them. But when this matter came in, I knew deep inside me that I
might not be able to achieve my goals because he's a kind of conservative man.
He even told my family that he would not allow me to continue my studies when he
got married to me. So that is an entirely traumatizing thing for a girl like me
at my age. Most of my family members, especially the extended family, they were
fully in support of this marriage. When I reached my third year in the high
school, that time I was 15, then my family decided to promise the man that they
would marry me off to him. And the engagement took place. He told them that he
really wanted the marriage to be consummated at that time, at the age of 15. So
that was when the real problem began. My father wanted to support my idea of
continuing my education even after the high school to university. But because of
the family pressure, many people were in support that I should just marry the
man. They believed that he is rich enough to take care of all my financial needs
and he is responsible enough to take care of me physically and psychologically.
So they didn't believe that it was important for me to achieve my goals or my
dreams. But because my father wanted me to at least finish my secondary school,
finishing secondary school at that time meant that I would get at least a
certificate that I can hold and say that, yeah, I went to school. So because of
that, an agreement was reached on the condition that immediately after I finish
my secondary school, then I will marry him. When I was in my final year in high
school, I was 17, almost 18 at that time. So the date of the marriage had been
fixed. And that moment was the most dreadful moment. I was so confused. I was
worried. I was disturbed. So getting desperate and frustrated, I decided to
leave my family. I packed my things. I left home and I was about catching a bus
to another city. And all of a sudden I remembered that in my society, any girl
that run away from her family, from that moment, her image and that of her
family will be tarnished forever. Even if you come back home, you would not be
accepted in the society because you will be seen as somebody who refused to
listen to her parents. So I decided not to go anywhere. I went back home. And no
one from my family knew that I left home. So the next day I went to school. Then
all of a sudden during a class, I think I became deluded and maybe started
hallucinating. I just saw a lizard come in through the window and entered my
clothes. So I started shouting and screaming and then I fainted. My teacher and
my classmates, they became so apprehensive. And many of my classmates started
crying. I was unconscious. I didn't know what was happening. So I was taken to
the school clinic where they were all praying for me. And then they got a car
which took me home. So when they took me home, I didn't even know what I was
saying. So I was just shouting and screaming, saying that the lizard was still
in my clothes. But some of my family members at that time, they just thought it
was a pretense, that I was trying to avoid the marriage by all means. That was
why I was coming up with that drama. That incident happened about two times
again. I was screaming and shouting. But they all believed that I was just
pretending. Maybe I was just looking for a way out. Then I wrote my final year
exams. But to be honest, I didn't even know that I would pass the exams because
writing exams in that situation was horrible and terrible. The time came.
Invitation cards were distributed. Preparations were underway. And I left Kano
for my hometown where the wedding was going to take place because in my
tradition, the bride is supposed to go ahead of her family. But surprisingly,
three weeks to the wedding, the man called off the wedding. The news of his
withdrawal left me totally flabbergasted. I was too stunned to say anything when
my father was telling me. But unfortunately, my family members, my extended
family members, especially my uncles, said that that would not stop me from
getting married. Even though the man had withdrawn, I have to get another suitor
to introduce to them and then I would get married to him like on the day that
was fixed. And that was another trauma for me because the man that I had hope
in, I sent him a letter that he could please come, send his own family members
to talk about the marriage proposal. But he said that he was no longer
interested. So they wanted to give any other person a chance who was available
at that time. But at that moment, my father insisted that no, since all the men
said they were no longer interested, it is better to allow me to continue my
studies. And that happened. I started my university. And when I finished my
second year in the university, I was 21. I got married to someone whom I loved.
And I still love him and he also loves me. And my long dream, my long goal was
achieved. I was able to become a journalist in the BBC House of Service. All the
time that I was going through the difficulties, the trauma, the depression,
nobody ever gave attention to know exactly what I was going through or to offer
a help. Because in my society, the only thing people believe is that maybe it's
spiritual problems. So I believe mental health issue is very important in this
part of the world. And people still don't pay attention to it. After telling the
story in my alma mater, where dozens of students listened to the story, at that
point, none of them asked me any question. But after the presentation, many of
the students got my contacts. And up to now, they keep sending me messages
asking me one question or the other. Some of them told me that they are going
through a difficult situation similar to mine. Because in most cases, especially
girls, young girls, they go through a lot from family pressures. So I can say
that I have become like a consultant, can I say, because almost every week, one
of the students of that school contact me. And they frequently ask me questions
about how I dealt personally with the trauma at that time. And I told them that
I didn't even know that I was going through depression or anxiety. But now as a
grown up adult, a journalist who works on different programs that has to do with
mental health issues, I am fully aware that at that time, I was just battling
with depression, anxiety and so many other things. And I try my possible best
now to help whoever is having the same problem. That was Halima Omar Saleh
speaking to us all the way from Abuja. And that's all the time we have here on
the fifth floor today. I'm Farhana Kamidi. As always, thanks for listening.
You're listening to the BBC World Service, and now it's time for Witness
History. Today, the political assassination that rocked Serbia. We're going back
to the 12th of March 2003, when the country's Prime Minister, Zoran Zinjic, was
shot dead outside government headquarters in Belgrade. Serbia was placed into a
state of emergency. So who did it and why? Gordana Matkovic has been speaking to
Matt Pintas about a moment she will never forget. They say people in America
remember exactly where they were and what they were doing when John F. Kennedy
was assassinated. I think it's the same in Serbia. Today, when you ask ordinary
people, everyone knows exactly where they were and what they were doing when
they heard the news. I was at a meeting. The deputy minister came to tell me
that Zoran Zinjic had been shot in front of the government building. Gordana was
one of the first people to know about the shooting. She was one of Zoran
Zinjic's most important government ministers. From that point on, everything
became surreal. We quickly learned that he had passed away. Bundled into the
back of a car, the dying prime minister is rushed to hospital, but emergency
surgery failed to save him. Two high-powered rifle rounds fired from a distance
suggest a well-planned professional assassination. We were all immediately given
personal security. I had a man with a rifle guarding my office. It was very
unpleasant, especially for a person like me. I wasn't used to that. I was so
angry and upset. To understand why Zoran Zinjic was targeted by an assassin, we
have to go back to the late 1980s and the administration of Slobodan Milosevic.
During more than a decade in power, Milosevic used his control of the media,
government appointments, police and the military to rouse ethnic hatred and to
build a Serbian nationalist mass movement. Zinjic was one of the most prominent
opponents of this ruling regime. He'd helped form a democratic movement against
Milosevic, and one of the people joining him in that movement was Gordana
Makovic. I was a member of the Democratic Party from the start. There was a time
when people would join a party by writing their names on small pieces of paper
because independent parties were still forbidden. Of course, Zoran had played a
heavy role in the party. We cooperated closely and had mutual trust. Zinjic was
at the forefront of protests against Milosevic, who had been accused of
committing war crimes during several bloody conflicts. Zinjic's life was under
very serious threat in 1999. He temporarily left the country because he received
information from reliable sources that there were plans for his assassination. A
political leader on the run, a would-be president of Yugoslavia after Milosevic,
that in itself today could be a sentence of death. And Zoran Zinjic's
calculation is that secretive planning, ingenuity and luck will keep him alive.
But Milosevic's time as Serbia's leader was running out. His disastrous war in
Kosovo led to the NATO air strikes on Belgrade in the spring of 1999, and he'd
become the first serving head of state to be indicted by the United Nations for
crimes against humanity. This gave Zinjic all the impetus he needed to return to
Serbia, and he was one of the key figures as Milosevic was ousted from power by
a popular revolution in Belgrade. Leaders of the democratic opposition of Serbia
celebrate their victory. It's a moment to relish. As of today, they're in power,
so they'll probably need to come up with a new name for their alliance. Zoran
Zinjic, the most vocal leader of opposition in the country, was appointed prime
minister in the transitional government. As prime minister, he had to make
decisions quickly. When he first talked to me about joining the transitional
government, he said, accept it as a military obligation, and when your service
ends, you're a free woman again. However, it's important to remember that with
our rise to power, certain people not only lost the privileged position they had
until then, but they also believed that Serbia was nationally damaged. Zinjic
was determined to clean up Serbia and rid it of the corruption of the Milosevic
rule, and one of his first acts was to overrule the constitutional court and
authorize the extradition of Milosevic to the Hague War Crimes Tribunal. Many
Serbians continued to support Milosevic. They believed that if Milosevic was to
face any responsibility, it should be done within the national judiciary system.
In this context, it's really important to note that we were bombed in 1999
without the consent of the United Nations. That experience caused resistance in
terms of cooperation with international institutions, even among the opposition.
For me, it was a matter of choosing the lesser of two evils. The judiciary in
Serbia at the time wasn't reformed yet, so the judges were appointed during
Milosevic's regime, and it was simply unrealistic to organize such a trial in
Serbia. So as a government, it was a very brave decision for Zoran Zinjic to
make that decision against Milosevic? It was a brave decision indeed, but at the
same time, it was inevitable. But this bravery had grave consequences. Following
the shooting, there was a huge outpouring of emotion in the country. Bordane
remembers Zinjic being more popular than ever. For the first time, people adored
Zinjic. His approval rates skyrocketed. I wrote an opinion column at the time,
and I said that it was the moment when people started packing their bags again.
It felt like people had lost hope. In total, 12 people were found guilty for
their involvement in the assassination in 2007 after a three-and-a-half-year-
long trial. Former police officer Zvezdan Jovanovic was sentenced to 40 years in
prison for shooting Zinjic. It was believed he had been hired by the crime gang
boss Milorad Ulamek, who was already in jail for the murder of the former
Serbian president Ivan Stambolic in 2000. The prosecution argued that both men
wanted to restore a pro-Milosevic government and believed that killing Zinjic
would help achieve that. Looking back 20 years on, Gordana wonders how different
life would be in Serbia today had Zoran Zinjic survived. Personally, it was a
great loss, of course. From my point of view, the greatest thing was that he
showed that change was possible. Things significantly improved even with such
limited funds. Serbia's GDP was so low that we were given loans from the World
Bank, provided for the least developed countries in the world. So, with very
little funds and a very small administrative capacity, Zoran showed that he can
change things and improve them tremendously. I think we crossed the point of no
return. In many areas, there was no turning back. It's hard for me to talk about
him, but it's comforting knowing that he had two years to show what it means to
be a great statesman. Gordana left her government position in 2004 before
becoming the general advisor of the president of Serbia, Boris Tadic. She was
speaking to me, Matt Pintus, for this episode of Witness History. This is the
BBC World Service with The Invention of Russia. We're telling the story of the
largest country in the world. In episode three of the series, Catherine the
Great comes to power when her husband is murdered. She was very involved in the
coup, but not necessarily overtly. For one thing, she was pregnant at the time
by another man. The Invention of Russia at bbcworldservice.com. At
bbcworldservice.com, Tech Tent. Do women still face discrimination at work for
being pregnant? We hear from one former Google worker who tells us about her
experience. Why are so many governments worried about that Chinese viral video
app? And we listen to the annoying...