TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-05-03H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 fast walk a day be enough to help you live longer. This is the BBC World
Service, the world's radio station. It's two o'clock GMT. I'm Jackie Leonard.
This is the newsroom from the BBC World Service. China's annual parliamentary
session has opened. It's expected to further tighten President Xi Jinping's grip
on power. In Ukraine, conflicting reports on whether Ukrainian forces in Bakhmut
are preparing a strategic withdrawal or holding ground in the face of intense
pressure from the Russian army and Wagner mercenaries. Every day we kill a lot
Russian soldiers. We absolutely believe in our victory. The United Nations and
Iran have announced an agreement to allow UN officials to carry out further
inspections of Tehran's nuclear program. Very importantly, our ability to
establish monitoring and verification measures that we believe are
indispensable. All here on the newsroom from the BBC World Service. We'll begin
with a bulletin. Hello, I'm Neil Nunes with the BBC News. China has announced an
economic growth target of about five percent, one of the lowest in years, at the
start of its annual parliamentary session in Beijing. The nine-day session is
expected to further tighten President Xi Jinping's grip on power. Viv Marsh has
this report. This meeting of the National People's Congress will erase another
link with the era before Xi Jinping. The Premier Li Keqiang, who was seen as
aligned with China's previous leader Hu Jintao, will step down during this
session after delivering the government's work report. His job and many others
are expected to be filled by Xi Jinping's allies. The Chinese leader himself
will be confirmed as president for a third term after he secured five more years
as head of the Communist Party and military last October. Up to 200,000 people
have been taking part in demonstrations across Israel and the largest protest so
far against the government's planned judicial reforms. Details from Anna Aslam.
For the ninth week in a row, people took to the streets with flags, banners and
drums calling for democracy. The demonstrations were largely peaceful, but
footage showed some protesters in Tel Aviv breaking down police barriers and
igniting fires as they blocked major roads. The police used water cannon to
clear the crowds. There were also some clashes in Jerusalem. Several opposition
politicians spoke at the protests, voicing their concerns about the government's
proposed reforms. The changes would allow ministers to choose Supreme Court
judges and would limit the court's powers. Iran says it's prepared to give
United Nations inspectors greater access to its nuclear facilities. The head of
the UN's nuclear watchdog, Rafael Grossi, told reporters Iranian authorities had
also agreed to install surveillance cameras. Here's Bethany Bell. Mr. Grossi's
trip followed the recent discovery of traces of uranium enriched to near
weapons-grade level at the Fordow underground nuclear site. Tehran, which says
its nuclear work is peaceful, says it restricts uranium enrichment, but
acknowledged there may have been what it called unintended fluctuations. The
agreement is likely to head off a move to censure Iran at the IAEA's Board of
Governors next week. But Western diplomats say Iran has made similar promises in
the past that have yielded little or nothing. The British Prime Minister Rishi
Sunak says he's committed to ensuring that no one who arrives in the UK
illegally will be allowed to stay. Writing in a British newspaper, Mr. Sunak
described his determination to stop migrants crossing the Channel in small
boats. The government's expected to announce legislation in the coming week
which will push for people arriving by sea to be removed to Rwanda or to another
country which has been deemed safe. This is the latest world news from the BBC.
Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to open an internal investigation
on corruption allegations involving President Guillermo Lasso. The vote is non-
binding, but it could eventually lead to impeachment proceedings against Mr.
Lasso. Mr. Lasso has been accused of involvement in a corruption scheme
involving state-owned companies. He's rejected the allegations. Journalists have
taken to the streets in Guatemala to protest against censorship and government
intimidation after a judge ruled that eight reporters covering a high-profile
trial should be investigated for obstruction of justice. The journalists were
accused of publishing deliberately misleading information about the trial.
Here's Leonardo Ruscha. The ruling was announced on Tuesday as the editor of the
prestigious El Periódico newspaper, José Rubén Zamora, appeared in court for a
hearing. Mr. Zamora, who has published several reports on government corruption,
was arrested seven months ago and charged with money laundering. During the
hearing, the judge opened a new criminal proceeding against him and accepted the
prosecutor's request to investigate eight other journalists. The ruling caused
outrage in Guatemala and abroad. President Joe Biden expressed concern, urging
Guatemala's justice system to reject the criminalization of independent
journalists. At least five people have been injured in Peru after the security
forces opened fire against indigenous protesters in the southern city of Huli.
Local media say demonstrators from the Armada indigenous group had encircled a
group of soldiers and police officers. The French football star Kylian Mbappe
has become the top goal scorer in the history of his club, Paris Saint-Germain.
The 24-year-old World Cup winner scored near the end of PSG's victory over
Nantes on Saturday. It was Mbappe's 201st goal in all competitions for the
football club. BBC World News. Hello, I'm Jackie Leonard and this is the
Newsroom from the BBC World Service. China's annual parliamentary session opened
with music and party members clapped along as President Xi Jinping took his
place front and centre. There will be nine days of meetings, during which
President Xi Jinping will be confirmed as president for a third term in office
and he's also expected to tighten his grip on power even further by replacing
several officials and ministers with loyalists. The economy, the military and
employment are likely to be on the agenda but what else can we expect? Our
correspondent Stephen McDonnell is in Beijing and joins us now. So Stephen, just
to begin with, what's the importance of this session? What's its significance?
Well, it depends how you look at it, politically or economically, but for
example, when it comes to the economy, we've had a target of around 5% this year
GDP growth. Now, that's important because it was a very disappointing 3% last
year and China is emerging from zero COVID and so a 5% growth rate is what you
might expect. However, can China achieve this with a leadership in place,
basically entirely loyal to Xi Jinping? So we have a kind of generation of
reformists who are at this Congress, especially the Premier Li Keqiang and in
their place we have people who are clearly loyal to Xi. Now, there's a danger
that they may be all sort of operating inside an echo chamber, that they won't
give Xi Jinping the fearless advice that's needed and that this might actually
hurt the economy and it might take off, say achieve 5% this year, but then in
the years to come, potentially just plateau. So that's what everyone will be
looking at at this Congress, signs that China can maintain its economic growth.
And what about the other priorities? You talked about zero COVID. What about
health? What about the military? Yes, well, in this opening speech, they're sort
of covering all manner of issues. It's like a kind of state of the union speech.
So for example, 12 million urban jobs will be created this year. You know, it's
a speech dealing with everything from people's health benefits to commitments to
climate change, you name it. But all of it is, as I say, to be seen through the
prism of emerging from COVID. Like, because the economy struggled so much last
year, it's had an impact on everything. And it's one of the reasons why, for
example, the health benefits of retirees have been cut, because the government
spent so much money on this zero COVID approach. Yes, and so that is really the,
you know, the question is whether or not the government can maintain things. I
mean, for example, there was some bullish comments from Li Keqiang about how
great difficulties and challenges were overcome with the guidance of the party,
we succeeded in maintaining overall stable economic performance. Well, I think
many people would say you didn't actually achieve that because third quarter
last year, for example, was negative growth. And there's been a lot of tension
here. So people will be looking forward to hopefully some stability. But as I
say, the problem, the real problem is, is the government now just so completely
stacked with Xi Jinping loyalists, that they will block innovation that they
won't be able to make tough decisions, because they'll be afraid of upsetting Xi
Jinping. Stephen, thank you. That was Stephen Macdonald in Beijing. In Ukraine,
there has been intense fighting around the besieged eastern city of Bakhmut. The
Russian mercenary Wagner group is heavily involved in the relentless shelling
campaigns. The group's leader, Yevgeny Prigozhin, has claimed his forces have
all but surrounded the city, where an estimated three to 5000 civilians still
reside. But a spokesman for the eastern grouping of the Ukrainian armed forces,
Sergei Cherevaty, said they were repelling Russian troops under difficult
circumstances. Every day, Russian Wagner's group attacks our position. Every
day, maybe it's 30, 50 times. But every day, our troops defend our position and
destroy Russian troops. Every day, we kill a lot Russian soldiers. We absolutely
believe in our victory. Our diplomatic correspondent, James Landell, is in Kiev,
and is watching the situation in Bakhmut. What we know is that there is still
fighting going on, and that it is incredibly hard fought at the moment. The
Russians are claiming that they have almost encircled the city, that there's
only one, maybe two routes out for the defending Ukrainian forces. That said,
there are indications from various sources suggesting that potentially Ukrainian
forces might be redeploying to prepare for some kind of strategic withdrawal.
That is merely a suggestion. It is not something that has been confirmed or has
been described as actually accepted as actually happening by the Ukrainians. But
that evidence is the British military officials saying that the Ukrainian forces
are coming under severe pressure in the north of the city. They say that Russian
troops are making advances there. They also say that Ukraine is sending in elite
troops to reinforce some of their units that are inside the city. There are
reports that Ukrainian troops are digging trenches towards the west of the city,
implying that they will need them at some point at that part of the city where
they don't have it at the moment. So there is a degree of uncertainty. It's very
hard to know precisely what's going on on the ground. But certainly, it is very,
very hard fought at the moment. And if and when the Ukrainian forces do
withdraw, how do they do that with minimal losses? How do they pull that off?
All armies train on how to withdraw in a strategic way. It's an action that
requires its own defence, which is one of the reasons why some people have been
speculating that the recent reports of reinforcements going in on the Ukrainian
side are there actually to prepare for some form of defence. That is only a
speculation. But that is one of the reasons that some analysts have given for
the possibility of why other Ukrainian forces have been brought in. How
important is Bakhmut? If the city does fall to Russia, what does that actually
mean? That's the question mark that hangs over this. Why is this battle being so
hard fought when Western analysts, Western officials, Ukrainian commanders say
that Bakhmut has no strategic or little strategic value in itself? It's not a
garrison town. It's not a transport hub. It doesn't have a particular geography
that allows, you know, armies to go in and out. So I think from the Russian
side, the Kremlin is simply desperate for some kind of victory. It hasn't had
one for a long time. It simply needs to have some good news to sell back home. I
think it is also hoping that if Bakhmut falls, then potentially that could be
some sort of springboard to future territorial gains elsewhere in the Donbas.
Again, that is challenged by military experts. And then on the Ukrainian side,
it seems to be pretty straightforward. They are using this battle to tie up
Russian forces that could be elsewhere. They're also using it to inflict as many
losses on Russian forces as possible, frankly, to kill as many Russian soldiers
as possible, to degrade its military capability. And that's a very, very hard
calculation to make, because a lot of Ukrainian soldiers are dying in the
process. But the calculation that Ukrainian commanders are making is that
substantially more Russians are dying. And that is a price worth paying. But
that is why the battle is so hard fought. But it's certainly a huge cost to both
sides. That was James Landale in Ukraine. Iran has agreed to allow UN officials
to carry out further inspections of its nuclear programme. The UN nuclear
watchdog chief, Rafael Grossi, says there's been a marked improvement in his
discussions with the Iranian government. He's been in Tehran for talks following
the discovery of uranium particles enriched to near weapons-grade level. On Mr.
Grossi's return to Vienna, where the International Atomic Energy Committee is
based, he said that the agreement, including tangible monitoring measures and
surveillance cameras, will be reconnected. In the first place, the normal
inspection activity and what is expected from Iran. In the second place, the
issues related to locations where we have been trying to find clarifications
from Iran. And finally, very importantly, our ability to establish monitoring
and verification measures that we believe are indispensable. From Vienna, here's
our correspondent Bethany Bell. Iran and the IAEA have issued a joint statement
which says that Iran is prepared to give more information and more access to UN
nuclear inspectors who've been looking into past nuclear work by Iran. And this
announcement was made after a two-day visit by the head of the IAEA, Rafael
Grossi, and he said this included reinstalling monitoring equipment in some
sites, including cameras. Now, the IAEA has also, in a separate development,
been concerned about the discovery of traces of highly enriched uranium at one
of Iran's underground nuclear site at Fordow. And the concern about this is
because weapons-grade enriched uranium is 90 percent, and what was discovered at
Fordow was 84 percent. And we know now, Mr. Grossi says, that there will be 50
percent more inspections at Fordow to try to get to the bottom of this. Iran
says that its nuclear program is peaceful, although it did acknowledge that
there could have been what it called unintended fluctuations at Fordow. Mr.
Grossi said he hoped that this was a new phase in relations between Iran and the
IAEA. He said he had got concrete steps that had been agreed here, but other
countries may be more sceptical, saying that Iran has made such promises in the
past and not delivered. Will it deliver now is the big question. That was
Bethany Bell in Vienna. This is the BBC World Service in London, a reminder of
our top story this hour. China's annual parliamentary session has just opened in
Beijing, with a massive reshuffle expected as President Xi Jinping brings in
more loyalists to tighten his grip on power. Canada is dealing with an influx of
migrants crossing illegally from the US. Last year, more than 39,000 people
entered Canada, mostly by a remote rural road linking New York state to Quebec.
Nadine Youssef reports from the border. This is a Royal Canadian Mounted Police
officer speaking to migrants, who are about to cross into Quebec from the United
States at Roxham Road. The rural paved road is an unofficial crossing into
Canada. It is a popular loophole fueled by the safe third country agreement
between Canada and the United States, which forces migrants to seek asylum in
the first country they step foot in. Those trying to cross from the US into
Canada at official crossings would be turned away. At Roxham Road, however, they
can enter, sometimes without a passport or visa, be arrested, and then apply for
refugee status once on Canadian soil. Just right now in the corridor, there's
about 15 Latino families that just showed up because they heard about us.
Maurice Poisson works at Welcome Collective, a centre that helps newcomers in
Montreal with anything from giving out toys and winter clothes to providing
legal support. The reality on the ground in Canada for many migrants has been
challenging. The backlog in refugee claims has increased 26% last year, and some
are being forced to wait nearly two years to receive crucial documents that can
allow them to work or access social benefits. Poisson believes it is the
responsibility of both the Canadian and Quebec governments to do more for these
migrants. As a society, we're just winning if refugee claimants can get their
work permit and work, you know, like really it makes a big difference to just
process these first steps quickly so they can be active in society. Quebec's
Premier, Francois Legault, has asked Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to close
Roxham Road, saying his province can no longer accept migrants with dignity. The
opposition has also placed pressure on Mr Trudeau to do the same. In response,
Mr Trudeau said he is speaking with his American counterparts to renegotiate the
Save Third Country Agreement. For now, there's no telling what the future of
Roxham Road will be, but people continue to make the long journey to Canada with
hopes of finding a better life. Why Canada? Why Quebec? Because you're people. I
feel me protect. Montreal is my new home, the only home I have. That report by
Nadine Youssef. Delegates at the United Nations have been wrangling over an
agreement to protect the world's oceans. Their latest round of talks has overrun
without agreement so far. The UN High Seas Treaty aims to increase protection of
marine life in international waters from 1% to 30%. The actress and campaigner
Jane Fonda has been at the talks in New York. I think that this treaty is so
important. We have to save these creatures who basically are fighting to save
us. They are our strongest allies in the fight against the climate crisis. The
ocean is one of our strongest allies. Ocean provides us with 50% of the oxygen
that we breathe. We cannot live without a healthy ocean. A treaty is something
that activists have been working for for years. So what's the holdup? Our
climate and science reporter is Esmee Stallard. The main issue is over the
resources that oceans give us and how they are shared amongst countries. Richer
nations have the money and the technological capacity to explore the deep
oceans. But poorer nations want to make sure they also get the benefits. They
see the oceans as a common shared resource. And that is the main sticking issue
at the moment. So do they just keep talking? Well, the fact that keeping talking
is a good sign. Normally when they think there's no way of a breakthrough, they
end these talks early or on time, which is what's happened the last few goes. So
we are hoping that means there is progress being made. Some of the delegates
having been up for 24 hours straight now with no naps, no rest, it does come
into question whether they can keep going. As you say, there are resources on
the ocean floor and below it, and people want to get their hands on that. But
why is a treaty necessary? What might a treaty actually achieve? So at the
moment, what the high seas is they're called, so they're the international
waters, they're the bit that any country can go into. They're sort of the wild
west of the oceans. There is no restrictions on them. Any country can go in,
fish, ship, research. The problem with that is it poses a lot of risk to the
marine animals that are living there. And we're already seeing the impacts of
overfishing and shipping. About 10% of marine animals are currently at risk of
extinction. So it's hoped that a treaty will put in place a framework to make
sure that if we do use the oceans, it's done sustainably. We're talking about
vast areas here, though, and we are talking about somewhere which, as you say,
has been hitherto anyway pretty much the wild west. How on earth would you
regulate such an area? Well, that is one of the key questions that actually
doesn't even get resolved at these negotiations. All that happens here is they
agree that they will set it up, and then there'll be a whole process of
committees that will decide who oversees that. Now, for those poorer nations
that have oceans near them, they're asking for funding, they're asking for
support to make sure those areas can be regulated. But that is the big, massive
next step. That was Esme Stallard. Let's get some sports news now with Andy
Barwell. Well, Jackie, an amazing comeback victory for the English Premier
League pace setters, and it was Arsenal's Reece Nelson who scored their decisive
goal in the seventh minute of added time, with Arsenal beating Bournemouth 3-2.
When the ball came out the edge of the box, I was thinking before it happened, I
was thinking, just please, just give me one chance, you know, and the ball
dropped in the right area, and I just put my foot through it, you know, and I
was happy about it in the back of the net. More than happy, I should think. I'm
buzzing, I'm buzzing, really, I'm buzzing, yeah, very happy. Well, the gap
between Arsenal and closest rivals Manchester City stands at five points in the
title race, City defeating Newcastle 2-0. Fourth place side Spurs went down 1-0
at Wolves. Wesley Fofana scored his first Premier League goal as Chelsea beat
Leeds 1-0. That was the same score as Aston Villa defeated Crystal Palace.
Pressure mounted on David Moyes, the West Ham manager, as West Ham suffered
their biggest defeat of the season, losing 4-0 to Brighton. Pressure as well on
Brendan Rodgers. Leicester City beat them 1-0 at Southampton, who moved off the
foot of the table. Now, the Southampton attacker Theo Walcott made his first
start since November and had this very frank assessment of the game. It wasn't a
great game, was it? If I'm being completely honest, I'll watch at home, or even
here. But it's been a very interesting week. It's been very challenging. A lot
of truth has been said behind closed doors, which is important for players to
hear and to see as well. See some people actually, you know, there's a lot of
people that care for this club. It's nice to see this. And I think today showed
a team, not just a team that play, but a unit of players, even off the field,
staff, everyone together, getting a result. Simple as that. And that's what it
is now. I don't care how we play, I'll be honest with you. Some people, yeah,
they want to see pretty football, but I'm a results man now to some extent in
the league because, you know, obviously there's not many games left. And we got
that today. I was pleased to see, definitely. Kylian Mbappe became Paris Saint-
Germain's all-time top scorer as he helped his side extend their lead at the top
of the French top flight to 11 points, thanks to a 4-2 home win against Nantes.
In Spain's La Liga, Atletico Madrid went third in the table, a thumping 6-1 win
for them over Sevilla. And in golf, the American player Kurt Kitayama leads the
way on 9-under par after the third round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational in
Florida. And South Korea's Ko Jin-young, on 15-under par, leads by three shots
in the early stages of the final round at the Women's World Golf Championship in
Singapore. Andy, thank you. That was Andy Barwell. Thank you, Andy. The
Uruguayan-born American architect Rafael Vignoli has died suddenly in New York.
He was 78. Rafael Vignoli was also a classically trained pianist, but is best
known for his landmark buildings across the world, including one in Fenchurch
Street here in London that's widely known as the Walkie Talkie. In 2013, it was
reported that its concave shape caused some drama on a hot summer's day by
reflecting light strong enough to melt produce in shop windows and parts of a
car. The BBC's Andrew Verity went to see for himself. It can scorch a carpet,
nearly setting fire to it. At this local hairdresser, the paint has bubbled up
from the heat. Even the products inside the window have been affected. Now,
behind me is something that's become rather famous in the last couple of days,
the exact spot where someone left his Jaguar just for a few hours, but because
of the heat, found that when he returned, the wing mirror and various other
plastic panels were melted. Rafael Vignoli's son Roman worked with his father
and he spoke about his life and work. Well, he was an incredibly brilliant, warm
and engaging man who had a passion for life and art and philosophy and history
and everything under the sun, frankly, who loved music, who loved to teach and
mentor people. Over his 58 years of practice, he mentored generations of
architects, designers and engineers. I mean, if there's one thing that your
listeners need to come away with from this conversation, it's that he understood
better than anyone the public and environmental dimension of every single
enduring investment in the built environment. He knew that when you put money
into building a building, it's going to be there for a long, long time and it's
going to affect very many more people than just the people that use it. And so
he always strove and in almost every instance succeeded in ensuring that there
was a contribution to the public square and the Tokyo International Forum is a
seminal project of his in Tokyo, the Cleveland Museum of Art also. But 20
Fenchurch Street in London is a remarkable building that only exists because it
returns to the citizens of London more free, publicly accessible park space than
would have been on that site if it had not been developed at all. Roman Vignoli
talking about his father, the architect, Raphael Vignoli, who's died in New York
at the age of 78. And there we end this edition of the Newsroom from the BBC
World Service in London. This is the BBC World Service and here's Harriet
Gilbert to tell you about the next World Book Club. This month we're in France
to talk about a most extraordinary, daring and original novel called Pigtails.
When it was published in 1996, it created an enormous stir. It's not a feminist
pamphlet. It's a feminist book, it is. But I'm not telling you what to think, I
hope. It's the story of a lovely young woman who submits to the sexual demands
of the director of a perfume company. Her body gradually begins to change,
growing more and more like the body of a pig. At some points she is very animal,
at some other points she is very human. She oscillates according to the level of
aggression against her. She's not stable. Nobody... It's a story of that, you
know. World Book Club with Marie Dariasek in half an hour. What are we to make
of the news that an 11-year-old girl in Cambodia has died from bird flu? She's
the first person to contract the disease there since 2014. I'm Claudia Hammond
and in Health Check, we'll be asking how worried the world should be. And in
Equatorial Guinea, there's an outbreak of a disease you might not have heard so
much about, Marburg virus. We'll fill you in on the latest. And would 11 minutes
of quick walking a day help you live longer? All coming up after the BBC News in
Health Check. BBC News with Neil Nunes. China has announced a reduced economic
growth target of about 5% at the start of its annual parliamentary session.
Meetings expected to tighten President Xi Jinping's grip on power. The Premier,
Li Keqiang, is due to be replaced by a Xi loyalist. As many as 200,000 people
have taken part in demonstrations across Israel. The largest protest so far
against the government's planned judicial reforms. Footage showed some
protesters in Tel Aviv breaking down police barriers and blocking roads. Iran
has agreed to give the United Nations inspectors more access to its nuclear
facilities. The head of the UN's nuclear watchdog held talks in Tehran after the
discovery of uranium enriched to near weapons-grade level at an underground
site. Journalists in Guatemala have demonstrated against censorship and
government intimidation after a judge ordered eight reporters to be investigated
for obstruction of justice. They were covering the trial of a newspaper editor
charged with money laundering. Congress in Ecuador has voted overwhelmingly to
open an internal investigation on corruption allegations involving President
Guillermo Lasso. The vote is non-binding but could eventually lead to
impeachment proceedings. The British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak says he's
committed to ensuring that no one who arrives in the UK illegally will be
allowed to stay. The government's expected to announce legislation that'll push
for people arriving in small boats to be removed to Rwanda or elsewhere. Two
international Red Cross workers have been kidnapped in northern Mali. It
happened in an area that's a hot spot for violence by Islamist militias. And the
Tunisian director Youssef Chabi has won the top prize for the Pan-African Film
and Television Festival, FESPACO. BBC World News. Hello, I'm Claudia Hammond and
it is lovely to be back with you on the BBC World Service with Health Check. And
we have lots to talk about today with the help of BBC Health reporter, Philippa
Roxby. Thanks so much for coming into the studio for us. Now, we've got some
serious disease outbreaks to talk about in a moment, but you also have something
that might cheer us, a way of maybe living longer. Yeah, you only need to do 11
minutes of exercise and it can make all the difference. That's a very short
amount. We'll talk about that later on. And we're also going to hear about the
new way of mending broken legs that's been trialled in Sri Lanka and Gaza and is
being used in Ukraine. Now, before all that, Philippa, I want to talk to you
about bird flu. It is back in the headlines after an 11-year-old girl died in
Cambodia. What do we know about the girl and how she contracted it and what
happened? OK, so this was an 11-year-old girl, as you say, in Cambodia. She
tested positive and then sadly died. Her father, we think, has also tested
positive and some other family members, but they're still trying to pin that
down. What we've discovered from a scientist who has analysed the virus that she
died from is that she didn't die from exactly the same strain that is
circulating widely in birds at the moment in all sorts of different parts of the
world. Yeah, because this is why in loads of parts of the world now, say,
chickens are being kept indoors so that they don't catch it from wild birds.
That's right. It's affecting millions of domestic and wild birds. But this girl
didn't die of that strain. She died of another strain which has been around in
Cambodia for around 10 years. So scientists are still trying to work out exactly
what's happened. There's obviously been a bit of spillover from birds into
humans, but how it's happened and what that means, they still don't quite know.
So how many cases are there altogether? At the moment, I think there's probably
about a dozen in Cambodia. And, you know, there have been sporadic cases over
the last few years, but not hundreds, not thousands. So lots of scientists are
saying we haven't seen that massive transmission from birds and then into
mammals and then into humans. It just hasn't quite happened yet. That's always
the big question, isn't it? Always the big question is, is it passing from
person to person rather than animal to person? Exactly. And they haven't pinned
that down yet. It doesn't seem to be happening. Is there a vaccine against it,
though? No, there's no vaccine against this virus, which is called H5N1. That's
the one that's circulating in birds. There's no vaccine against that. Scientists
are trying to develop one. But as soon as they develop one, the virus quite
often mutates into something quite different. So it's a real race to catch up.
So there's no cure at the moment. Yeah, off and away. So, of course, what
everyone wants to know is, especially, you know, after Covid, how worried should
we be? Is this something that we're going to see? We know the birds with bird
flu are around the world. Is this something we're going to see in people around
the world? Is it impossible to say? The risk to humans at the moment is still
very low. The World Health Organization are not overly worried about the risk to
humans. They're monitoring the situation very carefully because clearly they're
worried about the numbers of birds that are infected. This is a huge, massive
outbreak and it's affecting millions of birds. And they're also slightly worried
about the jump into other mammals like seals and otters, etc. And they don't
want it to jump into humans. But at the moment, they are not overly anxious
about that prospect. And I suppose what they need to do is to find out who else
has it. You know, if there's some people who've got it, does that mean that
probably there are a few more? But they'll be trying to trace people. Yes,
exactly. They'll be doing a lot of tracing and they'll be trying to find out who
else is affected. And more sequencing of the virus to find out what exactly is
it, which strain are we looking at that's causing the problem? So I guess
everyone is more alert now, thanks to Covid in a way. Their whole aim is to try
to do surveillance and to do it early to be able to intervene. Absolutely. I
think all countries around the world are hyper vigilant now because of Covid.
And they'll be alert to all these things and doing everything they need to do.
Now, you also have news for us of another virus that may well have gone under
the radar for many. And that is Marburg virus disease. And cases have been
detected in Equatorial Guinea and neighbouring Cameroon. So let's start with the
basics. What is Marburg? I guess there might be lots of people who've never
heard of it. Yeah, this is a really nasty, contagious virus. It comes from the
same family as Ebola. And Ebola took thousands of lives in West Africa, you'll
remember, back in 2014. It hasn't been seen in Equatorial Guinea for many, many
years. It has been seen sporadically in other African countries. The symptoms
are very, very nasty. It's a hemorrhagic fever, which means it causes bleeding,
sometimes bleeding of the ears, the eyes under the skin. And it's very, very
deadly. So they are worried, really worried about this. How many cases have
there been? There's been 11 deaths so far. And they're trying to trace contacts.
This is the important thing that happened with Ebola as well, trying to trace
people who might well be infected and who are moving around and not knowing
they've got the disease. So that's the real impetus right now, is trying to
track down those contacts and make them isolate. And how worrying is this one?
With all these, we're trying to guess, well, how serious is this? Obviously very
serious for the people who've got it or who know people who've got it, but how
serious globally? It's a big issue in Equatorial Guinea. The World Health
Organisation are saying, yeah, it's serious. It's low risk for everybody else
and any other countries because what they're trying to do right now is contain
it. And sometimes health systems in Equatorial Guinea may not be sufficient to
do that, but they're going to try their best. They're sending teams out there to
see if they can help. And there's not a treatment, is there? No, again, no
treatment. This is not very positive. It's not really, is it? No treatment for
this either. But again, scientists working hard on it and may well be testing
some of their development vaccines in Equatorial Guinea. Well, thank you for
that, Philippa, and do stay with us. Now, imagine you've broken your leg very
badly, maybe in a car accident or even in a war. Now, rather than having your
leg put into plaster, which might damage your wounds even further, in a high
income country, it would be held in place by a metal device called a fixator.
But these can be expensive and are sometimes in short supply. So a team at
Imperial College London, led by Dr Mehdi Saeedi, has been testing low cost
devices, which can be manufactured fast and locally, even in a conflict
situation. I asked him how these fixators work. So this device is basically a
device that is used for fractured bone, broken bones. And in some cases, when
you have a badly damaged wound, we cannot cast it. So we use an external device
to hold the bone in place until it heals. I can see that. You wouldn't want to
cover it in plaster if the skin is very, very damaged. So is it a bit like when
you sometimes see people walking around and they've damaged their leg badly and
they've almost got a sort of metal cage around it? Exactly. So there are two
types of them. In our case, it's just one rod next to your leg, connected to
your bone through some pins that go straight through the skin. I know it doesn't
sound very pleasant. It does sound painful, I must admit. And what made you want
to come up with a new kind of fixator, as they're called? What's wrong with the
other kind? The issue is that if that device is not good enough, you're not
going to have your bone healed completely. And you're going to have issues for
many years. And in many low and middle income countries, they're very expensive.
So we wanted to make it very cost effective. How cost effective have you managed
to make them? So it's one tenth of commercial devices. In London, we have made
them £100. Obviously, in low and middle income countries, we expect this to be
even lower. And also, we would be able to manufacture this device because of the
simple manufacturing process locally. And is it easy enough to make that, I
don't know, you could just email somebody the instructions for how to make it?
We have developed a toolkit. It's very similar to the toolbox that many people
have in their houses. A lot of drill bits, a lot of cutting tools, and also some
specific drilling and cutting guides. You can just send it to them and they can
manufacture it very easily. And how is the device being tested? So we have
tested through a lot of mechanical testing, using a lot of compression tests,
and also doing it through cadaver bones. So human bones, we just compared it
with the commercial devices and we measured how stable the construct is. So in
Sri Lanka, you've just finished a pilot where you are in effect trying them out
with real doctors, trying them on real patients. How well did they work? So we
have done it in two hospitals and we did it on 17 patients for the duration of
12 weeks. And we had a follow up every two weeks. So obviously, we had some
outcome measures, you know, the stability of the construct and the bone healing,
which was monitored through x-rays. The same result that you would expect from a
commercial device, we saw it in our device. So it was a very successful trial
and that gives us confidence to actually use this device in other countries. The
second trial is ongoing in Gaza, but with the part made in Gaza. Are you finding
it's used for different kinds of injuries in different countries? For Sri Lanka,
it was mainly road traffic accidents, but for Gaza, it was gunshot wounds. And
also this device was used in Ukraine due to the war. As you can imagine, many of
them were type of blast injuries and that sort of thing. Now, we thought it
would be interesting to hear what kind of difference it can make on the ground.
So we've heard from Dr. Mahmoud Mattar, who's an orthopaedic consultant and head
of limb reconstruction surgery in Gaza at Nassar Hospital. Here he is. I use
this mainly for the tibia or leg open fracture, for example, those with gunshot
injury as well as a big wound and on those patients with bone loss. It is a
stable device in case of temporary treatment for those with open wound. It's
used for maximum one month until the soft tissue settle and the infection
subsides. Then we are going for the final stabilisation. I hope we can widen the
privilege and the use of this device. So we've also heard from Professor
Blonsky, who's in Kiev in Ukraine, about how he's been using it. Our surgeon
team use external fixation for the treatment of gunshot fractures of the tibia
in a patient who was injured near the city of Bucha. This patient was surgical
treatment in our institute with external fixation device together with a vacuum
system. All of the above allowed the fracture of the tibia to grow and the soft
tissue wound to heal. Is the idea that places would be able to make these very
quickly when they needed them, for example, when a conflict has started?
Importing things to these areas are extremely difficult. It would take a few
months. In the case of Ukraine, as we heard from Professor Blonsky, we started
manufacturing in Poland for Ukraine in March 2022. And according to him, we were
one of the first to provide them with these devices. In a few days, we have the
full manufacturing and delivery and distribution ready. Recently, after the
earthquake in Turkey and Syria, we have been in touch with people on the ground.
In Syria in particular, they told us they have access to very low quality
devices. So hopefully in the near future, we're going to be in touch with Syrian
people to start local manufacturing over there as well. Now, your clinical
trials are still ongoing and so you're awaiting full results to see just how
effective they are. But what sort of difference are you hoping it might make for
patients, for the person who's been injured? How would this change things for
them? Knowing that you can provide very high quality, good surgical care for
patients with a much more cost effective device, I think it's very beneficial.
So we have been in touch with some organizations like World Health Organization
to help us to roll it out in many more countries. We have been sending these
donations to Gaza for years and it's endless and it takes months to send them.
But now that we have started doing this, you can see by empowering local
communities what difference we can make. Dr Mehdi Saeedi, it's a clever idea,
isn't it? I mean, there's more research going on into how effective they are,
but it's clever, isn't it? Yeah, I really like that idea. Well, you're listening
to Health Check from the BBC. I'm Claudia Hammond and my guest today is BBC
Health reporter, Philippa Roxby. Now, Philippa, I was really intrigued by this
new study from the journal BMJ Medicine on suggesting that having a COVID
vaccine might help with long COVID even, and here is the really interesting bit,
if you've already been infected with COVID. Now, this was an observational
study, not a trial done in the normal way, wasn't it? Can you explain the
difference? Because it's slightly tricky. Yeah. So ideally in a controlled
trial, in a perfect trial, you'd get two different groups of people, ideally
exactly the same ages and genders. And you'd give one group COVID vaccines and
see what happened to their long COVID symptoms and you wouldn't give the other
group vaccine and again, see what happened. But that's actually very difficult
to do in reality because most people in most countries have at least had one
COVID vaccine. And it's quite difficult to track long COVID symptoms too. Long
COVID is still quite an intangible thing. It's not something that's really been
pinned down. There's no official definition. And those symptoms can overlap with
lots of other different conditions. So you can see that an ideal trial to find
the answer to this is not easy. So what do they do instead? Okay, so instead,
they just monitored, they followed lots of people. It's a bit of French
research, 455 people to see what happened, but they can't absolutely prove the
effects. But they do seem to think that there looks like there's a positive
effect on long COVID. People's symptoms were reduced slightly after having a
vaccine. And I think overall, scientists tend to think there probably is some
benefit. They can't absolutely prove it. But there's no reason not to have a
COVID vaccine. Now, you can see why it might make a difference beforehand,
because hopefully, then you would be less affected by the symptoms of COVID if
you caught COVID. But what's interesting here is that it could make a difference
even afterwards, because usually you think, oh, well, if you're infected, that's
kind of too late. But what could be going on here? Yeah, I mean, they're not
really very sure of the mechanism behind this. They still don't quite understand
exactly what's happening. But I'm guessing when you get a vaccine, you build up
antibodies in your system. And those antibodies may be able in some sort of way,
tackle some of the symptoms of long COVID. So we're talking about fatigue,
breathlessness, brain fog are some of the many things people complain about. So
we need more research to know whether this was definitely something that was
helpful. Yeah, more robust research, more trials. Well, thank you for that,
Philippa. Now, with any vaccine, one thing people always want to know about is
potential side effects. But did you know that some vaccines might even have side
effects that are beneficial? The hypothesis is that the vaccine boosts part of
the immune system, even helping to protect against other diseases. Now, these
are known as non-specific effects. And the idea has been controversial. But
recently, some tantalising results are beginning to appear. To find out more,
our reporter Emily Knight spoke to researchers in Guinea-Bissau and in Denmark,
where teams are working together on the BCG vaccine, which protects against
tuberculosis. BCG vaccine has been around for more than 100 years now. It was
invented by Calmet and Garin, who were two French researchers. So it's called
Bacil Calmet Garin, in an abbreviation that becomes BCG. They took tuberculosis
from cows and modified that to become a weak pathogen, which would create
protection against tuberculosis in humans. This is Christine Stable-Ben, a
medical doctor and professor of global health at the University of Southern
Denmark. In Paris, at that time, 25% of the children who were exposed to
tuberculosis died. But among those who got the BCG vaccine, only 4% died. But
they also saw that their all-cause mortality declined tremendously. Calmet noted
at that time he actually wrote a paper about it, and he speculated that it might
be that BCG vaccine invoked some non-specific benefits in these children. But it
was potentially interpreted as spurious findings and never followed up. But,
well, here we are, 100 years later, and starting to unveil that BCG vaccine has
what we have now coined beneficial non-specific effects. We started doing a more
systematic search into the overall health effects of vaccines at the Bandem
Health Project, our field station in Guinea-Bissau in West Africa. My name is
Isaac-Ella Bartomeu Silva. I am a physician and epidemiologist working with the
BCG and measles vaccination in Guinea-Bissau. The Bandem Health Project started
working in Guinea-Bissau more than 40 years. So the Bandem Health Project is a
field station, a collaboration between the Ministry of Health in Guinea-Bissau
and the University of Southern Denmark, where I belong, and it started in 1978.
At that time, every second child died before it reached five years of age.
Guinea-Bissau is a low economic country. The child mortality is high. The main
problem is malaria, tuberculosis, HIV, and diarrhea for the child. When we
introduce the BCG vaccination, the mortality goes down. Those who had received
BCG vaccine, they had more than a third reduction in their risk of dying during
the first month of life. And this was not due to prevention of tuberculosis,
because tuberculosis does not kill children in the first month of life. It was
due to prevention of septicemia, blood poisoning from bacteria, reductions in
the risk of respiratory infections. We see that more than 20% reduction of the
mortality in the child who get the BCG vaccination, if you compare for the child
who don't get the vaccination. And we start making different trials to test how
this can work. In the main hospital in Bissau, mothers like Olga de Silva have
brought their babies in to receive vaccinations, including the BCG. The BCG
vaccine is a support, a defense for the health of the children. Even if my child
is sick, because of the vaccine, he will be resistant to sickness and survive.
In my view, every mother must take all the vaccines, as well as BCG, for the
well-being of the children. I bring my son to be vaccinated. The vaccine
protects him, even if he gets sick. If the child gets measles, for example, the
child vaccinated with BCG is more resistant to measles and other diseases than a
child not vaccinated with BCG. It's important to understand that we see that the
vaccine is helping well now. But what about in five years? What about in 10
years? What about in more than 20 years? What can happen for these people who
are getting this vaccine? I hope that this study can change the health politics
for the vaccination. Very interestingly, the BCG vaccine can also protect the
children from the disease. So there is now interesting research coming out of
the US showing effects of BCG vaccine on people who develop type 1 diabetes,
Alzheimer's disease. BCG, for many decades now, has been a treatment against
bladder cancer. There are also studies indicating that BCG vaccine may reduce
the risk of lung cancer. So, intriguingly, the vaccine is also a protection
against the disease. So, intriguingly, this vaccine seems to have many different
effects which are not all explainable from the same immunological mechanism. And
it's not just the BCG vaccine which has these unexpected, non-specific effects.
Vaccines for measles and polio have reported similar findings. It all comes down
to the kind of vaccine you're talking about. Vaccines can be live, using a
weakened but still active form of the disease, or non-live, in which the disease
is dead and won't replicate inside your body. Christine's team have noticed big
differences in the way these vaccines stimulate the immune system. So the
pattern we've seen now, after studying four live vaccines and six non-live
vaccines, is that the live vaccines all come with these beneficial, non-specific
effects. But in contrast, we have seen that the non-live vaccines, though they
protect against deadly diseases, are not associated with the same reduction in
all-cause mortality. This is partly because the different types of vaccines
stimulate different immune systems. You might not know it, but you actually have
two of them. We have two immune systems as humans. We have the innate immune
system and the adaptive immune system. The adaptive immune system has
historically been thought to be the immune system which could develop memory
against the infections that we met and make sure that we wouldn't be infected
from the same infections again. But the innate immune system is much more non-
specific in its way of working. There are only 5% of all living species that
have an adaptive immune system. So just from that perspective, when you think
about it, you get the idea that maybe the adaptive immune system isn't such an
important feature for surviving. It now turns out that the innate immune system
that all living species have is much more important than previously thought. It
also has a memory. It can be trained by the infectious encounters we have and
that will change how it responds to other encounters in the future. It's this
innate immune system that the BCG stimulates, boosting our response to all kinds
of disease. It enters the bone marrow. We're not quite sure how that actually
takes place, but in the bone marrow we can see that the progenitor cells, the
stem cells for all the innate immune cells, they start spitting out innate
immune cells that are more active. And that is quite non-specific. It's not
directed against something that looks like BCG. It's against many different
bacteria, virus, fungi. Although Calme first discovered the positive effects of
his BCG vaccine over 100 years ago, the science on it is still emerging. As late
as in 2012, a group of researchers from the UK wrote in response to our
randomized trial that they found it biologically implausible that we could see
these effects and kind of implicitly that they should therefore be dismissed.
Later the same year, this observation that BCG could train the innate immune
system was published. So I can't remember who said it once, but today's science
fiction might be tomorrow's science fact. And we also now understand more about
how it is that a vaccine against tuberculosis can invoke such non-specific
benefits. Emily Knight reporting. It's going to be interesting to see what
happens next and whether future research can tell us how big any positive
effects might be and how long they last, which might be really crucial. Now,
Philippa, there is just time for one more study before we go. And I like this
because it's suggesting that just 11 minutes a day of moderate exercise,
something like quick walking, could lower the risk of stroke, cancer and heart
disease. I have to say that sounds quite easy and almost too good to be true.
Can you walk us through this study and what they did and what they found? Yes,
sure. Well, they looked back at previous research. So they analyzed a whole load
of research that had already been carried out on the benefits of physical
exercise on our heart health and on cancers and on actually how early we die.
They sort of number crunched all these bits of data. So it turns out you don't
have to do very much to make a huge difference to your health. If you don't do
anything, even 11 minutes a day of brisk walking, something that gets your heart
rate up a bit and gets you a little bit out of breath, that would be enough to
cut your risk of heart disease, potentially stroke and maybe even some cancer.
So it's all extremely good news. One in 10 early deaths could be prevented. One
in 20 cardiovascular cases of cardiovascular disease, that's heart disease and
strokes. And one in 30 cancers could be prevented as well. That is really
extraordinary, isn't it? Yes, so across a whole population, that's a lot of
deaths prevented. And I guess the message here isn't saying all anyone needs to
do is 11 minutes and that if you were doing more than that, that you should,
should I stop running now? Absolutely not, because if you're doing more than
that, you're clearly already helping your health and the idea is don't cut back.
But if you're not doing anything and you're daunted by the prospect of the 150
minutes that you're recommended to do every week. That's across a week, is it?
That's across a whole week. If you're daunted by that, don't worry, just do 11
minutes, do 15 minutes if you can. I mean, it's never going to be the case that
everybody does it or can do it, is it? No, that's very true. But if you're
targeting as a population, if you're a government or you're trying to encourage
people to take up exercise, what you can say to them is look at the benefits
across a whole population and that incentivises people to try and do something.
There does seem to be a trend in the direction of anything being better than
nothing. So this adds to the evidence in a way, doesn't it? It's just showing
there's a minimum amount you can do, you can get away with. Yeah, just try and
do something if you can. Well, thank you so much, Philippa Roxby, for coming up
from the BBC Newsroom to join us on Health Check today. And thanks to the
producer, Gerry Holt, and our studio engineers today, Gwyn Jones and Michael
Millam. You can find me on Instagram and Twitter at Claudia Hammond, and I will
be back with more from Health Check from the BBC next week. Bye for now. This is
the BBC World Service, and on the Inquiry this week… It's 100 years since the
island of Ireland was partitioned, but major demographic and political changes
mean growing numbers want that split reversed. We'll be asking, will there be a
united Ireland? The Inquiry at bbcworldservice.com slash inquiry. The Inquiry at
bbcworldservice.com