TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 talk about this lunchtime, here's that number to call again 03700 100 444. The
lines are open. BBC News at 11 o'clock. A transgender rapist who attacked two
women has been sentenced to eight years in prison at the High Court in
Edinburgh. Isla Bryson, who's 31, committed both offences while known as Adam
Graham. Bryson attacked one woman in Clydebank in 2016 and another in Drumchapel
in Glasgow three years later after meeting them online. The Prime Minister is in
Belfast where he's trying to build support for his deal to overhaul post-Brexit
trading rules in Northern Ireland. Known as the Windsor Framework, it includes
new shipping lanes to ease the flow of supplies from the rest of the UK. Sarah
Hards works at a logistics company in the port town of Larne which checks goods
as they arrive. She was pleasantly surprised by the deal. It's further reaching
than we thought it was going to be. So really it's almost taken us back to pre-
Brexit days, almost. The paperwork required to come in now really has been
simplified, therefore costs will be reduced and hopefully this will be reflected
literally on the supermarket shelves and in turn the consumer in Northern
Ireland's pocket. The number of people in fuel poverty in England has risen
slightly for the first time since 2010 to nearly 3.3 million. People are deemed
to be in poverty according to their income fuel bill and the energy efficiency
of their home and the increase has been blamed on higher gas and electricity
bills. Police are urgently searching for the baby of a couple who disappeared
with the child in January when it was just days old. They have arrested
Constance Martin and Mark Gordon after the pair were spotted in Brighton last
night. Beijing has criticised the US after the White House ordered government
agencies to wipe the Chinese social media app TikTok from federal devices.
American officials believe it can be used to collect data for the Chinese
government and is a threat to national security. Beijing says Washington is
afraid of an app enjoyed by younger people and TikTok's makers deny sharing user
information. BBC News. You're listening to BBC Radio 4. The Iraqi politician
Ahmad Chalabi was one of the key players in the lead-up to America's invasion of
Iraq in 2003. Two decades on, Ahmad's distant cousin, the British journalist
Selma Chalabi, reflects on his complicated legacy both as a figure on the global
stage and as a member of her own family in My Cousin Regime Changer. It's
February 2003, post 9-11. The atmosphere is fibro, the war drums are banging in
Washington, DC and London. The target is Iraq and Saddam Hussein. And here I am
in London on the 15th of February, marching with my mum and my dad. I'm a
Muslim. I'm a Muslim. I'm a Muslim. Marching with my mum and my dad, who is
Iraqi, and thousands and thousands of others. We're marching to say no to this
war. We don't trust the motives and we don't trust the arguments and we don't
want to be party to it. There's a photo I've got of my mum and dad all wrapped
up in their winter wear with a look of hope on their face. I do not seek
unpopularity as a badge of honour, but sometimes it is the price of leadership
and it is the cost of conviction. The drums were getting louder. The war was
going to happen. This is the time for this house, not just this government or
indeed this Prime Minister, but for this house to give a lead. The real action
was taking place across the pond in Washington, DC. And as I watched the build-
up on television, this man kept on appearing. He was right at the centre of the
drive and the push to go to war and he shared my surname. His name was Ahmed
Chalabi. We are Iraqis working to liberate our country. We are not walking into
this blindfolded. We have seen the dangers. We have suffered the betrayals. We
are still here. He was laser focused. His goal was one thing, overthrow Saddam
and put all the energy on it and don't distract from this goal. He slapped the
table and he told me that he would do or say anything in order to persuade the
United States to invade Iraq. I can't think of somebody without an official
position who's not an American who could ever access the levers of power like
Chalabi did. He looked like so many who are close in my family. He had the heavy
jowls of the Chalabi clan and he had the pale skin. And I remember going to my
dad and saying, who is he? Am I related? What my dad told me next connected me
to a vast unfolding global story in a way I could never have imagined. And I've
been intrigued by this man ever since. This is my attempt to get to know him. My
name is Selma Chalabi and this is My Cousin Regime Changer. This is a song by
Aziz Ali called Bustan, which shows how rich Iraq was and how productive its
land is and how giving the river, the two rivers of Iraq. This is my dad, Zuhair
al-Chalabi. He's from Baghdad, but he's been in the UK for most of his adult
life. And certainly as a child and even now, I associate this kind of music,
this old Iraqi music with my dad. It's what he loves to listen to. My
relationship of Ahmed to me is his father. Yeah. Is the cousin of my father.
Okay. So did you as families spend much time together when you were? No, there
was a class division. At that time, we were living in the deprived area and then
we're living on the posh area facing the river. So it was a kind of split family
from the beginning, really. Yeah. There's nothing, have anything in common with
each other. So just to clarify, Ahmed's father is my grandfather's first cousin.
By my reckoning, that makes me Ahmed's cousin twice removed. I have a photo of a
common ancestor, a guy called Ali Chalabi, who goes right back to the days of
the Ottoman Empire in Iraq. He's extremely wealthy and influential. He even has
his own prison. But the family splits in two after that. One of the stories my
dad often tells me is how as a child, bailiffs came and took all the furniture
and he watched as his mother cried. On the opposite side of the river was the
other part of the family, a wealthy and influential Shiite Baghdadi family. So
bear this in mind when my dad talks about Ahmed, the personal and political
weave together. I'm ashamed. I'm ashamed of being a Chalabi. He has betrayed
Iraq, Ahmed Chalabi, and I will never forgive him. We are not going to see Iraq
rise again for a long time to come. The fact that it could happen or not with
him or without him, that's immaterial. He gave the justification. So what
exactly is it that Ahmed did that made my dad never forgive him? It's a long
story which I'll go into, but the pivotal moment was 9-11. He described it as
the American tolerance will be much less. This is Antifad Kanbar. He worked for
Ahmed in his Washington office. Afghanistan was not enough to satisfy what
happened and there is a highway from Afghanistan to Iraq. That's how he
described it to me. And the first comment, Saddam is gone. He said it in Arabic.
Ahmed Chalabi saw what many people didn't. We all know that there's
realistically, there was a lot of people who were in the United States. We all
know that there's realistically, there was no natural link between the attacks
on the United States of 9-11 and any thoughts of invading Iraq because there was
no linkage between Iraq and the attack and the terrorists who did this. But
nonetheless, he saw a tremendous opportunity there. Aram Rostan is a journalist
and he wrote a biography of Ahmed called The War. I talked to him down a line to
Washington where he's based. Now, some people believe that the neoconservative
movement that had now, well, sort of these seats in power because of Bush's
appointments, they would have, they wanted to topple Saddam Hussein no matter
what, and they would use 9-11 to do that. I don't know. I do know that Ahmed
Chalabi planned, as soon as it happened, he knew this would be an opportunity to
get the US to invade. By April 2003, Saddam was gone and Ahmed played a central
role in getting there. He was the leader and frontman of an Iraqi opposition
group called the Iraqi National Congress. As that leader, Ahmed was held up by
some in the corridors of power in Washington as the legitimate Iraqi opposition.
This is where I think his true brilliance was. He managed to convince
neoconservatives that toppling Saddam Hussein would bring about these
extraordinary results. He said it would bring about a stable Iraq, a pro-Israel
Iraq, a counterweight to Iran. His argument was that toppling Saddam meant
Shiites, because he's very much a Shiite politician, would prevail in Iraq, but
it would be moderate Shiites who don't favor Iran and don't oppose Israel. And
that's just a message he was telling people who wanted to hear it. Chalabi
instilled loyalty in many people. I'm Tom Krzeski. I'm a retired Foreign Service
officer, an American diplomat who served mostly in the Middle East during my
career. Many people thought he was indeed the best choice to lead Iraq in a
post-Saddam era, and that we should have supported him more before the war, that
we should have sort of declared him, I don't know, President in Exile or
something like that. Ahmed himself was to claim many times that that was not his
goal. We are not walking into this blindfolded. We have seen the dangers. We
have suffered the betrayals. We are still here. As for my own role, I do not
seek office and I'm not a candidate for anything. I think my role ends, from my
point of view, with the liberation of Iraq and the departure of Saddam. He was
such a controlled man. He knew how to use anger. He knew how to use sort of
sweet talk. He was a very effective speaker. He dressed in Savile Row suits. I'm
not sure if he actually got them on Savile Row, but I bet he did. His hands were
perfectly manicured. He had a beautiful haircut. He was charming. There's so
many charming people, so it's more than just charm. He had strategy. He was able
to make people loyal to him in a way that's reminded many people of a cult. What
I believe he was, was unstoppable. The latest Middle East crisis, perhaps the
most menacing of all, has flared up in Iraq, a country that produces over 30
million tons of oil a year. To understand Ahmad and the roots of his story,
biographer Aram Rostan takes me right back in time to a turbulent period in
Iraq's history, the revolution of 1958. It was a dramatic time in Iraq. It was
stunning. It was, they killed the king. They killed the prime minister, Nouri
al-As'aid, who's a very famous character. Crowds were looking for the wealthy to
kill, for the enemy. He was from one of the richest families in Iraq. It was a
Shiite family. It was very much in the camp of the British. It was in the camp
of the king. And once the revolution of 1958 took place, that family was done
there, at least that side of the family. For most people in Iraq, that
revolution overthrew a hated regime. For the Chalabees, it was a tragedy. The
family, including 14-year-old Ahmad, fled their estate in Qadamir, just outside
Baghdad, never to return until the fall of Saddam. One of his relatives said to
me, if you're looking for a rosebud, and of course he's referring to Citizens
Kane and that search for the one thing that drives a man, he said, look to that
revolution. And that's where you find Chalabee's life turned forever. He still
looked at the old Iraq with the eyes of a child who was privileged. He saw it as
a marvelous place of silks, gold, prestige, fun, wealth everywhere. And he
doesn't, you know, sort of acknowledge the awful poverty, the violence, the
repression that the regime that his family was part of had caused. But it's to
that he kept on wanting to return. He wanted to return to what he thought was a
golden age. Aram went on to tell me about a moment when Ahmad returned to the
family estate in 2003. There's a ping pong table that the teenage Ahmad had
hastily stashed away behind a wall when he fled. He went back to that house with
a throng of reporters and, you know, followers and his entourage. And he did go
behind that wall and he pulled out this old, frail, beaten up ping pong table.
Wow, it was still there. It was still there. Amazing. Amazing. Scenes like that
really helped me to build a picture of Ahmad and what might have driven him. His
life was to take many twists and turns. He grew up in exile in Beirut and
started out his working life as a promising mathematics professor. He then went
into banking. You may have heard of Petra Bank. He set that up in Jordan, but it
ended in scandal. He had to flee again, this time to London, and he was
convicted in absentia of fraud. It's at this point that he connects with the CIA
and his political life takes off. It's this part of his life that I'm interested
in, the 90s and the lead up to the war. Here's Entifad Kanbar. The relation with
the CIA started in 1992. Ahmad Chalabi came to Washington, met with them at the
hotel in Arlington, and they basically start funding him from 1992 until 1994.
As a result of this relationship, the Iraqi National Congress was formed. They
initially saw him as a facilitator who would bring these diverse groups
together, Shiites, Sunnis, Royalists, Communists, whatever it was, to make sure
this opposition could be stood up and have impact. But he didn't see himself
that way. He saw himself as the man who would lead Iraq. He did see himself as
that because there's some claims that, no, that was never the case. Yes. Of
course, many people always say that they have no ambition. I think it was clear
to everybody that was his ambition. Eventually. I mean, the CIA didn't realise
it at first. The relationship ends badly, as Ahmad himself explains. There was a
deep misunderstanding between us and the CIA. Perhaps what happened was not to
their liking, the way we developed ourselves and we developed this political
programme and this large organisation. They were frankly surprised at the extent
that we managed to use the resources that were put at our disposal, which were
not very much. Ahmad was pushing the boundaries of the relationship. The CIA
wanted a facilitator and someone to organise propaganda. He had very different
ideas. Things came to a head when we launched our military offensive against
Saddam in 1995, which they did not like. And after Saddam invaded the north and
destroyed our headquarters in Erbil and killed over 100 of our people, they
stopped helping us. And we have had no relation with them since that time.
Entifad met with Ahmad not long after the failed coup. It's a really low point
for Ahmad. And yet this is where he reinvents himself and achieves something
quite astonishing in Washington. I saw Chalabi and he was sitting on the couch
in his house in front of me. I can see him now. And he was very upset. He said,
Entifad, they tried to bury us alive. So I said, Dr Chalabi, what are we going
to do? We lost everything. There's no hope anymore. We can't overthrow. He said,
no, we're going to work in Congress and we're going to have an act to overthrow
Saddam. I thought this is crazy. It certainly sounds crazy. An outsider, a
foreigner with a track record behind him, the banking scandal and the failed CIA
relationship, is now going to try to influence American foreign policy at the
highest level. And guess what? He does it. He finds a new group of people in
Washington to back him. They're not in power yet, but they soon will be under
George Bush Jr. Here's retired diplomat Tom Krajewski. He recognized very
quickly that there were influential men, these neoconservatives, Paul Wolfowitz,
Richard Perle, a number of others, including the future vice president Dick
Cheney. And he was instrumental along with an administration was being very weak
in its confrontation with Iraq. And in 1997, he was instrumental along with many
of these people in kind of forcing through the Iraq Liberation Act in 1997,
which it did not, of course, demand that the president of the United States
invade Iraq and overthrow Saddam Hussein. That's not competency of the Congress,
of the Senate. But it did urge this and it did also provide funding for the
Iraqi opposition in exile. Antifad Kanbar was there and remembers working with
Ahmed during that period. Washington was 50-50 divided. The Pentagon and the
White House were with Chalabi. The State Department to a large extent and the
CIA hated Chalabi. We used to sit in a meeting on a long table with 20, 30 high
US officials discussing Iraq. And he sits at the head of the table and they
start fighting amongst each other about Chalabi. And he looks at me and smile in
a glorious way, whispering in my ear, look how they are fighting about me. The
Iraq Liberation Act passed in 1998. Some came to know it as Ahmed's Act. That
has never happened in history, by the way, the way it is. I mean, he's not a
head of a state, he's not anything. He's just a person who represents himself.
He was laser focused. His goal was one thing, overthrow Saddam and put all the
energy on it and don't distract from this goal at any second, at any moment. As
a result of the act, money flows again from American government coffers to Iraqi
opposition groups. The bulk of it flows through to Ahmed's Iraqi National
Congress. This is overt funding and part of Tom Krajewski's job as a Foreign
Service Officer was to scrutinise the spending. 25 million bucks a year, which
frankly isn't a whole lot of money these days or then days. But nonetheless, it
was money that I had to account for on the Hill. Tom had several face-to-face
meetings with Ahmed and remembers vividly one meeting about an information
gathering programme that Ahmed and the INC were running. We designated about
$400,000 a year to this information programme. And I had never gotten a real
detailed accounting of where that money went, how we were using it, what was the
product, what did it produce? If it's intelligence, I want to see it. I'll take
it back to Washington, we'll assess it. It'll be used. I mean, what are you
doing with it? That's the only time I ever saw him angry. And he slapped the
table and he told me that he would do or say anything in order to persuade the
United States to invade Iraq. This was his mission in life. And anyone who got
in his way should be very, very careful. I took that seriously. For his part,
Ahmed claims he complied with all auditing procedures. The record is very clear.
Anytime any auditors came to examine the books at the highest level of scrutiny,
they found out that things were in order. An astonishing series of acts of
terrorism has been perpetrated in the United States. Countless numbers of people
were killed and injured. I woke up my morning, have my coffee while I'm changing
to going to the office, my normal day. And I open the TV and I see smoke coming
from this high rise building in New York. And then while I'm watching, the
second plane come hit and my heart dropped to the ground. And I called Chalabi.
He's not a morning guy, by the way. So I told him two airplanes hit the towers
in New York and the first comment, Saddam is gone. I stood in my boss's office
and watched the towers attacked. And then the Pentagon was attacked and we
abandoned the State Department thinking we could be next. There was, I think, a
realization, not so much, not very clear on that day, but in the subsequent
weeks that the focus was no longer going to be on returning our embassy to
Tehran. It was going to be first on Afghanistan and then on any other country
that the president and his senior advisors thought was a threat to the security
of the United States. Saddam, of course, was considered a implacable foe. There
were many in the new administration who very much wanted to take care of Iraq,
finish the business of 1991. Now, Ahmed is pushing at an open door. He has
friends in powerful places and the case for war is built. Iraqi denials of
supporting terrorism take their place alongside the other Iraqi denials of
weapons of mass destruction. It is all a web of lies. First time we may be
completely certain he has a nuclear weapons. It's when, God forbid, he uses one.
Unless we act, we are confronting an even more frightening future. If we hadn't
had the Iraq Operation Act, they may have skipped him. But we did the groundwork
so it was ready for the United States. But what's interesting now is that the
weapons of mass destruction, all of that, and all of the intelligence, the fake
intelligence, that is now attributed to Ahmed. It's attributed to Ahmed, but
it's absolutely not true. Absolutely. It's laughable how it's not true. I asked
biographer Aram Rothstein the same question. You know, I don't know. There I'm a
little more conflicted. What he is really responsible for is public stories,
these massive, really crazy stories that were appearing in all sorts of
newspapers about WMD, or about hijackers that were training under Saddam Hussein
to take over airlines, mobile bio labs, underground wells, and so forth. Those
stories were due to Ahmed Chalabi and his Iraqi National Congress. He was
spreading those and he was really good at getting news to journalists. And he
was good at getting scoops to some journalists and making others jealous so
they'd get the scoop next time and give it as much attention as possible. It
would take just 18 months from the events of 9-11 for the US and its allies to
get to the point of invading Iraq. Once the military crossed the border in
Kuwait and headed to Baghdad, it was simply a matter of weeks before Saddam's
regime would fall. Saddam Hussein is no longer in power in Baghdad. This
morning, American troops arrived unopposed on streets throughout the center of
the city. But to assume that after that would be relatively quick and easy was
just a colossal blunder. As for Ahmed, he manages to get a US military flight
and is one of the first to reach Baghdad after the fall of Saddam. He envisions
himself like De Gaulle, coming one day into Baghdad the way De Gaulle would go
into Paris, right, with these throngs of people cheering him. We all know it's
delusional on his part. But the people in his, the Americans in his little
circle, they didn't know it was delusional. The Iraqis did, of course. He
doesn't get the recognition. Nobody knows who he really is. They just know he's
very rich. It's a point that Jeremy Paxman raised directly with Ahmed on a
satellite phone to Iraq. As far as you personally are concerned and indeed your
organization, isn't the fact of the matter that you have much more support in
Washington than you have in Iraq? Well, I hope you will not have to eat your
words. Come and have a look here. Jeremy never had to eat his words. When
elections finally did take place, Ahmed didn't poll well. He never became the
leader of a post-Saddam Iraq. As Iraq unraveled after the invasion, so did his
relationship with the United States. In 2015, he died, apparently of a heart
attack, at his home near Baghdad. He has betrayed Iraq, Ahmed Chalabi, and I
will never forgive him. Are my dad's words fair? I really don't know. Certainly,
Ahmed Chalabi had a lot to give for his son's death. Ahmed Chalabi had a lot to
gain and reclaim by getting back into Iraq after his long exile. I'm reminded of
the Citizen Kane rosebud moment, you know, the one where he finds that ping pong
table behind the wall. What is definitely fair to say is that for a period of
time, leading up to the war 20 years ago, Ahmed Chalabi had friends in powerful
places in Washington, and he was telling them what they wanted to hear. He was
the right man in the right place. But having achieved his aim of toppling
Saddam, he totally misjudged what would happen next. As for his legacy, it
depends who you ask. He's the liberator of Iraq from Saddam. He was a good
salesman. He was very persuasive. If it wasn't for Ahmed Chalabi, Saddam's
grandson would be ruling Iraq. He had immense influence on the actions of
America. There's no doubt that Ahmed Chalabi had an outsized impact on the
world. My Cousin Regime Changer was produced and presented by Selma Chalabi.
It's an Overcoat Media production for BBC Radio 4. Next, Professor Abigail
Williams concludes her exploration of objective reality and subjective beliefs
with an examination of the philosophy of facts versus feelings. And then at
midday, Winifred Robinson will be here with Call You In Yours. We want to talk
about energy bills today. They're double what they were last year. We'd like to
get a snapshot of how that's affecting you. Ring 03700 100444. The majority of
households, six out of ten, have reacted to the rising cost of living by using
less gas and electricity. UK households have more savings since the pandemic.
Maybe you've been dipping into them. Even before the latest price rise, around
one in ten people were behind with essential payments, including energy bills.
Some have been forced to have pre-payment meters. If that's happened to you,
how's it working out? Call us now. Tell us how our energy price rise is
affecting you. That number again, 03700 100444. Now on Radio 4, I Feel,
Therefore, I Am. Professor Abigail Williams' series asking where knowledge comes
from, fact or feeling, experts or experience. This week, things take a
philosophical turn. Prepare to step into the multiverse as Abigail explores the
limits of reality and the meaning of my truth. Where once facts, evidence and
rationality were the path to knowledge, does the logic of emotion now offer an
alternative? Although expressions like my truth and lived experience sound very
2020s, they have a long history. In the series so far, I've seen how exploring
our individual emotions and experiences has been valued across the centuries as
a source of truth, from the romantic poets and Sigmund Freud to Disney and Oprah
Winfrey. When you wish upon a star... The full act of knowledge in that kind of
romantic way of thinking about it is an act of the complete person. It's not
just an act of the reason. It's an act of the reason in kind of concert with the
life of feeling. Personal feeling and experience has also been an engine of
change. The rally started peacefully with 2,000 supporters of women's liberation
marching to Trafalgar Square. They demonstrated against discrimination in what
they regarded as a male-dominated society. The personal is political, declared
20th century feminists. But it's a slogan that also applies to 17th century
Puritans scrutinising their souls or French revolutionaries forging a new
language of human rights. But the focus on my truth can also be problematic.
Passionately held beliefs can foster intolerance and abuse, not only in Puritan
New England or revolutionary Paris, but in the identity politics, social media
hate campaigns and vitriolic demonstrations of today. As we embrace the value of
individual ways of knowing the world, we end up with a proliferation of
viewpoints. My truth is the same as your truth ranks with yours, even if I'm
lying through my teeth. Everything becomes a bitter controversy instead of a
cool look at the facts. So in this final programme, I want to explore a
fundamental question that emerges from all this. Does embracing my truth mean
abandoning any sense of the truth? And if so, at what cost? I think both in
intellectual thought and in the way we conduct ourselves, we do now believe that
our version of reality is the truth. Our version of reality is as good as
anybody else's. Let's begin with The Times journalist Hugo Rifkind, who traces
some of this confusion back to a fundamental shift in what truth actually means.
I think it's also to do with the breakdown of authority of truth, the idea that
you get so many voices these days and no one wants to believe that someone is
more right than them. No one wants to believe that there's some authority above
them telling them what's real and what isn't. What has been the most damaging
consequence, would you say, of this phenomenon? It's the thing people talk about
how they go home at Christmas and they argue with their relatives about whether
it's Covid or whether it's Brexit or whether it's, you know, the war or
whatever. And people who try and bring facts to the table, what they believe to
be facts, bring them to the table. Their facts are not respected by other people
even as facts. It's not that they're just disagreed with. They're not respected
as facts. The danger is that a sort of a my truth approach renders everybody
suspect who doesn't agree with you because by definition of you having your own
truth, anybody who doesn't agree with it is lying to you. Couldn't you say that
that's just part of the way in which we make an argument? That if we want to
persuade someone of something, we choose some facts and ignore others and we
know that we're ignoring others to make our case? I think the vital thing there
is what you just said, that we know we're ignoring others. The difference
between my truth and me winning an argument is I can win an argument while
knowing some of the things I say might not be true or I might be suppressing in
order to win the argument. I think when you start talking about my truth, that
distinction completely breaks down. When you start talking about my truth, the
fact that you are making the argument in your mind makes it true. It's a quite
different thing. I think the contemporary enthusiasm for my truth is mostly
about that word my. Putting individual beliefs and feelings to one side used to
be a sign of intellectual rigour. Whereas now we're more likely to insist that
our personal perspectives matter and our truth, embellished with whatever facts
seem fitting, is as valid as anyone else's. Much of this is positive. As a
society, we are more inclusive and less deferential. The problem comes in
reconciling one person's truth with another. So what kind of truths do we mean?
Across this series, we've talked about Enlightenment values for the mind, but
we've also looked at the Enlightenment values of scientific inquiry and
rationality as a benchmark of objectivity, facts which trump feelings. While
most people accept the fundamental principles of scientific evidence, there's a
vociferous minority who dispute those empirically driven facts. In the past 12
months, the anti-vaccination community has been given a real big boost. If these
people are saying that the virus isn't real, we're starting to believe them that
the vaccine is dangerous. Covid unleashed more scientific data on the general
public than we could ever have dreamt possible. But it also exposed massive
polarisation on what the science was telling us. And then there's climate
change. There's a lot of climate misinformation and disinformation out there.
We've been talking about this for a long, long time. And the reality of climate
change is undeniable. And not to say that it's not denied, that's the challenge.
With unsourced and unreliable science coverage proliferating online, a pick-and-
mix approach to scientific facts allows people to construct their own version of
truth. Their truth, not the truth. Facts, as we know, can now be kind of
manufactured rather than learned. The information age has almost created a
crisis where truth is not as meaningful of a term. Another place we've
traditionally looked to for a shared sense of the truth is religion. The 2021
census showed a steep decline in faith in the last decade, with more than a
third of the population of England and Wales now declaring no religion. And
although millions of us continue to worship, less established truths, including
paganism, manifesting and other forms of spirituality, are rising. And those
practices can involve imagining yourself into an altered personal reality. Hugo
Rifkind again. Oprah Winfrey was always big on this sort of thing. Oprah Winfrey
is a very interesting figure in the evolution of these kind of ideas, because
she came to it all through self-help. You know, in about 2006, she championed
this book called The Secrets by a self-help guru called Rhonda Byrne. Which was
all about basically visualising the you you want to be, visualising the life you
want to have, and living as if you're going to have it. Which is a sort of self-
help strategy, is fair enough. But Rhonda Byrne always went further and said
it's not just if you visualise this stuff, like imperceptibly, you will make
these changes in your life. She believed that if you visualised a different sort
of reality, that reality would come into being, because you were in control of
your own reality in a metaphysical sort of way. And you can see how that comes
out of self-help, because it's all about shaping your reality to better benefit
yourself. But when people say reality, normally in a self-help sense, they don't
really mean reality. You know, they don't really mean that if you imagine a new
car, the cosmos is going to somehow deliver one. And yet Rhonda Byrne kind of
did. We may not all be ready to embrace visualisation and the secret, but with
all these developments, are we losing our sense of objective reality itself? And
what do we actually mean by objective? To a journalist, objectivity means not
pushing a particular agenda. To a philosopher, something is objectively true if
it exists beyond what people think or believe. The teenagers I spoke to seemed
less sure of the value or even the existence of objective truth than my own
generation. We're definitely living in a society which is more based on
subjectivity as opposed to like objective facts. I don't think the notion of the
truth is often the truth. The notion of the truth is often or always a
particularly helpful one because in your everyday life, you're trying to create
a useful map of the world around you. And what's useful to you as truth might
not necessarily be useful to someone else. And I think that's a more important
distinction than absolute truth. So then maybe like in regards to that, the idea
of an objective truth and my truth, it does become irrelevant because there can
be no objective truth. So yeah, that's it. I mean, it sounds like you've arrived
collectively at this position where all of you doubt the idea of objective truth
in itself. Is that right? Yes, I would say so. Yeah. So what's going on here?
These students had an interest in philosophy. I don't think they're denying
scientific truths but they're intrigued by the limits of knowledge. What can we
really know outside ourselves? Beyond such scepticism about objective truth lies
more profound concern or curiosity that maybe there is no knowledge to be had
independent of our unreliable feelings. And that's an idea that's definitely not
new. Dennis McManus is a professor of philosophy at the University of
Southampton. There's been scepticism about truth within philosophy since it
began effectively. So doubts about what we can know, how we know it, it's a very
ancient idea. There seem to be certain phases when scepticism really, if you
like, bursts into life. There's a certain phase in Greek philosophy when it
happens but also perhaps most conspicuously you see it around about the
Enlightenment. The French philosopher René Descartes was fascinated by what can
and can't be known. Although Descartes is known for the idea that seems to
underpin our rational basis to knowledge, the maxim, I think, therefore I am, he
also wondered about the very nature of reality. René Descartes, he gave us this
kind of thought experiment where he said to us, you know, imagine that all of
your apparent perceptions of a world around you are really just information
being fed to you by an evil demon. So he imagines a kind of deceiving God. And
obviously that idea is rehashed within the Matrix films. Have you ever had a
dream, Neo, that you were so sure was real? What if you were unable to wake from
that dream? How would you know the difference between the dream world and the
real world? The person discovers that in actual fact what they'd taken to be the
world around them, there's no such thing. Instead, they are brains in vats, as
the philosophers like to put it. There is something kind of intoxicating about
the idea of kind of multiple realities and multiple worlds and the idea that
there are perhaps other universes out there, other worlds out there, or maybe
our world is really not the way that we think it is. So that's a kind of an
electrifying thought. The Matrix came out more than 20 years ago, but our
enthusiasm for multiple worlds has continued to grow. Recent films include
Marvel's Doctor Strange and the Multiverse and the acclaimed Everything
Everywhere All at Once. The latter stars Michelle Yeoh as a middle-aged mother
whose humdrum world suddenly gets a lot more interesting. There's an idea of the
parallel universes. The mother goes through like every possibility that she
could have been through. So she has like this potential to tap into versions of
her that have like all these abilities and stuff. There's the multiverse,
there's the multiverse theory that there's different versions of you in
different circumstances. It's just like a way of exploring infinite universes
where every single possibility exists even if some of them are near identical.
What happened? I think they lost their powers. The Alex Garland drama, Devs,
also explores what's real and what isn't. The sense that you were participating
in life was only ever an illusion. Life is just something we watch unfold, like
pictures on a screen. But she's not alive. She's a computer simulation. Explain
the difference. That idea that we're living in a computer simulation is a pop
culture trope but it has real resonance for today's young people. When we asked
a class in Portsmouth if they'd heard this theory, every student in the room
said yes. I think it's believed quite a lot because people like to kind of
venture into what's real and what's not real. People like to kind of venture
into what might be true but it's more interesting. I feel like it's something
that has come from the internet, people discussing ideas of stuff they've seen
online that doesn't seem scientifically explainable. In the same way computers
have their glitches, it's things that happen people perceive as a glitch in the
world, so to speak. In the world as a whole, there's so many things that seem
too good to be true and too much of a coincidence. People can just choke up the
things that are unexplainable to, oh yeah, that's just the matrix, so that's
like the system working or something like that. And it's not just modern
teenagers who question reality. Dennis McManus again. It's always been
challenged. People have always tried to throw off that kind of thought and try
and find ways of demonstrating that, no, we really can know that we're not just
being duped by an evil demon or we really can know that we aren't just brains in
vats. But there's a certain stubbornness to the thought and it's still highly
controversial as to whether any of the attempts to, as it were, undermine those
thought experiments really work. I began this series by trying to trace the
origins of an idea of personal feeling as a form of knowledge and the ways in
which this has evolved as a cultural and political force. But what's become
clear as we've taken a philosophical turn is that such matters also affect not
just how we relate to one another but what we even think reality is. For Hugo
Rifkind, the chief suspect in the hunt for the origins of my truth is not
technology or secularism or social change, but a philosophical tradition,
relativism. So Hugo, you've got a problem with the phrase my truth. Why is that?
Why do I have a... I think it's because I'm a philosophy graduate and at the
precise point I was a philosophy undergraduate, we didn't stand for this kind of
nonsense. We were told that there was one kind of truth and you might not manage
to figure out what it is, but that didn't mean it didn't exist. And the whole
idea of there being multiple truths with each one as acceptable as the next was
sort of dodgy and European and not for the likes of us. And when you say this
kind of nonsense, what do you mean by that? I mean relativism. I mean
ontological relativism, although of course relativism starts as a sort of an
ethical idea, but the idea that the truth is entirely based on perception rather
than being something more sort of concrete and real behind it. And has anything
changed in terms of the presence of that relativistic thinking in contemporary
culture? Oh, I'm sure it has, yes. We do now believe that our version of reality
is as good as anybody else's and anybody who tells you there's an actual reality
sort of lurking in the background that is the right one is being not only wrong,
but perhaps sort of bigoted and patriarchal and dogmatic. Even if we don't all
actually believe that our version of reality is as good as anyone else's, the
notion of relativism has had a big impact. Relativism is the view that there is
no one truth. There are multiple truths which are, if you like, tied to the
different perspectives that individuals have. So, you know, as well, what is
true for you and what is true for me may well be different. That pretty rapidly
turns into the idea that there isn't really such a thing as truth. These are the
kinds of thoughts that challenge the fundamentals of our existence and have been
hotly contested. It doesn't actually seem to be a coherent doctrine because if
somebody tells you, you know, there is no such thing as truth, the natural
question to ask in response is, yeah, but that's true, yeah? And if they say no,
then you, you know, the response would be, oh, well, best of luck. Like Hugo,
Dennis McManus was at Cambridge University in the 1990s and pinned some of this
concern about relativism to an event in 1992 known as the Derrida Affair.
Jacques Derrida, the controversial Algerian-French philosopher, became famous
for his theory of deconstruction, in which he challenged existing models of
knowledge and language, arguing that understanding something requires a grasp of
the ways in which it relates to other things, that understanding is a relative
concept. It was widely, sometimes unfairly, taken to be a rejection of the idea
of truth in itself and of the possibility of historical knowledge. This, in
Hugo's words, dodgy philosophy, set a cat among the Cambridge pigeons. This
week, what the papers say is presented by Robert Fox of the Daily Telegraph. In
the beginning was the word. And it's been downhill all the way ever since, if
recent events in Cambridge are anything to go by. A storm in the cloisters.
There was an incident when a certain group of academics at the university wanted
to give Jacques Derrida an honorary degree, and this caused an awful lot of fuss
because certain other academics thought that this was a disgrace. Monsieur
Derrida's voluminous writings, in our view, stretch the normal forms of academic
scholarship beyond recognition. Because they thought that someone like Derrida
undermines the standards that you have to hang on to if intellectual debate is
to be possible at all. When the row escalated, thousands of Cambridge academics
had to vote. Should a French literary theorist get an honorary degree? Asked the
Times. It was a rare moment when philosophy became a breakout news story. What's
it all about, Jacques? Much ado about the man who believes in nothing. A touch
of the sun in those headlines from the Observer in the Mail. The Observer went
on. Deconstruction is thus nothing less than the overturning of the old
patriarchal, theological, metaphysical assumptions we've all lived and read by.
Exciting stuff. Quite. There's a famous line from Derrida about there's nothing
outside the text. Denis McManus again. Inasmuch as truth is accessible to you at
all, it's always going to be via certain kinds of discourse, certain ways of
talking, certain array of concepts. And it can feel as if you're therefore, if
you're like sort of stuck within these particular discourses, and it's not then
possible for, if you like, claims from one of these discourses to contest claims
from one of these other discourses. So it can sort of feel like you're trapped
in these little kind of islands of language, conceptual islands. And obviously
if you embrace that, then that sounds like a threat to the very idea of
objectivity. That if you like, we can move around within our little islands of
talk, but we can't actually get outside of them to get at the facts of the
matter. So stepping out of the intellectual inferno of the ivory tower, why does
any of this matter? I think these ideas about relativism are important though,
because they've been so influential, gradually spreading through academia into
our wider society. Derrida and his contemporaries prompted us to rethink some of
the certainties of previous centuries, about where meaning comes from, whether
there really are universal values in books or paintings or music or ideas. At an
everyday level, you can now hear it in the insistence that what I say is as
valid as what you say, regardless of whether my thoughts or feelings or facts
are actually true. My concern about the rise of my truth is that the logical
consequence of everyone having their own my truth is that we end up with no
consensus and no way of talking to one another. We've seen in the series so far
that the idea of personally felt viewpoints has enabled some groups, some
identities, to find a voice, from Puritan pilgrims to 1970s feminists. But in
today's world, there's a real risk that all these diverse approaches to knowing
the world produce lots of little groups of people impassioned about how they see
things, but ignoring one another. Are we stuck with increasing polarisation?
Hugo Rifkind again. I mean, part of, I think, probably what sparked this line of
thought for me is, like I said, when I studied philosophy quite a long time ago
now, we were taught very much that objective truth was a thing worth aspiring
towards. And then I went back for an event maybe 10 years ago, and I met younger
philosophers, and they had become keen on prefacing every argument they made
with a sort of declaration of who they were and where they came from, with, you
know, they would say, I am a cisgendered woman, I am a gay woman, I am a person
of colour, and I believe that. And from the tradition that I felt like I was
taught 15 years earlier, that was sort of slightly horrifying because I was
taught that logic was meant to be like maths. And so it's, yeah, it's a big
change. I've experienced some of this in my own university and the way people
represent themselves and their interests. It used to be that students spoke for
the student body through a few individuals who stood for the collective whole.
But now each identity group tends to want its own representative in decision-
making processes. Identity politics can mean a fracturing of the body politic. I
do think that there is a strain in the society and in the zeitgeist, if you
like, which is this kind of dogmatism. Dr. Jennifer Judge, philosopher at New
York University. It's kind of like, oh, look, I am speaking my truth from here
and I can see the facts and this is the way things are. And if you disagree with
me, you're just wrong and bad luck to you, you know. So, I mean, that's
obviously a total caricature, but like, I think that it's an example of things
kind of sliding into a very problematic place. But if we turn back to
philosophy, we also find something reassuring. Jenny thinks that we should have
more confidence in our ability to understand each other and bridge the gap
between my truth and yours. So, do there exist facts that are kind of walled up
inside individual perspectives and that are in principle not accessible to
everyone? And I actually don't think that that's true. I think that there is a
way of recognising that, yeah, there can be certain facts that are only visible
from certain perspectives without actually sliding all the way into relativism.
The embrace of my truth and a respect for the lived experience of others does
not have to mean everyone's truth is as valid as another's, nor does it mean
that truth doesn't exist at all. It's more a question of what bits of the truth
we can see from different perspectives. People who are giving voice to my truth
need to acknowledge as well that, like, you know, if you want anybody to agree
with you and to actually take you seriously and listen to you, then it's going
to have to be possible for them to occupy your perspective, even if not in fact,
then in imagination or to try to work toward it or try to come to understand
what you mean. But the thing is, it's a two-way street, you know? So if I expect
you to occupy my vantage point, then I can also very legitimately be expected by
you to occupy yours. Stepping outside your vantage point takes practice. It
needs empathy, tolerance and mutual respect, qualities that can seem in short
supply in contemporary debate. But even if we are limited by our own subjective
viewpoint, we can make efforts to understand how others see things. Across the
past three episodes, I've tracked a varied thread of thought and argument. When
we say, speak your truth, or this is my lived experience, we are tapping into a
long history which has validated the power of the personal as a challenge to
existing sources of rational apprehension, political authority and philosophical
certainty. We live in a culture in which multiple viewpoints are tolerated, even
encouraged. We don't all have to sign up for a single version of the truth, as
we might in a super authoritarian state. It's been gathering for weeks a wave of
protests across China. The urban intellectuals in Beijing have held up sheets of
paper or called for an end to lockdowns. A lot of protesters were just taking a
blank sheet of paper that demonstrated that they can't speak openly. Literally,
this is all they can say. They can't say anything. It's just blank. It's just
blank. Feeling versus facts is not a zero-sum game. We can and should have both.
We need to hold on to expertise at the same time as we value experience. We will
disappear into an abyss of mutual incomprehension if we stop trying to
understand what it feels like to be someone else, to hold their views. We need
to preserve the idea that there are truths and there are lies. We need to be
able to see what is happening in the world. There are truths and there are lies.
And just feeling something strongly does not make it true. The historian
Professor Thomas Dixon is Director for the Centre of the History of Emotions at
Queen Mary, University of London. If you see slogans like your emotions are
valid, what I think it risks communicating is your emotions are outside the
bounds of critical, rational, moral discussion. I don't think for any of us,
individually or collectively, that's a good message. One of my prompts for
thinking about this series was a conversation I had with a student who in
response to my statement that feelings are not facts, said, whoa, that's
controversial. But it shouldn't be controversial. While conservative voices have
politicised this debate in the US, declaring facts don't care about your
feelings, we should be able to separate fact from feeling without denigrating
others. We should be able to see the value of subjective and objective
knowledge, expertise and experience, and use a combination of both to navigate
the choppy waters of the 21st century. That's what I think, or maybe what I
feel. I Feel, Therefore I Am was presented by Abigail Williams and the producer
was Julia Johnson. It was a Juniper Connect production for Radio 4. I feel that
we need to be more inclusive and more inclusive of the talent in terms of the
diversity of that talent pipeline. Is it in danger of becoming an elitist
occupation?