TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-28-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 50 years after his death. You're listening to Today on BBC Radio 4. It's 8
o'clock on Tuesday 28th February. Our headlines this morning. Rishi Sunak is
looking to secure support for his new post-Brexit trade deal for Northern
Ireland from Unionists and from his own backbenchers. He'll be speaking to us
live in 10 minutes time. The BBC has found that a preacher who was close to the
Manchester Arena bomber was monitored by MI5 a decade before the attack. Schools
in Scotland and much of Northern England are facing disruption as teachers walk
out on strike. And Queen Elizabeth's image is appearing for one last time on
British stamps. The BBC News is read by Caroline Nichols. The Prime Minister is
in Belfast as he tries to win support for his new deal on post-Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland. The Windsor Framework removes most checks on
goods moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland and provides Stormont with a
mechanism to object to certain EU rules. MPs are now studying the details of the
agreement ahead of an expected vote. The Democratic Unionist Party says progress
has been made but it still has concerns. Our Chief Political Correspondent Nick
Urdley reports. The reaction so far to the Windsor Framework has been about as
positive as the government could have hoped. Several senior Brexit-supporting
backbenchers have backed the plan. Most opposition parties are signed up too.
The Prime Minister will seek to sell the deal to business leaders in Belfast
today, telling them it'll make trade easier and secure Northern Ireland's place
in the UK. But some are withholding judgment for now. The DUP in particular,
whilst saying it's encouraged by progress, has also said it has some concerns
and wants to study legal text before delivering a verdict. Its leader Sir
Geoffrey Donaldson told his programme he wanted to take his time. We're
reasonable people but we want to ensure that what the Prime Minister has said is
matched by what is actually in the agreement itself. Some hardline Brexit
supporters in the Conservative Party hold a similar view, saying they want to
avoid nasty surprises. But threats of a mass rebellion have not materialised. EU
leaders have hailed the progress of the agreement with Ursula von der Leyen,
calling it a new chapter in the bloc's partnership with the UK. The Irish Prime
Minister, Leo Varadkar, said he hoped the framework would gain support. But the
view from Brussels is uncertain should Rishi Sunak fail to sell the deal, as our
Europe editor Katja Adler explains. Don't expect big pronouncements from Paris
or Berlin after the carefully choreographed unveiling of the new EU-UK deal. The
European Commission President flew to the UK yesterday to stand side by side
with Rishi Sunak, promising a new beneficial chapter in bilateral relations. Now
she and the rest of the EU watch and wait from the sidelines. They don't want to
be seen as interfering in a UK domestic debate. But if the revised deal is
eventually rejected, the mood music with Brussels, which believes it's made a
considerable number of compromises, may darken pretty quickly. Reopening
negotiations would be tough, Ireland's Prime Minister Leo Varadkar has warned.
And if the UK government returns to its earlier threat of acting unilaterally, a
trade war with the EU could loom large once again. An urgent search is underway
for the baby of a couple who disappeared with the child in January when it was
just days old. Police have found and arrested Constance Martin and Mark Gordon,
who were spotted in the Stanmer Villas area north of Brighton last night. Sussex
and Metropolitan Police officers are searching a large area between Brighton and
Newhaven. Detective Superintendent Lewis Baysford says the force had received no
information about the location of the baby from the arrests and that officers
were racing against time. This is about that baby. The fact that from our
investigation, both Constance and the baby had no medical attention obviously
pre or post birth. And we've seen the climate and the change in the weather
forecast that we've had since the 5th of January. My concern, as always has
been, has been the exposure from the elements to the baby. A BBC investigation
has found that MI5 suspected a Muslim preacher was close to the Manchester Arena
bomber of radicalising people more than 10 years before the attack. A public
inquiry into the bombing by Salman Abadi in 2017, which killed 22 people, will
report later this week on whether the security service missed chances to prevent
it. Daniel De Simone reports. The close relationship between the Manchester
attacker Salman Abadi and Mansour Al-Anaizi was such that the preacher from
Devon was referenced at the long-running public inquiry. Police said it was
clearly a connection of significance, but were unable to establish exactly what
it was. It was said that Al-Anaizi, who is now dead, was arrested after another
friend of his tried to carry out a suicide bombing in Devon, exactly nine years
before the arena atrocity. But the BBC has now established that MI5 had been
investigating Al-Anaizi as a suspected radicaliser even before that first
attack, and he was also barred from a Plymouth mosque. There was no mention of
either of those things in the inquiry's public hearings, although there were
also secret sessions focused on intelligence. A group of five bereaved families
told the BBC they're disappointed to learn of more connections to Abadi which
don't seem to have been investigated. Thousands of teachers across Scotland and
in the north of England are striking today in their fight for an above-inflation
pay rise. The Scottish Union has rejected a 6% offer, while teachers in England
and Wales want an improvement on the 5% increase. There'll be more walkouts in
other parts of England tomorrow and on Thursday, when they'll be joined by
teachers across Wales. Our education editor, Bramwen Jefferies, explains the
impact of the action. The strike today by the National Education Union is likely
to mean many schools in the north-west, north and north-east of England will be
partially closed. Secondary schools will prioritise those facing exams, such as
the year 11s due to sick GCSEs, as well as encouraging vulnerable children to
attend. Parents will have been warned if their child needs to stay at home. Many
primary schools in England appear to be giving priority to the youngest pupils
to help working parents. The impact of a national day of action by Scotland's
largest teachers' union is likely to be more extensive. At the heart of both
disputes are pay awards, which are below the increasing cost of living.
Ministers have argued they need to curb inflation through managing public
spending. Dozens of health and equality organisations have written to the
retired judge chairing the Covid-19 public inquiry, calling for race to be
examined as a key issue at every stage of the investigation. The Runnymede
Trust, the Windrush National Organisation and the Covid-Bereaved Families for
Justice Group are among those who've signed the letter. A preliminary hearing is
to be held today. Here's our community affairs correspondent, Ishita Nagesh. The
Covid inquiry has told BBC News that it is committed to looking at inequalities
throughout the pandemic. But the letter says a commitment to look at
inequalities isn't enough and that racism specifically should be looked at at
every stage. The 28 signatories say they're concerned race isn't being given
enough of a focus in the inquiry. Ethnic minorities in the UK were significantly
more likely to die with Covid-19, according to official figures. People from
minority ethnic backgrounds who lost loved ones to Covid have told BBC News that
they feel they're being shut out. Experts have warned that government efforts to
make air travel net zero by 2050 are under threat due to a lack of viable
alternatives to jet fuel. A report by the Royal Society concluded that none of
the four main options for greener fuels currently available would be able to
replace the 12.3 million tonnes of jet fuel used every year in the UK. Professor
Marcelle McManus from the University of Bath is one of the report's authors. She
told this programme that attempts to turn waste materials into fuel posed their
own environmental issues. Some of these waste materials, obviously there's the
collection and there's the processing involved with that. We would like to see
us investing in different types of fuels. So there's a hydrogen or some of these
e-fuels, but we don't have that technology currently available at scale. The
Royal Mail has revealed the final set of new stamps to feature the image of the
late Queen Elizabeth. The commemorative stamps will mark the 100th anniversary
of the Flying Scotsman steam locomotive. Here's our Royal Correspondent, Sean
Coughlan. It's the end of an era, with a final issue of commemorative stamps
showing the familiar silhouette of the late Queen Elizabeth. This design has
been in continuous use since 1968 and has appeared on hundreds of special
commemorative issues, on themes from the launch of Concorde to Star Trek to
famous comedians. Such stamps are planned a long way in advance and the Royal
Mail has stuck with publication plans made before the Queen's death last
September. For this last outing of the Elizabethan era, there is a set of 12
stamps featuring the steam locomotive, the Flying Scotsman. In future, such
commemorative stamps will feature the new profile of King Charles. Cricket,
England's men, have lost the second test in New Zealand by just one run. They
started the final day chasing a target of 258 to win, which would have been a
record after enforcing the follow-on. But the home side bowled England out for
256 and they lost by one run. Their captain, Ben Stokes, said he felt blessed to
have been part of an incredible game. The time now is ten past eight. A new way
forward, a decisive breakthrough, the promises made by Rishi Sunak sitting here
opposite me in Belfast. He's talking about the Windsor Framework, the new
agreement with the EU. Bear with me while I do a bit of explanation because it
is complicated. After Brexit, Northern Ireland stayed in the EU single market to
avoid a land border on the island of Ireland. But that meant trade barriers
between Great Britain and here and the deal with its green channels and red
channels is designed to prevent those barriers. But it's also about more ancient
divisions, green and orange, the different traditions here, nationalist and
unionist, and the efforts to get divided communities to share power together.
There hasn't been a fully functioning devolved government here for over a year.
So will the DUP come on board? Just one of the questions I'll be asking the
Prime Minister, Rishi Sunak, and welcome to the programme. Good morning. What
will people in Northern Ireland notice? What will be different here, do you
think, with the framework? Martha, I listened to your programme earlier and you
were talking to people and you could see the sense of, or listen to the sense of
frustration in their voices, the feeling that they've been let down because of
the impact of the protocol on their everyday lives, on their businesses. And
I've heard that loud and clear in the time that I've been Prime Minister. I've
spent a lot of time listening to communities in Northern Ireland, understanding
the challenges that they were and are facing, and then I've set about trying to
do my best to resolve them. And I do believe, hand on heart, that the Windsor
Framework does that. It's a comprehensive agreement that means that goods will
flow freely within our UK internal market. That was a big challenge with all the
hassle that that was before. It means that Northern Ireland's place in our union
is secure, that people will feel like they're part of the same country in lots
of obvious everyday aspects of their lives. Secondly, it restores and safeguards
sovereignty for the people of Northern Ireland so that they and their
institutions are in control of their destiny. That's really important and I
think, I hope when people give the agreement the time and the space that they
need to consider it, they will come to the same conclusion and we can move
forward positively together. Well, we will go through some of those areas, but
interesting you say that people have been let down by the protocol. That was a
protocol signed by your government and you've talked about the difficulties that
people have faced because of this. Will you now take the time to apologise? I
was very clear yesterday in Parliament and I've been very clear when I've been
in Northern Ireland previously talking and listening to all different
communities about the challenges of the protocol as it impacts their everyday
lives, what's available in the supermarkets. Well, I've been very explicit about
it, but my job as a new Prime Minister is to try and fix that. It's to try and
make things better for people because this is about them, it's about people,
it's about families, it's about businesses here in Northern Ireland. That's why
I'm here today and I'm confident that this agreement does do that and will make
a positive difference to their lives. And a crucial part of it is the sense that
there is a new border that has been imposed down the Irish Sea. Are border posts
still planned? Well, one of the key achievements of the Windsor Framework is it
removes any sense of an Irish Sea border so that when goods move from Great
Britain to Northern Ireland, they will now move without customs bureaucracy,
they will move without routine checks and the same goods that are available in
Great Britain on our supermarket shelves will be available in the supermarket
shelves in Northern Ireland. But there will still be border posts, won't there,
which isn't the same as between England and Wales? I'd just say two things on
that. The border posts are there very specifically for the Red Lane because as
part of having a Green Lane where goods flow freely within our UK internal
market, if goods are actually going to the Republic of Ireland, i.e. going into
the EU, well that's not our country and it's entirely reasonable that we have
checks for those types of goods and we also check when we suspect criminality or
smuggling and that's something that the government's always said that it would
do and has been long-standing practice actually. There will still be checks,
though, won't there, in the Green Channel? I mean far less than there are at the
moment, there'll still be checks. No, there won't be routine checks for goods
moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. There will be checks where we
suspect criminality or smuggling and I think everyone listening will think, well
that's a sensible thing to do. If we think people are breaking the law, we
should be checking things and I don't think anyone would disagree with that. The
crucial thing, though, is that there shouldn't be physical checks of ordinary
goods going between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. That wouldn't be right
and this framework ensures that that is not the case. On this vital question of
sovereignty, the DUP says there are still hundreds of thousands of pages of EU
law remaining and the European Court of Justice is still involved, so Northern
Ireland will still be different from the rest of the UK. This is ultimately
about balance and at the heart of the Belfast Grid Friday Agreement is the
delicate balance that needs to exist in Northern Ireland and that's about
respect for the aspirations and identities of all communities. And in practical
terms, something that is important to people in Northern Ireland is not having a
border between Northern Ireland and the Republic, I think that's important to
everybody, in fact, but also it's important for businesses to have access to the
EU single market. And as long as the people in Northern Ireland consent to that
arrangement, then that's why there's a small and limited role for EU law in
Northern Ireland. What we're talking about here is less than 3% of EU laws that
apply in Northern Ireland and they apply very specifically for the purpose that
I just mentioned, but crucially, and I'll just finish on this, that situation
only persists as long as the people are happy with it. And what we have done
yesterday is introduce a new measure, the Stormont Break, which gives power to
the institution in Northern Ireland, Stormont, to say if there's a new law
that's going to significantly impact people's lives coming from the EU, they
will be able to block it. And these are arguments that you'll be making to the
DUP, but some of their MPs have already spoken out against it, Ian Paisley Jr.
saying it just doesn't cut the mustard. Well, I think you had Geoffrey Donilon
on your programme earlier, I think your interviewer described him as being
cautiously optimistic, not my words, but what I've said very clearly is, look,
I've spent a lot of time listening to unionist communities from Northern Ireland
and indeed all parties that I've engaged with, because this is about everybody,
and I have taken the time to understand their concerns. I'm confident that the
Windsor Framework addresses those concerns, but I also respect that everybody,
including unionist representatives of all parties, will need the time and the
space to consider the details. As Sir Geoffrey Donaldson told us he was going to
be doing. And I look forward to having that dialogue with them, and I'm
confident that when they go through it, they will see that this, I believe, does
address the concerns that people had, and it is a huge step forward and is very
positive for the people of Northern Ireland. If they're still worried about
sovereignty and they decide that they don't want to go back into power sharing,
will the framework still go ahead anyway? The framework is what we have agreed
with the European Union. It's an incredibly positive and comprehensive
agreement. It ensures that we have smooth flowing trade within the UK internal
market, protects Northern Ireland's place. This is not about, actually, funnily
enough, this is not necessarily about me or any one political party. This is
about what's best for the people and communities and businesses of Northern
Ireland. And this agreement will make a hugely positive difference to them, and
it can start making a difference very soon, in fact. And that's what I'll be
talking to people about today, listening to them and explaining how this
agreement is going to make that positive difference. You've been listening to
people in Northern Ireland, obviously, but the Conservative MPs too, and Boris
Johnson behind the scenes, we hear reports that he may not be altogether happy
with this. Have you been briefing him about this? Of course I speak to the
former Prime Minister, but this is not about any of us. This is not about
personalities. It's not about Westminster. This is about, it's why you're here,
it's why I'm here. This is about the people of Northern Ireland and what's best
for them. And this agreement, the Windsor Framework, means that the issues that
have been raised, the challenges that people felt, those can be and will be
addressed. And that's what I hope people focus on, rather than focusing on the
personalities. And we talked, and you mentioned about democratic deficit. I
mean, the most important democratic deficit, even though we have eliminated one
with the new Stormont break, is the fact that people here in Northern Ireland
don't have a functioning government. And we've looked at that on the programme.
We spoke earlier to a father whose son is desperately waiting for a heart
transplant. The legislation can't go through. And there's a security dimension
as well, isn't there? I spoke on Saturday's programme to Father Martin McGill.
You may remember he spoke very powerfully at Lira McKee's funeral. And he was
very worried about the power vacuum and leading to problems in security. Do you
share those concerns? I mean, I've been very clear that people in Northern
Ireland need and deserve their government to be up and running. I mean, that's
what democracy is about. And as a result of there being no functioning
government in Northern Ireland at the moment, you highlighted issues, others
would highlight even more issues. But the security, I suppose, particularly in
the wake of the shooting of John Corbyn. Well, I think what it highlights to us
that stability in Northern Ireland is really important. And it's a reminder of
that. And there, of course, will be those who want to take us back to the past.
I thought it was a very powerful statement when all the parties in Northern
Ireland stood together to contend that. And I pay tribute to them for doing so.
But we've got to look forward. And at the heart of the Belfast Good Friday
Agreement was balance. It was about the delicate balance that needs to exist in
Northern Ireland. That balance had been unsettled by the protocol. But the
Windsor Framework restores that balance, respects the aspirations and identities
of all communities. And you hope that it will also help the economy here. One
way would be, of course, not to raise corporation tax because it makes it very
hard. And I'm sure businesses here will say this to you, very hard to compete
with the Republic, 12.5% there. It's soon going to be 25% here like the rest of
the UK. You make an important point about the economy. And I know from being
here and talking to businesses here, what they want is stability and certainty.
They want all the issues resolved with regard to trade and access. And this
framework delivers that. I've spent a lot of time engaging with business groups.
I thank them, actually, for that engagement. And this agreement ensures that
they will have a continuing role. But what they all say to me, actually, is that
if we can get this resolved in the way that we have, that will unlock an
enormous amount of investment. Because remember this, Northern Ireland has this
very special position where it has access to the UK market, has access to the EU
market, which makes it an incredibly attractive place to invest for businesses.
And that's sitting there waiting to happen if we can move forward and get the
government up and running here. And one final question. I know you've got a very
busy day ahead, but it's an important one. And that's about the future role of
the United Kingdom and the European Union more broadly. Do you hope that all of
this opens up a new relationship with more friction-free trade? Well, I think
it's important that we're able to cooperate with our nearest neighbour and ally
and trading partner, as I said yesterday. And there are lots of different ways
that can happen. If you look most recently at how we've worked together to
support Ukraine, putting in place sanctions policies, and those sanctions work
better when they're coordinated. Energy security. We have interconnected energy
markets. And, of course, illegal migration. That's a shared challenge across
many European countries. You saw the UK's involvement with a group of other
countries, the Calais Group, at the end of last year. The Home Secretary
attended that meeting. And that kind of cooperation with countries like France
is yielding positive benefit for us. But ultimately, even though I would like to
see that happen, and I believe it is happening and will happen, this is about
Northern Ireland. And the Windsor Framework means that we can make sure goods
flow freely within the UK. We can protect Northern Ireland's place in our
precious union. And crucially, with the Stormont Break, which is this incredibly
powerful new measure, the Assembly and people of Northern Ireland are in
control. They have sovereignty. They get to say no to rules that are coming down
there that they do not like that are having an impact on their lives. That's an
enormously, incredibly powerful achievement. And I hope people can see that.
Prime Minister Rishi Sunak, thank you for talking to us. Thank you for your
time. Well, that was Martha in Belfast, speaking live to Rishi Sunak. Chris
Mason, our political editor, was listening across, Chris, so we have a chance to
digest the way he is portraying it the day after this big announcement. Lots of
talk of balance and looking to the future and the special place of Northern
Ireland in the union. What do you make of the way he's selling this? Well, what
we're getting now is the touring sales pitch of this new deal. First stop,
Windsor. Second stop, Westminster. Third stop, Belfast. A couple of striking
lines, I thought, listening to the prime minister there. An acknowledgement of
the ultimate prize for him and as he sees it for Northern Ireland, the
restoration of a power sharing executive. The most important democratic deficit,
he said, was the absence of a functioning government in Northern Ireland. That
remains the prize and it's a prize that is still out of reach. But, but there is
a quiet confidence within government, I detect, that not instantly, they never
expected it to happen instantly. But perhaps in the end, the DUP may be
persuadable to go back in. Another striking line, I thought, which is an
argument you will hear made to the DUP and more broadly to Northern Ireland.
This idea that if you can get back into a situation of power sharing, there is
to quote, an enormous amount of investment ready to be unlocked. A kind of
dangling of the dollars, if you like, from the prime minister, which echoed
language from the White House last night. Joe Biden saying similar things in
welcoming this new framework. So I think what we'll get now in this ongoing
tour, this ongoing sales pitch from the prime minister and others, is trying to
take as many people as he can with him. I think there was a sense last night of
something, something of a sort of warm word blanket coming from many in the
House of Commons. If he can make the argument that loads are broadly favourable,
as far as this is concerned, can he in time, effectively, try and persuade the
DUP by boxing them to a relatively isolated corner? That said, we await the
verdict of some senior Conservatives, not least one Boris Johnson, as we see
exactly how views coalesce in the coming days, and there are plenty of people,
we should emphasise, me included, still reading the micro detail, the small
print of this, which is where arguments could still emerge from. And after all
that careful choreography of yesterday, I wonder if there's also going to be a
choreography now in that it will be the DUP and what they have to say when they
reach their verdict. That is the guide or the trigger for everyone else. I.e.
will everyone else, including Boris Johnson, hold their fire till then? I think
speaking to senior Conservatives and indeed to the DUP over the last couple of
weeks really, as we've built up to yesterday's moment, there was a real sense
from many, but not all, Conservative backbenchers that they would be driven in
their instincts by the instincts of the Democratic Unionist Party, as I was
saying yesterday. And as we've seen playing out in the last 24 hours, there are
differing views within the DUP. So we've already seen some pretty overt
scepticism from the likes of Ian Paisley Jr. and Sammy Wilson, more cautious
optimism from Geoffrey Donaldson, the leader on the programme, half an hour or
so ago. So, yeah, the power does lie with the DUP right now. Expect them to take
time. They are conscious that they extracted politically quite a lot of leverage
from their decision to pull out of power sharing a year ago, and therefore to go
back in is to give up on quite a lot of that, but also with the potential
significant gains for Northern Ireland attached to that. We heard Geoffrey
Donaldson talking about how he was a proud and committed devolutionist. So all
eyes on the DUP as they go through the detail. Of course, at some point there'll
be a moment in the House of Commons as well around all of this. No expectation
that will be absolutely imminent. Again, I think a desire on the government
side, echoed as well by Labour, that if this requires time, which it clearly
does because there's a lot of detail, give people sufficient time to be able to
come to a definitive judgment rather than a snap judgment, which is then quite
hard to backtrack from. Chris, thanks. 26 minutes past eight to the sports and
Rob. Hello again, Justin. Well, just the one story in town this morning, that
sensational result in the second cricket test in Wellington with New Zealand
beating England by just one run. It's only the second time that result has been
produced in test cricket, and it's only the fourth time that a team required to
follow on has gone on to win. The series is therefore drawn one all. Today's
scorecard shows England collapsing to 80 for five in pursuit of their target of
258 with Harry Brooke run out without even facing a ball. His partner, Joe Root,
going on to score 95 to take England within reach of victory, but then falling
that one run short with Jimmy Anderson, the last man out. That moment was
recalled by our chief cricket writer, Stefan Schemmelt, after the match with
England captain Ben Stokes. I think watching him walk off, actually, I didn't
know what Jimmy would react to because obviously he's been in those situations a
few times before and he's a bit let down and disappointed in himself. But the
fact he was walking off smiling, I think made just sort of everything that we
speak about and what we want to do just a reality because James Anderson was the
one to get out with two to win. But he's walking off smiling, knowing that he's
been a part of something unbelievable. And everyone who turned up today here,
obviously free entry was great as well. So I think our side and the Kibbe boys
know that they've given everyone here who turned up a great game to watch. Even
in defeat, this is what you say you want out of test cricket, isn't it? For it
to be entertaining for everyone who's come in and everyone watching or listening
around the world. We are disappointed when we lose. And we also love winning
because it's something that we always want to try and do, something that we'll
always give ourselves the best opportunity to do. And if it doesn't work out
that way, then we'll just hold our hands up and say we weren't good enough or
the opposition were better than us and New Zealand were better than us this
week. Even though England have lost today, there are a lot of England fans that
are very excited about the Ashes. What would your message to them be? Stay
excited. The amount of time that we've had over the last 10 months and building
what we've created in terms of this new ethos and the way in which we play isn't
going to change when the pressure really does ramp up within the Ashes. Because
that would just be a waste of 10 months. So yeah, I'm very excited. But again,
Australia's going to be a new challenge. But we'll be trying to meet them with
everything that we have done with every opposition we've played over the last 10
months. And that Ashes theme, the Aussies are here this summer, was picked up by
England head coach Brendan McCullen, but not before his assessment of the match.
It was an epic encounter and exactly what, I guess, when we started out on this
campaign we endeavoured to achieve. Obviously it would be nice to come out on
the right side of it, but just to see a full house here at the base and probably
millions all around, tens of millions around the world watching and listening
and seeing what was one of the great Test matches is what this game's all about.
Test cricket needs relevance and for two teams to play like they did and to duke
it out there at the end is exactly what things are about. So obviously it would
have been nice to win, but I'm just so proud of the boys for the fight and the
application they showed right throughout the Test match and right throughout the
summer. How's your captain? There's a lot of people worried about that left
knee. Yeah, look, obviously he's not moving that well at the moment, but the
skipper writes his own scripts and he doesn't get a better stage than the Ashes
to write one. So I'm sure he'll be sweet as by the time that arrives. At the end
of the Pakistan tour you got a bit cross with us when we mentioned the Ashes.
You said, well, come on, why can't we just enjoy this in the moment? Now you've
just mentioned the Ashes. Ben Stokes has just said he's excited. Are you
excited? Yeah, bring it on. And bringing the air home? I don't know about that,
but we'll try and play the cricket that we want. And if that's the outcome at
the end, then fantastic. But I know that we're going into it with a squad that
believes in one another and we have a style of play which will uphold right
throughout. And if Australia are too good for us, then so be it. If they're not,
then we'll have the urn, I suppose. England head coach Brendan McCullum before
him, England captain Ben Stokes. And just in case you haven't had enough
cricket, there's more tomorrow. England's white ball squad in Bangladesh for a
one day international. Here are the tips. Leicester 4.30, number one, getting
closer. Catterick 4.45, number five, just call me out. Thank you very much. Rob,
here's Jim Al-Khalili to tell us who will be joining him for the Life Scientific
this morning. Hello. Today I'm talking to a professor of immunology who spends
every morning from five to six a.m. in the bath reading 19th century classics.
Danny Altman joined Team T-Cells, as he calls it, in his 20s and has been
studying how these killer cells operate ever since. Our immune response is
highly targeted and incredibly clever, on par, it seems to me, with the most
sophisticated military intelligence operation. And thanks to Danny, I think I'm
finally starting to get my head around how it all works. We talk T-Cells, why
words matter in science and why he's determined to try and understand long
Covid. Do join me if you can for the Life Scientific after the news at nine. To
the weather, much of the UK increasingly cloudy, scattered showers pushing into
eastern and southern areas. Dry though in the west, wintry sunshine in north-
west Scotland. And to Caroline Nichols now for the news. Rishi Sunak is in
Belfast trying to win support for his new deal on post-Brexit trading
arrangements for Northern Ireland. The Prime Minister told this programme he was
confident the Windsor Framework addressed the concerns of the Democratic
Unionist Party and that it removed any sense of an Irish sea border. The leader
of the DUP, Sir Geoffrey Donaldson, said the deal represented progress but he
thought there were still issues with it. A couple who disappeared more than
seven weeks ago, Constance Martin and Mark Gordon, have been arrested in
Brighton. A helicopter and police dogs are being used in the search for their
baby who was not with them. Thousands of teachers across Scotland and the north
of England are striking today as part of their dispute about pay. Some schools
will be partially closed. Figures released in the last hour show the price of
groceries rose by a record 7.1% in the year to February. The analyst Cantar said
one in four shoppers was now struggling financially. Thank you very much
Caroline. It is just after half past eight and three new offshore areas have
been announced today as highly protected marine areas. They are Allenby Bay in
Cumbria, Farns Deep off the Northumberland coast and Dolphin Head in the
Channel. It's off the coast of West Sussex. All harmful activity there is being
banned from July, the government says. It's amid a big effort underway at the UN
at the moment on conservation in the high seas. Let's get the view of Callum
Roberts who's Professor of Marine Conservation at the University of Exeter.
Morning Professor. Good morning. What do you make of the choice of these three
areas first of all? Well I think these areas are representative of some of the
variety of life that you get around the UK and so they're as good as any place
really to get started with the creation of highly protected marine areas. They
are a designation above the current marine conservation zones, is that right?
They are a long way above the current marine conservation zones which mostly
don't do very much conservation at all because they're not protected highly
enough from harmful activities like industrial bottom trawling and dredging.
Which will now not be allowed. I mean I'm looking at the map now. They are
relatively small when you look at the expanse of water around us. How much
difference will it make if in these relatively small areas you have a ban on all
harmful activity? It will make a big difference to the life that lives in those
areas but of course if you want to spread those benefits across the whole of
English seas, which I think is the intention, then you have to do a lot more
protection than just under half a percent of the extent of those waters. At the
moment these three areas represent just 1.1% of the total area of English marine
protected areas. It's good because they represent a 60 times increase on what
we've had but they're 70 times less than what we need. It's taken the government
a very long time to get there. At this rate of progress it'll take 260 years to
get to the level of protection that science says we need, which is 30% of the
sea highly protected. So you hope it is just a start. Tell us about these
particular areas from your knowledge. What will flourish and thrive once these
are protected in this way? Well over 200 years of industrial fishing we've lost
a great many different kinds of species and habitats from UK seas. In particular
in the offshore areas we had rich oyster reefs which supplied the London market
with huge quantities of oysters in the early 19th century. We could expect to
start seeing those reefs reforming and rebuilding. The sea was full of enormous
skates as well and those have been virtually eliminated by industrial fishing
over the years. Two of these areas are big enough that they might be able to
begin to support the recovery of skate populations. You mean Dolphin Head and
Farns Deep which are bigger than Allenby Bay? That's right, yes. But an area
like Dolphin Head which is right in the middle of the channel, would this mean
that a ferry or indeed any other kind of boat or shipping couldn't pass through
it? That is true but if you have a look at the Orisons Strait between Sweden and
Denmark, this is an area that's been protected from bottom trawl fishing for
over 70 years because it's too dangerous to do it there. It's the middle of a
shipping lane and yet ocean life thrives in that area because it's been
protected from fishing. It seems that ships are much less of a harmful activity
than fishing is. I see, so they should still be able to pass through. I also
wonder whether you would need to demarcate physically somewhere or is it the
case that everyone on the seas in those areas will just realise pretty swiftly
where they are? Well pretty much everybody who would be working that far
offshore is going to have GPS navigation and those charts will be able to show
the boundaries of the marine protected areas. So you'll know when you're inside
or outside. So it's pretty clear that you could avoid doing the things that are
banned if you're navigating that way. Is there any danger of adverse
consequences for areas close by when you stop people fishing in these places? Do
you end up or can you end up with overfishing elsewhere? More likely, I mean you
do displace fishing from those areas, but more likely what we've seen in other
parts of the world is that these areas will create hot spots for fishing around
their borders because as fish stocks build up, the fish begin to spill out over
the borders and a process called fishing the line starts to emerge whereby
people are attracted to the higher densities of fish that are available. So
protected areas rather than taking away from the fishing industry actually can
contribute to it. And that's not a problem, the fishing up to the line, the hot
spots? Well, if you've got enough protected areas, then those benefits will be
distributed across the whole of the sea. And that's, you know, if you want
benefits from a marine protected area, you need one locally. You can't be
expecting that a protected area in the Channel will protect the coast off
Norfolk. And so that's why we need to create a network which spreads protection
across the wider sea area. Professor Callum Roberts, thank you. It is 23 minutes
to nine. There's a boost this morning for the space industry here in the UK, £50
million in funding from the UK Space Agency. And Dr Craig Brown is on the line,
who's director of investment at the agency. Good morning to you. Good morning.
What's the money going to buy? So as part of the UK Space Agency's kind of
objective is to identify some of the major emerging markets in the space
economy. And we've identified that the lunar economy is going to be a bit of a
booming one over the next decade. We expect the lunar economy to be worth
anything between 50 and 100 billion pounds over the next decade. And so what
we're doing is sowing the seeds of key technology development with our industry
to make sure that they can have a significant slice of that pie. Key technology
like what? So the two main areas that we want to invest in are
telecommunications and navigation. So the UK industry are leaders in both of
these areas. And in order to kind of deliver missions on the moon, we believe
that both navigation and communication services will be fundamental. And so by
supporting our industry to develop new technologies that will deliver both
telecommunications and navigation services to operators on the moon, we believe
that we'll be able to kind of access a big chunk of that. So basically you think
British industry could set up the phone service basically for the moon?
Absolutely. Absolutely. That's the plan. Yeah, which is extraordinary. I
remember asking my daughter once whether she wanted to be an astronaut. And she
paused and says when she was very young, she paused and said, is there internet
there? And the answer seems to be now from you that there will be and we'll be
doing it. Absolutely. It's absolutely key that whatever we send to the moon, we
get the information, the data back to Earth as quickly and as efficiently as
possible. And of course, the more activity on the moon there is, the more data
that's generated. And so the kind of bigger need for lunar broadband there'll
be. We've had a setback, haven't we recently, though, with our industry. It is
worth asking you about this because we had that takeoff from Newquay, didn't it?
The takeoff went fine, but the rocket then didn't get to where it was meant to
be. Does that have an impact on the kind of businesses that you're now hoping to
support? Has it put things back? Well, the kind of position on launch remains
the same. We plan on being a launch nation. And the launch that we had earlier
on in the year kind of got us 99 percent of the way there. Unfortunately, the
last bit didn't quite go to plan. But we're absolutely planning on being a
launch nation. Really, it's back on, is it, the launch nation? I mean, what is
the plan now in as much as you can tell us about it? Are we planning another
launch from Newquay, the same design, the same way of doing it? So our job
really was to make sure that we had set up the regulatory environment to allow
launch from the UK. And that's all been done. We've demonstrated that we've got
the right infrastructure in place at the launch site to do that. Really, it's
down to the kind of commercial space launch industry now to kind of use the UK
as a base for future launch. But we're absolutely kind of looking forward to the
kind of whatever emerges really on that front. But watch this space. We're
working on it. Right. And long before we need to watch the space and see if
something actually go up, the point being that there is a real career, well,
lots of careers now to be had in preparing for what we expect to be the
situation on the moon, if I can put it like that, in years to come. Yeah,
absolutely. I mean, the kind of space sector is quite a large sector, actually.
We're now at around about 16 and a half billion pounds a year to the UK economy,
supporting around about 47,000 jobs. And, you know, if the lunar economy
delivers on all that it promises, then we can expect that number of jobs to be
significantly increased. Dr Craig Brown, Director of Investment at the UK Space
Agency. Thank you very much. 20 to 9 now, one of our most celebrated designers
is curating an exhibition about one of the world's most celebrated 20th century
artists, Picasso, to mark 50 years since his death. The designer is Sir Paul
Smith, who's here now. Morning. Welcome. It's coming up next from next month at
the Picasso Museum. That's right. Yeah. The 7th of March. How did it come about?
In November 2018, the president of the museum came to see me in London and said,
we like the way you think. We like the way your shops look and anything to do
with you seems to be interesting and eclectic and odd. Would you be interested
in showing Picasso in a new light to celebrate the 50th anniversary of his
passing? And indeed, that's what the exhibition is called, isn't it? Picasso in
a new light. Yes, that's right. Did you have your choice of work that they
already hold? Is that what you dipped into? Yeah, I mean, the most amazing thing
was they said, you have carte blanche, you could do whatever you want, which was
frightening and wonderful at the same time, because I'm not an art historian or
a curator. So, yes, I to answer your question, yes. And what have you done? I
looked at about 200,000 Picassos in lockdown, of course, online, because the
whole project started in 2019 and then categorized his career, really cubism,
blue period, his work with ceramics. And so there's 24 rooms, I think, and made
them all a bit more, hopefully a bit more exciting and interesting than the
traditional way of showing art. So you mean you worked with the actual setting
of the room? So it's the that's been that's really been my main job. So one room
is completely full of new old posters and the whole wall. All the walls are we
call it in England fly posting. I don't know what other countries call it. I
think it's called illegal posting. So we just literally plastered posters all
over the wall. And you're seeing the paintings. And then the artwork on top of
them. And then another room is all green and another room is all blue. Another
room is covered in my famous stripes, but not the famous stripe, the hand
painted stripes on the wall with work big. I mean, they call them masterpieces.
So there's 35 masterpieces and 192 artworks. So it's pretty amazing stuff,
actually. And very different from the way that museums normally work and that
you'd walk into a room and everything is about your eye being drawn to the work
of art. And so the backgrounds are kind of as bland as can be. I know I'm
slightly nervous about that, to be honest. But there is a blue room that is blue
and that does have the paintings on a simple plain wall. Now, I mean, the brief
was carte blanche. The brief was, can we try and get young people, students,
schoolchildren to come and look at this man who did all this work and passed
away 50 years ago and just, you know, just reignite the interest in his work?
And I mean, what I've learned was, wow, he was he was busy. You know, he did
lots of amazing stuff and was always open to new ideas and openly admitted, you
know, Cezanne was my inspiration for cubism and so on. Did he influence your
work, Picasso? I mean, over the years, people like Picasso, Matisse, Giacometti,
obviously film, travel, graphics. There's always inspiration for a clothes
designer. And yes. So, yes. Is there a fabric dimension? I'm trying to think
what I know about Picasso as a dresser. I don't know. Would you like to dress
him? Well, the famous Breton, you know, the famous blue and white striped
T-shirt. Yeah. There's one room dedicated to that. And if you look up, you'll
find 80 of the Mariniere T-shirt floating in the air conditioning. So it's a
very different approach to exhibitions and hopefully you'll go away with a few
goose bumps. Does any of it make it into Paul Smith collections or Paul Smith?
Well, there's been a pretty... A Presell T-shirt a la Paul Smith? Well, he was
busy, that's for sure. So there's a lot of inspiration there. I mean, this is
not a question from you, but it's been so humbling. Can you imagine just being
offered that carte blanche to an entire museum, 20 something rooms? And so now
we know how you kept busy in lockdown, looking at those 200,000 works. And I had
the day job. Of course. Yeah, that didn't stop. Thank you very much, Sir Paul
Smith. The exhibition starts on the 7th of March and runs, I think, for a few
months. Until August, end of August. Congratulations. Yeah, thanks a lot. Thank
you. We're going to continue on an artistic theme, because when Ron Gittins died
in 2019, his family were amazed to find he'd turned his small rented flat in
Merseyside into a highly ornate classical villa by painting and sculpting every
surface. He's come to be seen as an outsider artist, among other celebrity
backers. The artist Grayson Perry describing his home as a rare cultural gem.
Ron's family has been campaigning for it to be preserved, but now it must be
sold and it is up for auction. What could be lost if an investor isn't found who
in time to buy it? We have sent Nicola Stambridge there to find out. Hello.
Today I'm talking to a professor of immunology. Far away and long ago, when
dragons still existed. Ron Gittins was not the kind of tenant everyone would
appreciate. He painted and sculpted every surface of his rented Edwardian flat
in Birkenhead with images of ancient Egypt, Greece and Rome. Since his death in
2019, it's been documented on film by Martin Wallace. There used to be some
large, almost like totem poles either side of that door that he constructed in
concrete, represented the Battle of Actium. Ron blended his love of history with
his passion for art. Ron's niece, artist Jan Williams. As a child, I just
thought it was kind of pretty exciting because he was just different. One of the
things he always said was, I will not be ignored. He did have some mental health
problems in his life and I think creativity was the main thing that kept him
going. He invented his own world, really. As you come into his hallway, you're
entering something not dissimilar to Tutankhamun's tomb. We've had Egyptologists
here from the University of Liverpool who've identified that all of these things
are based on tombs and the kind of ways he's laid the place out in different
horizontal layers are like the registers in ancient Egyptology. The thing that I
noticed though, is that the paint went straight on the wall and it is flaking
off. I think quite often it was household paints, a bit of poster paint here and
there, different veneers on the paints where he's mixed and matched and used
perhaps gouache or something like that over the top of other items. And over the
33 years that he was here, some parts of it haven't aged so well and that
presents a bit of a conservation issue. When you go into the living room, it's
quite extraordinary, his vision for fireplaces. I mean, we've got a bull for a
fireplace and it's enormous. It's seven foot? Yeah, that's right. And it's made
of concrete, so it's absolutely solid and it's painted, so it's got very staring
eyes. And you mentioned a bull, but perhaps it's a minotaur, it seems to have
sort of human teeth. And each room has its own historical epoch really that its
references are grounded in. We always knew it was up to something in there, but
we had no idea of the extent of it. But the one thing I do remember was just
seeing this utterly incredible, massive concrete roaring lion. It was a
fireplace. Inside the huge lion's mouth is a little old frying pan. And Ron used
to do some of his cooking. He actually loved the idea that Roman soldiers
marched for hours on wholemeal pancakes. Ron, particularly later in life, lived
a very kind of performative lifestyle. He would often dress up in unusual
costumes, often that he'd manufactured himself, and walk a mile and a half into
town. And often he would take a guitar with him and serenade people. He wasn't
busking, he was just entertaining. This is my island and my sun, where my people
have toiled and this time begun. It should be a community asset. You know, up
until now, we've been inviting small groups of people in like art groups and
Wittle Mind. We've had a group called Help the Hoarders. We've had musicians
come in. We've had writers. We've had some quite high profile people giving
their support. Including the musician and artist Jarvis Cocker. It's great to
actually see it for real. You've got this central corridor and everything's just
a room off that. The fact that it's all on this one level apart from the
kitchen, which is just a couple of steps down, it makes it a bit cozier in a
way. We could have affordable spaces for artists. We could have a studio in the
garden, a workshop. What we really need is an investor. If we can get enough
people to recognise that in time before it goes under the hammer, we'll have to
wait and see. But if this place ends up just another house, then all of this
potential is lost forever. The home of Ron Gittins and his relatives we're
talking to. Nicola Stammeridge brings us to nine minutes to nine. Big news for
fans of Terry Pratchett, the author who died in 2015. Short stories have been
found, quite a few of them. Short stories that he wrote for a paper under a
pseudonym. And they're going to be published. I've been talking to Rob Wilkins,
who's head of the Pratchett Literary Estate. And he began by reading an excerpt
from one of them. Far away and long ago, when dragons still existed and the only
arcade game was ping pong in black and white, a wizard cautiously entered a
smoky tavern in the evil, ancient, foggy city of Moorpork and sidled up to the
bar. Wizards aren't generally welcome in pubs. They tend to score 190 at darts.
I'm looking for a hired sword, this one said to the innkeeper. Ah, said the
innkeeper, someone who can brave unimaginable terrors, fight nameless monsters,
the usual stuff. The very same, yes, said the wizard. The bloke in the corner
might be a man. The wizard looked around, sitting on a bench by the fire, was a
young man with the shoulders of an ox, an honest face and the sort of
impractical leather clothes that no true adventurer would be seen dead out of.
Reckon he's tough enough then, said the wizard. Well, he's just eaten 15 bags of
pork scratchings, a bucket of cheese and smoky dragon flavoured crisps, ten
pickled eggs and an old individual meat pie I was using as a paperweight, said
the innkeeper. Good grief, said the wizard, then just give me a pint of
inexpensive ale and a small lemonade with a cherry in it, please. Beautifully
read, Rob Wilkins, and his authentic voice, Terry Pratchett's authentic voice.
Indeed it is, absolutely. Recently found. And recently found how? I love this
story. A fan, many, many years ago, this story, the quest for the keys,
resonated with him so much that he cut it out of his local paper, had it mounted
and framed. Put it on his wall as a young lad. And there it remained through
several house moves and whatever, probably ended up in an attic somewhere. And
he then presented it to Colin Smythe, Terry's original publisher and agent, and
said, have you seen this? And Colin hadn't. It was a story that was unknown to
us. And so he spoke to another couple of fans and they went hunting for it. And
during their hunt, they did find the quest for the keys, but the very way in
which they searched, they went back in time rather than forward in time. They
came across other short stories by the author Patrick Kearns. Now, Kearns just
happens to be Terry's mother's maiden name, Patrick. Not too much of a leap to
get from Patrick to Pratchett. And when we inspected them, yes, they were all
original Terry Pratchett stories. And that story that had been kept, the one
that you've just read from, was that also Patrick Kearns? Yes, it was indeed. So
did he know the guy who kept it? Not at all. No, it was just by chance that he
had worked it out himself that it was Terry Pratchett. Ah, yes. And actually,
when you read it, of course, the working out seems quite simple in a way,
because it is his style. And there's Moorpork in there. And in fact, I stumbled
over Moorpork, because throughout my life, I've just wanted to say Ankh-
Moorpork, which is the largest city on Discworld. And I realised that when I
read it, I stumbled. So that's why. So fans are going to do exactly the same.
They are going to see those fragments from Terry's later story. Yeah. And the
whole thing is going to be published as one book, is it? Yeah, yeah. On the 5th
of October this year. Yeah, we've put them all together. The lightest of edits,
just to pull them together. And that's it. Rob Wilkins, good to talk to you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Justin. It's five to nine. Let's turn to
onshore wind farms in England, because a group of environmentalists have written
to Michael Gove to express concern about whether the government is really
committed to the idea of lifting what has been a de facto ban on new onshore
wind farms. The letter, due to be published in The Guardian, has been
coordinated by Hugh Fernley-Whittingstall, who's on the line now. Morning, Hugh.
Good morning, Michelle. What's your concern? Because there is this consultation
underway at the moment. It hasn't yet concluded. Yeah, there is a consultation,
which is good. It hasn't concluded. The framing of the consultation and the
wording of the consultation feels very loaded to no significant change. Instead
of asking people whether they want the ban lifted, they're asking people to
comment on some very, very small word changes. So that, you know, at the moment,
everything is framed against wind farming uniquely in the world of planning.
Onshore wind has to jump through more hoops than any other infrastructure. And
that doesn't look set to change if they're just changing words like planning
concerns fully addressed to planning concerns satisfactorily addressed or
community backing to community support. It's just sort of weasel words that will
not have the effect of lifting the ban. So you think essentially the
consultation has been put out in a way that is skewed towards having a result
that does not change the ban? That's very much what we feel. And it's not just
that. But if we're going to get investment in onshore wind and jobs from onshore
wind, we need the ban to be lifted properly and meaningfully. And every
indication is that investors are saying these word changes are not going to give
us the confidence to invest. That will mean we don't get the green jobs we need.
It'll mean the government doesn't get to its net zero targets and the revolution
we need in renewable power in the UK will not happen. So it's absolutely vital
that the public opinions properly heard on this, not just not just invited to
comment on a few wording fudges. Your work, Hugh, you know, you are very rooted
in the landscape and the countryside and rural affairs as well as food. Do you
not have any concerns, as some people might, about there being a sort of a
blight, an explosion of of onshore wind farms if the current rules change? Well,
there's not very much danger of an explosion when the reduction of onshore wind
since the de facto ban has been about 96 percent. And we don't anticipate an
explosion. We just anticipate we would like a reasonable consideration rather
than the sort of singling out and persecution of onshore wind. We need this. We
need this to hit our net zero targets. We need it for cleaner, greener and
frankly, cheaper energy. Onshore wind is the cheapest form of energy that we can
have in the UK. It's even cheaper than offshore wind. Last year, it was up to
nine times cheaper than than energy from fossil fuel. So it's an absolute game
changer. And having hinted that they were ready to change the game, the
government now looks set to just push this through and investors won't invest.
Communities will not get the changes in planning that they require. Communities
all over the UK have got brilliant wind projects standing by and they need this
ban to be lifted. So perhaps the way it's being framed is in order to sort of
make sure that what happens next, if and when it's lifted, is done carefully and
cautiously. Planning should be done carefully and cautiously at all times. And
that's what happens with any other major infrastructure project. If you want to
put up a waste incineration plant or a huge agricultural building, you know that
you may have local objections. There may be broad consensus, but there's already
a framework and a structure for very careful and sensitive planning. You really
don't need to single out onshore wind for this bizarre special treatment, which
seems to only have been put in place to... Understood. Thank you. Sorry for
stopping you. We're out of time. Hugh Fernley, Whittingstall. Thanks.