TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Begins this Wednesday evening at 8.45 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. BBC News at 7
o'clock. Rishi Sunak and the President of the European Commission, Ursula von
der Leyen, have spoken of a decisive breakthrough in the beginning of a new
chapter, after finalising a new agreement on post-Brexit trade arrangements for
Northern Ireland. The deal will scrap some of the paperwork on goods arriving in
Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK, and Stormont Assembly will also be
able to reject new EU laws. But the European Court of Justice will continue to
have the final say when there are disputes. The leader of the Democratic
Unionists, Geoffrey Donaldson, says his party is yet to decide if the agreement
is acceptable. We need to look at the legal text, we need to get legal advice on
that, we need to make our own assessments and come to a considered view on this.
I hope that we can do that within a reasonable time frame, but let's face it, it
has taken months to get to this point, and we will not be rushed, we will not be
pushed into a hasty decision. We want to make the right decision. The Northern
Ireland Minister, Steve Baker, has said that a bill allowing the UK to
unilaterally override the existing trade arrangement will now be withdrawn. The
Prime Minister's spokesman said the Attorney General, Victoria Prentis, had told
the Cabinet that the legal basis for the bill had now fallen away because a new
deal had been negotiated. The US Treasury Secretary, Janet Yellen, is on an
unannounced visit to Ukraine. Announcing Washington's latest transfer of
financial aid, she said underpinning an effective government was essential to
maintaining Ukraine's ability to withstand Russian aggression. Tributes have
been paid to Betty Boothroyd, the first female Speaker of the House of Commons,
who has died at the age of 93. The former Foreign Secretary, Lord Hague, said
she was kind, fun, fair and forthright. The current Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle,
said she was a national institution. Canada has said it will ban the Chinese
social media app TikTok from all government devices because of security
concerns. The European Commission took a similar decision last week. BBC News.
The war in Ukraine and fears about energy security have changed how many people
feel about oil and gas. So what will this mean for the future of a respective
new oil field in the North Sea? Will it enrich the lives of people in Shetland?
Life on the Edge of Oil is at 8 o'clock this evening. And at 8.30 we ask whether
we're witnessing the end of globalisation. And if we are, should it be a cause
for celebration or concern? Before all that, a good dose of culture from Front
Row and a trip to Ambridge after this. On BBC Radio 4. I think there's something
peculiar about this house. I hear noises. A modern retelling of the classic
thriller by Patrick Hamilton. The gas lights over there, they sometimes go right
down and then after a while they go right back up again. The origin of the word
gaslighting. Do you think we should be seeing the doctor again? I'm telling the
truth, it happens. Rebecca Knight and James Purefoy star in Gaslight. Why do you
keep hiding? I really haven't touched it. You don't even believe that yourself?
Available now on BBC Sounds. In sickness and in health, my darling. This is BBC
Radio 4, where it's time for the archers and the Laurels has a new member of
staff. MUSIC Ben! Oh, hi, Lou. So you've started then? Yeah, as you can see. Got
my uniform and everything. It suits you. How's the shadowing been going? Yeah,
yeah, good. Who's been looking after you? Farida. Oh, yeah, she's great. And
then I'm flying solo. Already? Wow. Well, I've done a lot of the training
already through my nursing course, so I suppose I'm a bit ahead of the game.
Well, you should find it pretty straightforward then. That's what Farida said.
She's been very encouraging. I'm sure she has. You seem very positive. Yeah,
yeah, I'm so up for this. It's a really good way of filling the time till I go
back to uni. Ah, definitely. So you're here for your regulars then? Yep, I've
got a few scheduled this morning. First, I need to put this up. Erm... Oh, that
lower Loxley one could come down. Ah, yeah, it was yesterday, wasn't it? Yeah.
Not sure why they're trying to recruit volunteers from here anyway. I think it
was aimed at the staff, not the residents. Right, yeah. But this one is
definitely for the residents. Seated exercise class. Yeah, I could do with
drumming up some more support. Yeah? Christine and Ron are keen, but I haven't
had many other takers yet. Well, I need to get on. Oh, yeah, sorry to hold you
up. No, no, no, that's fine. I meant I could try to recruit a few people for
you. Oh, that'd be great, thanks. Make sure you've got a room big enough. I'm
actually speaking for the whole family. We didn't think it was necessary for us
all to come along. No, absolutely. But we've talked through the points that you
asked about and everyone's agreed on what we'd like. Good. So... Er, er, Kate,
before we start, obviously there has been an element of friction between us
recently. Oh, over Gran's window, you mean? I know we've talked about it, but it
has been playing on my mind. Oh, Alan, no. I want to put it behind us
completely. Well, that would be wonderful, of course. It just seems so trivial
now. Yes, things like this do have a habit of putting disagreements in
perspective. Yes. But I am delighted to hear you say that. You know, Jennifer's
funeral should be an important step in your journey. An early step, but an
essential one. That's how I see it. So, are you ready to get into the details?
Certainly am. Right, then, let's start with the music. What have you decided on?
KNOCK AT DOOR About time. KNOCK AT DOOR Yes, come in, for heaven's sake!
Morning. Blimey! Another one? Sorry, what? Where did they dig you up from? Um...
Local infant school, by the look of you. Well, you're just going to stand there
looking gormless... Er, no...and close the door! Yep. So, my name's Ben, and I'm
here... To give me me tea. No, no, it's morning, so I'm first... I'm going to
give you your breakfast... And know what time it is? Oh, sorry, I, um... I was
ready for me breakfast hours ago. Yeah, I'm very sorry about that. Barely thinks
me mouth's gone on strike. It's my first proper day. And your last, if you carry
on like this. Well, I'm here now, so shall we get you out of bed, and then I can
get you something to eat? You sure you can manage a big fella like me? Yeah. You
don't look strong enough to lift a pork pie. Well, you'll be the one doing all
the work. I'm just here to guide you. Right then. Do your worst. KNOCK AT DOOR
Morning, William. How are we doing? Oh, you're still in bed. Nothing gets past
you, does it, Sherlock? Yeah, I'm sorry, Lou. It's just we've got a therapy
session due. Not on my empty stomach, we haven't. Does that mean you haven't had
breakfast? Everything's taking a bit longer than I expected. Dine of hunger,
here? Well, you can afford to lose a bit of weight. Cheek. I've still got three
residents to see yet. OK, well, don't worry about it, Ben. I can jiggle things
around. Not in public, I hope. I'll pop back later. Don't bother yourself on my
account. I'm really sorry. It's all right. You'll soon speed up. DOOR SLAMS SHUT
Good riddance, too. Flipping torturer in chief. Lee? He's a physiotherapist. KGB
taught him all he knows. And you say Phoebe is going to read the poem? That's
right. Phoebe, granddaughter. Yep. So, what's next, Kate? Um, well, this eulogy,
or tribute, or whatever you call it... Oh, either's fine. I'll be saying a few
words about your mum myself, of course, as part of the service. Sure. But I take
it you'd like one of the family to speak to? Yes. That's why it's me who's here,
actually. Everyone thought it would be nice if it was one of the children. You
know, my generation. Yes. And Alice and Rory didn't feel strong enough to do it.
Oh, well, it can be quite a task. And, well, Adam reckoned I'd make a good job
of it. I actually thought Debbie would be much better, but she was happy to go
with the flow, so... So you've taken it on? Yes. I mean, I have got a little
experience in this sort of thing. Not so much in a Christian setting, more pagan
and wicca ceremonies, you know. Oh, yeah, and I'm sure there'll be similarities
to what you've done before. But this is, um... This is so much closer to home.
To be honest, Alan, I'm really struggling with it. Well, as I said, it is often
challenging. So, if it's not too much trouble, can I just read out what I'm
planning to say? Yes, of course. And please, tell me honestly what you think
about it. And there's your tea. Hope you enjoy your breakfast. Unlikely. And
I'll be back in a bit. I'll make a note of it in me diary. For 2026. Um, just
before I go, when Lee comes back, you might like to ask him about his seated
exercise class. No. It'll be ideal for you. I said no. You'd probably find it
beneficial, and you might even enjoy it. The only thing I'm going to enjoy is
that door closing with you the other side of it. OK, well... I just want to be
left alone and drink me tea. OK. What? What? Are you trying to poison me? What?
No, no, I'm sorry. Sugar! Where's the sugar? You said as it comes. Yes! And tea
comes with two sugars! People who only knew her superficially might have thought
she was a bit aloof. And it's true, she did have her funny ways. But when it
came to what was important, when one of us was in need, she never put herself
first. She was there for you, whatever it took. She was... She was our... Our
rock. I'm sorry. It's all right. I'm so sorry. No, no, no, don't worry about it.
Hover tissue. Thank you. Oh, this is what I was worried about. Would you like to
take a break? I'm just not sure there's any point. I tried to read it to Jacob
last night and I did exactly the same thing. Ah. If I can't even do it for one
person in a small room, how am I going to manage in a packed church? Oh, don't
be too hard on yourself, Kate. I've come across this plenty of times before. And
the answer's quite simple. If in the moment you feel you can't go ahead, or if
you falter partway through, then I can take over. I can read your words for you.
I don't think it's going to be a case of if, though. I just can't see myself
keeping it together. Well, you don't know all the... I'm grateful for the offer,
Alan, but I don't want to spoil the flow of the service. Well, I understand
that. I'm so annoyed with myself. No, no. I really wanted to do this for Mum.
Look, you shouldn't feel under any pressure. If you think it would be too much
for you, it doesn't mean you've failed Jennifer or that you love her any the
less. Quite the opposite, in fact. You're very kind. Just telling the truth.
I've got to be honest, haven't I? See if someone else could take it on. Well,
you could still work with them on the wording, if that felt right. And when you
think about it, it doesn't have to be one of the children. Of course not. It
could even be a close friend. No. No, I'd like it to be someone in the family.
Well, that's your choice, obviously. But as I say, go easy on yourself. This is
an extremely challenging time, full of difficult emotions. It certainly is. It's
really shaken me up and made me think about my own life. Oh, in what way? Well,
I've decided I want to be much more involved running the farm, for a start.
Aren't you already very busy with spiritual home, though? Yeah, but I'm
wondering if now might be the time to step away from that. You mean, what, what,
bring in a manager or something? No, shut it down completely. Oh, I see. I would
suggest you don't rush into that, Kate. It's generally good advice not to make
any big decisions too soon after a bereavement. No. It'd be a shame to see the
place close. I know that Usha has benefited so much from the sessions that she's
had there. The more I think about it, the more I feel it's right. Everything has
its allotted span, doesn't it? Well... I think the universe is saying this is
the end for spiritual home. Do you need a hand with the chairs? No, it's fine.
Still not expecting many for the class. I'm sorry, Lee, I did my best to get
people interested. It is what it is. A few said they were busy, which, as far as
I can see, meant they didn't want to miss their favourite TV show. There's
enough coming to make it worthwhile. And some of the ones with dementia I just
couldn't get through to at all. It's their choice. Our job is to encourage
people, not force them. Sure. So, how's your first morning been? Honestly? Of
course. Really tough. It's so full on, isn't it? This is literally the first
time I've stopped. I'm so sorry about messing up your appointment, by the way,
with Mr Padre. That's OK. I saw him later. Good. Looked like he was giving you a
hard time. Yeah. I mean, I know I was running late, but he was a bit... Yeah, he
is a bit. I was doing my best. He just needs a bit of time to warm up, that's
all. His bark's worse than his bite, trust me. Not sure I want to find out.
Honestly, I think some people get a lot out of places like this, living all
together, and others, like Mr Padre, find the adjustment quite hard. I just
think he misses his independence. Admittedly, takes it out on the staff
sometimes. It didn't make things any easier, that's for sure. Ben, it will get
better. A bit better, anyway. But all the time I've been coming to the Laurels,
the staff have always been rushed off their feet. I'm sure you're going to get a
lot out of your time here, but I'm not going to lie, you are going to have your
work cut out. MUSIC PLAYS Does Chelsea know what she's volunteering for? We'll
be back in Lambridge at 7 o'clock tomorrow evening. Six Music. The year is 1978.
Kate Bush releases her seminal debut album. The Kick Inside. And on the record's
45th anniversary, we're celebrating the icon that is Kate Bush. Six Music's deep
dive into The Kick Inside. You can find archive interviews and exclusive
performances, as well as playlists and programmes featuring artists she's
inspired. She was in her own world that she had created herself. Way, way ahead
of their time. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds, click the Music tab and
scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. This is BBC Radio 4. It's
now time for Front Row with Shahid Abari. Hello. Some complicated women in
today's Front Row, and I'm not just talking about me. Women teetering on the
edge and pushing at the boundaries of wrong and right. Whether they're beheading
suitors, murdering their children or seducing their step-sons, they make for
undeniably mesmerising drama. With new productions of Medea and Phaedra this
month, we find out why classical Greek tragedy continues to enthrall modern
audiences. Also in the programme, we mark the anniversary of the invasion of
Ukraine, meeting the performers who fled to the UK and who are still making
work, including a cabaret first devised in a bunker in Kiev. I'm an artist, I'm
Ukrainian I'm a patriot, I'm civilian I'm covered... The amount of questions
which I put in this show, like through my story, questions of identity, the
question of love, the question of belonging to something, the question of
doubting things, and the question of freedom and light. We're starting, though,
with a puzzle. Turin-do or Turin-dot? Is it pronounced with a T or not? Well,
don't worry, I won't be threatening to behead you if you don't know the right
answer, because we'll find out how conductor Sir Antonio Papano pronounces it in
a moment. He's here in the studio with me, having just conducted a new recording
of the opera, which includes the show-stopping Nessun Dorma. The album is
released on the same day as Papano begins his run of a new production at the
Royal Opera House II. Back in 2002, he was the youngest conductor to lead the
Royal Opera House Orchestra. Later this year, he'll be conducting at the King's
Coronation. Antonio, is it Turin-dot or Turin-do for you? Well, you've just
opened a real can of worms. For the Italians, they will tell you that it's
Turin-do, and with no T at the end. But if you go back, the word comes from
Turan, which is a region between Asia, I think, and Persia. I'm not exactly
sure. Please, no letters. But dokt, which is the word for daughter of, and there
it is. The reason I like the Turin-dot is because the score is so... that the
woodwinds are chattering, there's so much wood, there's so much of Asian sounds,
and I like that percussiveness. But the singers have difficulty saying, the solo
singers, when they're singing high notes, Turan-do! Well, I take your word for
it. Turin-dot it is. Whatever your preference, Buccini's Last Opera is a pageant
of colour and drama, of course, and it's set in a fantastical Chinese court. The
Princess Turin-dot beheads the string of suitors who fail to solve her riddles
until a mysterious prince arrives with all the answers. That was Oper L'Ultima
Volta from Turin-dot, where the princess appears in the first act, and Antonio's
already conducting in the studio here. Let's start with the album, which you
recorded only last year. It was your first time conducting Turin-dot, and the
first time, too, for your singers, Sondre Radvanovsky as Turin-dot and Jonas
Kaufmann as Calaf, who gets to sing Nessun Dorma. That's a lot of firsts to take
on. Why did you want to do this? Well, I think the question is more, why haven't
I done it up till now? It's very strange because I, who conduct, first of all, a
lot of opera, I mean, a lot of Puccini, I've done most of the rest of them, and
I always thought this opera, you know, the story is a bit lame and there's not
enough drama or melodrama, it's not like Tosca, it's not a thriller. But how
wrong I was. It's different. You can't compare it to the other operas. It's a
chorus opera, it's about ritual, it's about old traditions, it's about ancient
China, it's epic, and it's huge. So plot twists are not what are interesting in
this opera, it's about the spectacle, the grandeur, the savagery, the bestiality
of it and the cruelty of it, and the incredible sweetness of it, the pathos of
it is just heartbreaking. You're already making it sound so wonderful. The
production is opening at the Royal Opera House and you were actually born here
in Epping to Italian parents before moving to the US, so this is a big deal.
You, an Italian, conducting Puccini at the biggest opera venue in the UK where
you were born. What do you want to bring to this, your tour and dot? Well, since
I'm doing it on stage for the first time, and it's going to be in front of a
live audience, I mean, I have to make it turn into theatre. I've just said that
it's a fable, I've just said it's ritual, and okay, so how do I translate that
to the audience? I mean, they're coming there, it's a spectacle. Some people
only know Nessun Dorma. My job is to make it shine and make every word live and
make the orchestra and the chorus just sound absolutely fantastic. If I can do
that and get my soloists to give of their very, very best and to feel
comfortable vocally, because the roles are really difficult to sing. I mean, the
tenor role and the role of tour and dot are real voice breakers. And so you have
to help them, you have to balance the orchestra and you have to create a cushion
under them and yet spur them on. Well, you've already made a bold decision about
the ending of this tour and dot. The opera was left incomplete at Puccini's
death in 1924, and usually we hear the ending provided by Toscanini, but you've
chosen to do something else. Tell us about that. Well, this is on the recording.
On the recording, we decided to go back to Mr Alfano's original ending, which
was kind of torn to pieces by Toscanini, and we wanted something shorter, more
direct, but leaving out the moments, very important, I think, where tour and dot
needs to thaw, she needs to be purified somehow of all this psychological
baggage that she's carrying against men, against love, and where she becomes a
woman. And that's been... Now, this is the version I'm doing at the Opera House,
is the shortened version. It works. It's worked since its premiere in 1926. It
works fine. On the recording, however, we've given more space for this woman to
explain herself and to rid herself of all these demons, and I think that's
something worth doing. It has been recorded before, but never in a complete
opera recording, so I'm really, really very proud and very happy that we were
able to do that. For many years, until the late 90s, I think, performances of
tour and dot in China were essentially banned because of concerns about its
representation of the country. But even outside of China, when we think of the
fantastical way that Baccini imagines the Orient, do you think there are still
problems with staging the opera these days, or what can we do about it? Look,
there's no question that today we have to look at these things, examine through
the lens of today's society what could be potentially offensive or not. But I
think it's important to state that in China now this piece is played a lot.
Really? It is, yes. And I think that's the key. We're tweaking whatever bits of
staging need to be looked at to make it clear and absolutely acceptable by any
audience today. But the fact of the matter is it takes place in ancient China.
The first word is people of Peking, you know. So that's the location. And you
just have to go with that. It's a fairy tale. And you use a great word,
fantastical. That's it. Shall we hear some more of the new recording? This is
The Princess, performed by Sondra Radvanovsky with the aria In questa regia.
Antonio, I think it's fair to say that we're not going to be hearing I think
it's fair to say that women don't always do well in opera. Here in Turandot, the
servant girl Lu kills herself. The violence that female characters face is
something I wonder if that's something which you as a conductor are having to
give more consideration to more broadly in the operas that you're conducting
with contemporary audiences in mind. It's a little bit of an issue with Puccini
because Puccini perhaps controversially always needs to kill his heroines. He
gives them ravishing deaths often. And he spends an incredible amount of time
caring for them as they suffer. It's a strange psychology. He loves those
characters literally to death. He does it in every single opera, bar a couple.
But he writes the best music for them, heartbreaking music. So I don't pretend
that I can explain Mr. Puccini to you. All I know that we don't have to look
into too much theatre to see that killing off the characters and killing off
female characters and that's happened throughout theatre. I mean look at the
Greek theatre, my goodness. We're going to talk about that. Exactly. So it comes
from that. I mean I don't look at it too closely. I think you have to take it in
the context of the story, of the music that has been written for that story and
how these characters glow. Well you talk, you're talking so beautifully and
thoughtfully about Puccini and I can see what the challenges of conducting
Puccini are but what are the pleasures of conducting Puccini? Well, first of all
the orchestra. I mean the sophistication of the colours and the sounds that are
coming out and the way he has of binding the orchestra to the singing voices.
Very few composers write the orchestra unison with the singing but he does. It
creates problems for the singers because they have to battle the melody that the
orchestra are playing but it also creates from the audience point of view, it
creates a feeling of unanimity and direction and drive and sensuality that is
one of the main draws. I mean people come to the theatre to hear this music for
that reason. It draws you in. As a conductor I'm constantly thrilled by the fact
that I feel like I'm a stage director as I'm conducting and I work very hard to
make sure that the orchestra knows exactly what they're playing and why they're
playing it. To include them in the drama because it's all there. It's a picture.
It's a picture in music. Well talking of drama I think we should talk about
Nessun Dorma which of course was popularised by the three tenors and Pavarotti
at the 1990 World Cup. What's special about that piece that makes audiences
respond so strongly? Well what's so special about We are the champions? It's
exactly the same. Of course I mean Freddie Mercury singing that song just had
the stadium alight. And the last words of that aria, Vincero, Vincero, I will
win, I will conquer. And that's a heroic statement of course. But it comes at
the end of an aria that is incredibly refined and beautiful and then it soars,
it flies the voice. It goes higher and higher and higher. And then there's an
even higher note at the end. It's fantastically written. It's perhaps even
manipulative. It's a number like you hear in the shows. Well I'm very much
enjoying your version of it but we're going to hear a little bit from the CD
here now. Vincero, Vincero. Nessun Dorma sung by Jonas Kaufmann there. Talking
of rather important moments we should say that you have another rather important
performance coming up. The coronation of King Charles III. You're conducting the
orchestra in Westminster Abbey. Are you able to tell us anything about what
you'll be conducting and how you're preparing? Well there's an immense amount of
music. The King, His Majesty has been really hands on about choosing everything.
But what's interesting about the programme is that it's many things. There's the
traditional music that would always be played at the coronations. But there are
other surprises which I won't go into now. But he's also commissioned works, new
works. Of course they're the tributes to Scotland, Wales, of course to Ireland.
And so the fact that he's taken so much care about choosing this programme is
quite something. He really cares about the arts and has been a patron of the
Royal Opera House of course. That's so wonderful. I hope you don't have any
nerves. If you do you need to listen to Nessun Dorma just before you go on
stage. Thank you so much Sir Antonio Papano. Durandot opens at the Royal Opera
House on March 10th. The Warner Music CD recording is released on the same day
I've been listening to it. It's glorious. And if you can't get to the Opera
House then there'll be a live performance streamed to cinemas across the UK on
the 22nd of March and repeated on the 26th of March. Always a nice option. Now,
last week on the programme we heard from artists in Ukraine who, a year after
the start of the war, are staging performances in the most challenging of
circumstances. But what of the artists in exile who are also trying to make
sense of the horrors back home? The Hooligan art community was based in Kiev.
With the Russian invasion the group was split between those who could escape to
Germany and those trapped in the war zone. But thanks to the video conferencing
technology that has become familiar to many of us in recent years, they were
able to put together a new show, a bunker cabaret as they call it, originally
devised in a bunker in Kiev at the start of the invasion, then taken on tour
across Europe and now in the UK. Luke Jones went to meet the company's British
co-founder Peter Kant and performers Miro Zuchkova and Sam Kiesley at rehearsals
for the show. I knew that full invasion would happen. I just thought it happened
in 2020 or 2021 but it's happened in 2022. Four weeks before the war I started
to visit military training. Every Saturday I got some theoretical and practical
knowledge how to walk with a weapon, how to lie down with a weapon. And three
weeks before the war I bought two cans of petrol because I wanted to evacuate my
family from Kiev and I bought 20 liters of petrol. And I sat down with my family
and we discussed our evacuation plan. Plan A was like this. If rockets fell down
in Kiev we are made in my granny's house because my granny, she's old lady.
Performer Sam Kiesley rehearsing one of his songs for the bunker cabaret. My
name is Peter Kant and I'm co-founder of Hooligan Art Community and artistic
director and director of the show Bunker Cabaret with these fabulous people.
24th of February 2022 we started trying to collect money from outside Ukraine to
support our artists who were back in the country. Some of them managed to leave.
The women managed to come to join us in residency. We started working again from
May. It was amazing that we could begin. We couldn't work with the men from the
company until they got permission from the Ministry of Culture in Ukraine to
leave. And we all met up again at the end of last summer in the UK. We had
nothing, no money. We had been based in Kiev and we were just working
independently. And can you describe the work and what it is that you guys do? I
can try to describe our work. So we've, since I met these wonderful artists in
Ukraine, in Kiev, I realized that they have a directness, a power, an energy for
performance, which doesn't require very much else. So it was kind of a radical
act to take over space, old factories, different spaces of any kind really, and
work with the emptiness, work with nothing. And we've been doing that for years
now since we founded the company. And now it's become a necessity because we had
to go into emergency footing. And we knew that we had those skills to work very
fast with very little. And when we had no money, we had no base anymore. We were
displaced from Kiev where we were founded as a company. We managed to get the
team back together and work on a new show, which is Bunker Cabaret. And we did
everything we could to get back together. So the company is about being together
across international boundaries, and then throughout a pandemic and now in a
time of war. Mirazhuchkov, actress, performer, video editor. Tell me what it was
like when the full-scale invasion started and you guys were, I guess, going
about your business, doing your work. Did you immediately think about, what are
we going to do? Oh my God. The life changed. I was depressed. I was in my
depression. So I did some stuff like an actress, and we had our projects, our
residencies by Hooligan, our community. And it was like my life. But now I think
it's the same, but the quality of all these things changed. I really thought
that I was going mad, but also I accepted this and just put it on the stage
again. What's your contribution to the cabaret? It's more like dance because
before in my childhood I was dancing professionally, and I started remembering
how it is to dance. So yeah, and this is for me about happiness, about life, and
about to be alive and to be aware of every moment which is happening in the
world. So it's about war and about everything, like just the walk on the street.
My name is Sam Kislyi. I am a performer, artist from Ukraine, and also co-
founder of Hooligan, our community. So there were some people who had managed to
get out and were in Germany, there were some people still stuck in Kiev, and
what, via Zoom, telephone, you were rehearsing as a group? Yeah, yeah, we were
using Zoom to connect, to speak to each other, and there was a moment when in
May they did a show in Halle in Germany, which we were in Kiev. And Peter just
called us and he said, like, we need you, and we create all these videos in
Banka during the rocket attacks in Kiev. And there was a kind of a first seed of
future show Banka Cabaret, I would say, because we started to discover some
questions already there in Banka. And so explain what is actually in the show
itself. Interesting question. Simply dance, music, poetry, songs, drama. It
looks like you're on one level. Questions? Questions, passion, and individual
experience, sharing of individual experience and questions and stories which we
went through together. And what do you do? What story do you want to do with it?
There is a lot of, there is like a mount of questions which I put in the show,
like through my story. Questions of identity, the question of love, the question
of belonging to something, the question of doubting things, and the question of
freedom and light. I see a guitar in the corner, maybe you could give a quick
spell? You can't bring a guitar and not expect to have someone ask you to play
it, come on. Sure, sure, sure. I'm brave, I'm free man, I'm slave. Who am I?
What is that I? An answer on this question you can get when you come on the
show. We can't not clap him after that, come on. Otherwise it's just mean. How
does it feel to be performing this show outside of Ukraine as there is still a
year on? So many questions and problems back home. For me personally it feels
like there is a need for this, to be present and to speak about Ukraine, to play
about Ukraine, about us. Because wherever I go I feel this part of Ukraine
inside of me. And whatever is possible to do to stop this war and help us to
win, whatever you do, it's important. The performers of the Bunker Cabaret
speaking to Luke Jones. You can find details of their tour, which goes from
Waterford in Ireland to London in the UK via Derby and Wigan, on their website.
Well, pity and fear, wrote Aristotle, are the pleasures of Greek tragedy. It's a
combination of those feelings and others that you'll find at Soho Place in
London at the moment, where Sophie Okonodo stars as Medea in director Dominic
Cook's latest production of the classical Greek story. She plays the infamous
mythological mother who murders her sons when husband Jason abandons her for a
younger woman. But across the Thames, over at the National Theatre, Janet McTeer
stars in Phaedra, the story of the wife of Theseus who falls disastrously in
love with her stepson. Phaedra this time has been reimagined by Australian
director Simon Stone as Helen, a married shadow cabinet minister, and her story
relocated to the present day. Now it's the son of an old lover from Morocco that
she falls for when he appears out of the blue. You remember me? You thought you
would never see me again. You gave me such a shock. We're very honoured to have
you here. And this is my husband. Hugo. This is my irritatingly precocious son
Declan and my daughter Isolde. Hi. Isolde, beautiful. And her husband Eric. What
a pleasure, really. Why did you move here? Oh, that's a long story. The cast of
Phaedra at the National Theatre. When I met Simon and Dominic, I asked them why
the roles of Medea and Phaedra continue to fascinate us. Because we haven't
learnt from our mistakes. There's something in us that keeps having the same
instincts, the same drives, the same urges. And sometimes those are really
horrific. And those instincts exist in all of us, I think, which is why there's
that moment of recognition when we watch these shows. Dominic? I think that
there's something about taboos in both these plays and about women breaking
taboos. In both these plays, the taboos remain pretty universal through time.
And the Greeks were really interested in sort of shedding light on things that
are hidden. That was part of their sort of democratic process. In a way, they
wanted to sort of explore why certain behaviours happen and why certain
behaviours are seen as wrong. So these two women, of course, break the rules in
a big way. I think the reason that Freud used a lot of Greek mythology in his
theories was exactly because he was interested in exploring humanity and
extremists. That you can see in the maddest of us, the kind of everyday
instincts that we have on a much smaller scale. And the notion of catharsis is
very much based on the ritualistic kind of exercising of demons. So when people
watch these shows, it only works if they feel that there is genuine jeopardy in
themselves, that they could imagine that they could also have been in that
position. Are you modernising or do the Greek plays always feel modern? I think
they always feel modern. I just mentioned Freud before, but his fundamentally
revolutionary thesis was that Electra was walking along the streets of late 19th
century Vienna. And he was saying we haven't rid ourselves of the people that we
were before we were socialised. And I think that we find these myths in all of
human history. You find Antigone whenever there is a devastating war, like in
Ukraine right now, you read a play like Antigone, you think to yourself, that's
like so incredibly relevant at the moment. Can we make the same case for Medea,
Dominic? Because Medea is monstrous. And I wonder if it's hard to keep arguing
that Medea still speaks to us now. One of the things that's so interesting about
the play is that her madness is a sort of refraction, reflection of the madness
of what's been done to her. That's what we were really sort of exploring in our
production, because she has been, in contemporary terms, sort of completely
cancelled. She's a powerful woman. She has made this man what he is. And when
it's no longer convenient for him, he not only takes everything away from her,
but he sort of, in cahoots with the sort of political leadership, rewrite the
story. And there's a very powerful moment where he says, but it wasn't you who
got me the Golden Fleece, it was Aphrodite, because she made me fall in love
with you. And the audience palpably draws breath at that moment. They really
take sides at that point. The violence of her action is a way, a reflection of
the violence of the society. And I do think that these Greek plays are always
exploring the relation of the individual to the society and how much of the
society's values, but also sort of abuses are embodied in the individual and
responded to by the individual. And that conversation in Madea, I think, is one
of the most interesting parts of the play, because, of course, she does break
the biggest taboo, really. The idea of a mother killing her children is so sort
of beyond. But it's in a context. It's in a very specific context. Let me ask
you a bit more about the production, because your production draws from the
adaptation of Madea in the 1940s by the American poet Robinson Jeffers. And that
was a Broadway hit. So how did you go about developing that into the production
that we see now at Soho Place? To be honest, it was a bit of an accident because
I'd been trying to persuade Sophie O'Connor to do this part for about 15 years.
And initially, she was like, I don't know why I'm doing it. There's no way I'm
killing my children on stage. Just forget it. I want to do a comedy. And I kept
sort of badgering her. And then I did the old trick that directors always do. I
know, let's do a reading of it. Just see what you think. And I just came across
this version of it. I read a whole load and I really loved it because he was a
fascinating man. He was a pacifist, Robinson Jeffers, and he was an
environmentalist. He was a real outsider. And I think he made a very strong
connection with the criticism in the play of tit for tat, you know, revenge as
opposed to justice. And having lived through the Second World War and been a
conscientious objector, he really felt that very deeply. The war, the Second
World War was in his mind, the culmination of a series of sort of revenges from
one country or one culture to another. It makes for an intense 90 minutes.
Definitely. Simon, you've updated Phaedra and you've done that before. Your
production of Federica Garcia Lorca's Llama in 2016, starring Billy Piper at the
Young Vic, updates that story centering on a woman struggling to conceive via
IVF. That was a tremendous success. So how did you go about reimagining a
classic? How did you go about doing that with Phaedra? I mean, it's the same
process every time you, I mean, you don't choose the subject matter unless
there's something you think that it has to say to the world that you're living
in at the moment. And I was particularly interested and have been for quite a
while in Phaedra's exploration of a woman's forbidden sexual desire. In our
version, that was, you know, that kind of became the central focus, the idea of
exploring postmenopausal sexuality and what that kind of how it is a taboo in
society. So it's a kind of contemporary taboo that is equivalent to the old
Greek taboos that Dominic was talking about and how to kind of shed light on an
area that is not often discussed and a sense of kind of hopelessness that people
can feel at various different ages when they have a moment of amour fou. Well,
tell me a bit more about the casting. Both of you, two incredible lead actors,
Sophie Okonedo as Medea and Janet McAteer as Phaedra. Did you have them in mind,
Simon? Did you have Janet in mind for these roles? And did they have an effect
on how the production developed? Janet was suggested to me by the National. I
didn't know her work very well at the time. And then I watched a few things that
she was in. I was like, oh, my God, this woman is extraordinary. And then that
was very easy. We just met each other. Dominic, what was your experience? You've
been pestering Sophie. There was a long pester process. But then I decided, we
tried it on the reading, that I wanted all the men to be played by one man. I
wanted to sort of clarify the way that the players, the interaction of an
individual in a society and all the men are sort of upholding in different ways,
the sort of patriarchal order. So you have Ben Daniels play Jason and Creon and
all the roles, the male roles. That was a slower burn. It needed quite a lot of
convincing. And then we found the theatre because I knew I didn't want to do it
in a proscenium theatre because I wanted the chorus to be in the audience and
the conversation to be with an audience. In your case at Soho Place, the
audience are often lit. And so they feel part of the chorus. You know, you're
watching the play always and there's a duality. You're relating to the action on
stage, but you're always aware that there are other people in that space. You've
also made striking decisions about the staging, Simon. Phaedra is set in a glass
box. The voyeuristic element of observing these taboo moments as if you're
watching someone from an apartment opposite you, you know, a little bit like
rear window. That's what I was thinking. You see this kind of forbidden moment
as a member of society, the kind of voyeuristic ability to kind of lean in. They
are two great female roles, aren't they, Dominic? Medea and Phaedra. And, you
know, we could think of others, Antigone and Clytemnestra. All of these women,
they're not always likeable, but yet they continue to live. They survive. Have
our sympathies, Dominic, changed for them over the centuries? And where do we
sit now? I'm sure they have. And of course, part of our job as directors is to
make behaviour understandable to an audience, which I think was one of the main
functions of Greek drama, is to try to sort of understand actions and behaviours
that seem beyond understanding. I think it's important to try to put the
behaviour in a context and to see how that character is reacting to the context.
And then maybe empathy is possible, whether likeability is possible, I don't
know. The same question applies to Phaedra in one way, but here we have a woman
who makes a false accusation of rape, something that might be considered very
sensitive for a contemporary audience with our contemporary sensitivities. Well,
we got rid of that. So I was going to ask you, what kind of consideration did
you give that? Well, I didn't think we needed another story about a woman who
falsely accuses a man of rape. That's quite a radical change of Phaedra that we
know. Yes and no. She does something equally abhorrent. She reports someone
who's overstayed their visa to the Home Office. But that's not something
fundamental to her gender. Yeah. Anyone can do that. Giving people fodder for
their argument about women being very quick to accuse people of rape is not an
appropriate thing to be putting on stage right now. I just wasn't interested in
that being the taboo of the evening. That's interesting. Why do we keep going
back to the Greeks? Is it because nobody's matched them yet? Not to be rude
about the moderns, but why do we keep going back to the Greeks? Well, they
invented drama, for starters. I was thinking that what we most need at the
moment is either joy or catharsis. We don't want to be told how crap everything
is because we sort of know it, but there's something about the catharsis that
Greek, having been all been locked away and segmented in the way that we were
through lockdown, there's something really powerful. And you can really feel the
audiences yearn for it and respond to it when you present this intense
experience. It's something that only theatre can do, that sort of collective
moment. So it doesn't surprise me that there are artists at the moment wanting
to reach towards the Greek plays because they do that. They do that sort of
better than anything else. They're also, they don't seem to be recognisable in
their kind of moral structures in the way that anything written in the Judeo-
Christian tradition feels like you're always comparing it to the moral
structures of the world that you're living in now. And you don't have to do that
with the Greeks. And the position of women and men in society feels so different
to the 2000 years of writing after that. So of course, when you're trying to
find great roles for women, there really is only the Greeks that have that kind
of regularity of extraordinary roles. I do think that there is something about
how long these plays were being prepared to become plays. The oral tradition
that led to Medea being written by Euripides was already about a thousand years
old, if not older. So the character existed. So if you're looking at nowadays,
people redoing Spider-Man for the umpteenth time, that's a tradition which is 50
years old. Imagine if we'd been telling the story of a character like Medea
before we even write a single word of drama. We'd just been sitting around a
campfire and just telling ourselves that story. Euripides was the first person
that had Medea kill her own children in that tradition. Up until that moment,
the children were killed by the citizens of the city as revenge for her having
escaped after having killed Creon and his daughter. So you're looking at the
most radical rewrite that Euripides already did over 2000 years ago. And so I
think that the longer the tradition is, the more solid the drama then becomes.
And I think there will be myths that we endlessly rewrite over the next 500
years that will feel in 500 years time that someone's really created the most
essential version of that particular modern narrative. I hope it's not Spider-
Man. Are there parts of the classical Greek repertoire that you think should be
back on the stage? Is there something that we haven't seen that we absolutely
should be seeing again that you're going to produce and direct for us? Either of
you. I'm not going to say it because then other people are going to put it on
stage. And I'll steal it! Dominic Cook and Simon Stone. Phaedra is on at the
National Theatre until the 8th of April and Medea is at Soho Place until the
22nd of April. Finally, sad news today of the death of Baroness Betty Boothroyd,
the first and only female Speaker of the House of Commons. Last year, the actor
Maxine Peake performed in a play celebrating Boothroyd's political career and
her theatricality. Maxine spoke to Front Row as the play was opening about why
Betty Boothroyd was so inspiring. I'd had the idea for a long time about writing
something about Betty. And I think initially it was going to be sort of more of
a straight buy-up of her life. But we were sort of talking about what we felt
she represented. And it was about politicians from back in the day that we felt
whatever side they were on, they were there to serve the people. And Betty feels
very much of that ilk from that period. It was a job. You were the voice of the
people. It just all seemed to come together that I felt this is a woman that we
need to know more about and celebrate. And actually would make a really fun show
because she's theatrical as well. But Boothroyd grew up in West Riding and she
was a shop assistant, a typist and then at the age of 17 a member of a dance
troupe, the Tiller Girls. Did you see that theatricality, the sense of
performance in Betty Boothroyd's time as Speaker of the House of Commons? Oh,
definitely. And that's where the idea came from. I mean, if you look at her
image, I mean, it's amazing. Of course, the Speaker's gown is, you know, it's
very theatrical. But just Betty herself and that rich voice, that sort of
strong, you know, no nonsense sort of delivery she had, but also with a warmth.
Yeah, in another life, she definitely could have been a performer. Maxine Peake
talking to me last year about Betty Boothroyd, who has died aged 93. That's all
for tonight. Tomorrow on Front Row, Tracy Ann Oberman on reinventing Shylock in
a new production of The Merchant of Venice. Join Samira at 7.15. Front Row was
presented by Shahida Bari and the producer was Olivia Skinner with studio
engineer Giles Aspin. Next this evening, a documentary, Life on the Edge of Oil.
That's after the news. On BBC Radio 4. We are all a unique accumulation of our
own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet, Lem Sissay, looks at uniqueness.
Rainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it happens. Reflecting on
the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of graduates, people without
degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me! Lem Sissay is the one and
only. He'll like it all. Starting this Friday morning at 11.30.