TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-27-09H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Today on BBC Radio 4 with Michelle Hussain and with Justin Webb. It's eight
o'clock on Monday the 27th of February. The headlines this morning. The Prime
Minister and the European Commission President a meeting in Berkshire this
afternoon in the clearest sign yet that a deal is about to be sealed on post-
Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. An Australian start-up has bought the
battery maker British Volt which collapsed last month. And safety investigators
say NHS backlogs in England are causing significant distress to staff with
ambulance dispatchers saying it's common to worry how many are we going to kill
today. The BBC News was read this morning by Vijay Alis. Rishi Sunak is to meet
the President of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, in Berkshire
this afternoon to try to finalise a new deal on trading arrangements for
Northern Ireland. The protocol, which was signed as part of the Brexit
agreement, has long been a source of friction, especially for unionists in
Northern Ireland because it includes checks on goods entering from elsewhere in
the UK. Our political correspondent Ian Watson has the details. After hundreds
of hours of discussions, Downing Street is hopeful that these will be the final
talks before an agreement is reached. The Cabinet is expected to meet
immediately after the Prime Minister and the Commission President conclude their
discussions. And such is the confidence that a deal will be struck. Plans have
been put in place for a joint press conference, followed by a statement to
Parliament from the Prime Minister. This would allow MPs to express their
initial views on any deal, though there won't be a vote. An agreement with the
EU would ease trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, but it wouldn't
in itself restore power-sharing government at Stormont. That would only happen
if the largest unionist party, the DUP, agreed. Its MPs are unlikely to deliver
a verdict on any deal until they see the detail. So today may well be a landmark
moment in the EU and UK's post-Brexit relations, but a rockier road to solving
Northern Ireland's political problems could lie ahead. Theresa Villiers
supported Brexit and was Northern Ireland Secretary at the time of the
referendum. She told us it was crucial that MPs were allowed to vote on any
plan. I can't conceive of circumstances where something as significant as this
could be finally agreed and implemented without MPs voting on it in Parliament.
This is a very important step in terms of, I hope, finally delivering Brexit in
full. And that means that there is a vital need for Parliament to have its say
and to have a vote on this. Rishi Sunak has said he's focusing on the best
interests of the people of Northern Ireland, but there are other potential
benefits at stake for both sides. With her thoughts, here's our Europe editor,
Katja Adler. For Rishi Sunak, a deal avoids a looming trade war with Brussels,
the UK's biggest trade partner, after the government previously threatened to
unilaterally override the original Northern Ireland agreement. Better relations
also open up new possibilities, like UK access to the EU's respected Horizon
Research Programme and improved arrangements with France to stop people
smugglers. France and the UK hold an important summit next month, while in April
Mr Sunak hopes to tempt the US president to join him for a ceremony marking 25
years of the Good Friday Belfast Agreement. A working EU-UK deal on Northern
Ireland, something Joe Biden expressed a personal interest in, would boost
relations with Washington. Brussels meanwhile yearns for a friendlier post-
Brexit era with the UK. Russia's invasion of Ukraine has served as a reminder of
shared values and priorities. An Australian start-up company has bought the
collapsed battery maker British Volt. The business had been planning to build a
£4bn factory in Northumberland before it ran out of money and went into
administration last month. The buyer, Recharge Industries, is owned and run by a
New York-based investment fund. It will start by focusing on batteries for
energy storage and plans to move on to make batteries for high-performance
sports cars. Recharge's chief executive is David Collard. What we're bringing,
which is different to the prior British Volt, is we're bringing validated
technology. US Defence has also validated the technology. It's actually already
supplied to the UK Navy through a subcontractor over here. We've put forward our
case and we've been nothing but successful in everything we've set out to do so
far. Safety investigators say that doctors, ambulance dispatchers and other NHS
staff in England have faced significant distress and harm over the past year as
a result of long delays in emergency care. The Healthcare Safety Investigation
Branch said many staff broke down in tears when they were asked about their
working environment. Ambulance dispatchers said it was common to worry how many
are we going to kill today because of their frustration at not being able to
reach patients quickly. The watchdog said there was likely to be an impact on
patient safety. Dr Salwa Malik is an A&E consultant and Vice President of the
Royal College of Emergency Medicine. I've had nights where you go over the
scenarios in your head about patients or whatever problem that you were in and
it can be really difficult to sleep and if you're on edge for 10, 12 hours a
day, at the end when you walk out you can kind of crumble. NHS England says it
takes staff wellbeing very seriously while the government said the number of
ambulances and hospital beds was being increased. The energy regulator Ofgem is
expected to announce a lower price cap for gas and electricity bills for the
three months from April but because of a reduction in the support from
government, typical households in England, Scotland and Wales would see what
they actually pay rise from about £2,500 a year to £3,000. The Liberal Democrat
leader Sir Ed Davey told Today that the government should use money saved from
lower global energy prices to keep bills down for everyone. There's been a
consensus across the political parties that if you try to target help on energy
prices you will miss out millions of people and even the Conservatives agree
that that would be the wrong approach. So our approach follows what the
consensus is that this is the best way to help people with their energy bills
and our package that I'm announcing today not only would cut the energy price
guarantee by £500 but we'd target more money on the least well-off households by
increasing the warm home discount and the winter fuel allowance. The Labour
leader Sir Keir Starmer is to set out more details of what he has called his
mission to improve the British economy, warning that without new policies it
risks falling behind Eastern European nations. He will host a meeting in the
City of London later this morning with business people. Here's our economics
editor Faisal Islam. Labour will publish a document detailing what it calls its
mission for a fast-growing economy should it get back into government. This
suggests that the very sluggish growth in the size of the economy per person, if
continued, could lead to Poland overtaking the UK by the end of the decade and
Bulgaria and Romania doing so by 2040 on some measures. The party blames a cycle
of managed decline based on a lack of a long-term plan, slow growth, low
investment and flatlining productivity, made worse by what it calls a bad Brexit
deal. What is less clear is exactly how any Labour government would change the
Brexit deal or how much it would increase investments, for example. The
government is creating Jobcentre league tables in a pilot scheme, with staff
being given bonuses for getting people off benefits and into work. The PCS Civil
Service Union has dismissed it as gimmicky. Our employment correspondent Zoe
Conway reports. According to an internal document seen by the BBC, the
government wants to test whether bonuses will incentivise staff to get more
universal credit claimants into work. The 60 Jobcentres where this is being
piloted are to be ranked by performance. For those at the top, staff will get
£250 each. There will also be a requirement for claimants who have been on
universal credit for 13 weeks to attend daily meetings for a fortnight or face
sanctions. The government said it was right that staff were rewarded when they
went above and beyond to help people to get into jobs. The fantasy film
Everything Everywhere All at Once has dominated at the Screen Actors Guild
Awards in Los Angeles. It won three of the four individual acting awards and the
prize for the best ensemble cast, increasing the likelihood of Oscar success
next month. From LA, here's Regan Morris. Michelle Yeoh won Best Female Actor
for her role in Everything Everywhere All at Once. She plays a middle-aged
Chinese-American immigrant with a struggling business and marriage and an
unlikely destiny to save humanity. After the cast won Best Ensemble, their
94-year-old co-star James Hong received a standing ovation. My first movie was
with Clark Gable. But back in those days, the leading role was played by these
guys with their eyes taped up like this and they talk like this. And the
producer said the Asians were not good enough and they are not box office. But
look at us now, huh? Former child star Kei-Hee Kwan won Best Supporting Actor,
becoming the first Asian man to win in that category. Jamie Lee Curtis won Best
Supporting Female Actor for the film, beating the favorite Angela Bassett, who
has been an awards season frontrunner for Black Panther Wakanda Forever. Brendan
Fraser won Best Actor for The Whale. The Isle of Man cricket team have
registered the lowest score in men's 2020 history in a defeat by Spain. They
were all out for 10, having been dismissed in under nine overs. Seven players
made ducks. The previous lowest score was the 15 made by Sydney Thunder against
Adelaide Strikers last year. Viji, thank you. The time is now ten past eight.
Prepare for a day of careful choreography, well-planned photocalls and
appearances, ministers being briefed, a text being read. It looks as though
months of negotiation behind the scenes and sometimes front of house frustration
and progress, threats of strong legislation or trade war. Well, it looks as
though all of that might now be set into the past and a new era of a new
Northern Ireland protocol is upon us. Let's turn then to our political editor,
Chris Mason, as our guide to what lies ahead today. But Chris, before we get
into the politics, give us some context, first of all, because we're likely to
hear a lot today about the application of EU law in Northern Ireland. Tell us
first about the framework for that and why that has an application in Northern
Ireland at all post Brexit. Yeah, this is absolutely crucial to get our heads
around in order to understand what the rules have been for the last few years,
why some people don't like them and what is likely to change. So at the heart of
this appendix to the Brexit deal, known as the protocol, signed up to by Boris
Johnson a few years ago, was this idea that Northern Ireland would be in what's
known as the EU's single market for goods. Now, the ultimate arbiter of that
rule book, that EU rule book, is the European Court of Justice. Plenty of people
who don't like the protocol don't like the role of the European Court of Justice
having a role in a corner of the United Kingdom. And also, single market rules
can change over time. And as they change, they apply to every geographical
jurisdiction to which they affect. In other words, that includes Northern
Ireland. This is where the delightful phrase dynamic alignment gets used. In
other words, as Brussels changes the rules, the rules change in Northern
Ireland. What mechanism, what democratic mechanism is there for people in
Northern Ireland via their politicians to be able to do anything about it? That
has been absolutely central to these negotiations with the European Union, so
central that it will feature, I understand, in the conversation that will happen
between the Prime Minister and the President of the European Commission in the
relatively short conversation scheduled for around about lunchtime today. So
that's the crux of what caused problems for some, not all, for some, with the
Northern Ireland protocol and the core of the issues that the New Deal will
attempt to at least partially address. Because the expectation is this won't be
about removing every element, for instance, of the European Court of Justice.
Can it just be pushed a little bit further down the legislative timeline, if you
like, to try and reassure as many people as possible from the government's
perspective that they've done enough for people to back this New Deal? And so
therefore, at some point today, you're expecting to see a text released for
everyone to read? That's the expectation. Yeah, I mean, we've not yet been
specifically promised that. The focus has been very much on the kind of visual
choreography of the meeting between the two leaders. The expectation will be a
news conference mid to late afternoon, followed by the Prime Minister having a
statement in the House of Commons this evening. Clearly though, for any proper
reaction and scrutiny of what has been agreed, the accompanying documents will
be absolutely essential. And they'll certainly be essential for Northern
Ireland's Democratic Unionist Party, who pulled out of power sharing government
over a year ago now over concerns about the protocol, and indeed for
Conservative backbenchers who have been jittery about this, but more broadly,
obviously, for selling this change to a wider public. Interestingly, this
morning, I understand that Labour won't necessarily clamour for an instant vote
on this, if that's what does happen via the mechanism of the House of Commons,
their view being that if it takes time to reassure, whether it be the Democratic
Unionists or anyone else and give people time to read it, that would be
reasonable. Does it look, Chris, as if the text would include the UK agreeing to
drop the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill? This is fascinating about precisely
what happens around that bill. So the mood music from government in the last
couple of weeks has been one where they've made the argument that if they manage
to secure a deal that is better than the Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, because
it is a negotiated settlement, it is therefore, they argue, sustainable because
it has the agreement of the other side to that discussion, i.e. Brussels, which
the Protocol Bill, which was a unilateral piece of law to get rid of some of the
provisions of the Protocol, does not, then they would drop that bill. I've had
other people in and around government and assiduous followers of parliamentary
rules who have wondered if it could somehow be used as a vehicle for amending
some of the changes or making into law some of the changes that we've heard are
going to be in this package today. So precisely how they manage that will be
interesting. For some of those who are the most opposed, have been the most
opposed to the Protocol, there'll be some, I suspect, who will still think that
that Northern Ireland Protocol Bill, that unilateral action from the UK that is
currently paused in the House of Lords, would be better because it would go
further, it would perhaps remove all of the concerns they had with the Protocol.
It would also spark one heck of a stoochie with the European Union and so you'll
hear the government argue that that wouldn't really be a long-term solution to
what some see as those problems. And so therefore, moment of political risk for
Rishi Sunak but also an opportunity. Yeah, so in terms of opportunity, I think
we'll hear Downing Street emphasise that it is a better deal for Northern
Ireland because it removes some of what some see as concerns about the Protocol
and helps reset the relationship with the European Union, which is worth it
given the conversations that we can anticipate in the coming weeks. We've got
the Prime Minister going to Paris for a summit with the French President in a
couple of weeks to talk about the whole issue of small boats and the Channel,
massively important issue to the Prime Minister, obviously very, very, very
difficult to try and resolve and doing a Protocol deal doesn't mean it'll be
suddenly easy, but it'll mean the atmosphere for those conversations is a little
more positive. But on the political side, a moment of jeopardy domestically
because how do Conservative backbenchers respond, not least one Boris Johnson,
and how do Northern Ireland's Democratic Unionists respond? They were sounding
cautious last week, they were sounding quiet over the weekend. What do they say?
I expect they'll go away and say, look, this is something that we need to spend
time reading and scrutinising and passing through our lawyers. The Prime
Minister, I think, will hope that there isn't a sort of instant rejection from
the leadership of the Democratic Unionist Party in the hope that at some point
down the track, the ultimate prize from Downing Street's perspective can be
secured, which is restoring power sharing devolved government in Northern
Ireland. There's no expectation that will happen instantly, but this deal, for
all of its choreography today and for all of its smiles and sense of some
diplomatic achievement from the Prime Minister, if in the medium to long term it
doesn't secure the re-establishment of devolved government in Northern Ireland,
there'll be plenty that will say that ultimately it's failed. Chris, thank you.
The time is 17 minutes past eight. Let us return now to the vexed question of
how much we're going to have to pay for electricity and gas. The energy price
cap, the quarterly cap announcement comes today, comes with government support
for energy bills due to last for only another month or so. The Chancellor is
saying there isn't the headroom to go on spending, at least at the rate that we
have been. The impact of all of that is that costs for individual households in
spite of the cap coming down are going to go up. Dane Clare Moriarty, Chief
Executive at Citizens Advice, is here. Good morning to you. What is the impact
going to be? So, the announcement of the price cap is largely irrelevant for
those of us paying our bills. At the moment, the price cap is £4,200 but the
average household is paying about £2,500 and that's thanks to the energy price
guarantee that the government put in place. Now, they are due, as you say, to
reduce the amount of support that's being given so that those so average energy
prices are due to rise in April, that's just a month's time, to £3,000, £500
increase and at the same time, the rebates that we've all been receiving, £400
over the last six months, those run out. So, for most people, on average, we're
going to see a £900 increase in people's bills. Now, we know that that's going
to be unsustainable for very many people. We estimate that the number of people
who simply won't be able to afford their energy bills will double, so we'll go
from one in ten people to one in five people. That is a huge number of people.
That's why we're saying that the government has to keep the energy price
guarantee where it is at the moment, £2,500. And if they don't, not only are you
saying that some people won't be able to afford, but you're saying that the
numbers of people who won't be able to afford will, what, reach up into those
who one might think of as being relatively better off? Yes, well we're already
seeing that people are under a huge amount of pressure with energy bills where
they are at the moment. If you add on £900 on average for people to find a year
for energy bills, then you start to bring in a very large number of people. We
believe there are about three million people who would be paying more than 10%
of their income on energy who won't be entitled to any of the targeted support
that the government is going to make available. So, we are talking about
literally millions of people who are going to see catastrophic impact. What the
government says is that you're also talking, of course, about quite large
numbers of people who can afford to pay and at the moment have no incentive not
to use electricity and gas because they're getting quite a large amount of help
from the government. It is wrong that public money is used like that. So the
energy price guarantee is underpinning everybody's bills at the moment at a
level of £2,500 due to rise to £3,000. Now, with what we're seeing in terms of
projections about where energy bills are going to go in future, by July the
energy price guarantee will fall away and so there won't be any support provided
to everyone because the level of bills that people will be paying will be below
the level that the energy price guarantee is. That's an interesting point, isn't
it? Because that does then undermine that argument quite considerably if what
you say turns out to be the case. We believe that it is absolutely imperative
that the government addresses the short-term issue. So in a month's time, bills
due to go up hugely as the government withdraws support. The government can keep
that support in place. The energy price guarantee element, that particular way
in which it's supporting everybody, will in practice very likely fall away in
another three months' time. So why wouldn't you continue to provide support
that's meaningful to people for that period? We were hearing from Cornwall
Insight, the energy analysts earlier on in the programme, pointing out that in
the end these decisions have got to be taken by politicians, these decisions
about how we pay for energy in the future, particularly if we're paying much
more than we used to pay. Are you, as citizens, advised in favour of social
tariffs in energy, as there is, for instance, with water, where wealthier people
simply pay through their bills to make sure that everyone can afford it? So we
are doing some work at the moment with the Social Market Foundation and with
Public First, looking at precisely this issue of what needs to be the long-term
support for people. There are questions about who are the people who need to
receive support. In recent times, the government's given support to people
specifically on benefits and then support to everyone. There's a real question
about whether there is another group of people who do need targeted support but
aren't on benefits. So there's who gets the amount, who gets support. There's a
question about what level of support is going to be needed given what we think
is likely to happen to energy bills over the rest of the decade. And there's a
question of how it gets paid for and whether it's reasonable to share out the
cost of providing that across other people's bills. And is it reasonable as
well, eventually, to say we should not be cutting people's electricity and gas
off? We've had these awful cases recently of people working with British Gas
actually breaking into people's homes in order to fit meters that can then be
switched off. With water, you can't do it. Should it be the same with
electricity and gas? We're absolutely saying that it should not be possible for
people to have a forced installation of a prepayment meter until there are
proper protections in place that mean that people can't be cut off completely
from gas and electricity. There are ways of doing that. We've encouraged the
government and the regulator to look at the ways in which that whole mechanism
can be improved. Prepayment meters can be and have been in the past a useful
budgeting mechanism for people. But at the moment, with prices so high, they're
simply resulting, as we've seen, in huge numbers of people being unable to top
up, sitting in the cold and the dark. That just isn't something that should be
happening in today's society. Dame Claire Moriarty, thank you. Thank you. It's
now 23 minutes past eight and on Channel 4 this Thursday, Stephen Fry will tell
the story of two forgotten figures in the Dutch resistance in World War II who
worked to save Jews at great risk to themselves, particularly because they were
gay at a time of Nazi persecution. Their names were Willem, Arandeus and Frida
Belinfante. And Stephen told us what drew him to their story. Well, firstly, I
am Jewish and people don't like to think that of me in a strange sort of way
because they'd rather think of me as the quintessential Englishman. But yeah, so
I grew up with this one half of my family, my mother's half, who were survivors
of the Second World War. And most of the family didn't survive. I knew a few
details that my mother had given me and she didn't know them all. And indeed,
the family didn't know them all. But then getting on for 20 years ago now, I did
that program, Who Do You Think You Are? And that was quite an experience really,
because you agree to do it. And all they say is, make sure you've got a passport
in your pocket every day of filming. That's it. Otherwise, you don't know where
you're going to be. Anyway, we did the program and of course, all roads as they
do lead to Auschwitz, to the death camps. And it was a pretty harrowing
experience as it would be for anybody to discover the actual details, to see the
pieces of paper. It was your mother's aunt and her family who perished. Yes,
indeed. And her grandparents. Yeah, they went to Tereza and Chadat, where Riga
first and Tereza and Chadat and then Auschwitz. And since that experience, I've
been more aware of that identity. You see it in people from all ethnicities, I
think. The first generation wants to assimilate as my grandfather did in
England. You know, he wore tweed suits and went shooting and was a rather
preposterous but amiable figure in his Englishness in that sense, but with a
really strong accent, of course. And then my parents' generation just got on
with being British. And then my generation, as so often, is really more
concerned about where we come from. And the two people at the heart of this,
Willem and Frida, they are not Jewish, but they work to try and save Jews in the
occupied Netherlands. Yes. And they were from another minority to which I also
belong, which was generally murdered by the Nazis. And that's gay people, queer
people, as we say these days. Frida Bellinfante was this remarkable musician.
She was the first person in Europe to have her own orchestra. And Willem
Arandaes was an artist who had come out to his parents aged 17, which is
extraordinary during the teens of the century, and was immediately thrown out of
the house and never spoke to them again. And he had a lover and the house was
bombed. And he sent his lover to the town of Appeldoorn because he didn't want
him hurt, because he was going to devote himself to this new entity, the
artist's resistance. I knew nothing of this. Indeed, like a lot of people, you
almost forget that Holland was occupied. And Hitler, as far as he was concerned,
was merely occupying the land of fellow Aryans. So he didn't want to have a
brutal occupation in the way that Poland had. But nonetheless, of course, Jews
and queers were still absolutely to be rounded up. What was the risk then that
Willem and Frida, because of their circumstances as a gay man and a lesbian,
were taking in the work they were doing to save Jews? Oh, I think the risk was
ultimate. It was the, you know, the extreme. And these were artists. They were
musicians and a painter and writer in the case of these two people. And they
decided, what can we do with our skills such as they are? Well, I can draw, I
can paint. But how is that of any use in a resistance movement against the
Nazis? Well, it turns out that the Dutch had the best identity papers of any
country in the world at that time. They had watermarks and individual numbers
and photographs and all kinds of details that made them very hard to forge. So
they thought, we'll make for the Jewish people passes that are identical but
without the J, so that when they're stopped by the police, they don't come over
as Jewish. The better they got at it, and the more people knew about it, the
greater the risk was. And also, the more suspicious Germans and Dutch police
working for them became. And, you know, even towards the end, I don't want to
give away what happened, but the real heroism came towards the end, I think,
where Willem in particular stood up for his not just his Dutchness and his sense
of the importance of freedom from oppression, but for his sexuality. One of the
things he most famously said was, I wanted to show the world that homosexuals
aren't cowards and can be as brave as anyone, which seems to us obvious, but
back then wasn't obvious at all. And the film charts the consequences for both
of them and their respective fates. Last time we talked, it was about cricket.
And you're the current president of the MCC. And I remember you talking about
this was in the wake of the Azeem Rafiq situation. And you were talking about
the need for everyone to feel welcome in cricket. I wonder what you make of
where that whole process, the one that he sparked and what he said about
Yorkshire has got to because it does feel at the moment that it's run into quite
a lot of difficulty with people withdrawing from the proceedings as a lover of
the game and, you know, someone who's playing the role that you are right now. I
wonder what you think is needed? Well, I'm sure you'll understand that I can't
comment directly on the Yorkshire case. But partly because as president of the
MCC, it's not my business. It's an ambassadorial role, not an executive one. And
I'm not within the structure of cricket in quite the way that allows me to
comment, except as a lover of the game, I can certainly express my sorrow. And
as a cancer survivor, which is a weird way to open a sentence, I can assure
everyone as if they didn't know that when you try and get rid of a cancer, it's
always painful. There's always a lot of subsidiary and unpleasant pain and mess.
And that's sort of what's happening in Yorkshire, it seems. And I have every
sympathy for those trying to work it out. But, you know, you can use words like,
you know, equality and diversity and so on. I think the word accessibility, it's
all about the game being accessible to all who are even slightly interested and
that every encouragement for training and play is given. Stephen Fry, thank you
very much. Real pleasure. I hope I made sense. Well and from the MCC president
to cricket today, because that's what Jonathan's looking at. Most definitely.
I'm sure the MCC president will know that England's cricketers need to make
history if they're to win the second test against New Zealand. Ben Stokes' team
faces the highest run chase by any team that's enforced the follow on in a test.
258 after the Blackcaps were all out for 483 in their second innings in
Wellington. England lost Zach Crawley before they closed on 48 for 1. Hugely
grateful to spinner Jack Leach for taking the final three wickets to finish with
figures of 5 for 157. Hard work. I feel like I learnt a lot this game. I think,
like, speaking Stokesy, sometimes, yeah, it's got to be a struggle and that's
where you do the most learning. So I think hopefully that will stand me in good
stead. But yeah, just happy with how I stuck in there and kept trying to give
what I could to the team and that's the most pleasing thing. And to get a few at
the end was a nice reward, I guess, for that. Let's talk to correspondent
Jonathan Agnew. Good morning. Good morning. This victory target could have been
a lot bigger, couldn't it? But for a late New Zealand collapse, five wickets
going very quickly. Yeah, I mean, it's been an extraordinary game, this, really.
They lost the last four for five. I suppose what you could say is that by being
dismissed, it did give them that half hour towards the end and they got the
wicket of Zach Crawley, who, let's face it, is under some pressure now. He was
out for 24 and it wasn't a great inning. So you sort of give on the one hand and
take on the other, I guess. But they would have wanted some more, which probably
would have been more challenging for England. I mean, to score another 210 is
not going to be straightforward. The pitch is still doing a little bit and there
is some spin there as well. But I think New Zealand will be aware that they
really don't have very much in the way of bowling resources after Southie and
Henry. Michael Bracewell, their spinner, is not in Jack Leach's class. And
they've got a couple of seamers in there. Michael Wagner seems to have spent
most of the series looking for his ball in the stands. So I think if England can
get through that first hour, then they should record their what 11th win out of
12, which would be remarkable. Good decision to enforce a follow on by Ben
Stokes. I'm well aware we've got hindsight now. Yes. Well, we do have hindsight.
At the time, I can understand why he did it. Those who say that he shouldn't
will point to, I think, Anderson and Broad in particular, who looked knackered
by the end of this. If my figures are correct, that is, I think, the third
slowest England pace attack on record in terms of speeds. They were bowling the
ball. Anderson had another 27 overs, didn't get a wicket. Broad got one. He
bowled another 24. That is a bit of a warning sign as far as the Ashes is
concerned. Yes, they're two great bowlers. They've been around a long, long
time. But there's a lot of overs that have been bowled in those legs. So when
you do enforce a follow on and you've got to throw the ball back to your quick
bowlers again, they've got to be fresh. And I think that there will be one or
two questions asked now as a result of that. OK, well, we will believe. Rob
Bonner, who's here tomorrow, thinks they're going to win by four wickets. So
there. It'll be the middle of the night sometime. Yeah, OK. Sleep well. TMS
podcast coming shortly with Jonathan and the team. Manchester United's manager
Eric Ten Hag has challenged his players to make their EFL Cup final success over
Newcastle United, the first of many trophies during his tenure. We want to
restore this club to where they belong, he said in tennis. Well done to
Britain's Cameron Norrie. He's beaten the world number two Carlos Alcaraz to win
the Rio Open. Scotland's defeat by France in yesterday's feisty six nation match
leaves them chasing the triple crown against Ireland in two weeks. I'll remember
remain the only contenders for the Grand Slam. And in Super League St Helens
began their bid for a fifth successive title with 24 6 victory at Castleford
Tigers. Try these two racing tips. Plumpton 335 number two blue bikini and air
350 number three Glenn Truon. Jonathan, thank you. Tom Suckliffe here in the
studio now to tell us about this morning. Start the week one, Tom. Morning,
Justin. In his new book, the veteran US Senator Bernie Sanders says billionaires
should not exist. They do exist, though, and they're getting richer and more
numerous every day. So is this a mark of capitalism success or a symptom of its
inherent failures? You can probably guess what Bernie Sanders answer to that is.
And if you can't, here's a little clue. His book is called It's OK to be Angry
About Capitalism. He's joined this morning by the Financial Times journalist
Martin Wolf and the economist Kate Raworth to talk about how free markets and
free societies interact and whether capitalism needs restraining, reshaping or
replacing with something quite new. That's start the week just after nine
admission completely free. If you don't happen to be a billionaire, it's free.
If you are a billionaire, we should charge that. Equal access. Tom, thank you
very much. The weather largely cloudy today. There will be a few light showers
in the east, which we should welcome. The vegetables certainly will. When you
say we should, is that compulsory? Well, actually, I think it probably is given
the state of the vegetables in the east of England. OK, you're listening to
today. Michelle St. Justin Webb. Time is 26 minutes to nine. Vigielis has the
news. The European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen is to meet Rishi
Sunak in Berkshire this afternoon for what Downing Street hopes will be final
talks on a deal on post Brexit trading rules for Northern Ireland. The cabinet
is expected to meet immediately afterwards, followed by a statement to
Parliament from the prime minister. An Australian firm, Recharge Industries, has
bought the defunct battery maker British Volt. The new owner will start by
focusing on batteries for energy storage. Safety investigators who have
interviewed doctors and nurses, ambulance dispatchers and other NHS staff in
England say they've faced significant distress and harm over the past year as a
result of long delays in urgent and emergency care. Many staff cried or
displayed other extreme emotions when asked about their working environment. And
the energy regulator Ofgem is expected to announce a lower price cap for gas and
electricity bills for the three months from April. But because of a reduction in
the support from government, typical households in England, Scotland and Wales
will see what they actually pay rise from about £2,500 a year to £3,000. Thank
you, Vijay. 24 minutes to nine is the time. Thames Water, as we were hearing
earlier in the programme, has announced a very big investment in its network,
following a demand from the Environment Secretary that it does that. Therese
Coffey asked to see what water companies planned to do when talking about raw
sewage being discharged into our waterways. Thames Water, which is England's
largest water company, is unveiling its plans to invest, it says, £1.6 billion
in treatment works and sewers over the next two years. And on the programme
earlier on, Thames Water's CEO, Sarah Bentley, told us what the money would be
spent on. Well, what this investment is going to do is upgrade 135 of our 354
sewage treatment works and put half a billion pounds into our 68,000 miles of
sewer network. That's enough to go round the world almost three times. So we're
going to make big progress. What we've said that we'll do is reduce discharges
by half, by 50 per cent by the end of this decade, and actually prioritise on
sensitive water causes, where we'll be reducing the discharges by 80 per cent by
2030. Sarah Bentley talking to us earlier. Let us talk to Laura Renneker from
Henley Mermaids, which is a group of swimmers who raise awareness about clean
waterways. Good morning to you. Good morning, Justin. Are you delighted by what
you hear? Not really. 80 per cent by 2030 isn't good enough. Many chalk streams
are actually dead because of the amount of sewage that's been dumped into them.
And the chalk streams are the vital veins of the Thames that feed straight into
the Thames, killing wildlife and everything else you can think of. It's just
woefully inadequate, too little, too late. The lateness is interesting, isn't
it? Because it's not as if we've just started talking about all of this. And
it's odd that they come out with it now. I know. We're pleased by the steps they
have already made. But why so long? We need real evidence of investment and a
real plan on how long they plan to take to eliminate these discharges, which
shouldn't be happening at all. Does that mean a different structure for the
water industry? I mean, I know you probably don't talk about this stuff when
you're enjoying your swim. But I mean, it is interesting, isn't it? And it's not
just Thames. Right across the country, the way that the water industry is
structured doesn't seem to be doing a lot for people like you who are interested
in, as we all should be interested in, clean water in our rivers. Exactly. It's
almost like we're a third world country. I heard that they were dumping sewage
into Windermere, Lake Windermere. That's one of our main points of beauty and
used by many millions of people a year. The one thing that is happening is
bathing water status for various places. And Wallingford, which is near here,
has bathing water status. And Henley Town Council are applying for Henley to
have bathing water status. And what that does is it gives us information about
water quality. So, the Environment Agency have to test the water weekly and
report back. The problem is that the Environment Agency are testing water when
they know there hasn't been a discharge. But what this does is it gives
communities the power to compel Thames Water to upgrade their treatment works.
And it just gives us a bit more of a voice and a bit more power behind our
pressure on Thames Water. And is it reasonable for Thames Water and other water
companies as well to say, look, whatever happened in the past, and maybe some
bad things happened in the past or didn't happen, the good things that should
have been done weren't done, but actually here we are at least doing this today?
Well, a £2 million salary plus bonus, it doesn't really prove much to me. It's
interesting, you mentioned the £2 million plus bonus. This is Sarah Bentley,
from whom we just heard. Sean, our business presenter, did press her on that.
And interestingly, she was asked directly a couple of times, will you simply say
no to your bonus? And she didn't say she was going to do that. But in your view,
she should? Well, who needs a £2 million salary? She doesn't need all that
money. And in fact, it would show at least a little bit of willing if she said,
actually, I'm not going to take my bonus, that's going to go back into sewage
treatment plant infrastructure and improvement. But I suppose the other point is
whether or not a bonus should reward achievement. That's how most people
naturally understand a bonus. And it sends a strange signal, doesn't it? It
certainly does. And we just we keep shouting about it and we will keep going
until real change is made. It's simply not enough. 80% by 2030 is inadequate in
anybody's eyes, I would imagine. Laura Rennicker from Henley Murbains. Thank you
very much. It's 20 to nine. Ursula von der Leyen will be in the UK shortly later
this morning, seeing the Prime Minister sealing the deal, we think. What's at
stake then for the EU? Katja Adler, our Europe editor, is on the line. Katja,
first on her relationship with this Prime Minister. Do you think she trusts him
to not only to action, but fully implement whatever they agree? I think the EU
would say that it's been Brexit burnt before. So it's fully aware that
negotiating with any UK Prime Minister is just part of his or her journey, that
that deal then needs to be sold back at home. And so I think, you know, today,
Ursula von der Leyen, you know, she is somebody who really carefully manages her
image. She wouldn't be setting off unless she believed this should be in the
bag. But when I talk to EU diplomats, so who represent individual member states
here in Brussels, who I've been in contact with for years now throughout the
Brexit negotiations, so they're seasoned in all of this now and in UK politics
as well, they say, well, today feels like a big day, but we really hope Rishi
Sunak can cross the finishing line. As for whether they put their faith in Rishi
Sunak, well, I mean, definitely talking to EU figures, they make a distinction
between Mr. Sunak and his predecessors. They particularly point to Boris
Johnson, who actually signed the Northern Ireland Brexit deal originally. It's
the EU belief that he signed that in bad faith, because they say he knew
perfectly well that the original agreement on Northern Ireland involved checks
on goods coming from Great Britain into Northern Ireland, even though he would
not accept that publicly at all. So Rishi Sunak is a Brexiteer. Everybody in
Brussels and across the EU knows that. But they see him as a pragmatist rather
than an ideologue and somebody who's been focusing on the people and businesses
of Northern Ireland and wants to get the best deal possible over the line. And
that is what the EU is hoping for today. Is there a bigger prize for the UK in
that if a deal is done, will that unlock a better climate around talks on
improving the UK-EU trade deal or indeed better cooperation with France on
channel crossings? Absolutely. All of those things, Michelle. I think if you
think back to that really bad blood between the two sides over those, you know,
very bad tempered Brexit negotiations, the Northern Ireland protocol, this post-
Brexit agreement on Northern Ireland has remained a thorn in the side of
relations ever since. So it's not headline news in the EU. But for EU leaders,
good relations with the United Kingdom post-Brexit is of huge importance. We've
already seen relations kind of thawing because of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
You know, the two sides have worked together closely on Russia's sanctions and
on a country by country basis inside NATO. It's been a reminder for the two
sides of all the things that they have in common. So that's what the EU is
focused on. And for Rishi Sunak, well, firstly, he avoids having a looming trade
war with the EU, which remains the UK's biggest partner because the previous
government said, you know, we've got this Nordland protocol bill going through
Parliament and that will allow us to unilaterally override key parts of that
agreement with the EU that we find unacceptable. Now, the EU said that it would
take strong measures if that happened. So if there is this revised deal, that
means that that trade war that's off the table. And yes, it improves relations
and that can unlock or ease all sorts of other deals. For example, we've got,
you know, France has got this big summit with the UK on the 10th of March. I'm
actually on my way to meet President Macron's team now ahead of that summit.
Could this ease a better agreement on stopping those people smugglers over the
Channel? It'll certainly improve the mood music. Talking about music, we know UK
musicians have said after Brexit, it's impossible for them and their instruments
and musical instruments to travel across the EU. It could ease a deal on that.
There's still no deal on financial services between the EU and the UK after
Brexit. No UK access to the coveted Horizon scientific research programme. All
of these things could be eased. And importantly for the UK, also relations with
the United States. Joe Biden's team said very clearly that if the UK would
override unilaterally an agreement on Northern Ireland, that would not help
chances, as they said, for a US UK trade deal. We know there are all sorts of
other difficulties in the way of that. But this could also smooth relations,
which would be of interest to Rishi Sunak. Katya, thanks. Quarter to nine is the
time Labour are talking growth again today, putting flesh on the bones of a
policy for growth that is ambitious, but some say rather indistinct. We heard
from Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor earlier. Let us hear now from someone
won over by what she is saying. Ian Anderson is chair of the communications
group Cicero. Mr Anderson is a friend of the former Prime Minister Liz Truss,
the levelling up secretary Michael Gove. But after 39 years as a Conservative
Party member, he has quit. He supports Labour now and likes their plan for
business. Why? We're starting to get much more detailed. Often people accuse
opposition parties of not talking specifics until right before a general
election. So today they're talking about an enhanced set of powers for the
British Business Bank. They're talking about creating the equivalent of a wealth
fund to invest in our new technologies. They've talked for a long time about
their green prosperity plan. So they're really starting to go beyond headlines
and sketch out some specifics. And those specifics are things that businesses
and investors can hold on to. Two things they're not talking about. Number one,
reducing the rate of corporation taxes is going to go up to 25 percent, isn't
it, from April of this year. Labour are not going to reduce it. Does that
matter? I think most businesses do understand that there is a massive economic
overhang from the pandemic. That's all got to be paid for. And, you know, my
understanding and when I work with a lot of inward investors, they're less
concerned about the headline rate of corporation tax and they're much more
concerned about what government will do to encourage investment, research and
development. I mean, that's been true for years and I don't see that changing
now. The other thing they're not talking about in huge detail is the
relationship with the European Union. They say they want to improve it. Do they
need, would they be wise, do you think? Would they be attractive to business?
Were they to say, for instance, that we need a much closer relationship,
including a relationship that allowed things to happen, that put us on a line
to, well, it was talked about, wasn't it, relatively recently, a kind of Swiss
style approach where there are some bilateral agreements that actually put us
back into a closer, much closer relationship with the European Union? Look,
Labour has been talking about a closer relationship, a better relationship with
Europe. We're talking about this today when, look, hopefully the prime minister
is going to be able to seal a deal on the protocol. And if he does do that,
people like me will be cheering from the rafters. But, you know, there's a big
question that overhangs that and that's, shall we say, the psychodrama inside
the Conservative Party as to whether or not he's going to be allowed to do that.
You know, the Labour Party now is, I think, absolutely committed to a deeper
relationship with Europe, not going back into the single market, not going back
into the European Union, but a better relationship, a better dialogue in terms
of the economic relationship. And I think that's what most businesses would
argue for. Would we not be better off were we back in the single market, though?
Look, we've had that debate about rejoining the single market. In a way, it's
that debate Justin that's kind of kept us completely stuck over the past five or
six years. You know, what we can, I think, really strive for, shoot for here is
just a better ongoing relationship with Europe. Ian Anderson, chair of the
communications group Cicero. Thank you very much. Now, you put food out in your
garden and you make a spark, a bun fight or a crumb fight. We're warned this
morning by animal behaviourists who looked at videos filmed in urban gardens and
reached some surprising conclusions about how aggressive the humble hedgehog can
be. Here's Professor Dawn Scott from Nottingham Trent University. We recorded
the behaviour between different animals. We're mainly focusing on hedgehogs, but
we also looked at badgers, foxes, and also we got a lot of interactions with
cats. So what we did is analyse the videos to see if there was any sort of
interaction between these animals. And what we found actually is that there's
quite a lot more aggression actually between hedgehogs than we thought. So
hedgehogs seem to be fighting in urban gardens, more over food, more than we
expected. Around about half the videos submitted between hedgehogs and the
hedgehogs showed some form of aggression between them. This is really, really
interesting. And also what they were doing is they were sort of running at each
other, rolling up into balls and then they're rolling them across the garden,
down steps, sometimes into ponds. So this has just shown us that by providing
food, these high concentrated foods in urban gardens, does actually cause
strange different behaviour with animals that are living there. How can you be
sure that it is about the food and not merely animal behaviour in competition?
So when we study hedgehogs in the wild, we don't tend to see them interacting
very much outside of the breeding season. So these are very different types of
resources than what they would usually come across. These are really high
quality patches in people's gardens. And we know that hedgehogs use food
provided by people and it's quite an essential resource for some of these
animals. We don't see this typically in the wild. So we do think this is a
consequence of there being these really high quality small patches of food
provided by people. And what is it like when hedgehogs come up against other
animals? Lots of people might have foxes in their gardens. What's it like when
one species, even something as little and which we might think of as benign as a
hedgehog against a cat or a fox? So what we did is we looked at all the
different interactions between those mammals. So wild animals, badgers, foxes,
hedgehogs and also we brought in cats as well because there's a lot of domestic
cats. So in terms of hedgehogs with other animals, badgers always dominate
interactions with all animals. But what we found really interesting is actually
hedgehogs against cats. So cats are not sure what to do with a hedgehog. So when
it comes to competing for food, when they're trying to get access to food,
actually hedgehogs tend to win in terms of being able to actually access those
resources over cats. Cats don't know what to do with hedgehogs. Have you got
advice for people then? Because you said that this kind of food that people
leave out is an important source of food for them, but leads to these kinds of
interactions. I think with any feeding, we need to just be really sensible. So
we're trying not to get lots of animals together at the same place at the same
time. It's not just fighting, but it also could be sort of things like
transmission of disease. So we need to make sure that if we are providing food
in gardens, that we scatter it, that we also make it less predictable. So
there's less chance of those animals coming into the same place at the same
time. So just be sensible, try to create a natural resource as opposed to sort
of an artificial clumped high quality resource in a single place in the garden.
Professor Dawn Scott, thank you very much. Thank you. Seven minutes to nine is
the time. What could we have done that was different? How could we have rescued
the situation? There are so many families, questions about what was and what was
not done and the outcomes down the generations get, well, they're asked, but not
really answered. When you write a memoir, you do get to provide some of those
answers. And Blake Morrison is here in the studio, the poet and novelist, who
has written a book called Two Sisters, which is a memoir about his sister and
his half sister. Good morning to you. Good morning. Josie and Gillian. That's
right. And the outcomes of their lives that were, well... Sad. They died before
their time. My sister died three years ago. She was just 16 months younger than
me. I should have pre-deceased her, I didn't. We grew up very, in the same
family, obviously in very similar circumstances, and yet our lives went in such
different directions. And I think after her death, I began thinking, you know,
why was that? What were the causes? Was it, for instance, when at the age of 11,
she was sent off to boarding school, having failed her 11 plus, and I was
allowed to stay at home? Was that one of the damaging factors that led later in
her life to her becoming so dependent on alcohol? So, you know, you write a
book, a memoir, trying to understand. I mean, you don't know the answers, but
you're searching for answers. And you write the book, really importantly, after
those individuals, Gillian and also Josie, your half-sister as well, are not
here to be affected, to be upset by. No. You wait, and you're freer to write.
Issues then come up, of course, of the living. Both Gillian and Josie had
children, and it was very important to me that my sister's children, Louise and
Liam, had read a draft of the book, asked me to make the odd correction and
change, because, you know, there are still the living to think of, even though
your subject is dead. It's a really interesting one, that. Did you feel that you
had to have their permission, as it were, to write? Would you have written it
anyway? I would probably have written it anyway, but I would have put it away. I
had the same experience when I wrote a book about my father 30 years ago. My
mother was still alive. It was very important to me that she read it, she was
happy with it, or mostly happy with it. So that was when did you last see your
father? Yes. And then, of course, I ended up writing a book about her as well,
because after her death I discovered all sorts of things about her, including
the fact she was the 19th of 20 children. My father had kept all these letters
from their courtship, and so I just had to write a book about her too. So it
does seem a strange thing to have written books about all three of the people
you grew up with, but there you are. That, it does provide an ability, doesn't
it, to throw light not just on your own family history, but actually on family
histories that are so widely felt by people who don't write books, or
particularly want to write books about them, but who are fascinated by exactly
those questions you raise about what could have been done differently, and
actually were the things that were done really the things that influenced us or
not? Yes. I mean, that's why you're doing it. I hope not narcissistically, just
selfishly you've got to do it for therapy. You're hoping to connect with people,
and, you know, there's always trouble and adversity in every family, and so
people read even a largely sad book, which this one is, I suppose, and they'll
make connections and maybe find solace in reading about someone else's
experience that connect with theirs. Did you find solace in doing it? Yeah, I
did. I think I understood my, particularly my sister Gillian, better after the
years of writing about her, better than I had when she was alive. Do you wish
you'd done it when they were alive, and written a different sort of book, but a
book that kind of involved that? No, I don't think I could have done. The book
about my dad was largely comic, which sounds an odd thing to say, because it was
written in the year after his death, but he was such a larger-than-life
character, and this book, I'm afraid, is darker, but there you are. I think your
view of your family changes as the years pass, and the more you write about
them, the more you discover about them. Someone sitting very close to us, Blake,
has done something similar to you. When I wrote my memoir, my view of my family
changed a lot, actually, during the course of doing it. I mean, just to
emphasise that point, you can, the process of writing can really change your
view of your whole background, can't it? Yeah, I mean, I don't write about what
I know, I write about what I'm trying to find out, what I'm trying to discover,
what I'm searching for. And you take the reader along with that process of
discovery, I guess. Can I ask you, Justin, though, did you find some solace? I
feel like I've read your book, obviously, I've never asked you that question. I
know, I shouldn't be talking about that, I'm not even sure I'm allowed to, but I
did. Because I had this strange upbringing where I didn't know, well, I knew who
my father was after my mother very promptly told me, and then never mentioned it
again, and literally never mentioned it again. I had this kind of sense that I
wanted to write about it. But at the same time, what really interests me, and
this is why I asked you this, Blake, is the amount of, the number of people who
have locked away in their past things that they haven't thought about, and your
experience, yours, and to a minor extent, mine, opens up then the ability to
think about stuff that otherwise you put away. Yeah, you shut it off. I think
when people are alive, you don't want to face it. And then they're gone, and
you've got this sense of loss and grief, and you're more honestly looking into
stuff that perhaps you buried. You were also writing about, as I was too, the
stiff upper lip period, where these things were tucked away. Absolutely. I mean,
that's really the half-sister story, is that Josie read my book about ten years
after it came out, and although I'd changed her name, changed her identity, she
said, that's me, isn't it? And I've always thought your father was my father.
Shall we do a DNA test and find out? And so we did. Blake Morrison, fascinating
to talk to you, and you will be a huge hit on the literary circuit this year, no
doubt at all, and the book will be a bestseller again. Thank you. Our editors
today were Jack Evans and Purvi Patni. This is The Real.