TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-18H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Listen on BBC Sounds. This is Radio 4 at 5 o'clock and time for PM with Eben
Davies. Hello again. Is he offside? Gary Lineker is back in the headlines
comparing government language on asylum seekers to 1930s Germany. The BBC says
it'll have a frank conversation with him. A former news executive tells the
corporation to sort out the rules. They've got to clarify the position in terms
of impartiality guidelines and how widely they apply and until they do that
we're going to have another one and then another one of these kinds of crises
and they do corrode trust and corrode the reputation of the BBC. Who should be
the next leader of the SNP and Scotland's first minister? After a sometimes
fractious first TV debate last night, Ash Regan sets out her stall to PM. I
would definitely consider myself to be the dark horse, shall we say, in the
contest. However, there have been some divisions in the SNP for some time and I
think I'm the candidate that is able to draw a line, particularly under some of
those recent issues. Also on the programme, who was behind the attacks on the
Nord Stream gas pipelines last year? Some intelligence suggests it was pro-
Ukrainians. We'll take a look at this geopolitical whodunit. And the ethics of
fair dodging. My girlfriend and I regularly take what we call free trains. It's
easy to just kind of get on the train and get off the train. Often it's only
because I'm going a couple of stops. Is it ever justifiable to avoid paying the
fare? Well, lots do it and most 18 to 24-year-olds think, yeah, it may be
justified, according to one survey. How are norms of behaviour changing? We'll
start with the BBC News, read today by Vigie Allis. Downing Street has described
criticism of the government's asylum plans by Gary Lineker as not acceptable and
disappointing. The Match of the Day host, who is one of the BBC's highest-paid
stars, tweeted last night that the language used in setting out the proposals
was not dissimilar to that used in Germany in the 1930s. The corporation said it
was having a frank conversation with him. Here's our media correspondent David
Solito. Gary Lineker's comments yesterday on Twitter, describing a statement by
the Home Secretary as beyond awful, has once again raised concerns about whether
such a high-profile presenter with the BBC should express such views. The
Director-General Tim Davie has in the past spoken to him about the issue, and in
October a complaint about a comment made by Gary Lineker about the Conservative
Party and Russian donors was upheld by the BBC. And while Gary Lineker has been
criticised by Conservative MPs and some members of the public, others have
rallied to his defence. Mr Lineker tweeted today that he'd never known such love
and support and said he would continue to try and speak up for those who have no
voice. Rishi Sunak has insisted that his plans to reform the UK's asylum system
show he's on the side of the British people. The proposed legislation would see
those who cross the Channel in small boats deported and then banned from
returning to the UK. Speaking at Prime Minister's questions, Mr Sunak said he
was acting with compassion and fairness, but the Labour leader, Sakhir Starmer,
accused him of being absolutely deluded and described the plans as an utter
mess. German investigators say they've searched a ship they suspect may have
transported explosives used to sabotage the two Nord Stream pipelines that bring
gas from Russia to Europe. The attack in the Baltic Sea took place last
September. Kiev has denied reports that a pro-Ukrainian group was behind them.
From Berlin, here's Jenny Hill. Ever since the Nord Stream pipelines were blown
up in an apparent act of sabotage, rumours that this was a state-ordered attack
have swirled through Western capitals. Media reports in America and Germany,
quoting intelligence sources, now suggest that a pro-Ukrainian group may have
been responsible. Earlier, German investigators refused to confirm those
reports, but revealed that in January they searched a boat which they suspect
was used to carry explosives to the site of the attack. They're still
investigating the identities of the perpetrators and say that at this stage,
there's no evidence to suggest the involvement of a foreign state. The United
Nations Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, has said it's critical that a deal
that allows Ukraine to safely export grain is extended. The agreement was
brokered by the UN and Turkey in July to end Russia's blockade of Ukrainian
ports. Moscow has signalled that it wants more done to support its own
agricultural exports before it agrees to an extension. The government is to
review how sex and relationships education is taught in schools in England,
after MPs raised concerns about what they called inappropriate lessons. The
Prime Minister's spokesman said children should be given information that was
factually based and age-appropriate. Our political correspondent Jonathan Blake
reports. The Conservative MP, Miriam Cates, asked Rishi Sunak to honour the
commitment he made while running for the Conservative leadership to shield
children from inappropriate material. Across the country, she said, children
were being subjected to lessons that were extreme, sexualising and inaccurate.
The Prime Minister said he shared her concerns and had asked the Department for
Education to ensure schools weren't teaching inappropriate or contested content
and that a review into sex and relationship education would begin as soon as
possible. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex's daughter, Princess Lilibet Diana, has
been christened at the couple's home in California. The announcement is the
first time the one-year-old has been publicly called a princess. She gained the
right to the title when her grandfather, the King, acceded to the throne. Thank
you, Viji. Well, so often it is the case. Day three of a national news story, a
big national debate underway and the divisions focus on some aspect of the BBC.
And so it is today with the controversy over the government's small boat policy
still very much in the news. Gary Lineker has become a vehicle for the argument
to continue, in particular Lineker's attack on the government's policies. Is he
allowed to have a public view given his prominence at the impartial BBC? Well,
that controversy has blown up today. David Sillitoe is with me in the studio,
the BBC's media and arts correspondent. David, let's remind ourselves of what
Lineker has been saying and doing on this. You could do a media studies degree,
I think, on the emerging changes of policy about impartiality and how it applies
to freelance presenters. Let's go to the beginning of this. Gary Lineker
retweets a tweet, a statement by Suela Braverman about the boat's policy. And he
just has the words, this is beyond awful. And then he is challenged on Twitter
about those comments. And he said, some of the language being used was not
dissimilar to that used by Germany in the 30s. That has provoked the outrage.
Downing Street said it was disappointing, unacceptable, so too Suela Braverman.
And the BBC, well, last night, the message we were receiving was that he would
be spoken to and reminded of his responsibilities. As the day went on today, the
phrase is a very frank conversation, suggesting a hardening of attitudes of one
way or another. We do not know whether that conversation has taken place yet.
That was going to be my next question. Has there been that conversation? Has
there been any subsequent word from Gary Lineker or indeed from Tim Davy, the
Director General? Nothing that we know of yet. The only word we've heard from
Gary Lineker is a few tweets and one in which he said he had never known such
love and support and that he would continue to try and speak up for those who
have no voice. No suggestion there of contrition or of him rowing back on this.
It might be worth just saying one of the things about this is that the Director
General, Tim Davy, who was approached as he walked into work today, said they
wouldn't actually be commenting about what he was going to say. But he has
stakes everything on pretty much one word impartiality. And if you go back to
2016, 2018, the BBC sort of said he was a freelance presenter, but they've
changed the rules since then. And they said that if you have a high profile,
really, you have to be impartial. Thank you for that, David. Well, Richard
Sandbrook worked for the BBC for 30 years. His final role was Director of Global
News. He also reviewed the rules around social media practices of BBC staff for
the BBC. I spoke to him earlier. He told me that impartiality rules were fuzzy
when it comes to sports presenters. If there's somebody working in news and
express these views, then clearly it would be in breach of the kind of BBC's
responsibilities in terms of impartiality. But I think there are two fudges
which need to be cleared up. One is whether the BBC's impartiality
responsibilities apply only to news and current affairs staff or extend across
every part of the BBC. Gary Lineker, in his defence, always says, well, I work
for sport, therefore, I can say what I want, because the guidelines only apply
to news and current affairs. But the BBC in its relationship with Ofcom and
elsewhere says impartiality guidelines apply across the whole organisation and
across every genre. So which is it and that needs to be sorted out and clarified
because people really aren't sure at the moment. I think the second fudge is
over the responsibility or the relationship between the BBC and freelancers,
because it does seem a bit odd that you say to a freelance they have to carry
their BBC responsibilities and BBC guidelines into every other aspect of their
lives, other work for other organisations or indeed into their private life. You
know, there are not many roles where you would expect work for one organisation
to impose responsibilities that have to transfer across everything else you do
for other organisations. So that seems a bit odd. And I think if the BBC were to
say, actually, these guidelines apply to freelancers on BBC outlets, but not
when they're doing other things, then that would clarify the situation. But it
would, I think, also bring other things to light. So for example, it might mean
that freelancers wouldn't hold quite such high profile roles, or it might mean
if they did, and they incited some sort of, you know, public uproar, then the
organisation might decide to dispense with them or to move them into another
role. Rather, as we've seen with Jeremy Clarkson with his Sunday Times articles,
you know, calling into question his employment by ITV and Amazon. And people
will understand the freelance point. Radio 4 listeners will know Matthew Paris,
who has a column in the Times, has a show on Radio 4, and it's widely understood
that he was a Conservative MP and he comes from a particular perspective. And
that's okay. He doesn't have to write columns in line with BBC policy. He
wouldn't be allowed to just spout his columns on the BBC, because that's not
what we're about. So that is understood. But Richard, what about people where
the public don't draw that distinction, where they think of this person as an
innately BBC property, and aren't drawing the distinction between news or sport
or freelance or contract employee? Is there not an issue there? Well, I think
there is an issue, yes. So, you know, if a major news presenter, and I suppose
this was raised sometimes with Andrew Neil, for example, when he was a political
presenter for the BBC, and yet it was known that he was also the chair of the
Spectator and had, you know, certain certain views that were, you know, to the
right of the centre. And that was sometimes raised as an issue, you know, from
the other side, as it were. And yet, I think you would say that on air, Andrew
Neil was always actually impartial and stuck to the BBC guidelines. So, you
know, the BBC kind of managed its way through that one. I think one of the
problems with the Gary Lineker situation is very outspoken. And I think, you
know, in some ways, regardless of one's view about the particular issue that
he's tweeted on this time, his language, you know, was a little bit incendiary.
And I think that's part of the problem here. The BBC need to make a really
definitive call on these issues that you say remain very much unclear to have
been fudged, don't they? Because this, they can't allow too many of these kinds
of controversies without being able to say, well, it's a breach of policy, or
don't call us folks, it's within the policy and the policy's been agreed and
sorted out and all sorts of people have consented to it. Yeah, exactly. They've
got to clarify the position in terms of the impartiality guidelines and how
widely they apply and about their relationship with freelancers. And until they
do that, we're going to have another one and then another one of these kinds of
crises. And they do corrode trust and corrode the reputation of the BBC. Former
BBC executive Richard Sandbrook there on the Gary Lineker issue today. Now it's
coming up to quarter past five. Let's have a look at some other headlines.
Here's Vijay. The former director of the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention has told a congressional panel that he believes COVID-19 was likely
the result of an accidental laboratory leak in China. Dr. Robert Redfield led
the agency from 2018 until 2021. A 14-year-old boy who was the cause of the
death of a pensioner while on an electric scooter has been given a 12-month
referral order and banned from driving for five years. The boy hit 71-year-old
Linda Davis on a pavement in Nottinghamshire in June. The Met Office has said
that parts of central and northern England could be hit by snowstorms tomorrow.
It's warned of strong winds bringing blizzard conditions and up to 40
centimetres of snow. Thanks, Vijay. Now a week today, one week today, we get a
budget. Jeremy Hunt will set out any changes to taxes and public spending for
the new financial year starting in April. It does seem like budgets come along
more often than they used to these days. That's because we had several last year
doing stuff and then undoing it again. But Jeremy Hunt is under pressure from
all directions at the moment. He wants to make sure borrowing is under control.
That's been his number one target since the financial markets lost faith last
year. Against that, a pile of new public spending that he might want to pay for
pay settlements, stretch services and defence. He's been lobbied to cut taxes by
many of his fellow Tory MPs and all of it's against a background of a kind of
gloomsterism, a widespread feeling that Britain's economy is underperforming.
It's not growing well enough. Now at the heart of some of the budget decisions
is business because one area that might be a priority is to find a way to
encourage new investment. Investment delivers long-term growth. However, built
into the plans for next year already are a very big rise in corporation tax and
an end to a temporary tax incentive for investment called the super deduction
that allows you to count a pound 30 of cost for every actual pound that you
spend. Well, we're going to have to wait a week to see what Jeremy Hunt does,
but we don't have to wait at all to hear from the BBC's business editor Simon
Jack, who's been out and about canvassing business opinion. So I've come to the
Slough trading estate, one of the biggest industrial estates in Europe, and it's
home to 350 businesses across all different sectors. Where better to get a cross
section of some of the challenges the economy is facing and what the Chancellor
can do to help them out. Our first stop is the gas station, Jim. Jim's hit very
hard over COVID, hoped to emerge with confidence after that, but for many,
they've been running very fast just to keep still. I'm David Palmer and I'm in
charge of gas station fitness and nutrition. We need to see a pause on energy
prices increase. We need to see a reduction in corporation tax and we need to
see business rates reducing again. It's been really tough for us over the last
couple of years. We have noticed that we've had five gyms close in the local
area because of rising bills and because of people feeling the pinch in their
pockets. I'm inside one of the warehouses of Bid Food, their depot in Slough.
They're one of the biggest food wholesalers in the UK. There are forklift trucks
ferrying mountains of baked beans, mayonnaise, you name it. And they are right
at the heart of some of the biggest cost pressures that we've seen in the UK
over the last 12 months. Hi, I'm Andrew Selly, CEO of Bid Food in the UK. We're
based here on the Slough trading estate, but we have 40 depots around the
country and we employ 7,000 people. Over the last 12 months, we've had food
inflation, wage inflation, fuel inflation and utilities inflation. Those are the
four big pockets of inflation. That's basically all the big pockets of
inflation. Those are the four big pockets of inflation. That's basically all of
our costs sitting within all of those categories. What do you make of the
relationship of government with business? Some people will say whenever the
Chancellor needs a few quid, the first door he knocks on is that of business.
Obviously, the last three years have been very disruptive as businesses. The
main thing you want is stability and understanding of how and where and when you
can invest for the future. So we'd like to see a coherent strategy rather than
what we see at the moment is sort of individual policies that seem to pass cost
and complexity onto business. One of the Prime Minister's five key objectives
was to get the economy growing by the end of this year. But that is a tall order
when you think what businesses are facing. In April, energy support is being
scaled back. Tax breaks on investment are being phased out. And if you do make a
profit, it'll be taxed at 25 rather than 19%. All things that are likely to dent
confidence rather than boost it. And that's what businesses are looking for, a
bit of a confidence booster in the budget. It's lunchtime on the Slough Estate.
Customers at this bakery will see help with their energy bills continue after
March. The bakery itself will see that help cut back. As Mark Priestley puts
another batch of rolls into the oven, he's rolling back plans to expand. We
wanted to open up at least 10 shops by the end of this year. But now we find we
can't because of the cost of everything. But of course, then we won't be
employing more people. You know, we're hoping to employ at least another 50
people this year on top of what we're doing. But at this time, we're thinking
we've got to stay still because we just don't know what costs are coming. We've
got many empty units, very, very few. So we're running at a historically low
vacancy rate. So occupants about 97% on the trading. So I come to a brand
spanking new 20,000 square foot unit. It's got solar panels on the roof. It's
got LED lightings, both designed to bring down energy usage. But the landlord
Seagrove FTSE 100 company say that despite all the challenges they're seeing
very few, surprisingly few companies hand back the keys. I'm James Craddock. I'm
the managing director here at Seagrove and the Thames Valley portfolio. We own
and manage the trading estate here in Slough. When you have over 350 businesses
on a trading estate like Slough and also covering multiple sectors, we do see
customers who do struggle. But at the same time, the numbers have been very
limited both during the pandemic and in the post pandemic period, because what
we're seeing is a significant degree of resilience from our customer base. The
government insists that corporation tax will still be internationally
competitive, and it had plans to cut inflation and public debt while boosting
growth. The Slough estate is big, but there is a bigger picture. The US is
offering billions to tempt companies to invest there. EU countries too. Business
groups have reminded the Chancellor that the hunt for investment and growth is
international. Simon Jack and Simon's with me in the studio. And you didn't
visit Mars, Simon, but you did tell me that the Mars bar was first produced in
that trading in that very trading estate. Three million still made there every
day. Right. Now, we've heard about these American incentives, the Inflation
Reduction Act there to pour money into greening business over there. When you
talk to businesses, how important is corporation tax here? It's going up pretty
substantially. It's going from 19 to 25%, reversing over a decade of Tory party
policy, which was basically to bring it down to the lowest in Europe. So as you
say, it's going up to 25%. I should say smaller businesses with profits of less
than between 50 and 250,000 won't see the full effect of that. Nevertheless,
funnily enough, when I talk to businesses, corporation tax is not top of the
list of their gripes. They would rather look at ways to boost investment and
say, we haven't even made a profit yet. We want to pay less for the things
before we actually make any money. Things like business rates and particularly
energy costs come up every time. He's not going to help them with energy costs.
Very unlikely. That's going to be scaled back by a factor of two thirds after
April. Although consumers are getting help extended at current levels or very
close to them, businesses are not going to do that. And that was a big issue on
the trading estate. Now, a lot of people say this is no time to remove the one
incentive you have for businesses to invest in plant and machinery, the super
deduction that allows them to write off a tax more than they've actually spent.
That's right. And I expect there to be a replacement for that. The question of
the super deduction has actually been quite expensive. It's cost £25 billion to
the government over the last two years. And the funny thing is, it hasn't
particularly worked in the sense that business investment in the UK is less than
half what it is in Germany and France and has been for a long time. Even when we
were bringing corporation tax rates down in an effort to boost investment, it
didn't move the needle much on that. Having said that, business groups say we
want full expensing. That means whatever I invest, you knock that off my profit.
At least 100 pence for every pound. 100 pence for every pound. Even if not £130.
I think that's almost as expensive as the super deduction where they want to
phase out. So we'll see some derivation of that. There's also an annual
investment allowance, which has bounced around all over the place over the years
from £50,000 to a million. It's currently at a million, but there will be some
replacement for that. And the final thought, I should say, that business
sentiment has bounced back a little bit of very low rates. And that's to do with
the fact that wholesale energy costs are coming down. Yeah. So things might have
looked a bit bleak at the end of last year than they're feeling now. Simon,
thanks for that. And that budget next week, and there'll be plenty of coverage
all over the BBC, I am sure, next Wednesday. Simon Jack. How to prevent revenge
porn or any kind of unauthorised use of nude or sexual images of people. In a
world where sexual images are easily and sometimes enthusiastically shared and
posted, and where user generated content of this kind is an industry, it is all
too easy for someone to post picture pictures of another person's body without
consent. Now, here is an idea to counter it. You decide how effective this will
be. It's that people are encouraged to use an app to create unique codes that
match sexual images of themselves, which can then be shared with the main
platforms for hosting this kind of stuff. And then those images can be put on
block lists to ensure that they're not used on those sites. That may not be a
very clear explanation, but I spoke to Zara Ward, senior helpline practitioner
at the Revenge Porn Helpline, who run a service of this kind. The Stop NCII
works to create a hash of your sexual image on your device, and then it sends
that hash to our hash bank. And then those hashes are kind of like fingerprints
or barcodes for images or videos. And then that information gets sent to all the
corresponding platforms that we have on board. And then if anything is seen to
match that barcode, match that hash or match that fingerprint, then it is
moderated as high priority and then removed, and then it stays removed from the
websites from that moment. What is a hash? So a hash is like a string of letters
and numbers. So when you have an image or a video, it goes through what's called
a hashing algorithm that takes sections of the image and creates this
fingerprint or this barcode that is attached to that image. So it's a unique
identifier for each image or each video, which can then be used to be matched at
a later stage if needed. We're all now familiar with the idea that there's
facial recognition software, and my face is slightly different to everybody
else's. The same is true, is it, of our naked bodies? So the same with the image
itself. So what the hash creates is it's of that particular image. It doesn't
use kind of biometric tools. Just that one image. Just that one image can't be
used because that image will have been preloaded as being blocked. Exactly. So
it would have that hash would have been created, for instance, if you had 20
images, you'd have 20 hashes. Zara, I can see a really big problem with this.
You're going to require me to send, for example, to you and OnlyFans and all the
other platforms, every sexual image of myself that I might have and that I don't
want them to have. It's kind of very counterintuitive, isn't it, that we give
them the image in order for them not to use it? Thankfully, with the tool, you
don't have to send your images. The images are actually processed on the
person's device. So the images never go from your device. They never come to us
at Stop NCII. They never go to the websites. So the only time that the content
is on the websites is if it is uploaded and it's matched. OK, so I'm getting the
importance of the hash bit of this process. It stops you having to send the
image. It's sending the code. Well, I mean, where to begin? There are going to
be many, many cases where people don't know that an image has been taken of them
and has then been posted online. And that is a difficulty. Unless you have
access to that content, it is impossible to hash something that we don't know
exists. Isn't there a better way of stopping all the platforms publishing
material or posting material that is non-consensual? I mean, is it not something
along the lines of before user-generated material from, if you like, non-trusted
traders, when that material comes to them, they have to establish by some means
that consent is given. It can't be up to me to prevent an image of mine being
put on some other site. It is so challenging. I know we have OnlyFans. They have
that kind of prerequisite. If you are posting content of other people, that you
have a form that you fill out of saying, you know, that they've consented to it.
And I know Pornhub do similar things, but they are not foolproof. They really
aren't. And we know that. We want to prevent this from happening to people as
well as being reactive if needed. Because with StopNTII, it can search the
existing database that's on those websites or on those platforms if content has
been shared previously before that content was hashed. But of course, there
should be ways to stop it from being uploaded in the first place. And hopefully,
this is a step in the right direction. It's our reward there from the Revenge
Porn Helpline on one idea they're pursuing for trying to reduce the amount of
unconsented material coming online. Now, we have to wait until at least March
20th for RMT members to vote on the latest new and improved offer from Network
Rail, an offer designed to end the industrial action at the company. It's up to
the members who have, it's up to the members of the union who have until then to
decide. And the union isn't making any formal recommendation. But Katie Austin
is BBC Transport correspondent and is with me. And Katie, how significant is it
that the RMT are not asking their members to vote in a particular way? I think
it is very significant, especially if you look at what's happened before. So
Network Rail members actually had a previous referendum on a previous iteration
of this offer. That was in December. And at that time, the union recommended
that they reject it, which they subsequently did. So now there is a new offer. I
have to say this sort of the headline pay figure of 5% for last year, 4% for
this year is broadly the same. And the government have made it clear they
haven't, they haven't made more money available. However, things have been done
within the pay element to try and make it more attractive. There will be an
increased amount of back pay implemented as a bigger lump sum. The RMT has said
today that it does view this as an improvement. So although it is not telling
members to vote one way or the other, there is a clear shift in tone, I would
say, that at the very least they are not, they're no longer being quite so
negative in their language. They're not downplaying the offer. They're certainly
not. I would almost say the opposite as much as they can without telling members
to accept it. They are making a lot of the benefits in their communications.
Okay. That's very interesting telling. Now, if this was settled, this is not the
end of rail strikes we should because it wasn't only the RMT against Network
Rail. Well, no. So the RMT has separate negotiations with Network Rail, which is
the organisation that looks after the tracks, the signalling, the
infrastructure, basically. And then it also has had negotiations with the rail
delivery group, which has been speaking for the train companies. So the
companies that actually operate the trains, they employ guards, people like
that. Now, those RMT members who work for the train companies are still set to
go on strike as I sit here now. Those are meant to be next Thursday, the 16th,
although Network Rail, not being involved, will take some of the sting out of
that strike action. The impact won't be quite as extensive, but they have other
strikes coming up as well on the 18th of March, the 30th as well, and the 1st of
April. So there have been new calls following the announcement of this change in
the RMT Network Rail dispute. There have been new calls from the industry and
the government for the RMT to also give train company workers a vote on the most
recent offer put to them. We haven't yet heard from the RMT whether they will do
anything on that side of the dispute. Katie, thanks for that, Katie Austin. Just
to say, by the way, we're doing another transport story later in the programme,
and it's on this research that suggests that most 18 to 24 year olds, a small
majority, think it's probably acceptable to evade fares on public transport. It
caused quite a conversation in our office, because you do, if you go on public
transport, often see people dodging fares, barging through barriers or not
paying or getting on the bus at the wrong end or whatever it is. So we just
thought we'd like to hear from you if you have views or experience, direct
experience on this. And we have a new toy, which is this voice note, this Radio
4 WhatsApp number. And you can just send us a voice note on that number. It
might show up as Radio 4 WhatsApp, and then we're going to be listening to them,
playing them later. And that number is 03700 100 444. And so, yeah, send us your
voice notes and we'll try and play some when we cover that later in the
programme. But talking of trails, it is going to be the moral maze. And William
Crawley is presenting today and is here to tell us what is on later tonight on
Radio 4. Thank you very much, Evan. And speaking of WhatsApp, the question we
have tonight is, can you keep a secret? The question, of course, many who have
been asking the journalist Isabel Oakeshott after she broke her word and made
public the political treasure trove of Matt Hancock's WhatsApp messages. But you
don't need to be a journalist to struggle at times with whether or not to keep a
promise, of course. If you promised a friend to keep a secret, would you feel
duty bound to keep shtum no matter what? Or would it sort of, well, really
depend? Aren't there sometimes good reasons to break a confidence? Is there such
a thing, in fact, as a morally justified betrayal? Tonight's moral maze, the
promises we make sacrosanct or subject to negotiation? That's after the news at
eight o'clock. Thank you very much, William. And it's 28 minutes to six now.
You're listening to PM. We'll have a summary of the news from Vigialis. The BBC
presenter Gary Lineker says he will continue to speak up for people with no
voice after ministers condemned him for criticising their asylum policy. He had
compared the language used by the government when launching the proposals to
that of Nazi Germany. Downing Street said the comments were not acceptable and
disappointing. The BBC says it will have a frank conversation with Mr Lineker
about his impartiality guidelines. Rishi Sunak insisted he's on the side of the
British people as he defended the immigration plans during a heated session of
Prime Minister's questions earlier. The proposals would see those who crossed
the Channel in small boats deported and then banned from returning to the UK.
Labour has accused the Prime Minister of being absolutely deluded. The EU has
warned against drawing conclusions about last year's sabotage of the Nord Stream
pipelines which bring gas from Russia to Europe. The bloc's foreign policy
chief, Josef Borrell, was responding to allegations made in an article by the
New York Times that a pro-Ukrainian group was behind last year's attack. Kiev
has denied the reports. The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Antonio
Guterres, has stressed the need to extend a deal with Russia that allows grain
to be exported from Ukraine to the rest of the world. There are concerns Moscow
could walk away from the agreement, sparking fears about global food prices. The
government says it will bring forward a review of sex and relationships
education for schools in England, following concerns by some MPs that children
are being exposed to inappropriate content. The Prime Minister's spokesman said
children should be given information that was factually based and age-
appropriate. And the Duke and Duchess of Sussex have announced the christening
of their daughter, Princess Lilibet Diana. The announcement is the first time
the one-year-old has been publicly called a princess. She gained the right to
the title when her grandfather, the King, acceded to the throne. Thank you very
much, Vigie. Now, last night saw the first TV debate in the SNP leadership
contest. There are three candidates. Ash Regan, who the bookies are treating as
the least likely to win. She resigned from her government post as community
safety minister last year over the trans issue. There's Kate Forbes, Finance and
Economy Cabinet member, who has created waves in the campaign, offering socially
conservative views based on her religious faith. And the bookies' favourite is
Hamza Yousaf, currently the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Social Care. Well,
last night's debate succumbed to a risk of these internal party contests,
particularly when the party's in government, in that it got quite negative.
Here, for example, was Kate Forbes to Hamza Yousaf. When you were transport
minister, the trains were never on time. When you were justice minister, the
police were strained to breaking point. And now, as health minister, we've got
record high waiting times. What makes you think you can do a better job as First
Minister? And one of his responses... If a change means lurching to the right,
Kate, if it means rolling back and up to best their values, I don't think that's
a good change. Well, last night's debate was hosted by STV's political editor,
Colin Mackay, who got good reviews for his mastery of the event. He joins us
from the Scottish Parliament in Holyrood. And Colin, it is difficult for
parties, isn't it, to have these debates out in the open when essentially the
candidates are tearing strips off each other over their record in the government
they're supporting. We saw that during the Conservative leadership contest last
year, where Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak initially were tearing strips off each
other. I think particularly in the early stages, Rishi Sunak tearing strips off
Liz Truss to try and make up ground. And they seem to have some kind of
rapprochement behind the scenes there to try and calm things down. There's
absolutely no sign of that happening here. I think last night took a lot of
people by surprise because so far, there have just been official SNP party
hustings for party members. The big row about that was that they weren't even
going to let the media into those because they wanted them to be safe spaces.
But they have now made them all pretty much all public. They're web streaming
them all. There's one tonight in Johnston Town Hall. It'll be really interesting
to find out from the SNP membership of that what they thought of last night. So
I think the fact that last night was quite as rabid as it turned out was a bit
of a shock to them. The newspapers in Scotland today all have stories about the
gloves coming off last night. It wasn't just that, let me tell you. The jackets
were off as well and I was left holding them. But look, Colin, what do the
activists make of this? Are they thinking this is a debate that we need to have
now? We've got to have this. Let it rip and then we will settle down and unite
behind whoever wins. Or are they thinking, oh no, this is damaging us. We're
just going to undermine ourselves for the next general election and Scottish
election. When you get right down to it, I think they're still coming to terms
with the loss of Nicola Sturgeon with the announcement of Nicola Sturgeon that
she is resigning after all these years, because she has been such, particularly
electorally, a successful leader for the SNP. And I think most of the party
recognise that whoever comes in after her has got big shoes to fill, but big
problems to face. And it's going to be very difficult to replicate her electoral
performance when they are effectively starting from scratch. You're talking
about someone who is pretty much known, whether liked or not, but is pretty much
known by everyone in Scotland. And they're going to be replaced by someone who
is effectively starting from scratch with the electorate. And that's going to be
incredibly difficult, particularly with a general election next year. I think
the party would have liked someone to emerge. They would probably have liked
John Swinney, the Deputy First Minister, to take over. He's someone who has a
long service to his party and is loved generally by his party membership. I
think they would quite like to have seen him take over. What they've been faced
with, though, is pretty much a left-right, socially progressive, socially
conservative divide between the two main candidates, as you pointed out. Humza
Yousaf, who is that centre-left, he's known as continuity Humza by his opponents
because he's a bit of a continuity candidate. And you've got Kate Forbes, who's
trying to challenge that. And my goodness, did she challenge that full on last
night? Peter Yeah, I mean, just what is the centre of gravity, the issue?
Because you might think the members are most interested in routes to
independence, the public potentially most interested in government in Scotland,
you know, everything from the health service to the bins. A lot of the time it
has seemed like social issues around trans, for example, or attitudes to same-
sex marriage have been dominating. Where do you feel the members are in what the
social in terms of what they want to see out of the candidates? I think it's a
combination of absolutely all of that. But I'll tell you one thing that was
very, very clear last night, and has been increasingly clear throughout the last
couple of weeks of this campaign is that they don't have any new ideas on how to
deliver independence. Now, my understanding of why Nicola Sturgeon has gone is
that a lot of that is because she can't find a way forward on independence or
campaign for independence, basically her route to independence died when the
Supreme Court said the Scottish Parliament didn't have the power to hold the
referendum that she wanted to hold this October. She got herself backed into a
cornrow over the idea of making the next general election a de facto referendum,
which not everybody in the party agreed with. And there was a bit of a problem
there. And I think that's where the divide started to show a bit more publicly.
So I think, you know, given that the independence is the be all and end all for
the SNP, the fact that none of them have any idea really of how to deliver that
is actually quite damning at this stage. Yeah, Colin Mackay, host of that
debate, STV's political editor, thanks for that. Well, earlier, I spoke to one
of the candidates, Ash Regan, and I asked whether the contest does risk tearing
the SNP apart. Well, there are some issues. I think there have been some
divisions in the SNP for some time. And I think I'm the candidate that is able
to draw a line, particularly under some of those recent issues, and allow us to
heal as a party and move forward. So if you think that you are wanting to set
out an alternative vision of where the party should be going, you know, if you
think the party needs a reset, then you have to be able to obviously talk about
those issues. And you know, strategic mistakes that you think have been made in
the past. However, you know, I could have made personal attacks on my
colleagues, you know, and I chose not to do that. I don't think that's
appropriate. The SNP have been very, very successful electorally, and we've got
some great successes in government. However, we have lost our way a little bit
on some piece of legislation recently. And it looks to the public as if our
priorities are not the same as the public's. And I want to make sure that we
focus on the things that are important to them. And that would be things like
the NHS and the cost of living crisis and so on. But the party membership are
interested primarily, I would say, in what is the route to independence. Let's
talk about that, because you have suggested that Scotland doesn't need the
permission of Westminster to become an independent country. Explain that because
that's not the constitutional position as is widely understood, which is that
further change, constitutional change is a Westminster matter, not a Scottish
government matter. But there is such a thing as international law, obviously,
and the right to self-determination. And Scotland can't be held hostage. So
we're in a situation at the moment where the UK government has been denying
Scotland the route that's obviously we've used before, which is the advisory
referendum. And I'm suggesting that as the people of Scotland are sovereign and
that the UK is voluntary, we're always being told, you know, this is a voluntary
union, that there must be a way for Scotland to express its democratic will. So
I'm suggesting that we create a permanent mechanism where at each and every
election, we can use the ballot box, which after all, is the gold standard here,
not the referendum, but actually the ballot box for the people of Scotland to
have the power to decide when the time is right for them to, for Scotland to
become independent. I mean, it's important to remember that the people of
Scotland themselves, with full knowledge of what the constitutional arrangements
of the UK are, endorse the current constitutional settlement themselves in a
referendum in 2014. Aren't you really saying that you don't respect the vote
that Scotland gave less than a decade ago, if you say that Scotland can override
or somehow change the constitutional arrangements that its people voted on in
2014? No, of course, I'm not suggesting that I don't respect democracy. But what
I'm saying is democracy obviously is something that's alive. And it's moving
forward, isn't it, all the time. I mean, if we subscribe to the concept that
you're suggesting, we would just have one general election, let the Tories in
charge, and let's just carry on with that for 20 years, you know, the public are
entitled to think about these things again, and make a different choice. And of
course, if you remember, in 2014, some of the things that the Scottish public
were promised by the No campaign, such as, you know, staying in the European
Union, of course, have turned out to be entirely false. Is there any, though, is
there any place where there's a serious independence movement, as there is in
Scotland, where it is felt legitimate to think you might continually vote on it
every five years. Generally, these kind of very major constitutional shifts are
seen as much rarer than every now and then. Is it not the case that Northern
Ireland has the right to a border poll every seven years? Are we not suggesting
that this is not something that's quite similar? On the view you're taking of
it, Ash, if the SNP and other independent supporting parties get less than 50%
of the vote in the next general election, Westminster election, you'd say, okay,
Scotland has voted to remain in the UK? No, I would say that that sounds more
like a de facto referendum, which is another proposition that some other
independence parties and I think, in fact, Nicola Sturgeon was suggesting that
that might be a route that we would take. No, that's not what I'm suggesting.
I'm suggesting this is a permanent mechanism. And that it would be at the
general election and then the election after that, which would be the Scottish
election. So I don't understand it. You're not having a parallel vote alongside
the general election. You're arguing that the election itself is a referendum,
no? Well, it's not a referendum as such. It's just an election where people are
able to make their choice at the ballot box. You know, line one of the manifesto
will be very clear to everyone what they're voting for. So in Scotland, they
will know that if we receive a majority of votes, so I'm suggesting that the
trigger point for that would be 50% plus one, but I would expect it to be much
higher than that, that that would be an instruction, if you like, from the
people of Scotland, that they want Edinburgh to be talking to Westminster and to
make negotiations for Scotland to exit. So it'd have to be a majority of votes
cast. That's a tough hurdle. And there are many in the SNP who say that's
setting ourselves up for a defeat. It is a high hurdle. But I think if we're
talking about something as significant as Scotland breaking away from the UK, it
would need to be a high hurdle, wouldn't it? Just to final one, how do you feel
the campaign's going? The bookies don't have you as the favourite. They have you
quite a long way behind your two competitors. How do you feel it's going? Yes, I
mean, I certainly wouldn't consider myself to be a career politician. I did not
have my mind set on the top job, you know, the minute I arrived at Hollywood,
let's put it that way. And so at the moment, I would definitely consider myself
to be the dark horse, shall we say, in the contest. However, I am receiving a
lot of support. So I'm encouraged by that. I know politicians hate this
question, but in the event that you don't make a second round, and there's a
second round, who would you be casting your vote for? Who's your second
preference of the three of you? I think I'll leave you guessing on that one. But
I respect both my colleagues enormously. Yeah, I mean, people are thinking it
would be Forbes that you'd be closer to, Kate Forbes. Yes, but Kate is a friend
of mine. Yes. But we don't, obviously, we don't agree on all these issues. Ash
Regan, candidate for leadership of the SNP and First Minister of Scotland. 14
minutes to six now. Let's have some other headlines. Here's Viji. A union leader
has urged the Home Secretary to apologise after an email signed by her accused
civil servants of blocking efforts to stop small boat crossings. Number 10 said
Suella Braverman did not see, sign off or sanction the message. A Parole Board
panel has been told that the criminal Charles Bronson has developed post-
traumatic stress disorder. A psychologist said his symptoms were partly due to
what she called a brutal and unacceptable treatment while he was in jail.
Thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets of Georgia for a second
night, protesting against a law they say will restrict civil liberties. The
legislation requires organisations that receive more than 20% of funding from
abroad to declare themselves as foreign agents. Viji, thank you very much. Now,
who was responsible for causing the underwater explosions that ruptured the gas
pipelines linking Russia and Germany last September? Nord Stream pipelines. It's
a geopolitical whodunit this. Was it the Russians or the US or the Poles? All
have been suggested. But yesterday reports emerged in the New York Times and
elsewhere that US officials have seen intelligence that implicates a pro-
Ukrainian group. A Ukrainian group being behind it. Frank Gardner is the BBC's
security correspondent. Intriguing this, Frank, because it seems like this has
been talked about in intelligence circles for longer than has been let on to the
public. Yeah, it's utterly murky this. And it's now six months on since the
investigation began into these. So you've got the Germans, the Danes, the Swedes
all investigating because this took place in the waters not far from their
coasts. And there is still no definitive answer. The Germans are saying, well,
hang on, let's hold off trying to blame anybody right now. If it turned out to
be a Ukrainian involvement, and it's important to say the Ukrainian government
totally denies any involvement. But if it turned out that it was Ukrainians,
that would be hugely embarrassing, I think, for Ukraine, which is begging the
West for more and more sophisticated weapons to push back the Russian invaders.
But there's nothing to prove that at the moment. And in fact, the German defence
minister has even suggested that it's possibly what's called a false flag
operation where enough clues are left behind for investigators that seem to
implicate somebody other than the people who did it. In other words, you know,
he hasn't said so much, but, you know, the implication being was it the Russians
who wanted to make it look like it was the Ukrainians to discredit them? Let's,
let's maybe just sort of run through the facts here. Because back in September
last year, there were these two big underwater pipelines that were ferrying gas
from well, one of them was from Russia all the way to Germany. And that was, you
know, these are strategic energy pipelines for Europe. But the invasion of
Ukraine was underway and relations already siring between Germany and Russia.
And then bang, suddenly, there's all this methane bubbling up in the Baltic Sea.
So they sent down divers and found that there were these great big holes. The
conclusion was that they were deliberately attacked, but not sure by who. And it
now turns out German investigators have announced today that they apprehended a
ship, a small ship, a yacht, in fact, in January, which they believe was the one
used to transport the explosives used. And here again, it's pretty murky,
because this was a Polish registered ship owned by two Ukrainians that sailed
out of Rostock, a German port. Western intelligence has always said, well, we
think that this was a sophisticated enough attack that it must have had some
kind of state backing. But the Ukrainians say absolutely not. And it would be
very embarrassing if it turned out to be them. So you're right in what you said
right at the beginning. It's an underwater whodunit. Yeah, I mean, there is a
difference between Ukrainians doing it, maybe a group with some resource, but
and the Ukrainian government orchestrating it and initiating it. And that would
be a distinction. If this report goes further, the Ukrainians will be very keen
to draw. Yes, exactly. And that's something that the Germans have pointed out.
And they're saying, look, let's not rush to hasty conclusions. Russia, of
course, has seized on this and said, look, it's high time we had a full and
transparent investigation. And we want to be a part of it. NATO countries are
pretty reluctant to that because Russia, I think, for most of the six months has
been the prime suspect behind this, given the sort of murky dark arts, black ops
activities that the GRU have been up to things like the Skripal poisoning and
various other poisonings. So who knows which way this is going to go? I think
it's going to have it's going to run and run and we still don't know who's done
it. Frank, thanks for that. Frank Gardner there. Now, some fascinating analysis
of the World Value Survey was published yesterday. The survey is an enormous one
across many countries. It's been run for many years. And according to the Policy
Institute at KCL, King's College London, the survey shows the UK as among the
most socially liberal countries in the world. Already on immigration, for
example, KCL have said the UK have among the most positive attitudes, coming top
of an international league table as the most accepting of new arrivals.
Yesterday, they said there have been huge shifts in attitudes on issues such as
homosexuality, casual sex, abortion, euthanasia and divorce. It's been written
up with headlines such as Britain Goes Woke. But there was an interesting
finding that got less attention than the others, which was attitudes to
cheating. So here are some numbers. Three quarters of the UK think avoiding a
fare on public transport is not justifiable. So that's 75% thinks it isn't.
About a quarter think it can be or may be justified to cheat on public
transport. The most interesting thing was that people aged 18 to 24, most of
them thought it can be justifiable to avoid a fare on public transport. Well, we
all immediately got around to talking about scenes where people have jumped
behind us in barriers or jumped on buses without paying, etc. And earlier in the
programme, we asked for your thoughts on dodging fares on public transport. Yes,
I bunk the trains regularly. And occasionally I'm caught when I'm caught. I'm
more than happy to pay the fine because I've saved so much money bunking the
train. Since rail and bus services have been privatised, it's fair game not to
pay the fare. They cancel buses and trains, they run them badly, and they get
away with it just to increase their profits. So I think if you can fight back by
not paying, that's good. Very different though with a public company. I think we
have a duty to support state enterprises. People sometimes go through the
barriers with me, squeeze up next to me to get through the barriers. And I
always say something stupidly. I always say, hey, they've dodged the fare and
the ticket collector just shrugs. There's nothing that they don't even really,
not even that bothered, don't really care. So maybe I should do it next time.
Well, some of your thoughts on it. Professor David Halpern is the chief
executive of the Behavioural Insights team who look at the psychology, social
psychology as their specialism. David, what do you make of these results
specifically and the very high number of young people who clearly think this is
a norm that is often justifiable? Yeah, it's super interesting. It's just the
World Values Survey, as you say, and the ESRC have been supporting it. Well,
there are some areas in which there's been a big shift. So personal sexual
values, younger people are certainly more tolerant. But one of the key things
you try and pick apart in this bit of social science is to work out, were kids
always like that? Because it's cross-sectional. Do you get an aging effect when
they get older? They just become, well, they comply, or is there a deeper shift
occurring? And it turns out it depends which values you look at. So when you
look at things like the personal sexual values, abortion, casual sex, etc.,
actually everybody across generations are getting more tolerant, although each
later generation is getting even more tolerant. So the world is shifting.
Britain is shifting, becoming very much more liberal in that sense. Bearing in
mind one person's tolerance is another person's immorality, you might say. When
you get to this particular question, it's a really important one because it's
around the so-called acts of self-interest. And when you actually look over
time, the good news is that we actually haven't really changed very much. It's
also a particularly important variable because it's also a variable which
predicts crime levels across countries. And the key question with these younger
generations is, is that off-peak? And we've actually gone back, if you want to
hear, to the previous sweep to find out what did the same age group say 10, 15
years ago? And what do they say 10, 15 years ago? Well, as you say, it was like
56% on this one. It's about 48%. So it's moved a tiny bit. But it does look like
it's also ticked up. Do these young people then, is the question, do they turn
into their parents and then when you're 20 you might think it's okay, but by the
time you're 40 you're thinking, I don't like these fair dodgers cheating. So
that's what it looks like mainly. Yes, of course we don't know what will happen
with this bunch, right, compared to the previous. And it does look like there's
some additional movement. So on this particular issue, this bundle of so-called
self-interested acts, it looks mainly at sticking. It's true also for overtly
illegal acts, drink driving, et cetera. But there has been some evidence of
drift up. And they said we should worry about it quite a lot because it's quite
a consequential one because the stories we tell each other about, oh, in
ourselves most of all, that, oh, well, that's okay. You almost heard that on
those clips, right? Oh, well, everybody else is doing it, so I'll do it too. And
that does create tipping effects, which are quite serious. I just wonder whether
something else is going on here, that we've become a society more aware of
people who are less well off than ourselves. In fact, in some sense, you might
say, this is hypothesis, not assertion, we're more compassionate. So when you
ask me, is it ever okay to cheat on public transport? I might be thinking of
some poor person who hasn't got the money for the fair, wants to go to a job
interview, and this is the way to get there, is to sort of dodge the fair and
jump behind someone in the barrier. I just wonder whether a little bit of that
is going on here. Well, that might well be. The actual scale is a kind of, you
ask people, to what extent is it justifiable on a scale of basically one to 10?
So people are giving a number. And so when they're saying four or five, what are
they saying? They might well be saying, well, exactly as you say, well, some
people may just not have the money, right? So what sits behind it? But one of
the reasons why it is consequential is that we tend to overestimate bad behavior
in other people, partly because it's particularly visible. And that is
behaviorally consequential. So if we think more people are cheating on their
taxes, are dodging fares, then just as you heard in the clips, you start to
think, well, maybe I should do it too. It really does influence our behavior.
Rather sadly, we don't overestimate good behavior in other people, but we do
seem to overestimate bad behavior. And that does matter. And that does matter.
Yeah, if it's infectious, that does matter. David, thanks for that. David Halpin
there from the Behavioral Insights team. Close to home. Wild Isles with David
Attenborough starts on Sunday night on BBC iPlayer. And let's get some cold
isles news from Stav Dinaos now with the weather. Stav. Thank you very much,
Evan. Good evening to you. A very wintry spell of weather is set to continue
over the next few days. Several warnings issued for ice and snow across the UK.
We now have an amber warning issued for Thursday into Friday afternoon, mainly
across Pennine areas of northern England. So disruption is very likely with
treacherous roads for a time. So best to remain indoors if possible. Only travel
if absolutely necessary. Stay abreast of subsequent weather forecasts. Head
online to check out all the warnings as they are changing and being upgraded at
times. Tonight, then, wintry mix of weather will continue across England and
Wales through this evening and tonight, with sleet and snow falling across large
parts of Wales, the Midlands, northern England. Sleet will revert back to rain,
though, across southern counties of England through the night as it'll become a
touch milder here, but north of the M4 corridor into the rest of England and
Wales, and it'll be mostly of sleet and snow, with accumulations expected in
places, particularly over hills. So watch out for ice as well. For Scotland and
for most of Northern Ireland this evening and tonight, apart from a few snow
showers near coast, particularly the north and east of Scotland, most places
will be very cold, dry and clear, with frost and ice expected. Temperatures will
dip to freezing to minus double digits again across Scotland. Generally, for
most though tonight, we're looking at one to minus three degrees, but two to
five Celsius on the south.