TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-22H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 humanity survives. A point of view was written and presented by A.L. Kennedy.
But the Unite union, which represents 3,000 ambulance workers, has rejected the
offer of talks, saying preconditions set by the government were unreasonable. A
teaching union has called off planned strike action after receiving a new pay
offer from the Scottish government. The Educational Institute of Scotland will
now hold a ballot on the deal and is urging members to accept it. Its General
Secretary is Andrea Bradley. So the Salaries Committee met first and they
decided overwhelmingly to put the offer that came across just this afternoon,
late this afternoon, to members with a recommendation to accept. And the
Executive Committee following that decided to suspend the industrial action
campaign whilst members are being balloted on the offer that's now on the table,
the improved offer that's now on the table. A parliamentary committee has said
it would have been obvious to Boris Johnson that lockdown parties in Downing
Street breached coronavirus rules. The Cross-Party Privileges Committee has
found there were four occasions when it believes the former Prime Minister may
have misled the House of Commons. Mr Johnson has denied misleading MPs. A man
and a woman have been remanded in custody charged with manslaughter in
connection with the death of a baby whose remains were found in East Sussex
earlier this week. Appearing at Crawley Magistrates Court, Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon were also accused of concealing the birth of a child and perverting
the course of justice. A court in Belarus has sentenced the Nobel Peace Prize
winner Alias Belyatsky to ten years in prison. He was convicted of smuggling
money into Belarus and financing protests, charges he denies. And the price of a
first-class stamp is set to rise above £1 for the first time. Royal Mail says
the cost will increase by 15p next month to £1.10. BBC News. Now on Radio 4, the
story of Abraham Badrou, a 15-year-old boy who became recognised as a hero but
lived a life in fear. Sam Holder investigates whether more can be done to
protect witnesses of violent crimes in the UK. This is Please Protect Abraham.
The story you'll hear unpacks questions that many of us have probably never
considered before. But it's something that could happen to any of us. Imagine
that you happen to witness a serious crime. Do you know what rights and
protections you'd have? Would you be obliged to work with the police? Would you
have to share your testimony in court? And what if your life was at risk? Would
you be protected? Now imagine all of this is happening to you at the age of just
15. Abraham, since I had him in 1991, Abraham would not upset anybody. He has
never even given me a problem. No. When he was in secondary school, you know
teenagers. When I come back from work and I see the old house dirty, Abraham
would not like me to be upset with him. When I go back to my room, before I come
back, I will be hearing the sound of Hoover. Abraham, Hoover in the house.
That's Abraham. Just the two of you living together. Yes, we've been together.
My only child. So you were really incredibly close. Abraham would not sit
anywhere else. He would sit beside me and he would put his head on my shoulder.
Abraham would call me like four or five times a day, even in my workplace. He
was very gentle and funny. Fronting Park is a very big estate. They have a park
and every weekend the children will come out to play football. So Abraham knew
most of the people living on the estate? Yes, they were all friends. They used
to play football together. I think about it a lot in terms of I can never
understand what it's like for a black boy in London. A lot of things that he had
to go through, I don't even have to think about. I'm Abbie, Denny, cousins with
Abraham. We've never ever lived more than five minutes apart. So we'd spend all
of our time together. Abraham was a very, very, very well liked person. He had a
lot of friends. What was Frampton like generally where he lived and what was
life like for him in that area? Even being a girl was tough living in Hackney.
Everybody kind of knew everybody. It's not easy to be different. There's a
hierarchy naturally when you're younger and everything. And sometimes you have
to align yourself with people who are perceived to be top of the food chain. I
feel like he was not conformist just because he was such a social person. He was
able to toe the line in terms of not disrespecting anybody, but not getting
himself into something that he didn't want to be in. How did he manage to avoid
that? I think just being a likeable person helps you a lot. I think there's a
lot of leeway for people who are liked. Did you ever see any sign or evidence
that he ever was involved in wrongdoing of any kind? No, never. Never. Never
anything. Dodgy. Never. We're talking specifically here about Hackney in 2007,
when Abraham is a young teenager. At this time, Hackney is notorious. People
getting shot and stabbed just for stepping just outside their door and across
the road and they're in and out of a postcode. Now it's worth pointing out,
there are lots of difficulties when using the term gang. There's not really a
clear definition. And if we're being honest, it's often used as a catch-all term
for young men, often black, living in a certain area. But in the generally
agreed sense of people being involved in crime and violence and working together
as a group, gang culture was a big issue in Hackney. It was considered one of
the most dangerous places in the country. An entire stretch was nicknamed the
murder mile. Back in 2007, at least 22 gangs were identified in the borough,
almost double the next highest, Enfield, which had 13. This is the context, the
reality of the dangers that Abraham and his friends grew up in. And you need
this context to understand the bravery that Abraham is about to show. It's one
evening after school, the 30th of April, 2007. Abraham's life is about to change
forever. Just a warning that what you're about to hear contains references to
sexual violence. Here's Ronke again, Abraham's mum. Abraham said that he was
coming from after school lesson and he received a text that one of the friends
was celebrating a birthday in Frampton Park, just by our house. And he went with
another guy together. But this is not a birthday party. In fact, it couldn't be
further from it. What's happening in this flat in the Highrise estate is a
brutal attack carried out by nine local boys aged between 14 and 16 on a
14-year-old girl. The young girl is abducted on the way home from school. She's
forced by the group into a flat where they begin to gang rape her. Held at knife
point, the attack takes place over multiple hours, the group repeatedly
threatening her life. When the attack begins, Abraham isn't there. He has no
idea what's really happening. Even in the midst of the violence taking place in
Hackney at the time, the attack was so shocking it became headline national
news. In April last year, four of the gang grabbed the girl as she was walking
home. Grabbing her hair and shouting abuse. She begged for them to stop, but
they put her in a headlock and took her to a nearby estate. She was moved to
another block where other boys joined in. Together with a friend, with the
belief still it was just a birthday party, he makes his way to the estate
building. When Abraham turns up, he's horrified by what he sees. He saw that the
girl was being molested and young boys, lots of people were shouting at her. He
said that time he felt so sorry because the girl was crying. He looked at the
girl and asked, are you being forced? And he said the girl nodded yes. And
Abraham said that was when he spoke to the other friend they were going to get
that we have to rescue, are out. They ran out. He didn't know the girl at all,
did he? No. Even the girl in her statement, she called Abraham my lifesaver. So
how did Abraham end up saving her? According to a report from the time, the girl
tried to leave of her own accord, but kept being attacked and pulled back by the
group. At one point, there were as many as 15 boys there. When Abraham turned
up, he told them he was going to help the girl and get her home. But when he
tried to lead her outside, the others immediately started pushing him and
shouting at him, telling him they weren't finished. Abraham those stood firm and
did manage to escort her out. How rare a kind of person was Abraham? Okay, so if
I were to put him in a category, I'll put him in one all by himself. He was a
unique person. My name is Sheldavid Onomasi and I used to be a mentor for
Abraham Badru and I mentored him for close to about five years. How much did his
behaviour at that age even stand out compared to some of his friends? So I
remember times in class when I would need like a class captain and I would ask
Abraham to be that person, right? I would need someone to speak to the other
kids and say, you know, maybe they wouldn't listen to me, but they will listen
to one of theirs and Abraham will be that go to person. He felt that
responsibility to be the big brother, even though he was quite young, you know,
so he had that desire to want to protect. Protect I think it's a quality most
parents would be proud to see in their child. But what happens next might make
you question that because after that moment, Abraham's life would never be the
same. Abraham's mum remembers the day after he saved the girl like it was
yesterday. When I came back from work around 5pm, the police came around 6 and I
opened the door and they said they were looking for Abraham. I said, what
happened? I called Abraham from his room and he came out. Then I was like, what
happened? And the police said there has been a rape. I said, rape? And they
said, no, no, no, he wasn't involved. So I was very upset. I said, why did you
even go there? I shouted that. Why did you go there? And the police answered me,
I remembered that if he didn't go there, the girl would have been dead. Although
he wasn't involved, the police knew he'd helped save the victim. And so Ronke
says they asked him to go to Lower Clapton Police Station to give a statement.
Ronke has to accompany Abraham because he's underage. She thought that would be
the last time he'd have to deal with the police. After two or three weeks, I
think, the police came back that Abraham has to be a witness. Around this time,
Abraham would frequently go to church. Sian David Onomusi met Abraham at church
and got to know him incredibly well. What happened shortly into your mentorship
of Abraham was something that he could never have planned for. What do you
remember about the attack? So that was quite tough for him. I felt like he was
caught between whether talking or not, like anybody will be in such a very
precarious situation. And that caused him some level of disturbance. Abraham is
now at a crossroads. Abraham could be forgiven for thinking he'd already done
his bit by this point. But now he's faced with a decision about whether he
should publicly appear to stand in court and testify against people he knows,
people who live nearby, people who could then be put behind bars. I'm Alexandra
Wilson and I'm a practicing barrister. How crucial would a witness like Abraham
have been to the police to prosecute a case like this? Absolutely essential. I
mean, ultimately, the criminal case would have rested on largely witness
evidence, people standing in court and given their account of what happened,
what they saw, because if you haven't got the technology or the camera evidence,
you're going to be relying on people's accounts. So I think absolutely
essential. For somebody who's under 16, how differently, how carefully should
they be handled by the police in comparison to someone who's older? There is
absolutely no doubt that someone of that age should be handled with the most
care. The police have an extra duty to make sure that they're protected through
this process and feel safe. I think that's the key thing, feel safe. But as
Abraham's mum remembers, with the decision weighing on his shoulders, things
start to happen that make Abraham feel anything but safe. Abraham has been
receiving threatening messages, which he showed the police, like you're a dead
meat. So I was really worried. How were you and Abraham feeling in that moment?
He started isolating himself. He was there in there throughout and crying in the
room. I used to call the police every second that my son has been crying since
morning. He received a text. It got to a stage, Abraham didn't show me. He just
stopped because it upset you too much? Yes. And he was so scared. And this is
before Abraham has even made a decision about whether to act as a witness. So
how real are these threats, these texts that Abraham is hiding from his mum? My
name's Wale. I was good friends with Abraham. To the people who he grew up on
the estate with, they're going to see some sense of betrayal in that scenario.
Because if there's someone that lives amongst us that's happy to talk to police,
they'll probably even try and make sure to get you out of the vicinity if they
could. You just don't snitch, you don't talk. You don't say what you see, you
don't say what you heard. Once you kind of get that label on your head, then
it's like nobody trusts you after that. Abraham should have been referred to a
witness care unit. Dr. Samantha Fairclough is an Associate Professor in Law at
the University of Birmingham. Witness care units exist to provide individual
support to witnesses. So from the point someone is charged with a crime, all the
way through to when a case is completed. When we talk about witness protection
in this capacity, we don't mean things like being given a new identity or new
housing. Here we're talking about guiding an individual through the process of
being a witness and supporting their emotional well-being. Once the not guilty
plea was entered, the witness care unit should have contacted Abraham and then
conducted a detailed needs assessment of the witness, so of Abraham. That would
be the kind of routine thing to do. There's two main ways a witness can be
looked after. The first is, as we've just heard, through a witness care unit.
Anybody can get that support, but you need to be referred by the police. The
second is if you are identified as a vulnerable witness. There are multiple
factors that mean that at this moment, before he's made the decision, Abraham
falls into the category of vulnerable witness. First of all, his age, so he was
a child witness. So it's a violent offence, it's a sexual offence that could
cause Abraham to be in some fear or distress. Finally, we knew that Abraham was
receiving threats at the time that he was involved as a witness. Vulnerable
witnesses are meant to be given a choice of something called special measures.
They include things like the removal of official court dress, closing the public
gallery for the duration of the witness's testimony, or even witnesses giving
evidence from behind a screen or via Livelink. Witnesses can also have their
evidence pre-recorded and played at trial in their absence. According to
Abraham's family, this wasn't picked up. And according to our experts, it should
be. I asked Abraham's mum if she knew about this kind of witness protection
process, or if it was mentioned to her at the time. No. So, you didn't even know
to ask for it? No, no. They didn't even give Abraham counselling service,
nothing. They didn't even tell us about that. There was nothing like that. We
asked the Metropolitan Police about the fact that Ronke says Abraham was not
referred to a witness care unit. They declined to comment. Many of the people
we'll hear from in this series say witness protection in the UK is a closed
shop. There's a lack of transparency, a lack of information about how it works
and how to get it. We asked the police to respond to those concerns. Again, they
declined to comment. We've been provided with an official review, published in
2009, which examined the experience of victims and witnesses in the justice
system. It found that police officers were not always sufficiently aware of the
special measures or of the grounds for eligibility. That same review also found
that the CPS generally failed to fully assess the needs of victims and
witnesses, including whether special measures were needed when they were making
charging decisions. They also looked at witness care units and found that the
detailed needs assessments weren't always thoroughly conducted. It found also
that in some cases, the information about witnesses that was passed to witness
care units wasn't sufficiently complete, which caused issues even contacting
witnesses in the first place. The criminal justice system is simply unworkable
if we can't get witnesses to give their evidence in court. So it's in
everybody's interest that we treat witnesses well. Based on the fact that we've
spent a while explaining witness protection, you're probably thinking that
Abraham now takes the decision to work with the police, to willingly stand up in
court. But that's not the case. Rongke sees her son crying every day, afraid to
leave his room, getting terrifying text messages. So when the police formally
ask for Abraham to be a witness... I said no, no he will not. And I was
frightened. I was told that if you don't allow him, we will charge you for
perverting the course of justice. That's what the police said to you? Yes, to
me. I said no, that they all know him. What was going through your mind when
they told you that? I was like, maybe they're going to send us back to Africa.
You feared you'd get deported? Yes. So at that point, did you feel that your
hands were tied, that you couldn't really do anything? Yes, yes. I couldn't do
anything. At this point, they don't really understand what crime they say
they're being accused of, but they understand the essence. Abraham is told to
act as a witness, or potentially be prosecuted. We asked the Metropolitan Police
about what they said to Abraham, and whether, as is claimed by Ronke,
threatening to charge him should have been their next step. A young man, a
minor, in fear of his own safety. They declined to comment. How can you trust
someone who wants to put you in jail and ruin your life because you don't want
to give them information that can jeopardise your life? That doesn't make any
sense. There is one more consideration here that we should take into account.
This was a case looking to prove sexual assault, and convictions in cases like
this in the UK are painfully rare. So witness testimonies are really important
in this. On the one hand, Abraham knows how pivotal his evidence could be in
this case. On the other hand, he's getting these menacing text messages. The
decision about whether to work with the police and act as a witness falls solely
to Abraham. And although Abraham himself is scared, remember, Abraham leapt into
action to save the victim without a thought for his own safety. Now that same
moral conscience is urging him to speak up. Could he have even lived with
himself if he didn't testify? I don't think so. I don't think so. It would have
bothered him, definitely. This is Shaon David Onomousi, who not only went to the
same church as Abraham, but being nine years older, ended up being his official
mentor. At the time, I was just like, this is a tough one. I don't even know
what I would do in that situation because it takes a lot of bravery. Our
discussion went on for at least an hour, where we were just looking at the
different scenarios. If I were in your shoes, I would go out, but I'll be
careful. I'll make sure that I get as much protection from the law as I can,
because it could come back and bite you. How much do you think his Christian
identity was a factor, his faith was a factor in him deciding to take the stand?
I think his faith, you know, meant a lot. He was kind of puzzled, like, we've
read stories about standing up for people who can't stand up for themselves. How
do I practically apply this in this situation? As painful as it is, we don't
regret him doing the right thing. We're just upset that he wasn't protected for
doing the right thing, or fully protected for doing the right thing. In 2008,
Abraham decides to take to the witness stand and testify. Sharon said his only
regret was the lack of protections for Abraham. Alexandra Wilson is a practicing
barrister. A person can be given a separate waiting area to prevent them having
to run into family or friends of the defendant. They can be given screens in
court so that they don't actually have to come face to face with members of the
family or friends or the defendant. I asked Abraham's cousin Abiola what
happened when Abraham went into court. I don't think he was shielded even in the
courtroom. It was very obvious, it wasn't hidden that it was him. What measures
did they put in place to protect him? What about Abraham's mum Ronke? The police
know she's worried. So what's their response? Like, we don't have business with
you. As the way they treated me, as if they've got what they wanted, that
Abraham has gone to court with them. Did they ever talk to you, did anyone ever
talk to you about what kind of support you could get for Abraham? No. When we
asked the Metropolitan Police about what measures were offered to Abraham, we
didn't get a direct response to that question. Instead, Detective Superintendent
Mike Hamer of the Central East Command provided this general comment. The safety
of witnesses is of the utmost importance and we offer a number of measures to
support and assist those at risk. In many cases, much witness care is delivered
by independent national charities and organisations. You're asking a 15-year-old
to come forward against an acne gang and they live in the same block? We can't
do that. So we have to have a system where if they want us to come forward, then
they have to protect us. Sheldon Thomas is a former London-based gang member who
founded the charity Gangsline. He's now an advisor to various government
departments, including the Home Office and New Scotland Yard. He told me this
story that happened not too long ago. A girl, a bit older than Abraham,
witnessed a murder in East London. All the police wanted her to do was, oh, come
forward, you need to come forward. We're telling the police that you can't just
grab one of our young people to come and testify without at least contemplating
how are you going to make sure that this young lady lives. The police went to
the parents and made them feel they had no choice but to tell the daughter to
come forward. And that's because they just want an outcome. This is what the
policewoman said to me. Oh, this gang, they're not going to do nothing. They
kill people. What do you mean? They tried to tell the police about the gang, but
they're trying to tell us that they're not as bad. From your understanding, what
protections did the police offer? None. Not one. If we then take this to
Abraham's situation, even if Abraham and his mum hadn't specifically asked for
protection, do you believe it is the police's responsibility to understand the
danger in that situation? Yes, of course it is. But listen, it's not something a
parent knows about automatically. What should the Met police have done? I think
the police should have said, listen, in order to convict these people, we will
have to go to the council and tell the council we need you to move. You don't
think it would have been necessary to move him to, you know, the borders of
Scotland or somewhere in Wales? Just another borough in London probably would
have been safe enough. I think for him, it would have been the other end of
London. Abraham's mentor, Shayan, also presumed this is how a witness in this
situation would be handled. This is what he says to Abraham. I expect that you
would be relocated from that area and it means you won't be coming to our church
anymore, but that's OK because what you've done, you need to get protected. That
was my expectation. And that appeared to be his expectation as well? Absolutely,
yeah. So, to be totally clear, when he's first making the decision about whether
to act as a witness or not, it is on the basis that he believes he's going to be
relocated out of the area for his own protection. Oh, absolutely. That is the
basis on which he's making a decision about whether to speak out or not.
Absolutely, yeah. In the period that Abraham was gearing up to give evidence in
court, and whilst the trial is going on, Ronqués says she's trying to get the
pair of them moved to a safe place. With the seriousness of the case, she thinks
it's going to be almost instant, because she reckons the local authorities would
understand how urgent it is. They supposed to move us immediately. They didn't
move us out of the borough immediately. And something happens that makes them
even more desperate to leave. I would say they threw eggs at our door. Abraham's
home has now been targeted and vandalised. This ratchets up the stress and fear
to a new level. Ronqués says she quickly notified both the police and Hackney
Council, and this is what she says happened. They gave Abraham a small alarm to
hold, and they brought this alarm box to the house, like an intruder alarm. Did
you feel that that was a good level of protection? No, no. Abraham was just
desperate to move, to go away, to go out of the borough, very desperate to move.
What did you say to the police about what you wanted? After everything they
said, they told the Hackney Council to move us out of the borough. That was what
the police told me. The police gave us this statement. The Metropolitan Police
Service has never underestimated Abraham's role in a high-profile case and has
provided a letter of support to Abraham's family when they later requested to
move home. But that doesn't mean Abraham and his mum automatically get a new
home in a new area. The next thing I saw was a letter from my housing officer
with a bidding number. I started bidding every Friday. So you had to bid for a
new council house? Yes. Any time I bid, the position will be 400, 500. In our
last episode, you heard suggestions from Associate Law Professor Dr Fairclough
for why support for Abraham may have been missed. Potential problems like police
funding cuts, insufficient training on special measures. But Sheldon Thomas
brings up the potential of something else. We're in a situation where colour
does play a significant part in how we are treated. They do things from a biased
point of view. Do you think Abraham being a young black male had an impact on
the kind of protection he was offered by the police? He would have been treated
differently. Of course he would have been. We know that. That's like, goes
without saying. When black people are involved, no one cares. Back in 2008, when
the trial was being reported, some news reports wrongly described Abraham as
being a member of a local gang. Everything you've heard so far in this series,
from all of Abraham's friends and family, points to the complete opposite.
Nobody I've ever spoken to has accepted, even for a moment, that Abraham was
part of a gang. Dr. Samantha Fairclough explains how the possibility of racial
bias is backed up by research. There's a lot of existing literature on the
impact of racial biases on policing and on the administration of justice. And it
may be that for Abraham, the fact that he was black prevented officers and
lawyers from recognising him as a vulnerable witness. So I'm hypothesising. I
obviously can't say with any certainty what happened in this particular case,
but it is possible that Abraham's race and the racial biases of those who
encountered him affected the way that officers and the court perceived him and
therefore affected the support that he received. We put these points on racial
bias to the Metropolitan Police. They replied to say... The Metropolitan Police
strongly refutes that racial bias played any part in deciding the witness
support that was available to Abraham. At the end of 2008, the court case in
which Abraham gave evidence reached its conclusion. Nine schoolboys were jailed
this week for the rape, kidnap and false imprisonment of a 14-year-old girl.
There's a lot you'll learn about Abraham throughout this series. Decisions that
will make you wonder if you could do the same. Like the decision he makes now.
Fearing for his family's safety and desperate to return to some semblance of
normality, Abraham alone creates a new life for himself. I'm at Paddington
Station with its row after row of Victorian steel arches. This is the station
you go to if you want to get out of London and head to the west of England. I'll
get to where I'm going and why in a moment, but first I've just spotted the
person I've been waiting for. My name is Buki Bwari. I'm Nigerian. The reason
why I'm here is to give more in-depth of what I know about Abraham and how we're
related. Especially first coming to the country, Abraham was one of the first
people that was there for me to show me the ropes and how it works and
everything. So you're going to be my tour guide today? Absolutely. I'll take you
everywhere. I'll take you to our college. I'll take you to where we play
football. I'll take you to where we used to live. So you're in for a good ride.
Where are we going today? So we're going to Bristol, which is actually the first
town and city that raised me. Let's rewind back to 2008. Abraham knows some
extended family who'd gone to a college in Bristol, and he sees that as his
ticket out of London. So it's taken us an hour and a half to get here. Where are
we now? We're actually standing in Fulton College in Bristol, when I first met
Abraham. How did you end up meeting Abraham? Tell me about that first meeting.
Well, I knew no one and also my English was bad. So the first thing everyone
picked up on was like, okay, this guy is fresh off the boat. So at that time, my
official name in college was actually Freshie. And it was Abraham that gave me
that. You know, Abraham was always been a jovial guy, very bubbly. He knew I was
Nigerian, so it was so easy to spot. And then he came to me and then he just
took me on. He realized, you know, I'm by myself in the college and I need
someone to be there. You were in a difficult situation actually when you started
here. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, yeah. Me and my dad, we didn't really get on at
that time. So he didn't abandon me, but it was just more like neglected to the
point where I didn't have the proper clothing for the right reason. So like
wintertime, I will come to college with like t-shirt and you know, not really
proper clothes basically. So what Abraham would do is he will give me his
clothes, his jacket, and sometimes his shoes. I was, yeah, and sometimes he'd
give me like money for food and stuff like that, especially like the cafeteria
is so easy. So whenever he gets lunch, he passed me a plate and he was there.
Yeah, he was there for me. He was there for me. Remembering all of this now, it
makes me want to cry. I know, you know, because I've never actually had anyone
ask me that question. So now thinking about it, yeah, he was like a father I
never had. That's all I can say about that. How much did he change your life?
Yeah, very significantly. Very, very significantly because it's so easy to get
lost in a country or in a place that you've never been. You have no one and you
know no one. What he's done is basically he showed me not mingling with the
wrong side and always focusing on my studies. And because you can easily tell
from the home where he came from, education matters and, you know, being a good
citizen matters. Did you also stay with him at times? Yeah, I had my own
accommodation, which is literally like next to the college. And then I had a
part time job while I was still, yeah, we all did. I lost my job and then I
couldn't keep up with the rent anymore. It was just like, freshly, why don't you
just come and stay with us? He wasn't just doing things for me. He was also
teaching me how to be an outstanding citizen, an outstanding person. We know
that he was receiving threats and that part of the reason he came here was to
escape that. Knowing what you do now, what do you think would have been going
through Abraham's mind at this point? The only thing I can think of is probably
concern for his safety and his mum, because his mum is number one world. He
literally lives for his mum. Probably why he even fought to move down here,
because then that reduces the risk of him being chased and then his mum being
caught up in the middle. So you see, like I said, he's always thinking ahead for
people he cares about. Because that's the thing that I keep thinking of. We know
how close Abraham and Ronke... Ronke, yeah. Yeah, they are. But he essentially
had to leave her behind for multiple years. It shouldn't have to be, you know,
especially a teenager. It shows you what's exactly wrong in our system. If a 17
year old can't be encouraged to stand up for the good in this community, in
society, without having to fear for his life, it's not encouraging any other
person to be there for other people. Did Abraham ever mention the attack that
happened in London? The only reason why we even knew about that, when he had to
go for the award ceremony. Abraham has begun to settle in Bristol, trying to
forge a new life and escape everything that had been weighing him down. It's
fair to say that both he and his mum feel pretty let down by the system. And
then his mum gets a letter, a formal letter, an official recognition of his
bravery. It's an invitation to an award ceremony by the police. I went back to
Ronke's house so she could tell me about that night. The judge awarded him for
you to go in there and remove the girl. The place was full. They told the story
of what happened to the crowd. Everybody stood up for him. And people started
congratulating him that he was a brave boy. He received a standing ovation. On
the award night, one of the commissioners, a woman, she walked to me, that you
must be a proud mum. And deep down in me, I was thinking about all the
threatening messages, all the threats. She said, you must have been a proud mum.
I said, yes, but I'm scared. I told her. But she changed her face. Like, why are
you scared? Looking back, how do you feel about that event? If they do
appreciate what he did, they would take him to a safe place as well. And there's
another reason they thought, having been a witness, having received threats,
Abraham would get more concrete support to get them out. The girl was taken to a
safe place up till now. At the time, it's widely reported that the girl, who was
the victim of the attack, is moved to a new home outside of Hackney. This leaves
Abraham and his family feeling mistreated in comparison. I believe because
maybe, I don't want to say the R word. The R word is racism? Yes, because maybe
it's a black boy, maybe they didn't. Because why? The girl was a white girl. Why
was she taken to a safe place? And the witness, there's nothing for that for a
witness. It does seem odd that the police recognise that there is a risk there.
And it then doesn't follow that if the risk is from people that are so dangerous
as to warrant the victim moving away, why would he not? That doesn't really make
much sense to me. This is barrister Alexandra Wilson. Abraham and his mum feel
let down. But it's important to note that doesn't mean they don't support the
victim receiving new accommodation. Alexandra again. I think it's really easy to
kind of see this victim and Abraham as in kind of competition with each other in
terms of the witness protection programme. And I don't think that's how we
should look at it. I actually think that they both would have been deserving.
It's good that this girl was given it. What's concerning of course is she was
white. The police clearly felt there was needed for her. So they recognise the
seriousness of the offence but haven't given that same protection to him.
Because it's exactly the same people. Yeah, precisely. There does seem to be
this big distinction in terms of the protections and care offered to a victim in
comparison to a witness. What do you think about that? I think that that is an
accurate observation. I think the whole criminal justice system does really kind
of revolve around the victim. And that's important. The protection just needs to
be more widespread. Actually we need to not only be protecting victims but also
witnesses. And really interestingly when we do our training as barristers, when
we do for example the vulnerable witness training, that does cover witnesses and
victims. So from a practitioner's perspective we are taught not to distinguish
that actually we can have very vulnerable witnesses as we can very vulnerable
victims. You can only hope that this will be a lesson for police forces going
forward. That actually it's just as important to think about how vulnerable the
witnesses are and whether or not they're in danger as it is to think about the
victim. You heard Abraham's mum earlier trying to avoid the word racism. But it
is hard for them not to wonder if racial bias played a role in the level of
relocation support offered to Abraham. We put that to the Metropolitan Police
and they said. The Metropolitan Police strongly refutes that racial bias played
any part in deciding the witness support that was available to Abraham. It's in
spring 2007 that Abraham saves the young girl and starts receiving messages on
his phone saying that he's dead meat. Ronke began the bidding process in 2008
and then in 2009 she does finally manage to get a new home for both of them. But
there are issues with it. Ronke wants Abraham to be as far away from Frampton
Park as possible. And this place is still in the same borough, Hackney. Here's
Abraham's friend Wale and cousin Abiola. The council moved his mum from the
estate that they were staying at to another estate within the borough which is
only like what, no more than 10 minutes apart in drive. What? You got moved just
a couple of doors down the road. Like literally you moved from E9 to E8. I'm
pretty sure E8 gangs can reach E9 or E9 is still in the same East area and they
would have access to those areas. Ronke told me that at the time Hackney Council
says to her that it's not possible to move them to another borough. So this is
her best and perhaps only option. We asked Hackney Council why this was and why
Ronke even had to go through a council bidding process in 2008 rather than just
be allocated a new home. They said, We always give absolute priority to families
in urgent need of rehousing for safety reasons and have agreements in place to
move families outside of Hackney where they are suffering threats or harassment.
The council rehoused the family to another part of the borough in January 2009.
We do not have records of a move outside the borough being requested in 2008.
Despite deep-rooted fears about their new house, initially there are no
incidents of note. But Abraham's not actually living there. He's in Bristol and
because the house is in Hackney, once college ends a few years later, he decides
not to come back full-time. Instead he starts a degree in sports science at the
University of Gloucestershire and like uni students across the country, he comes
back to visit Ronke during the holidays. It's during one of these trips back
that something happens that makes the family desperate to get out of the
borough. Abraham used to come home every bank holiday, half-time he would come
home. In the morning, he went in the morning to wash his dishes before I woke
up. When I heard, Mum, Mum, Mum, come. Out of the kitchen window, Abraham sees
someone walking in the estate. A person he recognises as being a close
acquaintance of one of the boys he testified against. And Ronke confirms that is
the new neighbour in the area. And he said, oh, I can't stay here. He wasn't
happy. Then he went upstairs to pack his bag. He left to Bristol. He left. This
is a nightmare scenario for the pair of them. Abraham has only been home for a
few hours and he sees his worst fears coming true. Ronke, who's waited months
for Abraham to come and stay, now sees her son filled with fear. Once again,
he's being ripped away from her and the realisation sets in that he now will
never really feel safe in her home, their home. Ronke and Abraham feel that as
he's acted as a witness, and now they believe there's a greater risk to his
safety, it's the police who should automatically move them. I wanted to find
someone internal, someone who's aware of how this all works. So I got in touch
with former chief superintendent of the Metropolitan Police, Dal Babu, who
worked there for three decades. They'd have to assess it. They'd have to make a
decision about how quickly they need to act. You know, is this a high risk?
You'd expect a whole range of people to be spoken to and a risk assessment
completed. That would then inform their decision making. Do they need to move
this person today? Or is there mitigation that they can put in place? So the
police do have the ability to ask housing associations, ask councils to move
people who are at risk, that that is within their gift. Yeah, absolutely. I
mean, it happens. They can speak to housing departments or ask housing
associations who will have properties around a much wider region than a local
authority. But there are still nevertheless opportunities to move somebody to a
different area geographically. If the police deem the threat to be significant
enough. Yeah. We found a Met Police report from 2010, so roughly the same period
of time. And it found that fewer people from ethnic minority backgrounds
received witness protection. And it put forward some explanations, including the
theory that people of colour, and this is a direct quote, have a reluctance to
relocate and comply with a requirement to be disconnected from other members of
their community. I asked Dal Babu what he thought about that. I mean, that
phrase doesn't appear to be reflective of communities. It seems to be a very,
very big general stereotyping. The report also suggests another reason for fewer
people of ethnic minority backgrounds in witness protection. It says that there
is a propensity for some ethnic communities to cluster in geographic pockets
across the UK and that relocation to another pocket does not guarantee anonymity
because they tend to be acquainted with one another. What are your thoughts on
that? It seems to be almost making an excuse for not doing the protection work.
It's basically saying all black people know each other, isn't it? Which
essentially stereotyping people of colour, you know, people of colour want to
live together and aren't prepared to live anywhere else. Seems like that has
already got the answer it wants. It's sort of just looking for the evidence to
prove that. And I think witness protection is an example of an organisation that
doesn't understand issues around race, religion, age, protected characteristics.
Would you feel confident that officers have adequate cultural understanding to
know if a young man in Abraham's situation is genuinely at risk or not? I think
there's a big deficit in British policing when it comes to cultural
understanding. Ironically, you are more likely to see a police officer, a person
of colour in a fictional programme than in real life. The police service needs
to understand how important it is to have people of lived experience in crucial
roles so they understand why people will want protection and also understand if
they are asking for certain conditions. Abbey thinks that might have impacted
the support offered to Abraham. If you don't live in an environment, you're not
going to understand it. You didn't get any protection for that case. It's not an
easy, it was such a big thing. They didn't help at all. At all. Please Protect
Abraham was presented by Sam Holder and the producer is Unishka Sharma. It was a
Whistle Down production for Radio 4. You can listen to the second part next
Friday at the same time. In a moment, James Kamarasamy assesses the political
impact of Sue Gray becoming Keir Starmer's Chief of Staff and the latest on next
week's ambulance worker strike following the call off by three unions. But
first, a look at the weather. Tonight much of the UK will be rather cloudy with
showery rain moving into northern Scotland. Western Scotland, north-west England
and Northern Ireland may see some clear spells develop and it will turn rather
cold. For many areas we'll see another overcast day with a few brighter spells
at times. Northern and eastern areas of Scotland as well as eastern England will
see some showers, these wintry over the high ground. Some day will be largely
cloudy with showers across the UK. These could be wintry on the hills. Northern
Scotland will see some showers. Some day will be largely cloudy with showers
across the UK. These could be wintry on the hills.