TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4_AUDIO/2023-03-08-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 to run for president in Mexico. Her decision to stand was political but also
highly personal as I've been finding out. Next it's Outlook. This is the BBC
World Service, the world's radio station. Coming up on Outlook. When she was
growing up in Pakistan, Alina Khan never saw anyone in movies who was trans like
her. Oftentimes I've seen in Indian and Pakistani trans movies, there is no
positive message that the character has been able to give and there is no
authenticity to them because the character was not played by a trans person. Now
she's the first ever trans star of a major Pakistani film so it's important to
Alina that her character Biba is in charge of her destiny. Biba has all the
emotions, happiness, anger, sadness, jealousy. I like that she was a real
character, struggling and fighting with her circumstances as many trans people
do. She's stubborn, angry and a doer. Alina's fiery and determined journey to a
place on the red carpet. Coming up shortly. BBC News, hello, I'm Gareth Barlow.
Protests in the Georgian capital Tbilisi have continued late into the night
against proposed legislation requiring organisations that receive funding from
abroad to register as foreign agents. The bill has been criticised by the EU and
the United States. Rehan Dimitri reports from Tbilisi. Police used tear gas,
pepper spray and water cannons to disperse thousands of protesters outside
Georgia's parliament in the capital Tbilisi. There was chaos as some protesters
were seen falling on the ground, rubbing their eyes, coughing, while others
waved EU and Georgian flags, confronting high-pressure water cannons. The
protest broke out on Tuesday evening after lawmakers from the governing Georgian
Dream Party approved the first reading of a foreign agents bill. The UN refugee
agency has called on lawmakers here in Britain to reconsider draft laws that
would detain and deport people arriving by boat to claim asylum. A spokesperson
for the UNHCR said the measures violated both the letter and the spirit of the
refugees convention by punishing asylum seekers who don't enter a country at an
official border point. The British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak said all other
approaches had failed. The White House says it supports a bipartisan bill in
Congress that would give President Biden new powers to ban the Chinese-owned app
TikTok and other foreign technologies that could pose security threats. Our
North America technology correspondent James Clayton reports. TikTok has
experienced this all before. In 2020 the company came close to being banned in
the US by President Trump. But if they thought that Joe Biden's presidency would
be more amenable towards the company, they thought wrong. TikTok has been able
to do the seemingly impossible in times of political polarization in the US,
unite both the Democrats and the Republicans. The cross-party bill will give the
US government powers to ban TikTok and other technologies they believe pose
national security risks. Five women have sued the American state of Texas saying
they were denied abortions even though their lives were in danger. The lawsuit
follows a US Supreme Court ruling last year that removed constitutional
protections for abortion rights. Here's Nomia Iqbal. It was really powerful
testimony from these women who have been basically denied, they say, their right
to have an abortion given that they say their lives were at risk, their foetuses
were at risk as well. And standing with them was Nancy Northup. She's the
president and the head of the Center for Reproductive Rights. It's a group
that's dedicated to abortion rights. And she made the point that the lawsuit's
the first of its kind since Roe v. Wade was overturned. And she was very blunt
as well. She said it's now dangerous to be pregnant in Texas and said no one
should be forced to wait at death's door to receive health care. World News from
the BBC. President Zelensky's advisor, Mikhailo Podolyak, has said Ukraine was
absolutely not involved in sabotage attacks last year that severed the Nord
Stream gas pipelines in the Baltic. Earlier, a report in the New York Times
newspaper citing anonymous US intelligence officials suggested a pro-Ukrainian
group was responsible for the attacks. Cyclone Freddie is expected to make
landfall again in Mozambique later this week after it struck Madagascar for a
second time on Monday, bringing strong winds and torrential rain. Madagascar's
government said eight people were killed and more than a thousand homes
destroyed. The first storm wreaked havoc in the southeastern African region in
late February. A BBC World Service investigation has revealed how criminal gangs
across Southeast Asia are trafficking migrants and forcing them to carry out
online romance scams, targeting victims around the world. One former scammer
told the BBC that he'd been lured with the promise of a good job before being
trafficked and held in a casino compound in Cambodia. Scientists here in Britain
have found that bumblebees learn to solve puzzles by watching their more
experienced peers. The researchers said their studies showed that not only
instinct but also social learning play a huge role in societies of bees, ants
and wasps. Charles Havlant has this report. The experts devised a puzzle box
that could be opened using either a blue tab or a red tab to access a sugar
reward inside. They trained groups of so-called demonstrator bumblebees to open
the box using one of the two methods, watched by a set of observer bees. When
the observers tackled the task, 98% of the time they used the method they had
witnessed, even after discovering the alternative option. The bees therefore
learned this behaviour socially, not through discovery. The scientists' broader
conclusion is that innovations can spread like social media memes through insect
colonies and they can respond quickly to new environmental challenges and no pun
intended, beebeesingies. When Alina Khan was a child growing up in Lahore,
sometimes the neighbours would have uncomfortable questions, sometimes they'd
have cruel questions. Is your son mentally okay or does he have a physical
ailment? Why is he not able to walk? Why does he behave like this? Will you get
him married? Sure, perhaps some of these questions were in search of answers,
but others may have been intended to highlight Alina's difference. In the city
of Lahore in Pakistan's Punjab province, Alina undoubtedly stood out. It's not
just because Alina is a Khawaja Sehra or a third gender person, that's not so
rare in this part of the world, but it's because she was doing her best at the
time to fit into the conventions of her parental home. So these neighbours'
questions, these little jibes about what's expected from a quote-unquote
respectable Pakistani household would eventually push Alina onto the streets of
Lahore. But her talent and perseverance means Alina's face can now be seen on
billboard posters and cinema screens across the world. We would like to give a
commendation to Joyland, directed by Saeen Saeed. She's even made it to the red
carpet at the Cannes Film Festival, where an adoring press couldn't get enough
of her. Everyone was eager to photograph me. There was so much clicking. And I
felt so absolutely happy that thank God no one has a problem with my gender. For
them, I was a human being. You're listening to Outlook with me, Mubeen Azhar.
Today, Alina Khan, whose meteoric rise to international acclaim has smashed that
word ordinary into pieces. Alina is the first transgender person to take a lead
role in a major feature film in Pakistan. The film is called Joyland and
audiences have completely lapped it up. In fact, critics as well internationally
have loved the film. That doesn't change the fact that within Pakistan, the film
has attracted a lot of controversy. Now, before we really get into this, I just
want to give you this crash course in gender and trans rights in Pakistan. It is
absolutely fascinating. So in many ways, Pakistan is kind of a trailblazer. It
really is, because you have this idea of the third gender or the Khawaja Sera
community being protected in law. Now, for a lot of the community and for Alina,
certainly that protection doesn't really amount to a lot. So traditionally, the
Khawaja Sera community or third gender people, they've been seen as kind of
magical. They're certainly revered and they're thought to possess the power to
bless children, to bless marriages. At the same time, you've got the situation
where the community is vilified. So there's very limited job opportunities.
There's ritual performance and that kind of stuff. There's also sex work. But a
lot of the community isn't allowed into spaces where they can take positions in
government, work in restaurants, any of that stuff. So there's huge limits on
what the community of third gender people in Pakistan are actually allowed to
do. In a kind of Eurocentric way, you could say, ah, third gender people,
they're just transgender. It's the same thing, isn't it? They're not exactly the
same thing. Sometimes those terms are interchangeable. But actually, there's
parts of Pakistan where the idea of being transgender is seen as really
offensive, actually. And it's seen as being divergent and different from the
idea of being a Khawaja Sera or being third gender. And it's the question of
labels that I want to pick up the conversation with Alina. So how do you
identify? Speaking for myself, Khawaja Sera and transgender mean the same. In
South Asia, the term Khawaja Sera is used more and internationally, the term
transgender is used, which is fine too. Personally, I don't mind being called
either. So if you call me Khawaja Sera, I'm happy. How were you raised? Were you
a happy child when you were young? Tell me about your household. You know how in
childhood, you are not able to understand things. So when I was young, and I
would behave like a girl, my siblings and parents would ignore me and would
think I'm young and that's why I behave that way. I had a boy's haircut with no
hair on my face. But I would want to have long nails. Even now I do like long
nails. So I had these interests since I was young, but I would try to hide them
and suppress my desires. But gradually this behavior grew more. Like the way I
would talk or walk or move my hands when I would talk, I was living like a girl
and befriending girls and not boys. My family members had an issue with that.
When my father would go out of the house, he would have to hear all sorts of
things like, is your son mentally okay? Or does he have a physical ailment? Why
does he behave like this? Will you get him married, etc. So this would make my
father angry and he would come home and speak to my mother, who would then scold
me. My siblings also told me to not move my hands so much when I talk and to
talk like a boy and live like one. Then my father took me to a mullah, thinking
I had some devil in me. I used to wonder why would they do this to me? Because I
thought I was living like a normal human being. I couldn't understand why they
had a problem with the way I talked or walked. When you were trying to kind of
repress this spirit and repress who you really are, I mean that must have been
heartbreaking. It was very difficult for me. That's when I decided that I need
to go far away from home. I must have been 11 or 12 years old. I was very young.
I didn't know that when you leave home, you need money. You can wear the same
clothes for a week or 10 days, but you can't go hungry. When I first left, I had
20 to 30 rupees and I would wander off on the roads. And one time I sat outside
a cafe and it was early morning and I was very tired and I decided to sit down
there just for a minute and I went to sleep. And while I was asleep outside on
this table, this man came from the shop and woke me up and said, have you run
away from home? And I said, yes. And he said, why don't you come inside and
sleep? The minute I went inside, the minute I laid down, I realized that he was
harassing me and I ran away from there. I ran back home. I thought at least I'll
have shelter. I thought I will control my gender. I will start behaving like a
boy and I will get a job like a boy so that I can at least make a place for
myself in my parents' hearts. I started working, but my spirit and soul, I could
not tell how people were able to sense it. They eventually started judging me.
People started openly calling me names and I left my job. I thought I'm trying
to fit in with society, but society is still not willing to accept me. So I left
the job and I secretly joined a small dance academy on the side. You know, there
is a culture of dance in Pakistan, transgender and third gender people dancing
at functions, celebrations and weddings. So I learned some dance, but even
there, the dance academy administration would exploit me and think this is a
beautiful girl who will come to us to learn dance and the money she gets, we
will get some commission. They were very greedy like that. Within Pakistan,
dancing and performance is often seen as adjacent to sex work. So it's seen as a
kind of entry point into a world of vice. And so if you're in that world, even
if like Alina, you're seeing this as an art form, it's quite a it's quite a
shady world. And within that world, it becomes very easy to become exploited. At
this time, did you know any other transgender people? During the days that I
started running away from home, I made a friend on the streets, Lucky Khan. And
the day I went to join the dance academy, she was also there. So I said hello to
her. She shared the same problems with her family. But we both had the desire to
be more and get somewhere in life, at least gain acceptance from our families
and not be a source of embarrassment for them. When I left home and started
dancing, I made some money and started saving it to buy a new home. It had
nothing in it. I would sleep on the cold floor in winter with no pillow and
quilt. I would eat only once a day. Then the time came I started getting regular
bookings for functions and life became better. I started earning well. Where I
once had a bare floor, I started furnishing the place with what I needed. But
somewhere in my heart, there was the feeling that I am performing in functions
and that was something my parents feared. I had a principle that no one was
allowed to touch me. I told them, if you want to give me the money, you can, but
you can't exploit me. I had made up my mind that I will live my life in a better
way. Where I once had a bare floor, I started furnishing the place with what I
needed. But somewhere in my heart, there was the feeling that I am performing in
functions and that was something my parents feared. Once it also happened that I
went to see my family and even gave them some money and my sister said, don't
give us this money. It's haram, forbidden in Islam because it's money from
dancing. I felt so absolutely hurt. I had tears in my eyes, but I didn't cry in
front of them. In my heart, I spoke to my mom and said, if you could see me
dance, you would know just how difficult it is and I earned this money through
hard work. This is not haram. But I would often ask God, you made me trans, but
I don't want to be a joke for the world. I would say to God that I know you will
give me a chance to prove myself. So then I became invested in dancing. I would
listen to a song and practice it over and over again for at least two hours a
day. Music Were people respectful when you were performing? No, not in that way.
There were a few people who treated us like human beings. But most of the people
were like that, who knew that they don't have family support. No, there were
very few who treated us like human beings. People know that trans people have no
support from their families. That society doesn't accept them. And if they abuse
them, they will have no family support. There have been times when people have
forcefully tried to drag me out of cars. They would climb over my house, asking
me to befriend them, and asking why I don't take money from them at functions.
But this is because I had a principle in life. I didn't take more money than I
was owed, because I thought it would give them reason to blackmail me, or say,
we have given you this much, you should do things for us. You know what I mean?
I would tell people, this is art. I show you art, and take money for this. So
don't have any wrong expectations from me. Thank you so much. I want to just go
back a little bit again. Tell me, when you were dancing and you were going home,
and you were giving your family the money, I understand there was a stigma
attached to that money. But did you still have a relationship with them? If I
can be completely honest, it wasn't like this. I would only meet them when I
would go to give them money. I would stay barely half an hour or 15 to 20
minutes, not more than that. I would just give them money. Sometimes when I
would go after a month or two, my siblings, despite being home, would not want
to come meet me. I would yearn to see them. I would feel like my heart would be
at peace if I just saw them for once. Siblings are so special. And I was living
my life all alone. You need your blood ties. So when I would go to meet my
mother, I would ask where my brothers and sisters are, and she would say they
are sleeping. But I could hear their voices. I would get very hurt and wish they
would sit and talk to me. Amongst all that, though, there must have been
something driving you, because you continued doing your work, and you continued
building this community around you. And then you were approached to make and
feature in this short film called Darling. Tell me about that. I told you that
one time I came and my functions were good. People started to go to my dance
classes. So I started going to AIMERS. A time came when people started getting
to know me because of my dance. That's when I started going to nice events like,
for example, festivals. They were small in scale, but I would perform in them.
So I went to perform in one such event, and I did this Sufi Dhamal, a mystical
dance, which is part of our Pakistani culture. I was performing the dance when
Sana Jafri, a casting director, first saw me and gave me her number. I thought,
she's just another woman, and exchanged my number with her. And that was that. I
liked her. I liked the way she talked, and I realized that this woman does not
have any issues with my gender. Some time passed, and I got a call from my
friend Lucky. We have an NGO for the trans community, and Lucky was working for
them. So she asked me if I was interested in an audition for a short film. I
said, I don't know what an audition is. What will I have to do? She said, just
come. There will be other trans people over there, and you can see them and find
out. I said, okay, yes, I'm interested. When I went there, I met Lucky. We
exchanged greetings, and I saw other people, and I was very nervous. Then I saw
Sana outside the room, and I was shocked. She said, I'm happy you are here. I
was waiting for you. I gave the audition and went home. They said, if you are
successful, we will call you. Two, three months went by, and I didn't know what
had happened. Then I got a call from Lucky saying, Sana is coming to your house
to meet you. When Sana came to my house, the director, Saim Sadiq, was with her
too. And I was quite shocked. He was this big director. So Saim said, I have
heard a lot about your dance. Show us your dance. And I performed the Mujra for
them. Then the next morning, Sana came to see me and knocked really loudly on
the door. I opened the door, and she said, if we were to give you a role in a
short film, would you be interested? I said, yes, of course. Because even though
I didn't know anything about acting, I really wanted to do it. Saim said, we
have to change your hair colour, and we want it shorter. I spoke to other trans
friends, and they said, this work is just for a few days. You will get your hair
cut and coloured just for this? I had really liked my highlights and keratin
treatment, and had spent a lot of money on it. My friend said, leave it. We have
to ultimately do functions. These people are just here to make a film. And after
they are gone, your hair will be short, and you will lose all your appeal. But I
said, no, that's okay. My hair will grow again. But if I lose this opportunity,
I may never get it again. I learned everything in two days. I had such a lot of
drive within me, and it made me very happy. So tell me, after Darling went out,
and it was a short film, relatively well received, when did you first hear about
Joyland? After quite a while, maybe two, two and a half years later. In between,
I was performing in functions, and alongside, I kept myself relevant within the
industry by doing small shoots for brands. I never thought I would get an
opportunity like Darling again. So tell me, when you first saw the script for
Joyland, and you read about your character Biba, what did you see in her world?
And were there themes that reflected your reality as well? When I read the
character of Biba for the first time, the entire cast was together. Everyone
read their dialogue, and when I read my lines, I was really pleased to know that
trans people weren't victims in this story. We were not oppressed. Biba has all
the emotions, happiness, anger, sadness, jealousy. I liked that she was a real
character, struggling and fighting with her circumstances, as many trans people
do. Coming up in part two, Joyland takes Alina all the way to the Cannes Film
Festival and her first experience of the red carpet, but not before a struggle
at the airport. When I was going to the airport in Pakistan for the first time,
there was a man there who smacked his forehead and admonished his colleague for
sending a trans woman his way. I could hear people staring and sniggering. I was
so ashamed. I could not look at anyone. For a while, I felt sorry for myself.
But then I thought, no, I have been facing these things all my life. I told him,
what is your problem? Just scan me and let me go. There's a scanner, pick it up
and scan me and let me go. Because you are wasting my time. Alina's story
continues in part two. Stay with us. Our mission statement is to provide quality
care to the medically uninsured here in the Appalachian Mountains. I'm just
treating people that I care about, you know, good mountain people that I love
and try to care for the best I can. People are having to choose between their
medicine and food and a place to live. We have a lot of mental health issues and
a lot of substance use disorder that is very challenging for us to take care of.
If you can imagine a Winnebago that's totally stripped out and we design it to
be a medical clinic on the inside. This is state of the art. Everything is brand
new. We do not bill anyone. We're totally free. And the reason is because the
Health Wagon is an established charity with a lot of supporters. We're there for
our patients really 24-7 because we are in a small community and we love our
people here. The Health Wagon, Saturday at 12 GMT. In part two of Outlook, trans
actor Alina Khan finds herself at Cannes, representing the first Pakistani film
to be entered into its famous film festival. I had never been on the red carpet
before. I didn't know how to walk on it or strike a pose for photographs. Then I
said, OK, Alina, you have achieved this. Just enjoy this moment. You never know
when this will happen again. Alina's story continues after the news. BBC News
with Gareth Barlow. Protests in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, have continued
late into the night. Demonstrators descended on the Parliament building after
legislators gave their initial approval to a bill which requires organisations
receiving funding from abroad to register as foreign agents. The UN Refugee
Agency has called on lawmakers in Britain to reconsider draft laws that would
detain and deport people arriving by boat to claim asylum. The UNHCR said the
measures violated the Refugees Convention. The White House says it supports a
bill in Congress that would give President Biden powers to ban the Chinese-owned
app TikTok as a security threat. The legislation has bipartisan support in the
Senate. Five women have sued the American state of Texas, saying they were
denied abortions even though their lives were in danger. Texas has an abortion
ban but does allow terminations in an emergency. President Zelensky's adviser,
Mikhailo Podolyak, said Ukraine was absolutely not involved in the sabotage
attacks last year that severed the Nord Stream gas pipelines in the Baltic.
Earlier, a report in the New York Times newspaper suggested a pro-Ukrainian
group was responsible for the attacks. A BBC investigation has revealed how
criminal gangs across Southeast Asia are trafficking migrants and forcing them
to carry out online romance scams. A former insider described brutal conditions
facing those imprisoned in compounds. Cyclone Freddie is expected to make
landfall again in Mozambique later this week after it struck Madagascar on
Monday for a second time. Madagascar's government says eight people were killed
and more than a thousand homes destroyed. And scientists in Britain have found
that bumblebees learn to solve puzzles by watching their more experienced peers.
Experts from Queen Mary University of London trained a set of bees to open a
puzzle box. These bees then passed on the knowledge to others in the colonies.
BBC News. Welcome back to Outlook. I'm Mubin Azhar. Today I'm speaking with the
pioneering Pakistani trans actor Alina Khan. As a child, Alina always stood out
and she'd attract malicious gossip from the neighbours in her area. And that led
to her being rejected by her family. So as a result of that, by the age of 12,
she was living on the streets because her family felt embarrassed about her.
They just didn't accept her. She was alone and she was in danger from people who
actively meant her harm. But Alina found an escape and she found an income as
well from dancing at weddings and festivals. And eventually it was at one of
these events that she came to the attention of a casting director. She was
offered a part in a short film called Darling. And after that, she won a role in
the feature film Joyland. Now Alina told me it was really important and special
for her as a trans woman to be able to play a trans character. Oftentimes I've
seen in Indian and Pakistani trans movies, there is no positive message that the
character has been able to give. And there is no authenticity to them because
the character was not played by a trans person. So I was happy that as Biba, I
was not a sorry figure. And I was part of these lives of other characters. She's
stubborn, angry and a doer. Joyland is a film set in Lahore and the central
character is called Biba, played by Alina. And Biba, I would say, is a very
likeable, third gender, Khawaja Sera woman who is doing her best to make it out
of this quite claustrophobic art scene where everything is very prescriptive,
budgets are really low and a lot of people can't be bothered to do their jobs
properly. Amongst all that, Alina, as Biba, is aiming for the stars. So Biba can
see beyond what is immediately around her and is always thinking about her
future. And that means she has to really take control. So, for example, when
she's trying to put on a show and she's assembling a cast of backing dancers, a
lot of these backing dancers, you get the impression they'd rather just be
having a cigarette outside. They're checking their phones. They can't really be
bothered. Five, six, seven, eight. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight. And it's precisely at those moments that the character of Biba will clap
her hands and say, you've got to focus. Refer to me as Madam. I'm Biba, not
Madam. It should be an honour for you to be on the same stage as me. The
premiere was at the Cannes Film Festival. Had you heard of the Cannes Film
Festival before the premiere happened? I had no idea. I had no idea. When did
you first find out? I didn't know about Cannes. When I found out for the first
time that we were going to the Cannes Film Festival, it took me a few days to
come to terms with it. That I'm really going to the festival and that it is an
international one. Then I started looking it up on YouTube. Actors would walk
along the red carpet. That's all I knew about it. I was both nervous and excited
to go. I was lucky to represent my Pakistani trans community. I was travelling
abroad for the first time in my life. But I was nervous about people's reaction.
When I was going to the airport in Pakistan for the first time, there was a man
there who smacked his forehead and admonished his colleague for sending a trans
woman his way. Even then I could hear people staring in the air. I was so
nervous. I was so nervous. I was so nervous. I was so nervous. I was so nervous.
I was so nervous. I was so nervous. Even then I could hear people staring and
sniggering. I was so ashamed. I could not look at anyone. For a while I felt
sorry for myself. But then I thought, no. I have been facing these things all my
life. I told him, what is your problem? Just scan me and let me go. There is a
scanner, pick it up and scan me and let me go. because you are wasting my time.
He got angry but eventually scanned me and let me go. I just chose to make
myself comfortable and avoid any confrontation. I was afraid ever since this
unpleasant experience took place at the airport in Pakistan, I thought maybe the
same will happen when I land in France. But nothing happened. In fact, on the
first day we had a photo call and I was so nervous but when I got out of the car
people gave us such a lovely welcome. I didn't for a minute feel like an
outsider. When I went to get my photo taken, everyone was eager to photograph me
saying, look here, look this way. There was so much clicking and I felt so
absolutely happy. Thank God no one has a problem with my gender. People were
caring about my talent and my work. For them I was a human being and this lifted
my spirits. The next day there was the red carpet and screening. I had never
been on the red carpet before. I didn't know how to walk on it or strike a pose
for photographs. It was very difficult but I had to do it. The moment I set foot
on the red carpet, God gave me the strength and I said, okay Alina, you have
achieved this. So there is no need to get confused. Just enjoy this moment. You
never know when this will happen again. Did you actually enjoy it? Yes,
absolutely. I really enjoyed myself over there. There were such big billboards
of the movie. People would stop us for photographs. In fact, I saw my film for
the first time on the big screen in Cannes. People welcomed us with such a big
round of applause, gave us a standing ovation and I was tearful. It was a very
happy moment. When we got the jury award I let out a scream of joy and then
started crying. I could see Saim walk up to receive the award and then when they
called us for the Koei Palm Award and gave me and Saim the award, that was it. I
couldn't control myself. They gave me the mic to say something but I had tears
rolling down my face. I was so overwhelmed. They were happy tears but I could
not say anything even though I wanted to. I realised despite all that I have
faced, people are still giving me respect. It will forever be the most memorable
event of my life. Not only did you get the standing ovation, not only did you
get the award, this made international news. I know it was on stations like Jio
and ARY Digital, it was across the Pakistani press. Did your family reach out to
you? When I arrived at Cannes, it was the award night and I was very nervous.
When I arrived at Cannes, it was the award night and I was very nervous. I
called my mother and told her that I am going for an award night. Please pray
for me that our film is successful. My mother was weeping on the other end
because she realised all that I had been through and on some level she accepted
me. But because of my siblings and extended family she would not openly support
me. That day my mother said, I know you have faced a lot of hardships alone and
I pray that you are successful. After I won the award and we arrived back to
Pakistan, I immediately went to my family home, straight from the airport.
That's when I spent the first night in my family home with my siblings. I slept
with them under the same roof, ate dinner with them, had breakfast the next
morning. So yes, my family finally accepted me. My sister called me and now they
follow me on Instagram and they can see me. I often call them and visit home but
can't live with them because I am afraid that they will still face ridicule
because of me. I am confident that people's mentality will change. Just the way
my family was able to accept me, others will also change and more trans people
will be able to live with their families and get their support. So can you tell
me, I know on the international stage, the film itself is a huge achievement in
terms of Pakistani cinema, of course it is, it's critically acclaimed. But
within Pakistan itself, it's attracted controversy to the point where it's
actually in particular provinces it's been banned. When did you first hear about
the controversy? I was travelling a lot internationally and people loved the
movie and gave us a lot of support. But I was looking forward to the movie being
released in Punjab and my family going to watch the movie. While a lot of people
were happy for the film, some religious clerics had a problem with it. They
started speaking against the film without having watched it. When the casting
director Sana called to tell me that the film has been banned in Punjab, I
couldn't say anything. I started weeping. I tried to control myself but I felt
like I was giving up because we went to so many festivals, travelled so much,
did such a lot of hard work. I had hoped to show this film to my family. I told
my mother and I was crying as I spoke to her and my mother consoled me. Even my
sister called and said, don't worry, it will run. Now Saim is working hard to
get the ban lifted from the film. These clerics who have criticised the film
haven't even watched it. In fact, when asked by anchors on talk shows, they said
we don't watch such films. Well, if they haven't watched it, then how can they
cast a judgement on it? I want to understand this. I know the film is still
banned in Punjab at least. But of course it has sparked so much conversation,
not least perhaps because it's won awards and it's done well internationally. Do
you think it's had an impact in shifting the conversation in Pakistani society?
Look, the film is yet to be released in Punjab. There has been a lot written
about it and a lot of media coverage. We need to sensitise people urgently. The
educated people know that there is something known as a third gender, so they do
have some awareness on the subject. But I do not think people living in remote
areas are well aware about trans issues. They need to see these issues on screen
to understand. But Joyland is just one film. Before this, there have been many
films, dramas and comedies where trans people have been ridiculed or made fun
of. So society can't be sensitised through just one film. Yes, it has raised
some awareness in helping people understand that trans is a gender. It's not a
man or a woman pretending. Nobody spends their whole life in an act. This is our
soul. This is who we are. How has your life changed after Joyland came out?
There have been quite a few changes in me too after Joyland. The attitude of
those around my neighbourhood has changed. Some people still have the regressive
mindset and try to misuse me. But there are also new opportunities emerging for
us to work. I want to take the young trans community with me on this journey. I
want to know, in terms of your life right now and everything you've achieved,
are you happy? Are you happy with what you've done and what the film's done? My
personal life has changed a lot. Changed for the better. But that is not enough.
I still need to do a lot for my community. Me speaking to you because of this
one film doesn't change their status. There is a lot more that needs to be done.
I don't want trans youth to face the same difficulties I had to face.
Absolutely. Alina, thank you so much. And whenever you come to London, please
contact me. I'd love to meet you. And I'll do the same when I'm in Lahore,
Inshallah. If you come to Lahore, please do come. That was the brilliant Alina
Khan speaking to me in Urdu from her home in Lahore. Alina's words in English
were spoken by her Joyland co-star, whose name is Sarwat Jalani. Translation was
by Hania Ali. And music from Joyland's original score is by Abdullah Siddiqui.
And that's courtesy of Studio Soho Distribution. If you've been affected by any
of the issues raised in this programme, just go to bbc.co.uk forward slash
action line. There's a whole ton of information and resources there. Alina's
interview was first broadcast on Lives Less Ordinary. That's an original podcast
by the same team that brings you Outlook. Lives Less Ordinary is the podcast
that brings you extraordinary personal stories from around the world. Each week,
we invite listeners inside the most intimate and defining moments of our guests'
lives. Like the man who went to North Korea, posing as a fake billionaire to
expose North Korea's illicit arms trade. There's nowhere to run and I'm just
trying to look as cool as I can. The woman who took on Nigeria's military
dictatorship in the 90s. Her father is believed to have won the presidency in a
democratic election, but he'd been imprisoned by the regime. He was doing an
interview with the BBC just as he was being arrested. And you could hear in his
voice this sense that the problems that he was facing were going to be easily
resolved, but he never came out alive. And the boxing champion who spent his
teen years on the run from the law with his father. I don't ask questions, I
just do. Come on, I need you guys to pack up your bags. We get fake IDs and to
Mexico we go. For more incredible stories like these, search for lives less
ordinary from the BBC World Service. Find it wherever you get your BBC podcasts.
I'll be back here on Outlook tomorrow with Lesley Patterson. She's the champion
Scottish triathlete who optioned the classic German novel All Quiet on the
Western Front. It's now been nominated for multiple Oscars following Lesley's 16
year battle to bring the story to the big screen. Until then, from me and the
whole Outlook team, take care. Hello and now here on the BBC World Service, it's
time for Witness History. First hand accounts of events that have shaped our
world. I'm Mike Lanchin. Today we're going back to 1982 when a leading human
rights campaigner, Rosario Ibarra, became the first woman to run for president
in Mexico. Her decision to stand was political, but also highly personal, as
I've been finding out. It's the early 1980s and crowds march through the streets
of Mexico City, bearing a huge banner plastered with black and white photos of
mostly young men and women. These are the faces of Mexico's political prisoners
and of people who've disappeared without trace, kidnapped or killed presumably
by security forces. Their desperate families are demanding information. At the
head of the crowd is Rosario Ibarra, an energetic, small, dark-haired woman. You
could always see her sadness in her face and her commitment to the struggle
mixed in with her anger. This is Rosario Ibarra's eldest daughter, also called
Rosario. What defined her was her optimism and the conviction that she was in a
fight for justice. That fight for justice consumed most of Rosario Ibarra's
life. It thrust her into becoming a champion for human rights and later to
become the first woman to stand for president. It was a long and difficult
journey that had begun back in the 1970s. Across the whole of Latin America, the
1960s and 70s were a time of upheaval. There'd been left-wing revolutions in
Cuba and later Nicaragua. Popular protests were growing and from Argentina to
Guatemala to El Salvador, armed guerrilla groups were trying to unseat military
regimes. Mexico wasn't under military rule, but it wasn't exempt from political
and social turmoil. Nick Kayster is a London-based writer and broadcaster on
Latin America. The government in Mexico had been the same party since 1929, the
Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI. And after being 40 years in power,
it was becoming questioned. There had been student revolt in the 1960s, which
had led to a massacre in 1968. And though it was democratic in the sense that
they had periodic elections, there was starting to be unrest. After the violent
suppression of the 1968 student demonstrations, some Mexicans turned to more
radical methods, organising small armed groups, often in the countryside.
Militant leaders, as in the case of Cuba, they went out to the most remote parts
to try and foment revolution amongst the most poverty-stricken classes. Not
usually with a great deal of success, actually, within Mexico, but they were
hoping, as in Cuba, as elsewhere, to provide the spark that might lead to a new
revolution. Rosario Ibarra's son, Jesús, joined one of these left-wing militant
groups in his home state of Nuevo León. He'd been a young medical student in his
twenties when he'd gone underground. The only contact he had with his family
were occasional secretive phone calls to his mother. And then we heard nothing
until on the 30th of April 1975, a local paper reported his arrest in the centre
of the city of Monterrey. The paper said he'd been beaten up after a struggle
with the police and that he'd been taken to Mexico City. That was all. Rosario
immediately set off in search of her son. For months she'd trekked from one
police station to another, to government offices, to army barracks, and even to
see the state governor. But everywhere she went she was told, no, he's not here,
we don't know anything. Her eldest daughter often went with her. When we went to
see the state governor, he was very rude and told my mum, your son was no saint.
He was smoking and blew smoke in her face. It was very unpleasant. Mum was
obviously very cross. She told him the police had acted illegally. He replied,
if they were doing something illegal, then it was because it was necessary.
Don't bother me with this anymore. It would later emerge that during the 60s and
70s, hundreds of rebel suspects and activists opposed to the government were
kidnapped, tortured and often killed by state security forces. It was Mexico's
dirty war. But at the time, the authorities refused to recognise that Mexico had
any political prisoners in jail. Rosario and other families searching for their
loved ones didn't give up. They formed the country's first movement for
political prisoners and they disappeared. They held demonstrations, went on
hunger strike and petitioned national and international bodies. Nick Kayster met
Rosario at a meeting in London organised by the human rights group Amnesty
International in the late 1970s. She stood up in the middle of one of the huge
sessions there and said, why is Amnesty International ignoring Mexico? Why is it
doing nothing about Mexico? And it was very obvious that some sort of answer was
required because she was a very feisty woman. Thanks to Rosario's forcefulness,
the message did begin to get through. International attention turned to Mexico
and the government was eventually forced to release many political prisoners.
But Rosario's son Jesus and others remained unaccounted for. In 1981, a small
left-wing political party asked Rosario Ibarra to stand as its presidential
candidate the following year. She accepted, but her daughter says it came with
added dangers. There were phone calls to our house saying they were going to
kill us. They told my family and father, keep control of your wife, don't let
her stand for president. She was obviously worried for me and for all of us, but
she thought this would help the cause of the disappeared. She said it was
important to show that we wouldn't be intimidated. Rosario Ibarra was the first
woman ever to stand for president in Mexico and the first political outsider.
She won just over 400,000 votes, less than 2%, and she came fifth. But, says
Nick Kayster, she had set a precedent. It was extremely important for a woman to
stand. She didn't win, of course, but at least there had been some opposition
that had stood against the Institutional Revolutionary Party to show that you
could organise a campaign against them and you could get people to vote for you.
And that was the beginning of the opening of the Mexican political system. By
the end of the 1990s, the one-party stranglehold in Mexico had been broken.
There was an admission at the top of government that abuses had been committed
in the past and many more women were by then running for political office.
Rosario Ibarra was later nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize and continued
working as a human rights campaigner for many years. She died at the age of 95
in April of 2022. Rosario's daughter is rightly proud of her mother's
contribution to change. What she did was something historic. She wasn't just the
first woman to stand for president, she was the mother of a disappeared person
and that won people over. Rosario Piedra was speaking to me, Mike Lanchin, for
this edition of Witness History. It was a CTVC production for the BBC World
Service. This is the BBC World Service examining the challenges we face from
long Covid. We'll be hearing from scientists trying to unravel the cause of the
condition and finding out what the latest research on some sufferers is showing.
When we exercise participants just for six minutes and we do blood tests at the
end, their blood looks like they've run the London Marathon. The long haul of
long Covid at bbcworldservice.com slash documentaries.