TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-26-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Every Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15, with thousands of episodes
now on BBC Sounds. BBC News at 6 o'clock on Sunday 26th February. This is Lisa
Costello. Good morning. Rishi Sunak has said he's giving it everything to reach
a deal with the EU on trade arrangements for Northern Ireland. As speculation
mounts that an agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow, the Prime
Minister has told the Sunday Times his goal is to get the job done on Brexit.
Under the current arrangements known as the Protocol, Northern Ireland follows
some EU laws and goods arriving from Great Britain are subject to checks.
Securing the support of the Democratic Unionist Party for any changes will be
crucial for the Prime Minister, as our political correspondent Ian Watson
reports. A deal is tantalisingly close, but it's not there yet. The Prime
Minister has said that work is still to be done, and is taken to the pages of
usually conservative supporting newspapers to reassure critics in his own ranks
that any deal wouldn't be a sell-out, and to emphasise his credentials as a
Brexiteer and a Unionist. In what might be seen as a swipe at Boris Johnson, who
has Prime Minister signed up to the Northern Ireland Protocol, Mr Sunak has
described it as the unfinished business of Brexit, and has pledged that he will
get the job done. Much of the heavy lifting with the EU appears to have been
concluded, but the bigger prize is to convince the largest Unionist party, the
DUP, to return to a power-sharing government at Stormont. Its leader, Sir
Geoffrey Donaldson, has warned that the wrong deal would deepen divisions, and a
former Conservative cabinet minister told me that if the DUP were to give the
thumbs down, then all the political capital that Rishi Sunak had invested in
reaching an agreement with Brussels would have been futile. Police investigating
the attempted murder of a senior officer in County Tyrone have arrested a
71-year-old man under the Terrorism Act. Detective Chief Inspector John Caldwell
remains critically ill after he was shot at a sports centre in Omer on Wednesday
in front of his son. Police have said the dissident Republican group The New IRA
is their primary line of inquiry. Five other men remain in custody. Members at
social housing organisations in England will be required to have professional
qualifications under government plans to improve standards in the sector. The
new rules are the latest response to the Grenfell Tower disaster and the death
of two-year-old Awab Ishak after exposure to mould at his family's home in
Rochdale in 2020. Esselkhaar reports. Social housing managers who inspect
properties and oversee repair and maintenance programmes will have to gain
certain minimum qualifications under new legislation. It's part of efforts to
address the significant concerns raised by the Grenfell Tower fire and the death
of Awab Ishak. Officials say these requirements will bring professional
standards in the sector more in line with other front-line jobs such as social
work, health care and teaching. Under the plans, around 25,000 people working in
social housing will need to gain certification equivalent to a foundation
degree. Any landlords that don't comply could face being fined by the regulator.
These changes are in addition to plans already announced for Awab's law, which
will mean social landlords have to address mould and damp problems within strict
time limits. The votes are being counted in what's being seen as Nigeria's most
competitive presidential race in decades. Polling was largely peaceful but there
have been reports of violence being directed at voters in the biggest city,
Lagos and elsewhere. Nigeria's election commission hasn't commented. Our West
Africa correspondent, Mayoni Jones sent this report from Lagos. Nigerian voters
are waiting anxiously to find out the results of these general elections. Some
chose to stay at their polling stations overnight to oversee the vote counting.
There were reports of voter intimidation, including in parts of the southern
states of Lagos, Edo and Rivers. The election was postponed until today in parts
of Bialsa State where polling stations were attacked. Many other stations across
the country opened late and some not at all. Despite the violence and
disorganisation, there are early indications that turnout was high. Millions of
Nigerians are keen to choose a president who will help tackle an ailing economy
and rising insecurity. Many young people are hoping a challenge from former
state governor Peter Obie can help break the two-party system which has
dominated Nigeria since its transition to democracy 24 years ago. Several US
newspapers are to stop publishing the comic strip Dilbert after its creator
Scott Adams said Black Americans were a hate group in a video posted on YouTube.
The Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times and the USA Today network of papers
are all dropping the long-running cartoon which lampoons corporate culture. Mr
Adams said his comments had been taken out of context but he acknowledged his
reputation had been destroyed. In cricket, England remain on top in the second
test against New Zealand in Wellington. They enforce the follow-on with the
hosts 226 runs behind after their first innings. At stomps on the third day, New
Zealand were on 202 for three in their second innings, still trailing the
visitors' first innings total by 24 runs. BBC News. Lisa Castello, many thanks.
This is BBC Radio 4 coming up next. We bring you the gift of something
understood. Then in On Your Farm, Anna Hill is in Harlow, visiting the UK's
first producer of all year round strawberries. She explores their vertical farm,
which has been set up in a warehouse in Essex. On Your Farm is in half an hour.
On BBC iPlayer. Six robbers have carried out an armed raid, stealing almost
three tons of gold. Inspired by Britain's biggest gold heist. How do you shift
three tons of gold? Slowly. 26 million pounds worth of pure gold in the
possession of people who didn't expect to have it. If you could handle a job
like this, then I'd have heard of you. You only hear about the people who get
caught. Stealing it was just the start. We're looking for six robbers and three
tons of gold. Every ring, every watch. If you're looking for the gold, it's all
around you. The gold. Watch on BBC iPlayer. Now it's time for this week's
edition of Something Understood, and John McCarthy is considering the pleasures
and pitfalls of giving gifts. This programme was originally broadcast in 2014.
When you're asleep, it's Christmas Day and it's also the morning of your
birthday. Your partner has long ago slipped out of bed and is now busy
assembling a small orchestra on the stairs of your house. 50 musicians,
including trumpets. And so, oblivious to the kerfuffle which has preceded this
moment, you wake to hear this. Your partner's birthday gift to you. Well done to
Richard Wagner, who must surely get top marks for the most romantic, sumptuous
and beautiful birthday gift ever given. His secret idol, which he wrote for his
new wife Cosima's birthday in 1870. There's clearly an art to giving gifts, and
it's this skill that, at first glance, Mrs Wilcox in E.M. Forster's Howard's End
appears to lack, but one that Margaret Schlegel can apparently help with. The
crisis opened with a message. Would Miss Schlegel come shopping? Christmas was
nearing, and Mrs Wilcox felt behind hand with the presents. She had taken some
more days in bed and must make up for lost time. Margaret accepted, and at 11
o'clock one cheerless morning they started out in a brewum. First of all, began
Margaret, we must make a list and tick off the people's names. My aunt always
does, and this fog may thicken up any moment. Have you any ideas? I thought we
would go to Harrods or the Hay Market stores, said Mrs Wilcox rather hopelessly.
Everything is sure to be there. I'm not a good shopper. The din is so confusing,
and your aunt is quite right. One ought to make a list. Take my notebook then
and write your own name at the top of the page. O, hooray! said Margaret,
writing it. How very kind of you to start with me. But she did not want to
receive anything expensive. Their acquaintance was singular rather than
intimate, and she divined that the Wilcox clan would resent any expenditure on
outsiders. The more compact families do. She did not want to be thought a second
Helen, who would snatch presents since she could not snatch a young man, nor to
be exposed like a second Aunt Julie to the insults of Charles. A certain
austerity of demeanor was best, and she added, I don't really want a yuletide
gift, though. In fact, I'd rather not. Why? Because I've odd ideas about
Christmas. Because I have all that money can buy. I want more people, but no
more things. I should like to give you something worth your acquaintance, Miss
Schlegel, in memory of your kindness to me during my lonely fortnight. It has so
happened that I have been left alone, and you have stopped me from brooding. I
am too apt to brood. If that is so, said Margaret, if I have happened to be of
use to you, which I didn't know, you cannot pay me back with anything tangible.
I suppose not, but one would like to. Perhaps I shall think of something as we
go about. Mrs Wilcox surely does think of something truly wonderful to give to
Margaret, her house, and its end. On the face of it, this might seem to be a
perfect gift, but it is one that brings trouble in its wake, unleashing a storm
of jealousy and family feuding. How careful one has to be. I am on a mission, a
shopping mission. I want to get someone a present, a gift. She is a relation who
I knew very well when we were children, but I haven't seen for ages. We are
having a reunion in a couple of weeks time, so I want to get her something
special. But what? The trouble is, I don't really know her tastes now, and I
don't want to get her something that she doesn't like. I would really like to
get her something that she adores, but what shall I get? I am going to go out
and look around various shops and market stalls and hope for a bit of
inspiration. I am so far unaccomplished. I am still trying to find the present
for my relation I haven't seen for a long time. So I have decided that the best
thing is to go back to basics and write a list. Top of the list, books, could be
music, CD or something, or DVD, a film, perfume, soaps, nice things. I don't
know. I think I need another walk with more inspiration. I need to get inside
some shots of property. Maybe if I give myself a dead lobby, that could help. I
guess as we get older we learn to mask our indifference to certain presents or
disappointments a little bit. Just a couple of years ago, a little nephew was
presented by his beaming grandma with a big box carefully wrapped. Once he got
through the wrapping and into the box, he looked glumly at her and said, well,
that's exactly what I didn't want. We can probably all remember really, really
hoping for one particular present to come through. One Dog and His Boy by Eva
Ibertson. Right up to the last minute, Hal went on hoping. He would open his
eyes on the morning of his birthday and hear a snuffling noise outside the door
and the dog would come running in. Sometimes the dog was brown and fluffy.
Sometimes it was white with a smooth coat. Hal didn't mind what it looked like.
It would be alive and it would belong to him and it would be there when his
father was in Dubai and his mother was out with her friends and he was alone in
the house with the maid who changed every month and was always so homesick and
so sad. But the Phantom Dog remained a phantom. Nobody scratched on the door
when Hal's birthday came and the sound of barking which made Hal's heartbeat
fast turned out to be in the street. Hal dressed and went downstairs where his
mother waited beside the breakfast table piled high with parcels. Hamleys was
not the best known toy shop in London for nothing. They had sent the latest Xbox
game and the new board game and a laser gun and a radio controlled metal
detecting car. Harrods had sent an iPod and a giant chemistry set and a
Roboquod. Now, are you happy? asked his mother watching him as he opened his
parcels and he said yes, he was. And she told him that his father would be back
that evening and would bring him something from the airport. So Hal took his
presents upstairs and played with them and in the afternoon the van arrived with
the party tea and the birthday cake. Then the friends came only they weren't
really his friends and played with his toys and broke the metal detecting car
and tipped the chemistry set on the floor. The box would be empty except for the
memory of how they were answered by you. But there never seems to be enough time
to do the things you want to do once you find the room. I looked at the box and
I was like, oh, I'm not going to do that. Time in a bottle, which Jim Croce
wrote as a gift for his unborn son. The song turned out to be a hugely poignant
gift as Jim was killed in a plane crash when his son Adrian was only two. I
suppose we can't always know how significant our gifts might become. Even a
token present can take on huge emotional meaning as life moves on. One of the
best presents I ever got, particularly as a child was when my dad had been away
on a business trip and he sometimes came back with presents for my mother,
brother and I, but not always. But on this occasion he came back and I remember
it was late at night. We'd been allowed to stay up late to welcome him home and
he handed out these presents and mine was this fabulous cowboy pistol. I
remember it to this day. It had white handles, a white grip and this long black
barrel. I just thought it was fabulous. I'm realizing too that not only do I
want to get my relation, a present that she'll love, hopefully cherish, can use,
et cetera, et cetera and enjoy, but I also wanted to think well of me for having
got it so that she'll say, well, John, that was really clever. How marvellous
you are. What do women want? By Kim Adonizio. I want a red dress. I want it
flimsy and cheap. I want it too tight. I want to wear it until someone tears it
off me. I want it sleeveless and backless, this dress. So no one has to guess
what's underneath. I want to walk down the street past thrifties in the hardware
store with all those keys glittering in the window past Mr and Mrs Wong selling
day old donuts in their cafe, past the Guerra brothers slinging pigs from the
truck and onto the dolly hoisting the slick snouts over their shoulders. I want
to walk like I'm the only woman on earth and I can have my pick. I want that red
dress bird. I want it to confirm your worst fears about me to show you how
little I care about you or anything except what I want. When I find it, I'll
pull that garment from its hanger like I'm choosing a body to carry me into this
world through the birth cries and the love cries too and I'll wear it like
bones, like skin. It'll be the goddamn dress they bury me in. Okay, maybe not
something to wear. Maybe that would be courting disaster. Am I ever complicating
this? I will give my lover an apple without her a claw. I will give my lover a
house without her a claw I will give my lover a claw. You can unlock it without
any key. I think I'm one of those people, probably like a lot of men, who are
not very good at shopping, don't enjoy it. But I do get excited looking towards
someone's birthday or particularly at Christmas time when there are often lots
of presents to get for lots of different people hoping that I'm going to get
something really special for them. Speaking of which, there's a sale on in this
shop. It looks rather interesting. Not helping with my mission to get the
relation something but nice jackets. I Gave My Love An Apple, sung by Louise
Jordan I hope I know the cultural issues around gift-giving in this country, but
when travelling there are all manner of things to consider. One needs to be
aware of social and religious circumstances so as not to offend. Flowers, a
simple and safe bet, I always think, are a major risk, it seems, in some parts
of the world, chrysanthemums, for example, being widely associated with death.
In Japan, the presentation, the wrapping and the expressions used when giving
the present are as important as the gift itself. Wherever you are it comes down
to getting it just right. All in all, trying to be nice is a bit of a minefield.
Sometimes our gift-giving is transparently straightforward, but it's also
possible to be manipulative when we give. He gives her a smooth round bloodstone
to wear around her neck. So cold. He gives her a little house. All day long she
cleans her fingerprints from the paintwork. He gives her five gold rings. One in
her ear, one in her nose, one in her nipple, one in her navel, one in her
finger. He takes a fine gold wire and threads it between. Ear, nose, nipple,
navel and finger. He twitches the end. She dances. All day long she cleans her
lips. One in her nose, one in her navel, one in her navel, one in her navel. She
takes a fine gold ring. One in her navel, one in her navel, one in her navel.
One in her navel, one in her navel. One in her navel, one in her navel. Mourn,
Children of Israel, a chorus from Carissimi's oratorio, Jephthah. The great
warrior of the Old Testament vows to God, If you give the Ammonites into my
hands, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in
triumph from the Ammonites will be the lords, and I will sacrifice it as a burnt
offering. Tragically, it was his daughter who came out first to meet him. A
reminder to us all to be careful what gifts we might rashly promise to others.
Gift by Tamim al-Bargouti My life is a gift given to me on my zero birthday.
Today I pulled out the ribbon, unwrapped the box and found lots of things
ordinary, but also wonderful. A watch of gold and of gold is every hour in one's
life. A jack in the box which makes you laugh or scares you to death, it
depends. Two beautiful baby dolls, the first a toy, the second is not. A
prisoner's crown and the shackles of a king. I also found a jack of spades, you
turn him upside down and he stays the same. I found books. I found a long
videotape labeled fifty years of conflict between Zionists and the Arabs. I
found Hell in an inkpot. I found Heaven in an inkpot too. I found an Arab horse
on a race track covered with glue. I found a stove with no flames. At the bottom
of the box I found a white card with my name on it. The rest has not yet been
written. I did not know what to do with all these things. Oh God thank you. But
why the trouble? I put them all back in the box, I closed it, wrapped it, tied
the ribbon, I threw it skywards and up it went. The gift turned into a host of
flying dumps that I will follow forever. Why did I do that? I really do not
know. Then there's the matter of how to receive a gift. Billy and Peggy have
worked alongside each other for years in a chip shop. Whilst Peggy was dreaming
of winning the lottery, Billy has been saving up and bought her a beautiful
ring. He's proposed to her, she hasn't seen his love coming, thinks the ring he
offered was worthless and flung it into the sea. Isn't it easy to sometimes have
set ideas and not see what's on offer right in front of our eyes? Dream on
Peggy, bait man, dream on Peggy Sue, of sunsets and of sports cars as you smile
along the queue. Dream days to months and months to years in reveries of luck,
but never for her dreaming did her numbers once come up. So was she was cleaning
fish one day with a slit from tail to jaw, something slithered through her
fingers and fell onto the floor. She took it over to the sink then and she
washed the shining thing. Bright diamonds and bright sapphires set in a golden
ring. It was one in a million, one in a million, the chances of one in a
million. Oh Billy love your rings come back and underneath this light I can see
it's made of pure as gold, the stones are shining bright. Oh and Billy stood
beside her with a smile like the sun. He put it on a finger, he said, Peggy Sue
you've won. Sell the ring and taste the freedom, the dreamt of all these years.
He kissed her then and as they kissed they could taste each other's tears. Billy
go back to your frying and sing me love is blue. You're kindly and you're
comforting, I'd rather stay with you. It was one in a million, one in a million.
When the chips were down it was one in a million. Chris Wood singing Hugh
Lupton's words in One in a Million, a story of chance, love and how to receive a
gift. Alexander McCall Smith writes, gracious acceptance is an art. We think
that we have to learn how to give but we forget about accepting things which can
be much harder than giving. Accepting another person's gift is allowing him to
express his feelings for you. Here's A Blade of Grass written and read by poet
Brown Patton. You ask for a poem. I offer you a blade of grass. You say it's not
good enough. You ask for a poem. I say this blade of grass will do. It's dressed
itself in frost. It's more immediate than any image of my making. You say it's
not a poem. It's a blade of grass and grass is not quite good enough. I offer
you a blade of grass. You're indignant. You say it's too easy to offer grass.
It's absurd. Anyone can offer anyone a blade of grass. You ask for a poem. And
so I write you a tragedy about how a blade of grass becomes more and more
difficult to offer and about how as you grow older a blade of grass becomes more
difficult to accept. It's a lovely moment when you think that's it. That's
exactly the right present for this person. But it might not be. And what might
that say about you? Are you putting too much of yourself, your own taste for
instance, in thinking that he or she might like to wear this or that? I've
sought salvation at a bookshop. Everybody likes reading. I'm bound to find the
right book. However, I realise I'm now standing in the history section. I've
been browsed through the travel department. Two areas that I find particularly
interesting. Would my long lost relation be remotely interested in these areas?
I don't know. That looks interesting. What's that one over there? Not the
present I was looking for. I got that for my daughter, but I was looking for a
present for an older person. Thank you very much indeed. Thanks. Bye now. Thank
you. Bye. Bye. It hasn't been a complete disaster. I've seen one or two things
that I rather fancy for myself that I might come back and get another time. I've
got a book. My daughter says that's good. Just not quite what I set out for.
Maybe I should stop focusing on things. What about an event? Something to do.
Cinema tickets, theatre tickets. Going out for a nice meal. Flowers. It just
keeps getting round and round. The end of Cesar Frank's violin sonata, which the
composer wrote as a wedding present for virtuoso violinist Ize. And that ends
today's Something Understood About Gifts, which was presented by John McCarthy.
The readers were Fraser James, Rachel Atkins and Brian Patton, the producer
Rosie Bolton, and it was a Whistledown production for BBC Radio 4. You can find
more details of the music and readings from the programme on the BBC Radio 4
webpage. That programme was originally broadcast in 2014. We're on a strawberry
farm with a difference in just a moment. First though, one of our favourite
writers is presenting a new series. On BBC Radio 4, we are all a unique
accumulation of our own unique experiences and knowledge. The poet Lem Sisay
looks at uniqueness. Brainfall, like applause, is utterly unique every time it
happens. Reflecting on the occasions he's stood out. In a room full of
graduates, people without degrees can sometimes get defensive about it. Not me!
Lem Sisay is the one and only. He'll like an awl. Starting this Friday morning
at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Now on BBC Radio 4, on your farm today. Anna
Hill is in Harlow in Essex to experience a taste of summertime in February.
We're going through the process now of getting ready to go into the building. So
I'm suited and booted and I'm stepping into the disinfectants. Good morning and
welcome to On Your Farm. I'm not outdoors today on a farm. I'm indoors. But what
a space. The footprint of this is only 2250 square metres but the growing space
is 27000 square metres and that's because reaching up to the roof here are 12
tiers of green plants with beautiful red fruit hanging from them. It's the UK.
It's February. We're growing strawberries. What is going on? Well here with me
is the CEO of Smart Cast which is the company which runs this operation, Dr
David Maseros. David, what is the big idea? So I've created Smart Cast with a
vision and mission to design, build, own and operate smart farms to end world
hunger essentially. I want to be present in every single world and then adapt
the technology to the given climate and to the given geopolitical situation to
feed the people. But this is an operation growing strawberries. You're not going
to feed the world with strawberries, are you? Absolutely not. We always look at
what's being imported and exported from a given country or even a region or a
sub-region of that country and we try to replace that with locally grown
pesticide free fresh premium produce all year round. I have to say it is quite a
sight. I've never really been to a place like this before. It's a warehouse but
with these beautiful plants, they look almost artificial. They almost look
plastic don't they? There are bees flying around. That's wonderful. What about
this operation here? Tell me a little bit more about how it works. So this
operation is a semi-automatic indoor strawberry vertical farm. Essentially we
built it with the idea to be as sustainable as possible. Your audience should
imagine essentially a hermetically closed box where everything that goes in is
controlled. That's from air to CO2, water, nutrients, everything and essentially
nothing comes out because anything that would come out of it will either recycle
or simply doesn't exist. We don't have any chemicals, we don't have any
pesticides. Anything that we use in a form of pesticides are actually other
types of bugs. So our very, very hard working employees are the bees and the
other bugs. How you should imagine it is that you have an operation that runs
365, 24, 7 the whole year round non-stop without any impact from climate, from
rain, from the cloudy weather that we have in the UK. Birds don't pick on the
fruits. There is no damage, there is no stepping on anything. So it's an
extremely high level of control. How much did it cost to set this up? So I can
tell you the exact number but yes it's in the millions of pounds. The idea is
always that we create a business case first. So we already know what we're going
to produce, what we're going to sell, how much we're going to sell of it before
even the first brick finds its place or the shovel in the ground. So you get the
market first? Yes, absolutely. We are absolutely market oriented. We don't have
a sales department because we go out ourselves to meet with top tier retailers
and distribution partners and discuss with them what is the need. So tell me the
system for actual growing. So this is called a form of hydroponics. Hydroponics
means that it's soil free. So they are essentially held by little sponges and
the root system is hanging in water and the water that they received is already
set to the correct pH, to the correct temperature. It's already mixed with the
right nutrients and they all have their little location which is identified in
our system and then artificial intelligence tells us what each plant needs, what
are the climate requirements, nutritional changes and then the colleagues here
are checking that daily. We have sensors planted in the racks. These racks are
called NFT racks. NFT means nutrient film technique. We have a little robot
going around and this robot is essentially trying to replace what we call in the
industry as a crop walk. So essentially we have a robot that not only sees the
surface like we do with our bare eyes but through a thermographic imaging system
it sees the roots inside the NFTs. How does it see? Does it have a camera? Yes.
And then it communicates back to the operating system? To the server, yes. But
it's not just plant data that we're collecting. We're also collecting energy
data. CO2, airflow, chiller, irrigation, water. Shall we walk down to the other
end and I'm going to talk to Angus Thompson who's your grower. Just tell me a
little bit David about where you're from and what your background is. Why you
came to this idea? So I'm from Hungary from Eastern Europe and I moved to the
Netherlands quite a while back and I was busy with European Union projects
building smart cities and smart buildings and then after about 10, 20 projects I
realised that if we can control all the environment, the CO2, the oxygen,
everything for people, well then surely we can do the same for plants. So
essentially I don't have any agri backgrounds. I have a legal background
actually and artificial intelligence and robotics. These are sort of a tech
legal background. How did you have a connection with agriculture at all? I have
a sort of a personal vision or saying which is kind of synonymous with that of
smart cars but I want to make access to food and water basic human right. So
essentially I dedicate my entire life, profits aside, to feed the planet and I
don't believe in universal basic income but I believe in universal basic food.
I'm going to question you about that in just a minute. First of all we're going
to meet Angus Thompson. Angus you're from Scotland aren't you? You're a grower
and you're the agriculture side of this operation. It doesn't feel very
agricultural I have to say because it is so pristine. Just tell me a little bit
about how you got involved and what you do for the company. Yeah well I've been
involved in agriculture in a conventional sense all my life growing up on a
farm, a very mixed farm, doing fruit, vegetables, arables and livestock. And so
tell me about how you grow these plants. So this variety is Eves Delight 2. We
work closely with a nursery farm in Kent. So all of these plants you see here
were propagated in September in Kent into the sponges that you see. We're taking
a plant out now. Oh I see. If you can say very well then Eves had one of those.
Yeah so the plant goes into and it is a sponge it's literally a black sponge
it's not soil and then the roots go all the way through and they stick out at
the end in a hairy mess. Yeah exactly. So yeah so when they were propagated at
Edward Vincent's in Kent they were propagated into these small grow foams. So
now you can see as the plant is growing up and the roots are throughout the foam
and now dangling lower into the water they're completely healthy and they don't
need the structure that the grow foam gave them in their early life. They came
in in November so this is the first fruit that they're getting from so you've
come to see the first fruit that we're going here. It is really weird to think
that I'm standing here in February with fresh strawberries grown in the UK. It
sort of goes against the grain somehow in my head because I'm the sort of person
who walks past the strawberry shells in the supermarket because I say I'm not
buying that it's out of season. Brits love strawberries everyone knows that and
yes they are a very seasonal fruit and the British farmers do a great job in
producing very high quality fruit for the majority of the year but as you see in
February in the winter months the quality of that fruit does drop. The air miles
and the carbon that comes in from having to bring imported fruit from especially
this time of year from Spain, from Egypt, from Morocco it's just not the quality
that we're used to. What we're trying to do here and as you can see the quality
of the fruit that we can produce all year round matches and even goes higher
than what we're normally used to. It might do but you've had to invest a huge
amount of money to do that and have this artificial operating system to grow
them. David what's wrong with only eating food in season? Do we really need rows
and rows of LED lights, a massive great warehouse to produce a luxury good out
of season? Well first of all I don't think that it has to be an out of season
luxury good anymore. Let's set that straight. The second thing we have to think
about the social and job market impact of this all. The entire UK market drops
all of its volume in the summer months. That means that seasonal employment is a
thing and once those fruits have been dropped essentially those people have to
look for other kinds of jobs. What we've created here in SmartCuts is not only a
sustainable 365 days operation but also 365 days employment opportunity. It's a
career opportunity. So we've essentially created a plant factory. It's a fruit
factory where we're not having to rely on imports. We don't have any kind of
carbon footprint that the traditional farms have you know heating with diesel.
I'll talk to you about that specifically in a minute. Absolutely and I believe
that strawberry is really just a start. We can literally replace everything
within the realm of fresh fruit and vegetable. We don't produce meat obviously.
We don't need strawberries. We do. More than 180,000 tons of strawberries are
consumed by British people per year. There is an extremely high demand for it
and like I explained to you we do look at the demand first. So it was not that
SmartCuts that created a hype for these premium strawberries. SmartCuts is
answering a gap in the market and the demand. You're in the Harlow Innovation
Park. Let's talk about the carbon footprint. Absolutely. You're supposed to look
back and back and back in your supply chain and make sure every single part of
your supply chain is as carbon neutral as it can be. At least low as low or
negative indeed. So tell me how your carbon thinking works out here. I would
divide it into four parts. Number one is the light and energy. Number two is the
water and nutrition within that water. And number three is the airflow and the
CO2 usage. Number four would be sort of the AI robotic and the human component
in it. The number one factor is obviously on everyone's mind is that we are in a
hermetically closed box indoors. How's the sun shining? Well it doesn't. We use
extremely high efficiency and low consuming lead grow lights. We have developed
our own special light recipe for these grow lights which means that we manage to
drastically reduce the electricity consumption of those lights. So these are LED
strips and I can see red, green, red, blue, red, green, red, blue basically
throughout. So we don't have some sort of heating going on like you have in
greenhouses. The heating of the lights themselves is perfectly sufficient. So is
that all the heating there is in here? Yes. In February? Yes. The LED lights
provide enough heat for the plants. Correct. What's the temperature in here is
about? About 21 degrees currently. Very comfortable isn't it? It is. Yeah. And
tell me about the energy then. How you contain the energy and have your circle
of energy here. Let's start with the roof. So we have solar panels on the roof
but as you all know the sun doesn't always shine especially not in the winter
months especially not when it's cloudy. So we do have some degree of storage but
we have not invested heavily in batteries yet. We believe that the technology is
not quite there yet but we see that as a potential future solution. What we do
have rather is clever agreements and solutions with the neighbours, the
environment, the park where we can sort of set off the peak usage of the others
and of the entire park and then have smart costs and our farm act as sort of a
natural distribution of that energy. In very simple terms we are essentially
using the cheapest rates and the most affordable rates which we then equally
distribute over the whole year so we act as an equalizer for the grid. And what
about the water? Here because it's a completely closed environment even from the
perspiration of the plants the humidity eventually gets back to the tanks so we
do not have any loss of water. The only water that leaves our system is inside
the fruits essentially. So am I allowed to experience the picking of the
strawberries? Absolutely. How high are they? Right up at the top there. It's
about 12 metres high. It's about 10, 11 metres and the total building height is
12 metres. And someone is picking up there. They are picking fruit up there.
Logan do you mind coming down? I'm very excited. I'm about to go up in a scissor
lift and pick a strawberry. So if you'd like to follow me we'll head in. Thank
you. So we're climbing up. The view of heights don't look down. It's actually
quite high. It is quite high. Yes I'm not very good with heights being a short
person. Just make sure it's not on that button. Oh okay. Right we're now secure.
Off we go. So we're travelling forwards. Oh we're starting to go up. Up and up
and up. And actually it doesn't feel like you're high up because I can see as
I'm coming up each layer of strawberries looks like I'm in the middle of a
field. But I'm actually, I'm actually about 10 metres up. The gutter where the
strawberries sit is white. So the actual red of the strawberries is shining out
to me. And I suppose when you're picking that's actually really important. What
do you think as a grower Angus just seeing this? Is it a bit weird? It is a bit.
It's very different you know from what we're used to. We don't have welly boots.
We're not in mud. We're very clean. We're very pristine. There's a lot of white.
As you said about the white gutters that's very important because in these
gutters is full of water. That water has to be kept at a very controlled
temperature. So that white is insulated. It's there to reflect the light so it
doesn't absorb the light and absorb the heat. The water is constantly moving,
constantly bringing fresh nutrients to each plant. That water is then recycled.
It's cleaned and it goes again. And I know the whole system here is powered by
solar power not by electricity from the grid. Yeah we've chosen all of our
inputs very carefully such as our LED lights to make sure they're the most
efficient as possible to bring down that need for energy as much as we can. As
you can see the way the fruit grows so far our best sensors to know the
rightness, to know the size, to know the position is the human eye. Well we're
going to find a perfect strawberry to pick actually we spoke for choice because
they are absolutely everywhere. So I'm seeing a nice looking one here. What do
you think of that? That looks gorgeous. We want to minimize bruising so
minimizing how easily also picking. Hello, hello up there. He's poking his head
through the strawberries. Right so basically we want to be we want to make sure
that we're getting we're not touching and not being too firm on the on the
actual fruit. So the way we want to pick it is just by holding the stem from
above and just snapping off so I'll let you do that. It's got a long way to fall
if it falls down. You'll hold onto the stem. Pinch the top and catch it as I
snap. Here we go. Lovely. If we'd like to open it up. Let's open it up. Wow it's
red throughout isn't it? Yeah so that's one thing with the variety choice with
the way we're producing the quality is the mean thing obviously. We want to make
sure that our premium products for our consumers is the best that it can be. And
it is it's a beautiful red all the way through and yeah so I'm going to taste
this LED grown. I cannot believe that I've suddenly found myself in February in
a box with LED lights. I've just eaten a strawberry and it tastes like July. It
doesn't taste like February. That is sweet and juicy. It's summertime. Goodness
me. We're now trundling back. We're going down and trundling backwards to the
end of the row. So we're back on the ground now. We've got Paul, Stephen and
Angela here and Stephen's brought me some strawberries obviously haven't you?
Just tell me a little bit about working here what it's like. It's very nice. Yes
I love this job. I come in at work with pleasure. Yeah I don't come in at work.
I have to go to the work. It's horrible. No I like all the job. I like peaking.
I like pruning. I like we are me and Steve we are QC. Yeah. Quality control. Yes
quality control. Yes we check the quality berries. Yeah. I come from Romania and
I'm very proud because I'm Romania and in Romania I live in country space. I
don't know the name. Countryside. Countryside yes and at house and I have a big
garden. Yeah. Lovely but not like this. No. Completely. No. It's the first time
for me as well and I was very very surprised. I should say Stephen what do you
you helped build this place? We did. We did. We started right from scratch. So
we most of us have been here for about five months now and so we came in and the
building was empty when we came in. And so we helped build the frames. We helped
paint the we've done everything. Everything you could you can think of we've
been doing and it's been great because we know how things work. So something
goes wrong. We can kind of fix it can't we? It makes sense doesn't it? I got to
that time of life when I thought Steve you need to change and that's what I did
and I went along to the job center one day and I the lady there said to me
what's your ideal job? And I said packing boxes that's what I want to do. And
she went okay that's great. She said well what about this job picking
strawberries but she says not just picking strawberries there's a lot more
involved and there is. Well that's important. You feel ownership. Yeah.
Actually. Yeah totally. And I think that was what was great about sort of being
part of the build I suppose. I mean it was odd work. I mean a lot of us didn't
come here to be builders but on the plus side we've all got a stake in the place
it feels. And finally David is the scale that you're growing at now the perfect
scale for an operation like this or could it be extended? We're not even
beginning to scratch an itch that the berry market has in the UK. Once you've
nailed down one growing room you can attach as many next to each other as you
want. So you could have hectares of acres and acres of these next to each other.
The other question is do you actually have the demand for that many berries
right? But then because you are using a chambered approach so you have growing
cells growing units you can actually grow different varieties are totally
different fruits and vegetables in each of them. And then you can really have a
mega facility feeding entire let's say London. I just think that we are put on
this earth to do something with our lives. Some find their passion in art in
fashion in design. I found my passion in feeding the planet. On Your Farm was
produced and presented by Anna Hill. This is BBC Radio 4. It's time now to take
a look at today's weather and we're joined from the BBC Weather Centre by Louise
Lea. Louise good morning. Good morning Neil and good morning to those who are
listening. If you have opened your curtains already you might be seeing a little
bit of sunshine but don't be fooled. It's chilly out there. Low single figures
widely across the country. In fact in highland Scotland temperatures have fallen
as low as minus five. So here it's quite a frosty start. But that's where we're
likely to see the best of the sunshine as you're closest to the centre of high
pressure that's dominating the weather story. It's here to stay not just for
today but throughout the week ahead. So Scotland and Northern Ireland the best
of the sunshine today. Temperatures likely to peak between five and seven
Celsius. Now we still got north-easterly winds circulating around that high. So
maybe eastern Scotland and certainly down through eastern England there's more
cloud just pushing in off the north sea. That's still producing a few isolated
showers. And so that means for northern England and perhaps north Wales there's
going to be more cloud around today. And if it doesn't break up temperatures
will struggle only at around four or five degrees. The wind's not as strong as
yesterday so you might not have the wind chill but it'll still be cool and
disappointing. But south of that, so central Wales, the rest of England down to
the channel is going to be glorious. Lots of sunny spells coming through.
Lighter winds than yesterday. Largely fine and dry. Few isolated showers across
the Kent coast. But it will be a pleasant day and temperatures are likely to
peak between seven and nine degrees. Now as we go through the night that north-
easterly wind might just drive in a little more in the way of cloud across
England and Wales. That'll keep temperatures up above freezing. But where we've
got the clearer skies once again temperatures falling below freezing. Touch of
light, frost possible. Tomorrow we're likely to be chasing cloud amounts around.
Largely fine and dry. Generally a few isolated showers coming in off north sea
coast. And that's the story as we go through the week ahead. The high pressure
not moving very far, very fast. A lot of settled weather for many and it looks
as though temperatures about where they should be for this time of year. Enjoy.
Many thanks, Louise Lear. Attacks on refugees is one of the subjects to be
covered on this morning's Sunday coming up in 10 minutes. First on BBC Sounds
there's an in-depth investigation into the Smeema Begum story. BBC Sounds. Seven
years ago I was filming East London Moss. We are making changes to the way BBC
live streams are distributed via third-party services and platforms. And the BBC
stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you are
using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. What do you think people think of you? As a
danger, as a risk, as a potential risk. From BBC Radio 4.