TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-20H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This Tuesday morning at 11 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. The movement at the
moment this week, which is why these strikes have been suspended, is because the
government in England has now said we will look at this financial year's paid
settlement. But then it gets complicated because at the moment it seems that
what's being talked about is a one-off payment for this year rather than a
permanent increase in wages. And it looks like Unite's representatives have
looked at that in particular and decided that's not good enough. Monday's strike
by workers at the Welsh Ambulance Service has also been called off. The involved
union said significant progress had been made in talks with the Welsh
government. A parliamentary committee says it would have been obvious to Boris
Johnson that parties in Downing Street breached coronavirus rules. An update by
the cross-party Privileges Committee has found there were four occasions when it
believes the former Prime Minister may have misled the House of Commons. Mr
Johnson denies misleading MPs. A man and a woman have been remanded in custody
after appearing before Crawley Magistrates Court charged with manslaughter of a
baby. Constance Martin and Mark Gordon are also accused of concealing a birth
and perverting the course of justice. They'll appear at the Old Bailey later
this month. The Chancellor is expected to extend government support for
household energy bills for a further three months. Typical home energy costs had
been due to rise to £3,000 a year from April but they're now likely to stay at
around £2,500. A separate rebate scheme is ending. And Royal Mail says the cost
of a first-class stamp is to rise above a pound from April. The price is going
up by 15 pence to £1.10. BBC News. For all this and more, open BBC Sounds, click
the music tab and scroll to find Kate Bush's Artist Icons collection. And
there's a real mixture of music genres being added to the playlist here on Radio
4 this evening in 15 minutes, where Brian Eno remembers discovering a new piece
of equipment that changed the face of popular music in 1977. Add to playlist is
at a quarter past seven. But first, on Radio 4, it's the Archers and Ambridge
prepares to say goodbye. Music Everything set up inside? Yeah, all by the orders
of service. I'll get those in a minute from the funeral director. Fine. Ah, it's
looking good in there, I must say. Pam Fletcher's done a beautiful arrangement.
Thanks for allowing flowers, even though it's not usual in Lent. It seems so
appropriate for Jennifer. Kate, how's Peggy? She's settled, at least. I assume
she's in her usual period. Yes, right at the front. How's she been coping? The
day can't be easy for her. She's quite frail, I'm afraid. Oh, dear. Hello,
everyone. Morning. Hello, Lillian. Morning. Hello, Tony. Isn't this a sad day?
Yeah, we'll get through it. Yeah. How's Brian doing? That's what we're most
worried about, really. He's clearly been dreading it. I have to admit, I'm
rather nervous myself. Makes two of us, Tony. About what you'll be saying? Our
tribute, yeah. Oh, both of you? Yes, a change of plan. Lillian felt we should
share it between us. Say farewell together. Ah, that's nice. I'm so grateful you
both took it on. That's all right, Kate. Are you sure you're going to be OK?
Well, with Tony's help, I think so. And I can always step in. Lillian, that
perfume, is it... Yeah. The one Mum always wore. I thought somehow it would keep
me close to her. The car's here, Dad. Dad? Hmm? The car's outside. Oh, um...
Could you pick up the others first? I'm not quite ready. The others? Well,
Phoebe and, you know, Kate's other children. Nonotando and Sipo? Yes. It's
already done that. They're waiting in it. Oh. What is it, Dad? Alice, I can't
decide on a tie. I'd like to wear the one Jenny gave me for Christmas. Well, go
on, then. It's quite bright. That's not a problem, is it? I don't know, Alice.
Might it seem disrespectful? Perhaps I'd better wear a black tie. No, not
necessarily. Not nowadays. She'd know. She'd put me right in an instant. She
would. She'd have us all organised. Yes. I miss her so much. I tried to say it
didn't matter, but I just couldn't get through to him. Oh, Alice. He's in such a
weird state. I didn't know what to do or what to say. Come here, darling. It
doesn't have to all fall on you. You're grieving too, remember? We're all here
for your Dad. You make sure you look after yourself, too. Thank you, Aunty Lily.
Oh, Alice, did you come with Brian? Yes. It's just that I can't see him
anywhere. Oh, no. He said he needed a moment. I think he's by the other door,
round the side. Oh, right, thank you. Do you want me to... No, it's fine, thank
you. I'll go. Are you ready, Brian? The hearse will be here any minute. Needle
on bread. Yes. So, shall we... What do you think about this tie? Is it all
right? Oh, absolutely. It was my Christmas present from Jenny, but it's awfully
bright. There really are no rules for funeral attire nowadays. I'm just not
sure. Maybe the black one. It doesn't matter. The people who'll be here today,
not just your family, but your friends, they loved Jennifer, and they love you,
too. Oh, Alan. They're on your side. They know how hard today's going to be, so
anything you do to help you through it, any choice you make, is the right
choice. I know exactly what Jenny would say. For goodness' sake, Brian, stop
fussing and get on with it. Probably pretty good advice for most situations.
I'll be on my side. Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. We
have come to give thanks for the life of Jennifer Aldridge, who each of us knew
in our own special way. To say goodbye to her, to commend her to God's loving
care, and commit her body to its final resting place. Jennifer was many things.
An author, a farmer. The glamorous centre of the local social scene. A superb
cook. An impeccable host. But for us, she always was.....and always will
be.....our.....our beloved big sister. It wasn't all perfect. What family is? We
could fight like cats in a barrel. Growing up in the ball was a strange semi-
public existence. Even in those early days, Jennifer showed a talent for
throwing the finest dinner parties. Even if the guests were a collection of
dollies and teddy bears. And I had to be the waiter.....with a tea towel
borrowed from the bar as an apron. And woe betide me if I laid out the plastic
cutlery incorrectly. Now, before we go outside to commit Jennifer's body to the
ground, we will sing a final hymn. For decades, Jennifer was, as you know, a
staunch member of Ambridge Women's Institute. Please join in the WI's anthem,
that celebration of the green and pleasant land which she loved so much. Thank
you for the bells, Neil. The peel, or whatever it was. Just a method. It was
very powerful. Well done, you two, on your tribute. That was just right. Thank
you. I was laughing one minute and welling up the next. It was lovely. It was a
good thing to do together, if rather daunting. I did wonder if Roger would show
up. Oh, her first husband? I don't think he's in great health. It's a long way
from Fife. But Debbie's planning to visit him while she's here. Well, Xander and
Martha were very good, I thought. Except for Martha with that rose. She didn't
want to throw it into the grave, did she? She's still holding on to it for dear
life. Talking of flowers, what's this I hear about a planter? Oh, yeah, I
thought we might organise one on the green, in Jennifer's memory. Don't you
think that's a lovely idea? Lillian. Oh, sorry. I was wondering where Rory was.
I just couldn't look at him in church. Oh, Brian. You would have destroyed me.
It's all right. And Brian does seem to be pairing up. I'm actually doing better
than I feared. Oh, that's good. I was really worried about, you know, the bit at
the grave. Yeah, the committal. It's just so... so final. Yeah. But Alan made it
rather beautiful. Yeah, it was beautiful, wasn't it? It was, Kate. Yeah, it was.
And having all of you around me, well, I felt really supported. Oh, Dad. I'm so
pleased. Your mother would have approved, I think. I hope so. Is Debbie OK?
Yeah, I think so. I don't seem to have had a proper conversation with her yet.
No, well, she drove to the church separately, didn't she? No, not just today.
Oh. I mean, since she came home from Hungary. Oh, well, she's dealing with it in
her own way. She's very strong. Oh, she is. Look, what's this I hear about you
giving up spiritual home? What? How do you know about that? I'm your father.
It's my job to know everything. So is it true? Well, I'm not fully decided yet,
but I think it's more likely than not. Oh, I must say I'm very surprised. I
mean, today, I know I've been a bit in my shell, but I've watched you. Helpful
word here, supporting hand there. You've got a real talent for it. For what? All
that touchy-feely stuff. Oh, you never used to have much time for touchy-feely
stuff. I know, but when life throws things at you, yeah, it can make you rethink
what's important. Well, yeah, that's actually what's happened to me. That's why
I'm thinking of selling up. Well, darling, it's up to you, of course. It's your
decision. Only you can make it, but give it very careful consideration. Not only
is it something you're good at, but you've also made it into a successful
business. Dad, that's really lovely of you. Now, what do you think? Shall we get
a piece of that pie before it goes? Oh, not for me. It's lamb. Oh, no, of
course. But you dig in. When Adam suggested it, I wasn't sure. Having a wreath
of herbs on the coffin. Rosemary, thyme, sage, all the herbs Mum used. It was a
lovely touch. Just right. I think you could say that about the whole day. Yes.
It's not something any of us wanted. No. But it was perfect, wasn't it? Perfect.
Right, let's get inside and get the kettle on, shall we? No, no, that's all
right, Alice. You get off home. Really? Or back to the wake, if you like. Well,
no, I thought I might stay the night. Well, that's very thoughtful of you,
darling. But this is how things are going to be. I might as well get used to it.
Are you really sure about this, Dad? Absolutely. Well, if you get hungry...
There's plenty in the fridge. And if you need anything... I'll ring. Go on, off
you go. All right, then. Thanks for walking me home. I'll pop back in the
morning. Well, if you like, but I really am fine. Well, you know where I am.
Don't hesitate. I won't. Bye, then. See you, darling. Well, I wore my lovely
coloured tie in the end. The one you gave me. You always had impeccable taste,
Jenny, darling. Well done. You know, you'd have loved today. All your family
around you, all your friends. I couldn't bear the thought of having to say
goodbye. But I don't, do I? You're here with me, in my heart. And you always
will be. The Archers was written by Kerry Davis and the farming and countryside
advisor is Sybil Ruskell. It was directed in our Birmingham studio by Peter
Leslie-Wilde and Jessica Bunch. The editor is Jeremy Howell. In a moment, add to
playlist, then later at nine o'clock, how do we protect those who do the right
thing? The story of Abraham Badreau, a 15-year-old boy who became recognised as
a hero, but lived his life in fear. In Please Protect Abraham. There are over
one and a half million postcodes in the UK. The Patch, on BBC Radio 4. We
randomly pick one out. So which one do I press? Clear the random postcodes? And
uncover a story there you probably wouldn't have heard about. They can't get the
staff to put them here, let alone a new prison with 700 more staff. He said we
know exactly what's up there. We're looking for something that shouldn't be up
there. The Patch, on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. When the police lock these people
up, who looks after them? Well, that's prison officers, and it's all done
unseen. Starts next Wednesday morning at nine. Back to this evening on Radio 4,
and time to find out which five tracks have made the cut this week. Hello and
welcome to Add to Playlist with me, Keras Matthews. And me, Geoffrey Boakye.
We're going to be discussing five music tracks this evening, so Geoffrey, remind
us of how this works. Of course. We start each episode with a recording. Examine
it carefully, then find a connection to another track, and then another, and so
on, until we have a complete playlist of five tracks. So, we start with a
playlist of five tracks. We're going to be discussing the songs that we've
recorded. And then we're going to go on until we have a complete playlist of
five tracks. Joining us tonight to help us with this kind of musical quilting
are two guests. In town on a visit from his homeland, Norway, is Baroque
violinist, founder of Baroque Solistene, and also founder of The Alehouse Boys.
Bjarte Eker, welcome. Thank you very much. Now, Bjarte, you've been stirring up
classical music in great style these past five years, playing it to imbibers at
alehouses and other worthy venues around Europe. Well, I like to shake things up
a bit. My background is classical music, combined with a lot of folk music. So,
I've gathered this crazy bunch of people around me that do all sorts of things,
besides playing their instruments really well. So, I like to combine things. I
wonder if you could give us a taste, Bjarte. Oh. Oi! So northern sounding. Is it
okay to say that? Yeah. This is from the Shetland, actually, and it's a type of
tune which is called Old Norse. Nice. Well, you're very welcome, Bjarte. We're
delighted to have you with us. Oh, thank you. Our next guest came to our
attention as part of a 12-piece band formed by Prince Harry for a gig at
Buckingham Palace way back in 2011. Her talents were off the scale then, and
continue to be so, both in terms of her vocal abilities, but also her playing,
her harmonies and songwriting. Natalie Duncan, welcome. Hi, thank you for having
me. No, great to have you. You're at the piano. Do you reckon you could give us
a little taste of your playing and singing? Ooh, okay. I might do a cover,
actually, if that's okay. Bit of Georgia, Ray Charles. Ooh, yes, girl. From
north to south. Georgia Oh, Georgia The whole day through Just an old sweet song
that is keeping Georgia on my mind Oh. I know, I know. Natalie Duncan, what are
you doing to us in the studio? What's going on? Welcome, Bjarte. Welcome,
Natalie. Thank you. Well, as usual each week, we pick up where we left off at
the end of the previous episode. And last Friday, that was Keres, your choice,
of the beautiful track Kyrie Eleison by the Lebanese-French singer Bashar
Makhlif, a hymn sung in Arabic. My silence is for you, for you, my Lord I
believe, I swear, I believe Kyrie Eleison, I'm glad you like that, Geoffrey. So
where does it lead you, and what's the link? In Christian tradition, the Kyrie
Eleison is the part of the Mass where the congregation ask for forgiveness,
translating to, Oh Lord, have mercy! After that bit of the service, you get the
Gloria, where everyone praises God. Gloria in excelsis Deo. So it's a logical
hop, step and jump to go from the Kyrie Eleison to the Gloria. So what's the
track? The track is Gloria in excelsis Deo by Vivaldi. Gloria in excelsis Deo by
Antonio Vivaldi, written around 1715. This version performed by John Elliot
Gardner's Monteverdi Choir and the English Baroque soloist, and one of the most
popular sacred works in the canon. Gloria, Gloria, Gloria, Gloria In excelsis
Deo There you go. I spent a lot of time in church growing up, Kyrie, so this is
bringing back very vivid memories. I love the fact you're conducting it, it's
marvellous. Do you know, right from the beginning, and in we go with those
string octaves. Yeah, they play... Now, I think it has a lot of swing to it as
well, because it doesn't stay on eight notes all the time, but it goes one, two,
yon, ta, ga, dat, da, four. So it has a four bar phrase and it goes to the
middle of it, so if you listen to how John Elliot is doing it, he's doing... So
it has a lot of swing to it, even if it's very, very simple. Would Vivaldi have
wanted that swing in it? Definitely. Because we know about Vivaldi. He was
called the Red Priest, he was a fiddle player, and this music is written for
these orphans at the Ospedale del Pietà in Venice, orphan girls. And so you'll
find a lot of music from Vivaldi, which is for short concerti, so small
concerts, for all kinds of different instruments, because these girls, they were
taught how to play music, instruments and everything, so they got to try out.
And this piece, it's done for the girls' choir. Because it's quite short, isn't
it? Two minutes and 27. Yeah. Gloria, Gloria... It's funny you say that it's
swung, because actually to me, especially with the Baroque era, I am an
appreciator of classical music, but I don't know that much about it, being
honest. But with the Baroque era, I always find that it's very straight and not
swung, and it's sort of very bright and bombastic sounding. The strings are
very... They're always very bright and very major key. And I kind of always
imagine aristocratic gentlemen in wigs, sort of dancing in opulent surroundings.
So it's really interesting to hear the actual background of that song, because
it puts me in a completely different place emotionally when I hear it now. Now
that I know the meaning. Oh, that's cool. I just think that it's a time period,
right? The Baroque period. So it's not really as classic. There's so many
different styles that are so diverse. So you have a lot of king and pompous
stuff. You have so much experimentation as well. What era are we talking about?
Approximately. Approximately. You would say it from 1600, when Monteverdi
started writing operas, and you start having figured bass chords in songs and
not lines, which you have in the Renaissance music, where you have individual
lines, like polyphony. So 1600 until 1750, when Bach dies. I wonder, Natalie,
when you go back to listening to this piece, or when we listen to it again in a
minute, will knowing this change your perception of it? It does. It definitely
will. And actually, when you talk about the chords, that is the one thing about
this piece that struck me, because the vocal arrangement is actually quite
interesting, because I'm really into harmony. So I'm always looking for
interesting harmony. And there's, I mean, I can play the part that I'm thinking
about. Obviously, because it's tuned slightly down, you can't really play along
with it on piano. You can, but it sounds a tiny bit out of tune. We'll give you
space, Natalie. This is all yours in your tuning. I think it's from like one
minute ten into the song. So when the theme, the vocal theme changes, this cool
thing happens in the movement, where it's like contrary motion, which means
that, basically means two melodies are doing opposite things. So the bass is
descending, but the vocal melody is ascending. So you've got these notes. piano
plays And I really like those chords. Gloria, Gloria, Gloria, Gloria in excelsis
Deo And then the bit after it, which is a little bit of a pedal point. So that
means that the bass stays on one note, but the chords above it move. So it goes.
piano plays And I really like that bit. That's stuff I would write. I might
steal it. Gloria, Gloria, in excelsis Deo I mean, it sounds amazing when you're
playing it just like that. I have to say, just take away all the trumpet bits
and the choral and the text, maybe the Gloria and everything, and you just leave
it with you. You put a little, I mean, the chord progressions are quite, I mean,
you will find it in lots of pop music, I guess. Kyrie Eleison has wonderful
moments of release, like a valve being opened on all of that tension. Gloria, to
me, this piece feels like one big, triumphant musical release all the way
through, like a scream of joy. And then almost complete opposite to that, there
are moments, two moments in Kyrie Eleison where the music falls away completely
to total silence. Huge pauses, very dramatic. Vivaldi does the exact same thing
in Gloria twice, just before the big vocal chorus kicks in. Gloria, in excelsis
Deo That was it, that was it. The big pause. It's done in dance music all the
time, isn't it? Doot, doot, doot, doot, doot, doot, doot, and then the bass
drops, and the crowd goes wild. Boom! Could we, just because we can, end with a
little bit more of Vivaldi on the piano, Natalie, and perhaps, oh no, you can't
play together because you've tuned down, have you? We have. The Gloria, Gloria
In excelsis Deo Natalie! Thank you so much, and thank you Jeffrey for our
opening track today, Gloria in excelsis Deo by Antonio Vivaldi. So it's over to
you, Beate Eicke, for track two. Yeah. Where does Vivaldi's sacred composition
lead you, and how do you get there? Well, so the ostinato, or the repetitive,
simplistic chord, just one chord, and the rhythm, dat-dit-dat-dat-dat-dit-dat-
dat-dan-da-ga-dat-dat-dan-da-ga-dat-dat-dat-dit-dat-dat-dan, it just kept on
going, just made me think of some Norwegian folk stuff that, they use this
instrument, hardanger fiddle, folk fiddle, which I'll talk to you about later.
So I associated it with a fantastic project that I recently discovered, and it's
called Music Without Border, and it's an album called Ferd, which just means
travel, I think, or a journey, is the best way to translate it. And it's sort of
traditional music from a very, very small place in Norway called Stetestal, and
they have shared it with people around the world. It's 52 people involved from
18 countries that are involved in this project. But not on this track. On this
track there are at least six or seven, and they have recorded it in different
parts of the world, in their own home studios and everything, and they took this
traditional tune, sent it around, and then these wonderful musicians have had
associations on it, so it's very much like we are talking now, and then recorded
it, and it's called Norefjells. That's the title of this traditional tune.
Norefjells means just the little area. They divide Norway into north, south,
west, and east mountains, so this is a part of the northern eastern mountains,
and it sounds something like this. ♪ The introduction sounds very northern,
until the throat singing comes in. ♪ And then this low string instrument, quite
flabby sounding bass, but very effective, adding a lot of propulsion, and then
the voice comes in. ♪ That's Sara Gaup. She is Sami, one of the indigenous
people from the Nordic countries, so it's called the Sami, and she lives up in
Kautokeino in Finnmark. This album is just full of incredible singers from
everywhere. Norway, Sweden, Ireland, Armenia, Romania, Syria, Palestine, Jordan,
India, Indonesia, Cambodia, Thailand, Nepal, Iran, China, Mongolia, and Tibet.
This is a whole journey. It's a very long song, but let's just get reactions
first. Natalie. There's so much to dissect about this piece because there's so
much going on. You can't place the song in a geographical location because of
the amount of influences from around the world, and I think for me, I just found
it really interesting how so many musicians, and you said they recorded
remotely, from different parts of the world were able to blend really
sensitively and cohesively and make this piece of music pulsate together as one
organism. Tell us more about the hard angle. Why is it given us the drone? Why
does it differ from the Western classical violin? It has eight strings, or this
is a typical hard angle. It has eight strings, so it has this resonating string,
which are... Is it in tune? No. Please describe it because it's beautiful. It's
got some extraordinary mother-of-pearl work on the fretboard. So you have these
resonating strings, which are the amplifiers of the time. Do they sit under the
four strings? They're under the four strings and you don't play on them. They
just move because... Move along, yeah. So it rings for a long time. And it's
from Hardanger. It's a place... So that's why it's called the Hardanger fiddle.
Originally, I think the oldest one is from 1650, so it's like a baroque
instrument. This might be a silly question, but why was there a need for an
amplified fiddle? It's not a silly question. It's because the tradition is that
they play these dance tunes on their own. And so you have fiddle players, and
they still do that. They go around with their fiddles. And they have these
resonating strings because you come into a room and there's typically maybe 30,
40, 50 people dancing, and they're stomping and they're drinking a lot. And you
have one fiddle, so you have to make it louder. So that's why they... Let's hear
it. Come on. ♪♪♪ ♪♪♪ That sort of thing. I just want to down tools and listen to
you and go to the pub. It's a take on her. ♪♪♪ There's various artists that are
introduced during this journey we go through in this track. Jew's harp,
apparently named because it's also known as the jaw's harp because the jaw
resonates. Also, sometimes the juice harp and my favourite, la mellophone.
What's it in Norwegian, Bjarte? It's called munnharpe, mouth harp. Munnharpe.
There's the metal string dulcimer. Am I hearing dulcimer in this as well? And
then there's a metallic percussion instrument in it. And then there's tablas as
well, right? There's a big tabla break. Absolutely. Huge. ♪♪♪ After the tabla,
what happens? Because then it goes like... ♪♪♪ And this tune is going like this
and has this ostinato thing and it just keeps on pumping on. And then it stays
on this... ♪♪♪ And then moves away... ♪♪♪ Comes back... ♪♪♪ Moves further
away... ♪♪♪ Comes back, always comes back again, but it keeps going further and
further away. The oldest traditional tunes that we have is called rammeslott.
And ramme, it just means... It's a trance-like thing and it's described as the
performer who's normally either playing on the fiddle or the mouth harp just
keeps getting into a trance and then he loses or she loses the sense of being
and the only way to stop it is to cut the strings of the fiddle. And then it
brings us to an end with vocals and the echo of that fading drone and throat
singing. And we're like, we're turning our backs to the audience and walking
back into the plains. ♪♪♪ Thank you so much for that, Beata. Track two this
evening is Nordafjell Littikjösti from Music Without Borders. Over to you now,
Keres. From this multi-international offering, where are you going to take us
and why? The choice I'm going to go for begins just as Nordafjell ends, with
epic atmosphere made largely with those sustained notes. But the similarities of
the two came to me in the earlier bars of the song. If we return to Beata's pick
and listen in at about the half-minute mark, you can hear the low, flabby, so-
called, you'll see this is an important part of the song. When that string
instrument joins in, he's playing some arpeggiated triplets as well as the
downbeat on a drum. And you feel that massive energy lift, this new propulsion
when instruments are playing more notes rather than compared with the long
sustained notes and rhythmically, and it brought me straight away to a game-
changing, global hit where you can clearly hear the same method is used. Out of
ambience comes rhythm and energy, but this time not on a string instrument but
on a new boy on the block, the Moog. Not Moog, Dr. Robert Moog, the inventor of
the instrument, according to Bowie, says it rhymes with folk. So that's what
we're going to stick to. The instrument is called the Moog. We're going here.
You hear it? Yeah, totally. It makes sense to me. I Feel Love, Donna Summer,
produced and co-written by Jav Joe Marotta and Pete Bellotti, recorded for Donna
Summer's fifth studio album, I Remember Yesterday in 1977. Interesting, this
album, as each track was made to evoke a different decade, this became the last
track which they wanted to represent the future with. So we're talking about I
Feel Love, Donna Summer, produced and co-written by Jav Joe Marotta and Pete
Bellotti. So here we are, they were in Munich in the 1970s in a studio called
Musicland. Cue the entry of German classical composer Erbart Schörner's
engineer, Robby Wedel, and his Moog. And that's when I Feel Love, this track,
began to be born, created by an Italian, a German, an Englishman and an
American. Natalie, are you a fan of this? I love it. I love this song. It
absolutely slaps. It's been... It does. And it stands up, like, the test of
time. It's very influential and you can hear how many songs have been born out
of the progression of that. Talk us what it's doing musically. Okay, so
musically, obviously the Moog, almost. Almost! I've got the ruler here. The
Moog-like Vogue synthesizer is playing that bass line, which is... It's just
that, which I guess it's more like... Whoa! What was the second one? What was
happening there? Because they put a delay on it, I guess. I think there's a
delay on the bass line, so it's going... The thing that I picked out about the
actual musical content of that is that it's based around a C minor pentatonic,
which is... Five notes. But the minor third is not in there, so it's open. So
we've just got straight up to the seventh. So it's this... And I think because
there's no minor third or major third in there, it's ambiguous. The harmony is
quite ambiguous. So I think it's about 30 seconds into the track, you hear that
pad that swoops in over it. It starts off, the pad is here, playing the minor
third. So you've got that. And then it goes to... And it opens. It takes us to
space at that point. Exactly! Why does it take us to space? I think it's because
it's just so ambiguous and freeing. So when the vocals come in with that melody,
that major note has set you up for her... Don't know the words, sorry. But then
that melody carries on. And as it moves up through the progression, it just gets
better. Yeah, and so on. Do you know what? The grand piano is so happy. It's so
happy. It is mopping. I'm so happy. It's slapping. So I Feel Love, when it was
released, it was as part of that album, 1977, it went to number one in
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Netherlands, UK and many, many countries. Changed
the musical landscape, reactions and accolades, things like one of the most
influential records ever made, like a bomb going off. And I want us to hold
right there to get a better concept of just how game changing it sounded in
1977. I thought we'd invite pioneering electronic wizard producer, artist,
member of Roxy Music, producer of Bowie, Coldplay, Pavarotti, U2, Grace Jones
and many, many more. Please welcome Brian Eno. How are you? Hi there. Thank you
for joining us. I'm fine, Gary. Can we go straight to it? Where were you when
you first heard I Feel Love? I was crossing the street, Basing Street in London,
which was the site of the studio that I was working in at the time. It was
called Island Studios then. And I heard that coming out of a shop doorway. And I
thought, that is something really new. And I remember running back to the studio
and saying to Rhett Davis, the engineer I was working with, you have to hear
this. So it was a very big moment. What made it sound so different? Well, it
married together two things that really hadn't, in my experience, been married
before, which was a sort of the black gospel tinged expressionistic style of
singing with a completely mechanistic music underneath it. So suddenly, like a
soul had entered the machine. And it was very, very powerful. I mean, I had sort
of dreamed about a kind of music like that. And I'd even tried to make something
like that myself. But I hadn't realized what I was doing really until when I
heard that. I thought, OK, I understand what the marriage here is, what's
unusual about this. What did you do next? Well, I got in touch with David Bowie.
And I said, you have to listen to this. We'd been working together. And I said,
this is really the future. You know, this is a new music coming. And did he
agree? He did. Yes. Yes. I mean, he'd also been sort of, if you think about it,
he'd also been moving towards something like that. Pop music is all about these
kinds of hybrids, I think. It's all about an idea that's around being put
together with another idea that's around. And suddenly, that's a whole new idea.
It's not the same thing. It's more than just adding two parts. It's a new
discovery. Brian, did you go out and try and get yourself a Moog then? Well, I
had one. You had one already? Yeah, yeah. But I didn't use the sequencer in the
way that Giorgio Moroder was using it. Tell us more about the actual machine
itself. Well, the Moog is essentially an analog synthesizer, which is to say
that it isn't a computer. It's made of a number of oscillators, which you
control from a keyboard. And those oscillators, being analog, that's to say
being non-digital, tend to drift a little bit in pitch. And if you're making a
sound that has, let's say, two oscillators together, they're slightly drifting
in tuning relative to each other, which means that they change character because
they do a thing called phasing, which is when the waves are slightly out of step
with each other and you get sound cancellation and sound addition. And that
means, sorry, that's a bit technical. If you're not a synthesizer player...
Brian, talking phasing with Brian Eno is the highlight of my entire year. Do you
still play the Moog in 2023? I don't have a Moog any longer. My Moog was stolen
when I lived in New York shortly after that Donna Summer record. And I never
bought another one. Brian, it's such a pleasure talking with you. Thank you so
much. And always know you'd be so welcome to come on and talk more
technicalities any time. I'd be happy to do that. I'll try to find a simpler way
of explaining it in future. It sounds perfect to us here, honestly. Thank you.
OK, thanks, Keris. Thank you so much for that one, Keris. This is Add to
Playlist on DVC Radio 4 with me, Geoffrey Poitier. And me, Keris Matthews. With
us in the studio are our guest songwriter, Nathalie Duncan, and violinist, Beata
Eicher. Keris, could you please remind us of the three tracks we've had so far?
Certainly. Number one, Gloria, in Excelsis Deo by Vivaldi. Track two, Nora
Fjell's Litti Kirsti by Music Without Borders. And track three, I Feel Love by
Donna Summer. So, Nathalie, it's your turn now. Where are you going to take us
and what's the musical connection? There were so many places I could have gone
from Donna Summer, because as you've said, it's just influenced a lot of
different songs. But I decided to go with The Way You Make Me Feel by Michael
Jackson. The Way You Make Me Feel from 1987, written and sung by Michael Jackson
from his seventh studio album. But it really is the bass line that drove me from
I Feel Love to this song. And again, it's that same composition of, it's kind of
the same exact melody, to be honest, because you've got... That's the Donna
Summer song. And then when we go to MJ, you just move it to an F and it's... So
it's swung. Obviously, it's completely different in that it's swung. But again,
we've got the minor pentatonic, no minor third, just the seventh. So it's
essentially like a blues kind of... You've got that chord, which means that
there's freedom above it for the instruments, which is kind of what the blues
is. And when those chords come in... You can hear the swing. Yeah. Hey! Love
this track. Absolutely. I wore it out bad. Michael Jackson, bad. I was sorry
with the LP. I loved it. I mean, this track for me, it's definitely the swing of
the... The underlining triplet thingy, which is actually also the same what they
do in this Nora Fjells. You know... It just keeps on... It's a propulsion. Yeah,
you just want to keep on dancing. Right. And it's not this sort of... Insisting.
It's sort of floating. Yeah. For me, it's just so much better that it's floating
and not like... Now you need to dance like a machine. Yeah. So what is picking
up those triplets again? I mean, it's just... The synth? Yeah, it's underlying
there, right? So it's not insisting. So it's the... It's in four. It's the
synth, really. Yeah. Because you've got the... If you were counting it in
threes, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one,
two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three.
So it's coming on the third of each triplet. Yeah, exactly. He's got such a four
hooks. Yeah. Even with the chorus line, you make... The way you make me feel,
the repeat, the way you make me feel. Yeah. And then again, you know, and it's
just never ends. It's just the hook, hook, hook, hook, hook. Yeah, yeah.
Producer Quincy Jones, obviously a long-time collaborator of Michael Jackson's,
said that he added lots of little rhythms and sounds to the track to give it
texture. So there's a lot going on. Do you know what the beauty about the
playlist is? To sit down and really concentrate on trying to work out what's
happening. Yeah. I hadn't noticed, but within the whole arrangement, there are
some lovely boing, boing sounds. Explain yourself. I haven't noticed that,
actually. Boing, boing. When I'm trying to think about music in terms of
arranging, I always refer back to Quincy Jones, because he had this way of, like
you say, layering sounds to add textures and colours. And even the horn
arrangements, those stabs, they're all so perfect, but they are spacious enough
with one another that it doesn't sound like a cluttered mess. It just flows
along really naturally. One of the things about the percussion in this track,
which I love, is that it sounds so industrial and heavy. You can almost see
hammers on anvils, but it's got this kind of like shuffling rhythm to it. And
actually, allegedly, Michael Jackson wrote this song after his mother asked him
to write a song with, quote, a shuffling kind of rhythm. Really? So that, you
know, so Mummy Jackson said, could you write something with some shuffle in it?
So this song's got that kind of shuffling thing going on. Play us so we can
enjoy that shuffle feel. Bit of a shuffle. So it's not stamping. It's the bounce
that we were talking about. I just wonder, because of the controversy
surrounding his personal life, does this affect how we listen to music like
Michael Jackson's music? For instance, if Wagner's another example. It's a
really interesting question. It's something I think so many Michael Jackson fans
probably do grapple with. But then the way I see it is that the artist is there
to create the art. And if we go too deep into the histories of many, like you
say, many different musicians, actors, like you name it, they could have
checkered pasts. So I guess it's up to you whether you allow that to emotionally
affect the way you hear the music or not. I can't with Michael Jackson because I
just hear Quincy Jones and I hear Rod Temperton and I hear his voice and I hear
the song and it's very hard for me not to be moved. And it's an interest because
context does affect the way you listen to things, as we proved earlier with the
Baroque music and learning about the story of the little girl orphanages and the
fun that it is and it was. I mean, it's difficult to separate the artist and
personality completely. But I mean, I think in an ideal world, you should
definitely let the art speak for itself, I think. And then try to, you know, try
to separate it. But it is sometimes difficult not to not to think about it.
Thank you very much Natalie. We've just had two absolute classic pop hits in a
row. The Way You Make Me Feel by Michael Jackson. And before that Donna Summers
I Feel Love, which leaves you, Geoffrey, for our final track this week. Where
are you going to take us and why? My personal favourite part of The Way You Make
Me Feel is the bit where MJ, Michael Jackson, starts ad-libbing on Ain't
Nobody's Business. And he hits us with Ain't Nobody's Business but mine and my
baby. So, you know, as a vocalist, to me, rhythmically, he just flies off the
handle, you know, he shakes off the 4-4 rhythm, the time signature goes
somewhere else. And I had to investigate. So was it freeform scattering? Is it a
counter-medley? Is it a moment of pure release? I don't know. I counted the
rhythm of the syllables. Sorry, I got very nerdy. I counted the rhythm of the
syllables and to my ear, it was 10 syllables more or less distributed evenly
over two bars of four. So it kind of got me to a 10 over 8 time signature. It
turns out that 10 over 8 has a musical home. It's in Armenia and it comes with a
shuffle. Okay, so we're going back there. Staying with the shuffle. Staying with
the shuffle. And it's rather beautiful. Where are we going? We're going to
Armenia with this. Kündüü-i-ki-yak Ha-su-pesa by String Harmonies from 2013.
That's where I landed from the shuffle and the 10-8 rhythm. We've shuffled off
the dance floor and I'm now kind of lying on a pebbly beach, listening to the
sea come in and out and that shuffling rhythm. You're floating still, aren't
you, Beata? Yeah, absolutely. Very Mediterranean feeling to it. Very. Armenia is
not in the Mediterranean. No, no, absolutely. It sounds Greek. It does. It's
like Sorba feeling. Natalie? So with the MJ song, so the end of it, which you
were talking about, ain't nobody's business but mine and my baby. So the song is
still in four. Nothing's changed rhythmically with the actual. I was in the
wrong key there. I'm not going to be able to sing this, but I'll try. So it's,
ain't nobody's business but mine and my baby. So that's like tapping your head.
It's like that. So the time signature of the main song doesn't change. Stay
solid. But Michael Jackson is coming off of it with a counter rhythm. Yeah,
exactly. I find it really interesting that you counted the syllables and got to
a 10-8 song from there. We're listening to Kounji Ikiyak, Hasu Pesa. The Hasu
Pesa is actually a traditional Armenian wedding dance. It's become very popular
among the Armenian American community. And the three musicians we hear in string
harmonies are Armenian musicians based in America. So that shuffle is something
which you're supposed to dance to. And that is essentially the driving rhythm of
it. To a kind of typical stereotypical Western ear, it's very difficult to find
that rhythm because the 10-8 is something which you're not attuned to hearing if
you're not used to listening to it. I had a little listen and you know when we
play five, four songs, we can count one, two, three, one, two, one, two, three,
one, two, or one, two, one, two, three, one, two. I could do that to the 10-8.
Is that how you do it Nati? I hear it in five. Yeah. And I imagine if you, I
don't read music. I imagine if you were sight reading it, it would be easier to
read in 10 because there's lots of 16th notes with that guitar. It's playing
like fast melodies. So it kind of adds more up to 10. But I hear it in five,
definitely. I definitely hear it in five as well. Can you play it a bit on the
piano, Natalie? Oh, I'm not sure. I mean, I can play like just a simple five,
four thing and not tease it and do. I mean, it sounds a lot jazzier now. It's
nice. I love five, four. It's great. Again, I think this is like floating. It's
not insisting on, the downbeat or the emphasis of the melody just keeps
switching around. I performed actually at an Armenian wedding once and they were
doing this dance and we weren't playing this, but the music that they were
dancing to was maybe in like, I want to say like 13 and a half over eight. And
yeah, me and my band were just sat around like absolute nerds, just like
counting. But all the children and everyone was just in perfect time. It's
really interesting how that's like our time signatures are really fluid in other
cultures. It's just our Western ears. And also the crowd dancing and the
children dancing, they're not going to think, oh, well, this is hard. They're
just learning by intuition and by habit. Thank you so much, Geoffrey, for our
vinyl track this week. K'njw'i K'yek Hasu Pesa. By String Harmonies from 2013.
So that's it for this week. We're going to shuffle away, not off this mortal
coin, but our huge thanks go to our studio guests this week, Natalie Duncan. And
Beata Eicke. And thanks also go to Brian Eno earlier. Don't forget, you can find
all previous episodes of Add to Playlist on BBC Sounds, as well as a list of all
five tracks featured tonight. I'm Keris Matthews. And I'm Geoffrey Boakye. So
please join us at the same time next week. So it comes to the point in the show,
which is my favourite, we beg our guests to play us out with something. What
kind of time signature should we go for? Should we end with some Vivaldi? Get
some of that D major royal sit up and take note of stuff. I like that. I like
that. And D? Yes. Okay, let's go. You can count it in if you want. One, two, a
one, two. Cut. Was that alright? Yes. Thank you for having me. Email Saturday
Live at bbc.co.uk.