TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-24-19H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 BBC News at 6 o'clock. This is Vigielis. Good evening. The world has been
reflecting on 12 months of war in Ukraine. President Zelensky said his people
remained resolute in the face of Russian aggression. It was a year of endurance,
a year of compassion, a year of bravery, a year of pain, a year of hope, a year
of perseverance, a year of unity, a year of invincibility. Tonight we will look
at how the first anniversary of the invasion has been marked in Ukraine and
beyond, consider the response of the international community and assess the cost
of the war to the Ukrainian people. Also in this bulletin, Northern Ireland's
political leaders have appeared together to condemn the shooting of a police
officer. Junior doctors in England are to strike for three consecutive days in
March. Three candidates have secured enough support to join the contest to
replace Nikola Sturgeon as SNP leader and Scotland's first minister. And Sir
Bernard Ingham, Margaret Thatcher's long-serving press secretary, has died.
President Volodymyr Zelensky has said continued Western backing for Ukraine will
make victory over Russia inevitable, as he marked exactly a year since the full-
scale invasion of his country began. Mr Zelensky said the Ukrainian people had
endured 12 months of pain at the hands of what he described as Russian
terrorists, but that there was a sense of invincibility as the war entered its
second year. Ceremonies have been held in cities and towns across Ukraine to
mark the anniversary of Europe's biggest conflict since the Second World War.
Our first report tonight comes from our chief international correspondent, Lis
Duset, who is in Kiev. A single trumpet sounded for every soldier's death. In a
solemn ceremony on a stone plaza in the heart of Kiev, Ukraine's President
Zelensky joined government ministers and military officials to honour the fallen
in Ukraine's war against Russia. Slavo, Grigni. Go, Slovo! Go, Slovo! The
Ukrainian leaders shouted in what is now the greeting of this war. Glory to
heroes, they replied. It's not clear how many soldiers lost their lives this
past year, but the numbers are certainly high among Ukrainian and Russian
forces. But today Ukraine also marked a year of survival against the might of
Russia's military, an achievement secured by Ukraine's effective fight, but also
its formidable support from allies around the world. On this day a year ago when
Russian warplanes screeched across Kiev, when plumes of dark smoke from
explosions blackened the skies, many believed it would be a short, sharp war,
that Ukraine didn't stand a chance against a far superior force. Now with this
one-year mark many are asking how and when will this end? President Zelensky was
asked at a press conference in Kiev if he was ready to negotiate an end to these
hostilities. This was his message to Moscow. Please respect our right to live on
our land, get out of our territory, stop bombing us, stop killing civilians,
stop killing our infrastructure, our energy sector, our drinking water, stop the
bombardments of villages, cities and towns, and then we will tell you in word
format we shall diplomatically put an end to it. Every Ukrainian I've met this
week still says this is a war Ukraine can and will win. And now they also add,
echoing their president, that victory will be theirs this year. But President
Putin is also vowing with single-minded resolve to fight his way to victory. And
on this cold winter's day in February, on this date seared in memory, all the
talk now is of new offensives by both sides in the spring. Twelve months on from
the start of the invasion and Moscow remains defiant despite military setbacks,
international criticism and sanctions. Russia editor Steve Rosenberg has this
analysis. In Russia, the first anniversary of the war was not headline news. The
bulletins on state TV did give an update on Russia's offensive in Ukraine. But
they didn't focus on the anniversary and they glossed over the fact that
President Putin's special military operation had failed to achieve what the
Kremlin had expected a year ago, a swift victory. Quite the opposite. Over the
last 12 months, the Russian army has suffered heavy losses. A few days ago, a
talk show host on state TV admitted that a huge number of people had been
killed. There was no end in sight, she said, to the conflict. And what of the
man who ordered the invasion? What is Vladimir Putin thinking? What is he
planning? Well from the speeches he's been making, the Kremlin leader seems to
think that although the invasion went badly wrong, Russia has the resources and
the staying power to ultimately secure victory over Ukraine and over the West.
Many Russians still support him and believe the Kremlin's false narrative that
Russia is not the aggressor and that the West is out to destroy Russia. And so
Mr. Putin is planning to push on and is ready to escalate, if necessary, to
achieve his goals. No sign of any Kremlin U-turns. This Russian president isn't
for turning. In the UK, there was a minute silence led by Rishi Sunak on the
steps of Downing Street to mark the anniversary. The Prime Minister said it was
important for the country to reflect on the courage and bravery demonstrated by
the Ukrainian people. Here's our correspondent Richard Galpin. Across the UK,
events have been held to remember the tens of thousands of people who've been
killed and injured, and those that have been forced to flee their homes. People
came together to show support and solidarity. In a message to the Ukrainian
people, the king said they had suffered unimaginably. But he also highlighted
their remarkable courage and resilience. At the Ukrainian church in Manchester
and in churches elsewhere in the country, there have been vigils. But there's
also been some controversy with the Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby in his
thought for the day here on Radio 4, warning against overly punishing the
Russian regime when the war eventually ends. Truthful but not hating the
oppressor. There must be a future with a just and stable peace, a free and
secure Ukraine, and the beginning of a generations-long process of healing and
reconciliation. Meanwhile ambassadors based in the UK have marked the
anniversary of the invasion in a very different way. They've been swimming in
the comparatively cool water of the Serpentine in London's Hyde Park. The
Estonian ambassador Viljor Luby described it as a show of resilience needed as
the war grinds on. Countries of Ukraine have pledged their continuing support.
The first of the tanks promised by Western countries have arrived in Ukraine
from Poland. The US and the UK have also announced a new raft of sanctions
against Russia. Questions remain about China's role in the conflict, but
President Zelensky said tonight that he wanted to meet President Xi Jinping.
With the fighting at a stalemate, our diplomatic correspondent Paul Adams
considers what factors may determine the shape of the war in the months or years
ahead. The West's response to the war has been remarkable, unlike anything seen
in recent times. Without it, Ukraine would not exist today as a democratic,
independent state. Each step has been marked by protracted debate, sometimes
creating the impression of division and doubt. But from anti-tank missiles to
sophisticated artillery systems and heavy armour, vital weaponry keeps coming.
Today Poland said it had already delivered the first four leopard tanks, and
Sweden added ten more to a growing list of promises. The debate moves on to the
much more complex issue of jets. Here, the government says it doesn't have any
of its own to send, but the defence secretary Ben Wallace said Britain could
help others to send theirs. That is definitely always on offer, as I put it that
way. If a country approaches us and says we'd like to do that, the United
Kingdom would be very happy to either backfill or indeed cover with things like
extra deployment of our aircraft to cover for air policing or protect that
country. That's already been happening, that's been happening for the last,
nearly for the last eight, nine months in other countries across Europe. The
strain is showing Western countries have used up their own stocks of ammunition
in a frantic effort to keep up with the pace of the war. The head of NATO, Jens
Stoltenberg, said Ukraine's allies still had a lot to do. We are working hard to
both increase the volume, but also the speed. We are delivering support. In
addition to delivering the specific weapons systems, we need also to be able to
deliver all the different stuff we need to sustain, meaning ammunition, spare
parts, fuel, maintenance. So it's a huge effort. In the meantime, the West
continues to impose fresh waves of sanctions on Russia, conscious that so far at
least they do not seem to have dented the Kremlin's ability or desire to wage
war. Today, Britain added banks, aircraft parts, radio equipment and electronic
components. The United States added metals and mining, as well as efforts to
counter rampant sanctions evasion around the world. But in recent days, all eyes
have been on China. Washington has warned that Beijing is thinking of providing
weapons to Russia. If that happened, the effect could be immense and the crisis
could get a whole lot deeper. China says it has its own peace proposals, the
details of which have not been released. President Zelensky said the fact that
China was talking about Ukraine was not bad, but he needed to know more. I want
to believe, he said, that China will side with the idea of peace and fairness
and will not supply weapons to Russia. Our international editor, Jeremy Bowen,
has spent much of the past year reporting from Ukraine. He considers the cost of
the war on the country and its people. Speak to Ukrainian soldiers and medics on
the front line and you will hear their horror at the number of comrades who have
been killed, as well as civilians back home who've died in shelling and missile
attacks. The government here does not release precise casualty figures. Most
estimates have killed and wounded are in the tens of thousands. As for the
physical cost, all front line towns have been badly damaged. Some are in ruins.
Many towns away from the fighting are not damaged. Kiev is remarkably intact.
The railways have brought in presidents and prime ministers and knit Ukraine
together. Russia has targeted bridges, junctions and stations, but more than 90%
of trains arrive on time. The war's balance sheet does have a positive side.
Fighting Russia has united Ukraine as never before and transformed its armed
forces. But as the war goes into its second year, strains are likely to emerge.
President Zelensky has criticized Ukrainians of fighting age who've left the
country. The burden of fighting and dying falls almost entirely on men from
their late teens to their sixties, mostly volunteers. As casualty figures mount
in what is looking to be a long, attritional war, more individuals will be asked
what they did when Ukraine needed them, and the government might be forced to
tighten the rules on conscription. Police in Northern Ireland say they are now
treating the shooting of a senior officer as a terrorist incident and their main
line of inquiry is focusing on the dissident group, the new IRA. Detective Chief
Inspector John Caldwell was shot on Wednesday night while off duty in Oma. A
fourth man has been arrested in connection with the attack. Earlier political
leaders in Northern Ireland met the Chief Constable in a show of unity. Our
Ireland correspondent Chris Page reports. The nature of the attack on John
Caldwell has added to the sense of public anger. The Detective Chief Inspector
had been coaching an under-15s football team. He was looting equipment into his
car when two gunmen opened fire. Mr Caldwell's son was close by. Dozens of other
children were also at the sports complex. Northern Ireland's Chief Constable
Simon Byrne said his colleague had been very seriously injured. John remains in
hospital where he is critically ill and heavily sedated. Last night I had the
chance to speak to John's wife and his son. They are clearly heavily affected by
what they've gone through but want to pass on their thanks both to the people
that rendered first aid and care at the scene but also in terms of the
outpouring of support from across the community. Mr Byrne was speaking at a news
conference alongside the leaders of the five biggest parties at Stormont.
Michelle O'Neill of Sinn Féin said the symbolism was significant. It is so
important in moments like this that we stand united as one voice in our
condemnation against this horrific attack on a police officer. And the
Democratic Unionist leader Sir Geoffrey Donaldson had this message. I would also
say to the evil people who carried out this heinous attack, you are not the
future of this place. We stand against you. The police said their enquiries were
confirming their initial belief that the shooting was carried out by the new
IRA. It's thought to be the largest of the dissident Republican groups which are
opposed to the peace process. The Chief Constable indicated the organisation had
become more active in the last few months but he said officers were working
round the clock to deal with the threat. You're listening to the Six O'Clock
News here on BBC Radio 4. The main news so far, Ukraine's allies have marked the
first anniversary of the Russian invasion with promises of more weapons as well
as further sanctions against Moscow. Police in Northern Ireland say their
investigation into the shooting of a police officer is focusing on the dissident
Republican group the new IRA. Still to come. It's a lovely book and I wish him
all the better best. Ken Bruce welcomes his replacement on Radio 2. Junior
doctors have announced three consecutive days of strike action in their pay
dispute starting on the 13th of March. The walkout will affect both routine and
emergency care. Their union, the British Medical Association, said doctors had
been left with no choice but to take action, claiming the health secretary had
refused to attend a meeting to negotiate on pay. Junior doctors say their wages
have seen a decline of 26% over the past 15 years after failing to keep pace
with inflation. Here's our health correspondent, Katherine Burns. At the heart
of this is pay. The British Medical Association says members are angry,
demoralised and no longer willing to work for below inflation wages. This strike
is not small. Junior doctors make up 40% of the medical workforce, everything
from recent medical school graduates to doctors with up to 15 years of
experience. It's not short either. We can expect tens of thousands of doctors to
stop work at 7am on the morning of Monday, March 13th and not to restart until
the Thursday morning, including Dr. Hena Shakur. We're hoping to make it clear
what our value is and how much we actually contribute. It's through our absence
that we can demonstrate that, I think. So it's only through striking and
striking for a significant period of time that I think it will really be obvious
how important we are to the workforce. Junior doctors also went out on strike in
2016, although not for three days in a row. At the time, more senior doctors
were called in to cover for them, especially in key areas like A&E. Matthew
Taylor is chief executive of NHS Confederation, which represents managers. He's
worried it might not be so simple this time around. I think this action will be
extremely difficult for us to manage. The problem is that consultants themselves
are having an indicative ballot and so it's very unclear the degree to which
consultants will necessarily be willing to fill in. The government says the
strike is disappointing and that doctors have had an 8% pay rise over four
years. One of the smaller unions involved in the long-running rail dispute has
voted to accept a settlement deal with train companies, the Transport Salaried
Staffs Association, or TSSA, said its 3,000 members had accepted an offer,
including a two-year, 9% pay deal. Three candidates are to take part in the
contest to succeed Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader and Scotland's first minister.
After nominations closed at midday, it was confirmed that Kate Forbes, Hamza
Yousuf and Ash Regan had all received the required number of 100 nominations
from 20 local branches of the party. The result of the vote will be revealed on
the 27th of March. Miss Regan formally launched her campaign this morning in
North Queens Ferry in Fife, from where our Scotland editor James Cook reports.
Ash Regan opened her campaign with a blunt take on the independence movement,
calling it divided by petty differences and personal agendas. She promised to
restore harmony by using an election at Westminster or Holyrood to advance her
cause. You have said that you will explicitly declare in your manifesto... Line
one. Line one that should you achieve a majority of seats and votes, that on day
one of being in power you would open negotiations. Absolutely right. With whom?
With the UK government. On day one? Yep. And if they don't come? Listen, we've
got to move away from this point where we're asking permission from the UK. This
is about Scotland, and it's about Scotland expressing its views on how it wants
to be governed. So we're going to get away from that, and this is my attempt to
move us forward, move that conversation forward. But the concept of an
negotiation obviously requires two parties. If they refuse to turn up... Of
course. My question is, what would you do then? So we are going to be getting
international recognition obviously for the fact that Scotland has made a
democratic choice in this case. In a general election? Yes. All week, the other
candidates have been dealing with questions about how their faith influences
their politics. Kate Forbes, who's a Christian, came under fire for her
opposition to gay marriage. Hansa Yousuf, who's a Muslim, denied that he dodged
the final vote on the subject for religious reasons. In the city, the 100 Chain
Index ended the day down 29 points at 7879. On Wall Street a short time ago, the
Dow Jones was down 370 points at 32784. On the currency markets, the pound is
trading at $1.19.5 and against the euro, Stirling is at 1 euro 13.2. That makes
a euro worth 88.3 pence. Sir Bernard Ingham, the long-serving press secretary to
Margaret Thatcher when she was Prime Minister, has died after a short illness.
He was 90. Sir Bernard's son described him as a formidable operator in the
political and white-hall jungles as well as a fantastic family man. Our
political correspondent, David Wallace Lockhart, looks back at his life. For
almost the entirety of Margaret Thatcher's time in number 10, Sir Bernard Ingham
was the key link between the Prime Minister and the media. A surprising career
zenith for a former Labour election candidate. The bushy eyebrowed Yorkshireman
started out in newspapers before joining the civil service, serving Labour
ministers like Barbara Castle and Tony Benn in the 70s. He may have seemed an
odd appointment for Mrs Thatcher when the Conservatives came to power but
previous political leanings deserted him as he embraced her ideology. He
reflected on his ability to capture her voice on desert island discs in 1995. I
came to have very considerable sympathy for her political views but I think that
it was the fact that here I had a Prime Minister who had a clear philosophy,
knew what she wanted to do, had worked out the implications and wasn't going to
change her mind. That made me blessed among press secretaries as I told all my
colleagues when I retired. A controversial figure, Sir Bernard's press briefings
could irritate cabinet ministers but the Prime Minister stood by him. The
backroom operator flirted with becoming the story himself on occasion. Millions
watched on TV as he elbowed reporters aside before Mrs Thatcher addressed the
press during a leadership challenge. His position at the Hillsborough disaster
was caused by tanked up yobs, which was not the conclusion of a public inquiry,
diminished him in the eyes of many. He left Downing Street with Mrs Thatcher but
he never left politics, his regular newspaper columns as recently as last month,
testament to this. It's been announced that the presenter Vernon Kay will be
stepping into Ken Bruce's shoes as the host of Britain's most listened to radio
programme, the weekday mid-morning show on Radio 2. He will take over in May
after Ken Bruce, one of the station's longest serving presenters, lost his
decision to leave last month. Our arts correspondent David Silatore reports.
Vernon Kay, the presenter of TV programmes such as All Star Family Fortunes and
the celebrity diving show Splash has a long radio pedigree. Radio 1, Radio X and
in recent months he's been a regular stand-in on Radio 2. That's the boss, good
morning, it's BBC Radio 2, Vernon in for Zoe. No pressure, Vernon, but
yesterday's show with Gordon was the best ever, says Jacqueline Brighton. I
think we've razed the bar, the dizzy heights that we might not be able to reach
ever again whilst I'm here anyway. And he presents his own dance sound show with
its back to Bolton cheesy bangers. We celebrate the cheesy hits that would have
never ever been heard. Now he's been announced as the replacement for Ken Bruce
as the voice of mid-morning, which is at the moment Britain's most listened to
radio show with more than 8 million tuning in each week. Are you ready? Now it's
also a generational shift. 72-year-old Ken Bruce has been a fixture in the slot
for more than 30 years. Of course, when he began, he was rather younger than his
2023 replacement, 48-year-old Vernon Kay. And as he left work today, Ken wished
him well. Vernon's a lovely bloke and I wish him all the better best. Ken
Bruce's last show will be on March the 3rd. Vernon Kay will take over in May for
what he says is a dream come true. The publisher Puffin says it will release
what it calls a classic collection of Roald Dahl's books after it was criticised
for editing his works to remove potentially offensive words. The 17 titles will
be released later this year and will sit alongside the newly rewritten books.
This report from our entertainment correspondent Colin Patterson starts with
Michael Palin reading from one of the original texts. There was Augustus Gloop
who was always eating and was very fat indeed. For a week Augustus Gloop has
been enormous. Now he's back to being fat. Penguin Random House, which owns
Puffin Children's Books, has performed a U-turn of which the Great Glass
Elevator would be proud. The publisher had announced that future editions of
Roald Dahl's books would contain hundreds of changes so the stories could be
enjoyed by modern audiences. These included the Oompa Loompas being small rather
than tiny, the Cloudmen becoming the Cloud people and the Twits are no longer
described as ugly. The Prime Minister complained, Salman Rushdie said the Roald
Dahl estate should be ashamed and yesterday Camilla the Queen consort gave a
speech at Clarence House in which she defended the rights of authors to express
themselves as they wanted. Please keep doing so and please remain true to your
calling. Unimpeded by those who may wish to curb the freedom of your expression
or impose limits on your imagination. In a statement Penguin Random House said
it had listened to the debate over the last week and had decided to publish a
new Roald Dahl classic collection, featuring 17 books with the original text
unaltered. These will be sharing shelf space with the new, more sensitive
versions so readers can decide themselves which to choose. The big friendly
giant once said don't gobble funk around with words so maybe he would describe
today's turn of events as scrumdiddly umptious. Cricket and England's women have
lost to South Africa in the semi-final of the T20 World Cup. In front of a
packed crowd in Cape Town they fell seven runs short of their target of 165.
Their opponents scored 18 runs of the last of their innings. South Africa will
now play the defending world champions Australia in the final on Sunday. The
jersey worn by the Welsh rugby player Sir Gareth Edwards when he scored what is
widely acclaimed as one of the sport's greatest tries has been sold for a new
world record price. The black and white striped Barbarians No. 9 shirt went for
£240,000, the largest amount ever paid for an item of sports clothing at a UK
auction. Sir Gareth wore the top on January 27th, 1973 when he helped his team
score a 23-11 win over New Zealand in Cardiff. The new owner of the shirt is not
known. Returning to our top story marking the first anniversary of the Russian
invasion of Ukraine. More than 8 million Ukrainians are now refugees in Europe.
Many of them have no idea when they will be able to return to their homes and to
the lives they left behind. World reporter Kalem Tully has been speaking to a
number of young Ukrainian music students who are now living in the UK. A year
after the invasion, life looks very different for young Ukrainians in the UK.
Are you happy here? Yeah, of course I'm very happy. Irina is 20 and lives in
temporary accommodation with her mum and sister. We organised our choir and
we're seeing in Christmas. So you're still able to follow your dreams in the UK?
Yeah, of course. I'm a musician, I'm a vocalist and a guitarist. Andre is 21 and
was a music teacher back in Ukraine. In the night, for example, I lay on my bed
and think about young guys, sometimes younger than me. And they fight on the
front and I think, oh my God. Nikita is 23 and is a top violinist. Most men over
the age of 18 aren't allowed to leave Ukraine, but Andre and Nikita were given
military exemptions so they could continue their careers at the London
Performing Academy of Music. The one of my friends, he was near my opal in March
and he was a prisoner of Russians, the prisoner, and now I really don't know if
he's alive or not. Despite everything, they still have big dreams for the
future. You think you're going to make it as an opera singer? Yeah, I think so.
I've seen your videos, they're very good. Yeah, thank you. I cannot fight, I
cannot be with a weapon, but my weapon is my violin. So with this weapon I can
do something. I can tell the people we are Ukrainians. We're not the part of
Russia. Yeah, we are not the part of Russia, we are Ukrainians. Finally, we look
back on a day of remembrance and reflection after 12 months of conflict in
Europe. It was a year of endurance, a year of compassion, a year of bravery. We
have survived. We have not been defeated and we will do everything to win. Putin
cannot, must not win in Ukraine because what's at stake is the international
order itself. You understand and live with the thought that every day you can
get killed. It's very strange that people can get used to everything, but we are
somehow used to it already. We have a joke. Putin will be awarded as a hero of
Ukraine for his job that he did to unite Ukraine, to build our army and to make
Ukrainian nation great. BBC News. The news this evening was read by Vigialis. A
British jazz funk musician and Ukrainian-born pianist help us add pieces to our
playlist at 7.15 this evening. Before that we have comedy and his altsman and
his guests who will be here with the news quiz in a few moments. Lem Sisay is a
one-off. Are you the poet? A woman said to me in the street. Lem Sisay isn't
anyone else. Now I can say that I finally met Benjamin Zephaniah. Lem Sisay
explores uniqueness. You are a visible original apentacle of miracles. We're
talking about being the one and only non-graduate in the room. You just said you
failed. You are the Lord Mayor of Manchester. Lem Sisay is the one and only. Are
you that poet? Tony Walsh. On Friday mornings at 11.30 on Radio 4 and BBC
Sounds. Welcome to the news quiz. Hello, rationing is back this week in our
supermarkets and I'm only allowed to use the letters Q and Z twice each in this
week's show. I am Andy Zoltzman. I'll be asking the questions. This is going to
be really quite difficult. This is the news... Our teams this week, well, in a
week where not only have vegetables been disappearing from the supermarket
shelves but rumours of a Beatles Rolling Stones collaboration have been sweeping
the internet, we have team Sergeant Last Remaining Pepper against team I Can't
Get No Salad's action. On team Pepper we have Andy Parsons and from the
spectator Kate Andrews. APPLAUSE And on team Salad's Holly Walsh and joining
Holly, it's Ian Smith. APPLAUSE Our first question goes to Andy and Kate, who
this week popped on the karaoke machine and belted out a frankly appalling
rendition of the classic number one hit, It's My Party and I'll Ramble On
Deludedly for almost two hours if I want to. I believe this was Vladimir Putin.
Correct. He was going to suspend the New Start Nuclear Treaty and then very
shortly afterwards Biden made a speech in Kiev. I was obviously, you know, after
John Kennedy had gone to Berlin and said, Iqbin, I'm Berliner, which apparently
means I'm a donut. I was very surprised that Biden actually made quite a good
speech and didn't actually say that he was himself a chicken coated in
breadcrumbs. LAUGHTER We were very lucky. I'm speaking as an American because,
you know, Biden had one job and that was to show up and remember where he was
and remember what side he was on. And he really did rise to the occasion. This,
of course, marks the one year anniversary of Russia's war against Ukraine. And
you had these competing speeches within, you know, a matter of hours. And so,
yes, I'm delighted to say this time the answer was Putin in terms of a rambling
speech and not the President of the United States. One of them had a very
different view of how the war started than the other one. I mean, Biden thought
it was Russia's fault and Russia felt that it was very much the West's fault. So
it was kind of like Jeremy Kyle, but done on the World Stage. LAUGHTER Biden
said in his speech, we will not tire. But it was funny because it visibly wore
him out just to say that. LAUGHTER So Zelensky is still there one year on and he
was, of course, he was the number one target for the Russians and they wanted to
eliminate him to sap the morale of the Ukrainian people. And I was thinking
that, of course, it had been Britain that had been attacked rather than Ukraine.
I'm not sure the Russians would have targeted Boris Johnson or Liz Truss in
quite the same way. LAUGHTER Because they'd have worried it would have had the
opposite effect on our morale. LAUGHTER I was just going to note the difference
between watching UK and American coverage of these speeches. You know, here we
were basically trusted to watch the speech and know who was the good guy and who
was the bad guy. But in America, where people have been a bit more misbehaved,
that little insurrection and all, it was interesting to watch the news
presenters because they would play the Putin speech and then they jump in and be
like, this is a lie. This is not true. Please do not storm the Capitol again.
LAUGHTER I do think Biden did say quite a lot in the speech that was wrong
because he said Putin thought the world would roll over and he was wrong. But
the world is rolling over constantly. LAUGHTER Almost daily. LAUGHTER Almost
daily. LAUGHTER Can anyone tell me how Joe Biden got to Kiev? Bus pass. Close.
LAUGHTER I think he might have delivered the actual speech from Warsaw. Yes.
Because the Polish government was putting a lot of pressure on Joe Biden, of
course, to defend NATO and they want to sign Ukraine up to a different kind of
security level. But, you know, there's a lot of pressure being put on the
president. So, again, the fact that he was able to keep it all in line and show
up for the occasion was very impressive. It was a ten-hour train journey, wasn't
it? That's correct. So, for any British listeners, that's equivalent of a day
single from Hull to Liverpool. LAUGHTER As you mentioned, the START Treaty. So
this is the last nuclear pact between Russia and America. I mean, do we need to
keep things in perspective? Because, I mean, thanks to the success of various
nuclear treaties over the years, there are now only enough nukes in the
superpowers' respective arsenals to wipe out all life on Earth ten to twenty
times, whereas it used to be twenty to thirty. So, actually... Yeah, no, it's
decreased significantly. So, a reminder as well that politicians can never win,
because if you are promoting keeping your nuclear weapons, everyone says, well,
no, we need nuclear disarmament, and Ukraine learned that the hard way. But then
if you're saying, no, we should really scale back or we're going to scale back,
everyone's like, more weapons now. There's just... There's no winning. But it's
been brilliant in some ways. Putin thought he was going to win in two weeks and
a year later it not worked out how he had hoped and Britain, one of the biggest
supporters of the Ukraine, weapons, loads of marches. And it's been incredible,
everybody wearing blue and yellow on the marches. I did see one bloke wearing
all green and the only thing I could assume was he'd actually put his blue and
yellow stuff in the wash. I mean, there was a story this week, there was a
protest, the campaign group led by Donkeys had a protest outside the Russian
embassy in London. They painted the street yellow and blue, the colours of the
Ukrainian flag. But unfortunately, the just-stop oil then came along with some
red paint, leaving passers-by terrified that Putin had just invaded Ecuador.
Yes, one year on from the start of the Ukraine war, Vladimir Putin gave a
formless and incoherent hour and 45-minute long wind ramble, celebrities
justifying his floundering Russian flunk-upation of Ukraine, while civil
Tennessee blaming the West for making him do it. Now, obviously, tantrums at
birthday parties are nothing new, but when it's a scripted 105-minute strop
before you even got to the pass, the parcel phase, you know things are not going
well. And some senior officials, including former President Dmitry Medvedev,
were seen to fall asleep during Putin's speech. Now, look, all of us on this
panel have had people fall asleep during our gigs. Putin also said that the West
intends to transform a local conflict into a global confrontation. Well, let me
assure you, Vladimir, we do not intend to do that. We can barely get through an
unedited role doll book without profound emotional damage. I really don't think
we're looking at another World War. I know as a species we're obsessed with
sequels, but two World Wars was, frankly, more than enough. Right, at the end of
our Ukraine round, the scores are two to team Pepper and one to team Salads. Are
we Pepper or Salads? You're Salads. Are we? Yes. Sorry, you're losing. Holly and
Ian, since they're behind, you can take our next question. Who tried to prove
this week that he is not just a man on a mission, but a man on five missions? Is
this Kia Starner? Correct. Oh, God. This is... Did you listen to what he had to
say? He's decided he's got five missions that he set up because, you know, Rishi
had five things, so he's going to have five things. And they're basically
economy, health, climate crisis, education justice. That's it. They're just the
most vague things ever. I mean, he might as well just bought a tea towel on
Etsy. You know, with like five things, and like, what are your five missions?
Just live, life, love, dance like nobody's watching, and Prosecco O'Clock. Like,
that's how completely pointless saying those five things were. That sounds like
an election-winning manifesto. Well, thank you. The economy one is quite weird.
He said that he wanted the UK to achieve the highest economic growth in the G7,
which is such a... The G7, I always think, is a weird group anyway. Do you know
who's in the G7? Does anyone know who's in the G7? Yes. Just four patronising
men said yes. It's like doing that in Q7. It's the most advanced and richest
economy. Did they do reach for the stars? Yeah. I completely agree that they're
vague. My favourite one was breaking down barriers to opportunity at every
stage. I mean, that literally means nothing. It's like a fill in the blank
option. Like, what does labour mean to you? Did I not say it? Fill it in here.
And it strikes me that none of the ideas were particularly new, that they
sounded a lot like Tory pledges with a splash of red. And that does seem to be
the labour tactic these days, just move as far to the right as possible without
totally giving it away. But I think I was most relieved that this time the
missions or the pledges weren't put on a tombstone, like Ed Miliband did. I
think he should have tucked them into a dreamcatcher or something like that. For
all we know he did, he's home right now, you know, manifesting the election.
It's totally possible. Manifesting is manifesto. Exactly. I'm sad we missed a
bit where he's presented with the missions and asked if he chooses to accept
them. Nobody's bothered about pledges anymore. We've seen them too often, right?
He might have just sort of said, you know, one bullshit, two waffle, three
fantasy, four not going to happen, five, hopefully nobody will remember this one
in two years' time. And if he did want people to remember them, he should just
have had one at the end, which is something like three tomatoes and people have
gone, oh, Christ! Can I say, I've got some missions that if I was Prime
Minister, what my pledges would be, change April Fool's Day to the first of
June. Just like the ultimate sort of prank. Right. Double thumbs up and your
passport's allowed. That is a good one. That is very good. Show a bit of pride.
This is a very happy manifesto and something Labour voters haven't felt for 13
years now, so maybe this is... Well, you say that, but my next one is, bring
back a surname-based clan system. So, I'm basically me trying to get power for
the Smiths. I think they should just do one pledge. Right. I think they should
stick to it. What would your one pledge be, then? Well, mine would be to
convince the British public to stop using the word jet ski and use the word
motorcycle, but I don't know. Well, I mean, Stalmer said he wanted a green tech
superpower. That was one of the pledges, wasn't it? And it'd be nice if we could
get our energy sector, right, wouldn't it? At the moment, they're saying, oh,
green tech, we want more nuclear power. Eight nuclear power stations, that's
what they're trying to build at the moment, isn't it? And we're struggling to
build one, because we don't build the technology, do we? They're getting the
Chinese to build it. The Chinese, of course, who we, you know, we're not going
to let them have any sort of part of our 5G mobile phone networks, because
they're a security threat, aren't they? But we're quite happy to let them build
a 3,000-kilowatt mega-watt nuclear reactor on the Somerset coast. And, well,
they might be able to cause a nuclear core meltdown, but they will know nothing
of the survivors WhatsApp group we've set up afterwards. Yes, Keir Starmer has
unveiled five missions for the UK. Mission one is to flesh out what the other
missions are in a bit, at some point, maybe with a bit more detail. And Starmer
pledged zero carbon power by 2030, which looks easily achievable, as long as
they just drop the word carbon. He also said he wants to give Britain its future
back, but was not specific about how we will do that. But given that he also
mentioned energy, I assume it consists of a vial of plutonium, a wild-haired
scientist and a DeLorean going at exactly 88 miles an hour. At the end of that
round, Kate and Andy have four, Holly and Ian have three. For our next round, we
have a home or home round, rather than home or away. But you have to choose one
of the home nations of the United Kingdom to receive a question about. Kate,
which nation are you going to go for? I'm going to choose Northern Ireland. Good
choice this week. Now, here's your question on Northern Ireland. Some cons are
pro the pro. Some cons say the pro is a con. There's been some to and fro. Who
are the cons? What's the pro? And what are the pros and cons? Protocal? Did I
hear that in there? Correct. Yes. So this is quite triggering, because I had
just got to the point where I had stopped having nightmares about very specific
Brexit terms. Like alternative arrangements, non-tariff trade barriers, John
Claude Juncker had just stopped haunting my dreams, and now it's all flooding
back. But the Northern Ireland protocol, which was supposed to solve the border
issue between Northern Ireland and the Republic, has not been working. Residents
feel cut off from Great Britain, because there's essentially a trade barrier now
between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. So some MPs, to be specific, Boris
Johnson, is insisting that the UK just press on with this bill that he crafted,
which would give the government the right to essentially rip up parts of the
protocol that they don't like. And Rishi Sunak thinks that it maybe isn't such a
great idea just to unilaterally rip up international agreements. So he's put
that protocol back on the table, and the hope is that they can get the Northern
Ireland Assembly back up and running. It's been suspended on and off for three
years now. So just like last time, we can cancel all of our holidays. We can
kiss our loved ones goodbye, because we are back to the all-consuming Brexit
negotiations. Yes! Yay! APPLAUSE And really, basically, as far as I can work out
the background, isn't it, is that Boris Johnson, he promised the DUP that there
be no checks, then he signed the Brexit agreement that said there would be
checks, then he complained when it turned out there were checks, so then he said
he wanted to introduce the protocol bill so as he could then unilaterally ignore
any checks, and then he got kicked out of office because he was lying, wasn't
it? And now he's re-entered the fray, saying that, in fact, Rishi Sunak should
do exactly what he had been doing because it was working so well. Ian, I know
you're a massive fan of the Northern Ireland Protocol. Well, they're one of my
favourite prog-rock bands. Basically, it looks like it's very difficult to
solve, and we need to celebrate the small wins. Apparently, the EU are willing
to negotiate on reducing the amount of paperwork. We've really just got to sell
that as, like, there's a bit less paperwork! Yes, we've done it, and just sort
of lean into that sort of thing. They've proposed green and red lanes, and I'm
going to try and explain that now, having not really read about it. So, if what
you're trying to import is green, it can go straight through. If anything is
red, that needs more checks, which is going to cause a civil war amongst
peppers. Isn't that like when you go through customs and it says anything to
declare, and you think, no, I just walk straight through? Like, who bothers?
Yeah, it's an honesty box system. Yeah, it's a really stupid system. Yeah, only
the honest drug dealers get caught out by that. The UK is desperate for an
honesty box system, but the EU is not feeling so trustworthy. Once, when I went
through the airport and the anything to declare thing, I shouted out, I once
ironed my shirt before a rectal exam. I like these stories, because I like the
term Eurosceptic MPs, because it makes it sound like they're flat-urfers who
don't believe Switzerland exists. Wouldn't necessarily be that far from the
truth for someone. Well, if you describe Switzerland to someone, it doesn't
sound real. It's like a mountainous land full of banks where all people can go
and legally kill themselves. Yes, this week, Rishi Sunak has been seeking an
agreement with the EU on the post-Brexit rules, but I think it's fair to say at
this point that Brexit remains the magic goose that will surely one day produce
something from its arse that looks at least a bit more golden and a bit more
egg-like. But thus far, it's had a bit of a tough time, but as a young nation-
facturing process just starting out on its career, you can't expect miracles,
and it has been hindered Brexit by things beyond its control. For example, a
global economic downturn, a pandemic, a war, dysfunctional parents, and, of
course, the unexpected discovery of Northern Ireland. Andy, which nation from
the UK would you like your question on? I'm going to go Scotland, please. OK.
Who in Scotland this week said she'd given a straight answer to a straight
question, but was then criticised for that answer being, well, too straight? So
I think this is going to be the SNP election, and it's a lady called Kate
Forbes, and a lot of discussion about the views of the three candidates,
particularly about the gender self-ID, and if nothing else, the whole
transgender debate, it has made me very confident of what a pronoun is, and I'm
very grateful for that, because I never actually got talk grammar at my state
school. Kate Forbes is a member of the Free Church of Scotland, and they tend to
take very conservative viewpoints, so in addition to trans rights, she's also
being asked questions about gay marriage and even what she thinks about women
having children outside of being married, and I think it's actually a real test
of stated versus revealed preferences on our part, the publics, because ever
since Partygate and Boris Johnson's resignation, it's been all about integrity,
right? Where she's seen a promise to bring integrity back to the Tory Party, Kia
Stama says no, I'll be honest with voters, and Kate Forbes is the first one to
really, you know, try answering very directly these questions that she's being
asked, and everyone is like, no, thank you, please be a little bit less honest.
Roll that back. Can you, like, make up some beliefs, because we feel a lot more
comfortable if you lied right now? But she did kind of roll it back there,
didn't she? She did an apology. A non-apology apology, yeah. It's one of those
apologies where it's like, I'm sorry that I'm right. It is so funny, isn't it?
The SNP is basically a party that's there for Scottish independence, and they've
been completely sucked into this trans issue that's now, it's like UKIP sort of
like falling apart because no one could have agreed that it was a blue or a gold
dress, you know, like it's... I'm completely pointing this... I mean, what I
love about Kate Forbes with this trans stuff is that the irony being that Kate
Forbes identifies as a potential SNP leader, and yet no one else agrees with
her. They got into an argument about what constitutes a woman. It's very
controversial at the moment. Obviously J.K. Rowling very offended along with a
lot of other people that often she's now no longer referred to as a woman, but
referred to as sometimes different phrases such as people with vulvas. And I
think your blokes do have to be described eventually as people with penises. I
think most blokes are going to be fairly comfortable with that, I'll be honest
with you. You know, yes, yes, I've got a penis, so I'll show you if you like.
Obviously I won't because I know that that can constitute harassment, because
not only have I got a penis, I've also got a brain. But I'm afraid I can't show
you that either because it happens to me in the same place as my penis. APPLAUSE
Kate Forbes as well, she said that she's got these views but she wouldn't, like,
repeal anything, she wouldn't change the laws. And she said it's because she's a
servant of democracy and not a dictator. I always feel like when someone goes,
I'm not a dictator, you're like, I feel more suspicious that you might be a
dictator. No, like, no one would assume that the leader of the SNP is going to
go on to be a dictator. It's got Naked Man In A Bush going, I'm not a weirdo,
kind of violent. Right, at the end of our UK round, the scores are, let's call
it, Ten All. APPLAUSE We're calling it Ten All as we enter our final round, and
our final round is a picture round. Yes. I think it could be the first picture
round in Radio Quiz history. I'm going to describe a picture, and our panellists
have to tell me what news story it's from. So, Ian and Holly, your picture is
this. An empty shelf in a supermarket with a parent comforting a small child who
is weeping, but you promised me I could have extra broccoli. Is it the food
shortage? Yes. The vegetable shortage? Aldi and Asda and Morrison's, they're all
rationing the amount of vegetables, but M&S and Waitrose aren't, mainly because
they're going in to Aldi and Morrison's and buying the vegetables, and then they
can still make a massive profit back at M&S and Waitrose. So, the reason we're
having these shortages is because there have been harvest problems in Spain and
North Africa, where we import a lot of this food from. So, it's not just the UK,
other countries are having issues, and it's an important reminder that anyone
can be the problem, because, you know, we have a war going on, we have tree
tensions rising around the world, but this time it's the holiday destinations
that are giving us the headache. Somewhat unexpected. But people keep sending
photographs of French supermarkets with loads of salad in it, as though to taunt
us, as I eat my quiche with no garnish, and I drink my pims with nothing but
sweet in it. LAUGHTER I think we just need to start utilising some of the less
popular, but still readily available vegetables, and it's finally happening. A
resurgence of cress. LAUGHTER We use it in primary school to teach kids, I don't
know, that life is shit, and... LAUGHTER You grow it and then you don't use it
again, now it's time to get some recipes going. Cress surprise. LAUGHTER And our
final picture question, this can go to Ian and Holly, the picture is a marker
pen scrolling all over Gene Wilder's face. LAUGHTER What is the story? This is
the Roald Dahl story, isn't it? Yes, correct. Of course, which I find
disgusting, you know, I just think it's about making changes, doing edits and
woking up Roald Dahl books, which is just awful, because, you know, you make
little changes here, little changes there, and then before you know it, it's not
a Roald Dahl book, is it? It's a David Walliams book, so... LAUGHTER Everybody's
getting very excited about this, but, I mean, in fact, Roald Dahl rewrote Roald
Dahl, didn't he? It was Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, originally the
Impalumpas, they were black pygmies from deepest, darkest Africa who were happy
to be slaves, only working for chocolate, and their actual diet had been eating
the bark of the bonbon tree, and then Roald Dahl read this and thought, oh,
sensitivity, read my own work, realised where he was going wrong, and actually
he went completely woke, Roald Dahl, back in 1973. So, you know, he was the woke
leader, a lot of people struggled to believe that, a lot of this audience are
struggling to believe that. But it seems, yeah, he was actually... He wasn't
just a gobba funka, he was woke curious before that was even a thing. LAUGHTER
The difficulty, of course, Andy, is that if you are going to make changes to
text, you have to be confident that they're good ones, so I think the one you
just described is a really great example of a good change. But, you know, I read
Roald Dahl as a kid, I'm sure we all did, and I was curious as to what these new
edits were from the publisher, because they were insisting they were very small.
And I also went back to Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, and they've addressed
the Impalumpas again, but this time they've changed them from small men to small
people. And I'm just wondering what woman felt excluded from that group?
LAUGHTER Like, I've heard women say to me before, you know, I really want to be
a part of this boys club or that boys club, but no-one's ever said I'm desperate
to be an Impalumpa. LAUGHTER And we're called enough names already, I would have
thought we could have left Impalumpa off the list. I think the changes haven't
been the best, I think that's fair to say, because they changed... Augustus
Cleep is no longer fat, he's enormous. Now, I'm not sure that that is much
better. LAUGHTER Kids being bullied at school and, you know, somebody's been
called fat and you have a kid going, no, no, no, you can't call them fat,
they're not fat, they're enormous. LAUGHTER In all seriousness, it was done by
the publishers, wasn't it? It was done by Puffin, and they did it because
there's a certain amount of people who felt uncomfortable reading those books to
their kids because they had difficult words that they felt was outdated. So,
really, it's just a money thing, isn't it? It's just to sell more books to more
people. It's very much to sell more books to more people, and there's two ways
of doing it. Obviously, you know, one is to try and make everybody feel more
inclusive and then they've got a bigger audience, and the other way, of course,
is to change completely unnecessarily a couple of words and then everybody
thinks, well, that is completely ridiculous, I'm going to go online and see if I
can get one of the old editions and generate sales that way round. And those
prices are going to spike because the demand is going to be high. And they
probably bought loads of the copies early, so they were working the system from
the inside. Oh, my God, this is like Ocean's Eleven all over again! LAUGHTER I
can't believe that got rid of... The creepiest bit in China Chocolate Factory is
those wife-swapping grandparents who share a bed. LAUGHTER To give them separate
beds, we all know what's going on there. They're at it 24-7, and Charlie
Bucket's sleeping with his hands over his ears. No wonder he's out looking for
chocolate bars all the time. He's just trying to get away from that sex fest
that's going on in there. There's a reference in the BFG of Mary going as white
as a sheet and they've changed that to as white as a farmer's market. LAUGHTER
APPLAUSE Yes. Indeed, the publisher of Roald Dahl's books has been changing some
of the wording in his books. Roald Dahl remains one of Britain's most popular
anti-Semitic children's authors. LAUGHTER It's important to keep his work
successful for all anti-seamites today. LAUGHTER Dahl himself made revisions, as
Andy said, to his texts. And some of these revisions made now are sensible and
some are probably unnecessary. Is it progress? Is it regress? Is it destroying
literature? Is it saving it? And above all, do we need to take a more nuanced
view of these things and stop seeing them as simple binary choices? Well, do we?
Come on! Yes or no? LAUGHTER And that concludes this week's news quiz. Our
winners, going home with a luxury cucumber for two and an all-inclusive
lettuce... LAUGHTER..Holly and Ian on team Salads with 14. Kate and Andy finish
on 12. APPLAUSE Thank you for listening to this week's news quiz. I've been Andy
Altman. Goodbye. LAUGHTER APPLAUSE Taking part in the news quiz were Ian Smith,
Holly Walsh, Kate Andrews and Andy Parsons. In the chair was Andy Zoltzman. An
additional material was written by Alice Fraser, Katherine Brinkworth, William
Hall and Jade Gebby. The producer was Sam Holmes. It was a BBC Studios
production. APPLAUSE Lovely more from Andy at the same time next week. There's
more comedy over on Radio 4 Extra this evening where comedians including Lucy
Porter, John Richardson and Kevin Bridges aim to make us laugh in the comedy
show Act Your Age. That's just about to get underway. First to look ahead to
tomorrow evening, here on Radio 4. You can literally go anywhere at the snap of
your fingers. For 100 years, the BBC has been We are making changes to the way
BBC live streams are distributed via third party services and platforms. And the
BBC stream you are currently listening to will stop working by mid-2023. If you
are using an internet radio or smart speaker and hearing this message, please
contact the manufacturer. If you're listening on web or mobile, this service is
available to stream on BBC Sounds. To happen on radio. Dramatic. Dramatic beats.
On Radio 4 and BBC Sounds.