TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-03-14H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 92 to 95 FM, 198 longwave on digital radio and BBC sounds. This is BBC Radio 4.
Hello and welcome to The World at One with me, Johnny Diamond. Former Culture
Secretary Nadine Dorris turns her guns on the civil servant who's going to work
for Keir Starmer. She's brought the civil service into disrepute. She's broken
the civil service code quite patently. And when it comes to the report, I don't
think her report is actually worthy of the paper that is now written on. We'll
hear more from her and a statement from Boris Johnson, who says the situation is
surreal. We'll get reaction from the former head of the civil service, Lord
Kerslake. My word is my bond may no longer be enough. At the centre of all this
activity is the London Stock Exchange, where great ideas meet the capital to
make them happen. There are warnings that the big players are moving to the Big
Apple. We'll hear why and what might be done. And as Ken Bruce leaves Radio 2,
it's last call for this classic quiz. It's time for Popmaster. But pop pickers,
he made it look easy. We'll ask an expert what makes the perfect radio quiz. The
BBC News is read by Alan Smith. The Parliamentary Committee investigating
statements Boris Johnson made to MPs over PartyGate has said there's evidence
that the House of Commons may have been misled. It's published a report setting
out the next steps in the inquiry, including details of when the former Prime
Minister will present his account of events. Mr Johnson has denied misleading
Parliament and has raised concerns that a report on government lockdown parties
by the former civil servant, Sue Gray, may feed into the investigation after she
was offered a senior job by Labour. Here's our political correspondent, David
Wallace-Lockhart. In an update from Parliament's Privileges Committee, the
cross-party group of MPs said there was evidence that the Commons may have been
misled on a number of occasions by Boris Johnson's statements about Downing
Street gatherings during the pandemic. They added that the evidence strongly
suggests breaches of Covid guidance would have been obvious to Mr Johnson when
he attended certain events. This is not, though, the committee's final
conclusions. In a statement, Boris Johnson said there was no evidence that he
knowingly or recklessly misled Parliament. The former Prime Minister has also
expressed concern that a report by the former civil servant, Sue Gray, who is in
the process of accepting a job with the Labour Party, could feed into the
investigation. The Privileges Committee said they had not based their findings
on the Sue Gray report. Labour said Ms Gray had shown the highest integrity
throughout her civil service career. The MP Neil Coyle is facing a five-day
suspension from the Commons after drunkenly abusing two people in separate
incidents in a parliamentary bar. He lost the Labour whip in February last year
after complaints were made about his behaviour. This morning, Mr Coyle
apologised unreservedly, telling MPs he was ashamed of his conduct. Rupa Huq has
been reinstated as a Labour MP five months after she lost the whip for
describing the then-Chancellor Kwasi Kwarteng as superficially black. She says
she's reflected on the offence she caused and has completed anti-racism and bias
training. The Chancellor Jeremy Hunt is expected to extend the government's
energy price guarantee policy at current levels for a further three months,
after asking suppliers to prepare bills on that basis. Typical average household
annual bills were set to rise to £3,000 from next month, but it's understood
some energy firms are already preparing to keep them at around £2,500 instead. A
court in Belarus has sentenced last year's Nobel Peace Prize winner to 10 years
in prison. Alias Belyatsky, who was 60, was charged with smuggling money into
the country and financing a protest group he founded, charges he denies. He was
arrested in 2021 after mass demonstrations took place following the presidential
election, where Alexander Lukashenko secured his sixth term in office. Our
Russia editor Steve Rosenberg has been following the story. Mr Belyatsky is the
founder of Vyazna, a leading human rights organisation in Belarus. His deputy,
Valiantin Stefanovich, was on trial with him. He was jailed for nine years. And
activist Uladzimir Lapkovich was handed a seven-year prison term. They were
found guilty of economic crimes and of funding protests. The case against them
is widely seen as politically motivated. Vyazna has been monitoring and
documenting human rights abuses in Belarus, as the country's authoritarian
leader, Alexander Lukashenko, has been suppressing dissent and cracking down on
civil society. According to Vyazna, there are currently 1,458 political
prisoners in Belarus. The Belarusian authorities claim there are none. The
Russian mercenary group Vagner says its forces have surrounded the east
Ukrainian city of Bakhmut. The area has been the focus of heavy fighting in
recent weeks, with Kiev acknowledging that its troops are under severe pressure.
Our Europe regional editor Paul Moss reports. Bakhmut is now subject to constant
gunfire and explosions. Those who remain describe a population suffering severe
deprivation, while Ukrainian forces try to hold out against the Russian
mercenaries apparently now surrounding them. The claims by Vagner's Yevgeny
Prigozhin can't be taken at face value, but Ukraine has acknowledged that its
troops in Bakhmut are under severe pressure and may have to withdraw. Casualties
on both sides have been severe. All this for a city which many believe in the
end is of little strategic value. The former England cricket captain Michael
Vaughan has denied allegations he made racist comments towards the former
Yorkshire player Azim Rafik. He's begun giving evidence to the Cricket
Discipline Commission, which is investigating claims of racism at Yorkshire
County Cricket Club. Our sports news correspondent Matt Graveling is at the
hearing. A witness statement for the former England captain has been provided to
the three-person panel of the Cricket Disciplinary Commission and in it Michael
Vaughan says that I've been involved in cricket for more than 30 years and have
never been involved in a disciplinary offence. The allegation goes against my
values, morals and personality. He said the first time I became aware of the
comment, you lot, was part of Yorkshire's investigation in December of 2020. I
have always believed and championed that the fundamental aspect of a dressing
room is culture and it has to be inclusive. And Ken Bruce has presented his
final show on BBC Radio 2. He started at the station in 1984 and made his mid-
morning programme the most listened to radio show in the UK. Signing off, he
said the BBC was still the finest broadcasting corporation in the world, aside
from what he called the occasional vagary. He went on to thank his listeners. A
lot of people would say, oh, write down a big speech and deliver it. Now, that's
not the sort of thing I do. I do really just want to say thank you to everybody
who has contributed in any, any small way to this programme, particularly the
listeners. You know, I really couldn't do it without listeners who contribute
and complete the dialogue. We talk to each other on a daily basis and I hope
maybe sometime in the future we may be able to continue doing that. Ken Bruce,
who's left Radio 2. Thanks very much, Alan. A little more of Ken Bruce later in
the programme. A left-wing stitch-up against a Tory prime minister. That was
former business minister Jacob Rees-Mogg's verdict on the work of Sue Gray, the
senior civil servant who investigated the drinks and the parties held during
lockdown at No. 10 and whom it was announced yesterday was joining Sir Keir
Starmer's office as chief of staff. Mr Johnson was not brought down directly by
Sue Gray's report or by the breaches it investigated, but it's widely
acknowledged that the long-running investigation into social events at No. 10 in
lockdown drew much of his political capital before his downfall last July. An
hour ago, the House of Commons Privileges Committee, which is investigating Mr
Johnson's statements to the House regarding those social events during lockdown,
said the former prime minister would give oral evidence to the committee in
three weeks' time. That report from the Privileges Committee was swiftly
followed by a statement from Boris Johnson. He said he was vindicated by the
report and had some choice words for his former investigator, Sue Gray. It is
surreal, he said, to discover that the Privileges Committee proposes to rely on
evidence culled and orchestrated by Sue Gray, who's just been appointed chief of
staff to the leader of the Labour Party. I leave it to others to decide, he goes
on, how much confidence may now be placed in her inquiry and in the reports that
she produced. Civil servants have moved into party positions before, of course,
but it's hard to think of a time when an individual charged with such a
sensitive political task as the investigation into lockdown breaches has moved
so swiftly into such a senior position in the party of opposition. Nadine Dorris
was culture secretary under Boris Johnson and is a strong supporter of the
former prime minister. I spoke to her earlier this morning before the Privileges
Committee had reported and before Mr Johnson had given his statement. I asked
her why she thought that the report Sue Gray wrote on number 10 and lockdown was
now discredited. We know, as of early this morning and the research that's been
done overnight, that Sue Gray is a personal friend of Keir Starmer's and her
appointment as chief of staff to Keir Starmer did not happen overnight. She has
obviously been in discussions with Keir Starmer over a some period of time. She
is also the head of PET in number 10, the government's head of propriety and
ethics for the time that she was in number 10. That is the most sensitive civil
servant role in government. And in order for that role to be undertaken, the
civil service code has to be adhered to. And that is that civil servants are
absolutely neutral and void of any political affiliation whilst they are
carrying out that role. One of the things that she's done is she's brought the
civil service into disrepute. She's broken the civil service code quite patently
as a result of having had her conversations with Keir Starmer whilst in relation
to becoming his chief of staff, while carrying out that road. And I think more
needs to be known. Yes, the reason why her papers and computers have been seized
from her home this morning. More needs to be known about the duality that was
taking place while she was carrying out that role in terms of her relationship
with Keir Starmer and Labour and those conversations that were taking place. I
think it's hard to underestimate how outrageous that is and how very
disappointed and let down many civil servants will be feeling this morning, who
make a point of being professional in their role and adhering to the civil
service code. And she's completely blown that last night. The point of her job
with Keir Starmer is going to be bringing down the Tory government. She knows
the most she has in her possession, in her mind, not on her computers or in her
papers. She has in her possession the most sensitive, politically sensitive
information imaginable in her mind. She knows it. How it is inconceivable that
she, whilst undertaking this role as chief of staff, will not be using that
knowledge that she has acquired over the period of time while she was head of
PET. And when it comes to the report, I think it's now quite obvious as a
personal friend of Keir Starmer's, as someone who has been in discussion over
who knows what period of time, and that's something we need to find out, in
discussions about taking the role as his chief of staff with the primary
objective of bringing down the Tory government. What was her motivation in
writing that report? And I think it can only be concluded that given her new
political role, it was to bring down the Brexit supporting Prime Minister Boris
Johnson. I don't think her report is actually worthy of the paper it is now
written on, because obviously it's written by someone who has broken quite
patently the civil service code today, who has obviously had deep political
motivations while she's been writing that report, has possibly, and this is to
be uncovered yet, having dual conversations with both Keir Starmer, his office,
and Labour at the time she was writing that report. And I'm afraid it just has
blown the whole thing up. So there is more to be uncovered. And I think the
weekend is going to be a very interesting weekend. There is more to be
uncovered. But I think we'll be looking at next week a situation whereby a
number of issues, which are highly, highly sensitive and important and
discriminatory in terms of her approach to the report, will be possibly revealed
and we'll be having a different conversation about whether the report is valid
or not. You, alongside a fair number of people at the time that she was
appointed, praised her. And you said she was professional and formidable and
known to be independent. Are you essentially saying I was wrong? So, you know, I
worked with Sue Gray on the infected blood inquiry and I found her to be, I
liked Sue. I found her to be very personable, hugely personable and very
professional. I thought she epitomised what was the best of the civil service.
What I didn't know at the time was that she was also, you know, a close personal
friend of Keir Starmer and was obviously, even back then, lined up for the role
to be his chief of staff at some time in the future. If I'd known then what Sue
was doing as head of propriety and ethics, if I'd known then that she was having
conversations with Keir Starmer whilst holding the most important role in
government, I would not have had that opinion. And yes, you know, I thought she
was a professional civil servant. I can't even, I've spoken to a number of civil
servants last night and I can't even tell you how outraged and upset they are.
She's brought into question their integrity, their professionalism. There's so
many civil servants that go out of their way to be impartial, particularly
senior civil servants, because their job, their professionalism, their
impartiality, their ability via that impartiality to make clear headed
decisions, void of political interference, is something they prize, is something
they're proud of and something we as ministers depend on. Because it is
impossible as a secretary of state or a minister, quite often impossible, not to
allow the politics to cloud your judgment. And so that new symbiotic
relationship between civil servants and ministers and a government is a really,
it's a finely tread line. It's a really important relationship and it totally
depends on the impartiality of civil servants and their professionalism on one
side and the political considerations on the other, on the part of ministers.
And she's actually damaged that today. And I know a lot of civil servants are
very angry indeed. Would you like to see the appointment blocked? I think I
think it has to be. It's not whether I would like it or not. I think there are
so many questions over it now and so much needs to be revealed. And I think
there will be so much we will find out. Do you think there should be a new
report? Does the report, if it's invalidated, do you want to see a new report?
And what of the Privileges Committee, the House of Commons Privileges Committee
doing its own investigation? Is that an alternative to the report? How does it
work for you? The report should never have happened. The investigation should
have been and was carried out by the Met Police. They found Boris Johnson
guilty, fined him for being sat at his desk in the middle of a working morning.
They are the authoritative body that decide whether or not a crime took place
and whether there was any breaking of the rules. And that's what they found. Why
Sue Gray insisted on continuing with writing her report at the time the Met
Police were brought in is something which needs to be questioned. So she was
writing her report. The Met stepped in. She no longer needed to continue that
report. In fact, I believe she was as the terms of reference of the report were
if the Met Police are brought in, you step down. She absolutely refused to step
down. She absolutely insisted that she continued writing the report. And so I
think there are huge questions that need to be asked over that. Why did she not
stick to the terms of reference? Why did she decide she needed to continue
writing her report when the Met Police had already stepped in? And why did she
think her report was more relevant than that of the Met Police? And what of the
House of Commons Privileges Committee? Should that go on ahead? I don't think
legally. I mean, I don't know whether this says to the Privileges Committee, you
have to throw this report out. But whether or not in terms of reference or
whether or not in terms of the legalities, it means the report needs to be
thrown out. I don't know. But what I do know is that morally, there is a huge
question mark over this report now. And I would think that most members of the
committee will find it very difficult. I mean, it will probably stick in their
craw to have to use the report to make findings because they know that in the
same way, there is now huge doubts over Sue Gray and what she did whilst writing
that report. They will know there will be huge doubts and they will be
discredited if they use that report to reach their conclusions. So, you know,
you're talking to me this morning. This only happened last night. I think a
lot's going to happen over the next few days. But my feeling is that if I was
sat on that committee, how on earth could I now seriously and legitimately take
that report and take a position on the basis of what was written in that report,
knowing that there are huge question marks over how and why that report was
written? That was the former Culture Secretary, Nadine Doris, speaking to me
earlier this morning. We did put those points to Sue Gray, who declined to
respond. Ian Watson's our political correspondent, joins us from Milbank. Ian,
quickly, if we could, just to clarify, from the Privileges Committee today, an
update, not a final report? Definitely not a final report, Johnnie. This is an
update. But it's effectively setting out that questions are going to be asking
Boris Johnson when he appears in public before that committee in the week
beginning March the 20th. Just a couple of quick things to mention on what
Nadine Doris was saying. I asked Downing Street this morning if they felt the
Partagate report had to be reopened or re-examined. They said that actually the
events around Partagate were looked at by multiple bodies, including the police.
So that sounded like a no. And secondly, the Privileges Committee responds to
the House of Commons as a whole. The Commons told the Privileges Committee to
meet and to examine this. I don't think the Privileges Committee is therefore
itself going to start to shut down operations. And within seconds, well, minutes
of the Privileges Committee issuing its update, Boris Johnson put out a
statement saying he'd been vindicated by the report of the Privileges Committee.
Has he? No. He does say that there's no evidence in the report that I knowingly
or recklessly misled Parliament. So let me just read you, if you bear with me,
John, a few lines from that Privileges Committee report. The things I want to
put to Boris Johnson. They say that the Commons may have been misled when Mr.
Johnson said on the 8th of December 2021 that no rules or guidance had been
broken in number 10. The Commons may have been misled when Mr. Johnson failed to
tell the House about his own knowledge of the gatherings. It may have been
misled when Mr. Johnson said on the 8th of December 2021, he relied upon
repeated assurances that the rules had not been broken, when in fact, actually,
those assurances were given about only one event and not the multiple events
that took place. They also say it appears that Mr. Johnson did not correct the
statements that he repeatedly made. And this goes to the point of whether he's
been reckless. If you're misleading the House inadvertently, it's seen as less
serious than if it's deliberate or reckless. But they are saying he didn't
correct the statements he repeatedly made. And they say the evidence strongly
suggests that breaches of guidance would have been obvious to Mr. Johnson at the
time he was at the gatherings. And it is, he uses the word surreal in his
response, says it's surreal that, you know, so much of this is based on Sue
Gray's report. But what may seem surreal to some people is that he goes on to
say there's no evidence in the report that I was aware of any events taking
place at number 10. It seems to me that the committee were actually saying
directly the opposite of that, Johnny. And the committee also went out of its
way to say, I think, after it issued its update, that its report today is not
based on the Sue Gray report. It's getting its version out in front, isn't it?
Well, that's absolutely right. I mean, effectively, they complain about the fact
that it was difficult for them to get evidence that Boris Johnson initially said
he didn't have any relevant material, that they got redacted evidence from
government. In the end, though, they managed to obtain 46 of Boris Johnson's
WhatsApp messages, many more photographs than had been published in the Sue Gray
report, and I think 23 witness statements. So they're basically saying they're
basing this on their own evidence. And of course, the Metropolitan Police, as
Dean Doris said, we're also investigating this as well. So they're not accepting
that this is simply based on what Sue Gray said and therefore Boris Johnson's
attack that something based on Sue Gray's evidence is therefore not worth the
paper it's written on. Thanks very much, Ian. Ian Watson, our political
correspondent in Milbank. There is, of course, machinery in government for
considering the moves of ministers and senior officials into other jobs. The
Advisory Committee on Business Appointments is meant to look at requests from
outgoing ministers and officials to go and work in sensitive areas, but it's
widely thought to be a pretty toothless watchdog, something its chair, Lord
Pickles, acknowledged speaking to this programme in late December. Yes, of
course, it's creaking. The system is in need of reform, and it's in need of
reform immediately. I don't believe we have the time to wait for legislation to
do it. Well, Bob Kerslake, Lord Kerslake, was head of the Civil Service under
David Cameron. He's now a crossbench peer and has advised the Labour Party. Good
afternoon, Lord Kerslake. Good afternoon. Has Sue Gray made a mistake in taking
this job? Well, look, I think a lot of the accusations of impropriety are
completely wide of the mark. I worked with Sue Gray for a long time, longer than
Nadine Dorris, and I found her to be someone of complete integrity, who lived
and breathed the Civil Service and the Civil Service Code. So she would have
acted with integrity in everything she did as a civil servant. And I think it's
perfectly reasonable for her to think about taking on a role such as this. The
nature of a chief of staff job is that it's both about political understanding
and organisational capability. It's not a surprise that two previous chiefs of
staff, Jonathan Powell for Tony Blair and Ed Llewellyn for David Cameron, came
from the Civil Service. They were former diplomats. And so I'm not at all
surprised, therefore, that Kirstama has gone for someone who is with that
background. No, I mean, Kirstama's done clearly done very well in getting a
senior civil servant, but it is pretty breathtaking for people of many different
political hues to see a woman move from the heart of government straight into
perhaps the most senior position in an opposition party. You must be able to see
why people think it's improper. I see why they think it, but I think it's
misjudged, I have to say. And you don't think that the image of impropriety
itself is a problem? Well, let me just make this point. Sue Gray had completed
her role on the propriety and ethics role and moved into another department. She
was, in fact, in the DELUC department, levelling up department, at the time the
whole Partygate story broke. And in fact, she only took on that inquiry because
the then cabinet secretary, Simon Case, recused himself because he felt he was
compromised by having attended one of the events. And so we really got to see
this is not some devious process where she was drawn in or used her position.
She was drawn back into a role she had left in order to do a piece of work that
they had no one else to do. At the time she did it, there was no vacancy for
chief of staff. She may well have known Keir Starmer. He, of course, was a
director of public prosecutions and therefore a civil servant, and she would
have known him through that route. So I think there's a lot of frankly rather
absurd imagination going on here to create a role and a kind of conspiracy
theory that simply does not add up. I mean, the honest truth is the principal
culprit for Boris Johnson's government demise was Boris Johnson. Well, that may
or may not be the case. There is still the question of impropriety or the
impression of impropriety. Nadine Dorris says she's been speaking with other
civil servants who are outraged and upset. You can imagine that, can't you?
Seeing this kind of sideways movement out of government into opposition? It's
not unusual for people to move from civil servants into political roles, as I've
said. For example, we've seen that in a number of areas with the current
government, people moving into roles. So this is not something that doesn't
happen. The key thing is that we have processes to regulate it through a COBA
that you referred to. They will do the investigation and check whether there was
any impropriety. And I think the suggestion that some... You heard Lord Pickles
say a COBA was effectively toothless and everybody thinks it is in the political
world. Personally, I think it needs strengthening, but actually it's still the
process we have. And Sue Gray will go through that process in the same way as
anybody else moving from the civil service into another role would do. And I
think that's perfectly appropriate. And she will follow what comes out of that.
So I think personally, the issues of impropriety are way overstated. She has
seen an opportunity for a new role. She's gone for that opportunity and got it,
subject to the processes, and she will follow those processes. Lord Kerslake,
thank you as always for joining us on The World at One. Gaze at the glass and
steel skyscrapers of the City of London, and it may be hard to believe that
until the late 70s and early 80s, the city had become something of a backwater
when it came to international finance. For the last 40 years, we've grown used
to London as a huge financial player, bringing in a significant chunk of our
overseas earnings and tax revenues. But the ground may be shifting beneath some
of the city's strengths. For years now, the London Stock Exchange has seemed
becalmed, a place of steady but deeply unspectacular growth. And listings, when
a company goes from privately to shareholder-owned and lists itself on a stock
exchange so as to raise finance, those listings have been going to New York,
where it seems the action is. This week, two big companies headed across the
Atlantic for their listings, a British microchip designer and a buildings
materials company. Simon Jack is the BBC's business editor. Simon, the Financial
Times has this on its front page, fear of London becoming overshadowed. What
degree of concern do you think there is? I think there is real concern among
many people in the city of London. The reason we're talking about this today is
that this week, Arm Holdings, which was once the jewel in the crown of UK
technology, was bought by a private Japanese company seven years ago. And there
were big lobbying efforts for it to be relisted on the London Stock Exchange.
But in fact, they have confirmed they are in fact going to move their listing to
New York. Why? Well, it's generally thought that investors in New York, in New
York markets, are prepared to pay higher prices for companies with good growth
prospects. Here in the UK, a lot of investors prefer dividend-paying stocks.
Some would say that means they're post-growth, they're paying out their own,
rather investing in their future growth. And just over a year ago, Paul
Marshall, well-known UK hedge fund manager, called London was becoming a
Jurassic Park of a bygone era. How important is the Stock Exchange when it comes
to the city compared to the sort of huge range of financial services that the
city overall provides, both nationally and internationally? It's only a smallish
part of the things like foreign exchange trading, something called euro dollars
and futures and derivatives, all these exotic instruments that trillions of
dollars and pounds change hands every day. But in terms of prestige, it's
important to have London as your base. It's seen as a blue chip kind of
financial centre. And secondly, it creates a lot of ancillary revenue. Every
listed company needs accountants, they need lawyers, they need financial PR
firms, they need advisors in those places who advise on mergers and
acquisitions. All of those things are part of the ecosystem. If you lose those
London listings, you begin to chip away at that sort of coral reef of interest.
Simon, as always, thank you very much indeed. Simon Jack, our business editor.
Anthony Brown is the Conservative MP for South Cambridgeshire, many of whose
constituencies work at Arm, that microchip designer that went for New York over
London. He's also held a range of posts connected with financial services and
technology. Anthony, thanks for joining the World at One. Does Arm heading to
New York set alarm bells ringing for you? Well, it certainly is a disappointing
announcement that they made last night. I know the government tried very, very
hard to keep them in the UK. The fact is that technology valuations in the US
are far higher than here, and the owners, SoftBank, decided they'd get more
money listing in the US than here. But it is concerning, and there's all the
arguments that Simon Jack was just talking about there. But there's also the
impact that it could potentially have on jobs in future. I know Arm, in this
case, have given a commitment saying that their research and development and
headquarters will stay here. But there is a pattern that where the investors
are, basically jobs and research tends to follow. And I see that a lot. I've got
a lot of life science companies in my constituency. Often they get early stage
money in the UK, but if they need large sums of money, they end up having to go
to US investors. And those investors often want clinical trials done in the US
and jobs moving to the US and so on. And so that is the real long term risk here
of having crowning the jewels like Arm list totally in another country. I know
you've sat on a series of important financial services boards and represented
various different banks and bodies like it. When you look at the state of the
London Stock Exchange, do you think, oof, this is a body in decline? It
certainly has the smell of decline about it. And there's a whole range of
different reasons for that. I mean, some of the companies that have been moving
overseas, as you say, partly I think pension funds in the UK have been looking
more at what's called fixed income, like bonds rather than equities. And that
reduces the amount of money invested there. The government did launch a big
review of the listings regime called the Lord Hill Review a couple of years ago,
looking at how to make sure that London stays competitive as a place for company
listings. And some of those are being implemented. But it is it's I wouldn't say
it's panic stations at the moment, but it's certainly something that the
government and the London Stock Exchange itself should look at. And when you
speak to financial people about this kind of thing, they tend to mutter about
the burden of regulation. Is that an issue? The issue is some regulations that
probably don't really add any value. So we definitely need a high standards
regulator regime across the piece. And this is also involved, as you mentioned,
in financial services regulation. We definitely need to keep that in place. But
there are certain bits of regulation. The government just announced it's what's
so-called the Edinburgh reforms, which are looking at how to get rid of some of
the regulations that don't actually help in terms of financial stability and to
improve our competitiveness. But on the listings regime, I was speaking to a
company recently about listing on AIM. So that's the alternative investment
market in London versus NASDAQ in the US technology company. And they said the
trouble with listing on AIM is one, there just isn't as much money there as
there is in the US. But two, the rules are a lot more burdensome. It's a lot
more complicated dealing with the compliance for than it is in the US. And
that's again, that's one of the things I think, you know, particularly post
Brexit that we need to look at is, you know, making sure that our regulations
are competitive globally because we are we are on a global marketplace here. And
if there's things if there's bits of regulation that don't really add any value,
they don't protect consumers and they don't protect financial stability, then we
should look at whether we can get rid of them without doing any harm. Do you see
this as a Brexit opportunity, as a freedom that the country may have as it's
left the European Union? Well, it's absolutely true that it is a freedom in the
sense that almost all financial services, wholesale markets, financial services
regulation was done at EU level when we're in the EU. And we can now change laws
that we couldn't change when we're in the EU. Having said that, when we were
part of the EU and I was often involved in these negotiations, the EU tended to
adopt laws that are basically written in London because we're the financial
capital of Europe. So they look to us to do that. So most of the legislation
we've got in place for financial markets is largely fit for purpose. It's
generally pretty good legislation. So I think although there are opportunities
here, they're not going to be completely, you know, they're not going to
completely change the whole framework. Anthony, thank you very much indeed.
Anthony Brown, MP there, MP for South Cambridgeshire. Barely has the anniversary
of the Russian invasion of Ukraine passed and fears are rising about the opening
of another front in the war. On Ukraine's western border sits Moldova, whose
heavily Russian speaking east, the region known as Transnistria, has for three
decades maintained independence, a move supported by troops supplied by Moscow.
This week has seen pro-Russian protests in Moldova amidst warnings from Moscow
that Transnistria could be dragged into its war in Ukraine. Lucy Williamson
reports from the tiny enclave of Moldovata Nur, where residents live next door
to Russian troops guarding the breakaway region of Transnistria. The dirt road
into Moldova's breakaway pro-Russian region is deserted except for the convoy of
cars carrying men in military fatigues from the village of Moldovata Nur. Men
now in their 50s and 60s crossing into enemy territory as they did 30 years ago
when they fought pro-Russian forces for control of this area. Men like Vlad and
Tila. That's where the checkpoint was, but they were shooting at us from that
hill over there, from a tank. Once a year, these veterans make a pilgrimage from
the Moldovan village of Moldovata Nur into Russian-controlled Transnistria,
following a trail of simple monuments, pale blue crosses made from metal poles
that mark the places their comrades fell, sharing wine from a plastic bottle and
remembering young men like Vasya. I was coming down this road with Vasya. We
were both snipers. He was hit in the neck with a shrapnel fragment. He fell to
the ground and died in my arms. But memories of the past here are now joined by
fears for the future. Moscow has been talking up the threat of a Ukrainian
assault on Transnistria, warning that any attack on its forces there will be
seen as an attack on Russia itself. Moldova's president has warned of a Russian
plot to topple her pro-Western government. As the veterans pass a local school,
the pupils come out with head teacher Tatiana Roska to greet them. There were
big battles here in 1992 that left deep wounds. We're very afraid. We know what
war means and we don't wish it on anyone. One of her pupils tells me she's ready
to take up arms, as her father and grandfather did here 30 years ago. But the
pull of Moldovan identity is set against the pull of subsidised Russian gas from
Transnistria. There are those here who say that Transnistria looks after them,
while Moldova's government on the other side of the river Dniester ignores them,
and that President Maya Sandu is provoking a war with Moscow by moving closer to
the West. I'm going to be honest. It's very difficult to convince people that
life is better in Moldova when they pay a fraction of the price for gas here.
The mayor of Molovatovo, Oleg Gazya, says divisions here have deepened since
Moscow cut gas supplies to Moldova last year. We can't talk about freedom and a
better life, and at the same time tell them to go across the river and pay 30
times more for their bills. They'll say, are you crazy? But there's a hidden
price. It buys their support. In the village square, the veterans end their
pilgrimage by laying red carnations at a memorial to the frozen conflict. In the
years since they fought pro-Russian forces, their children have grown up
alongside Russian soldiers, Russian language and Russian economic support. We
older men will still form the heart of any resistance, Vlad tells me, even with
the involvement of younger men. Jammed up against Transnistrian territory and
separated from the rest of Moldova by the Dniester River, many in this tiny
Moldovan enclave feel vulnerable, wondering if they'll be asked to defend it
again. Lucy Williamson reporting from Moldova on the Ukrainian border there. It
is over. At midday today, Ken Bruce, host of the biggest radio show in Europe,
said goodbye after three decades for the very last time to his Radio 2 audience.
He signed off with The Beatles, who else, and this message from the song The
End. And in the end, the love you take is equal to the love you make. I have
loved being here with you. Thank you so much, and may we meet again somewhere.
Trailing him in clouds of glory out of the studio door is the hugely popular
quiz that Ken Bruce has tickled listeners with for so many years. Popmaster. Ten
questions on pop music from the 50s onwards. Three bonus questions are possible.
39 points, not everyone gets them, someone only got three today. Popmaster has,
along with the voice of Bruce, helped define the show. But what makes a quiz
like this so good? Lloydie James Lloyd worked in commercial radio for 25 years.
He's now content director at Fun Kids, a children's radio station. I think one
of the key elements for me is people's ability to play along at home. I think if
you're putting together any kind of quiz on the radio, you need to have the kind
of quiz where you can easily put yourself in the shoes of the contestants. So
it's got to be easy enough that it's within the realm of possibility for you to
answer the questions, but also be difficult enough that there's some element of
challenge. So it's kind of balancing those two things I think is really
important. You have to be able to think that out there, in there are millions of
people thinking, oh, is that 1975 or 1976 or something like that? That's exactly
it. And actually that brings to mind a really good example of the kind of quiz
that works very well. The big one back in the day was, of course, The Golden
Hour with Simon Bates on Radio One. The Golden Hour with Simon Bates. Radio One
and this. These are the headlines. But what was the year? Okay, it was the year
that John Glenn completed the first American orbit of the Earth. And it's also
been done in various formats like the Time Tunnel on Heart. And, you know, in
that you've got some songs all from one year and people have to guess a year.
And that's the thing I think with music quizzes, music evokes so many emotions
and memories. So like a song could have been your breakup song. The lyrics, I
don't know, you could have used them in your marriage vows or something. It can
remind you of a time and a place. And so I think that's why that feature was
just so, so successful. You want a relatively simple format so that people can
understand what's going on and they can stick with it as it goes through the
highways and byways. Yes, that's exactly it. I think a good example of
simplicity on a pop music radio station was Simon Mayo's Confessions when it was
on Radio One. OMG, I said one of our fence panels was down in the back garden
and it was no thief that had stolen the old lady's wig off the line. It was our
very own boo. There was no poor creature in its mouth. After all, it was one and
only wig. I think when you're a radio DJ, your job's to create a friendship and
bond of trust with the listener. And the idea of Confessions was people would
write in to confess a terrible thing they'd done in the hope that they'd get
absolution from Simon Mayo. And I think what I loved about it was you'd get a
different story every day, like almost borderline salacious. And then, you know,
we can all relate to those. We all do imperfect things. But it positioned Simon
Mayo as the presenter, as someone that you could trust and share things with.
And I think that helps bring an audience closer to a presenter and helps them
become more loyal, which is good for the presenter. And of course, you know, as
a knock on, good for the radio station. And it's a reminder of why radio is so
much better than any other form of broadcast, isn't it? Because of the intimacy
that builds up between listener and presenter. Exactly. Radio is a one to one
medium. You're one person talking to one individual. It's consumed an individual
at a time. And I think, you know, if you can feel like the presenters are your
friends, that's a big thing. And I think actually that's something that Scott
Mills did so well with Innuendo Bingo. This discussion seems to have drifted a
little bit off topic. You're a barbecue sort of girl. Oh, we absolutely love our
barbecue. Yeah. And we'll just cook anything on it. It's amazing. My father-in-
law, his favorite thing to do is to spit roast anything. Straight in the face
already for Rachel. One of the things behind that whole thing is that the
biggest laughs you have in life, usually the laughs you have with your friends.
When you're sitting with your friends, you usually laugh more heartily than at
any other time. And this was such a good example of that. And rather than the
presenter being like some kind of high minded person above the audience, that
feature made the audience think, my goodness, these people are just like me. And
I think it created that bond, that one to one bond of loyalty as a result. And
there is a role for the music as well, isn't there? I mean, especially obviously
on a music radio station in that quiz, you probably want to hear a bit of the
music. That's been the great thing about Popmaster, for example. It relies on
the bond that you have not only with the presenter, as we were talking about,
but also with that music. That music reflects so many experiences you've had
through your life. Do you play along when you're listening? Always. I'm very
competitive. I always play along when I'm listening. And I desperately want to
do better than the person playing at the time. Lloydy James Lloyd and lots of
pop quiz jingles. Our main headlines this lunchtime, the cross party committee
investigating whether Boris Johnson misled MPs over Partygate has said it
appears he may have done so. The Privileges Committee said evidence strongly
suggested breaches of covid rules would have been obvious to the former prime
minister. He has denied misleading Parliament. Labour has defended its decision
to offer a senior job to the former civil servant who investigated government
lockdown parties after Conservative MPs expressed anger about Sue Gray's
appointment. PM is at five. This is Johnny Diamond. That's the world at one
forty five. Studio Direction was by Adrian Bargova and the editor was Jonathan
Harvey. We'll head to Ambridge in a quarter of an hour where Brian may have a
solution to an unexpected problem in the arches. But first on Radio 4, we soar
towards Mediterranean shores in the company of Emily Knight and Britain's
migrating birds. This is Flight of the Ospreys. The Ospreys of the UK are well
on their way on their annual winter migration. They've travelled down the length
of Britain, through France and south through Spain to the southernmost tip of
continental Europe. An outcrop jutting into the Strait of Gibraltar called
Tarifa. Here the birds pause to take stock before one of the most hazardous
parts of the entire migration. The Great Crossing from Europe into Africa. Hot
on their wingtips are the Flight of the Osprey team, the adventurer and
biologist Sasha Dench and her crew of intrepid conservationists. They're
tracking the birds along the flyway to discover the dangers they're facing and
meet the people who are helping them along. When you get to southern Spain,
there's Tarifa and Gibraltar that stick out as two points where the birds have
got the shortest migration across into Africa. So many different birds go
through there. They also have in the past been really significant risks due in
fact to the really strong winds they have on that stretch of coast. What have we
got there? Lots of black kites coming into this valley, just gaining height and
going up. What's this one here? This one, oh, lovely honey buzzard. We were
hosted by Fundacion Migres and a group called Inglourious Bustards. Female,
adult female honey buzzard. This part of the world is a bottleneck, not just for
the ospreys, but for every migrating bird that wants to cross from one continent
to the other. The sky is thick with them, either solo or in flocks, carefully
assessing the conditions, picking just the right moment to make the crossing.
Sasha and Simon Tonkin from Inglourious Bustards sit and watch as they stream
overhead. It's very hard to not have your binoculars in your hand all the time
because there's so much that's coming. What is it that is so special about this
place, this valley, this headland? Yeah, well, the Strait of Gibraltar is the
epicentre of migration. It's, I'm sorry, I'm just looking everywhere at the
moment. There's stuff happening all around us as we're talking. Yeah, these
birds are concentrating here because it's the narrowest sea crossing between
Europe and Africa. Only 14 kilometres away. But this is the most treacherous
part of their journey. But yeah, it's only 14 kilometres of their massive
journey that they're making. These birds are designed for soaring and for
utilising thermals, which they can only get off the land. As soon as they go
over the sea, there are no thermals. So, of course, these large winged birds
designed for soaring flight are dropping quite a lot. And this is really
dangerous for them. It must be a really scary moment for them. And sometimes
they do ditch into the sea. This morning we've seen quite a few birds go out and
then come back. And today they're struggling to see the coastline of Africa.
Right. So they know it's there, but they can't see it. Maybe. Yeah, I would turn
back I think. Yeah, exactly, I would as well. Yeah, yeah. I mean, these guys,
you know, they're navigating around Saharan dust storms and all sorts of
challenges on their routes. But for me, this must, well, for them, it must be
really daunting looking out there across the Straits. This one, really nice, a
booted eagle. See that white with a black trim. You can also see the two
headlights on it as well. Those two little white dots on the leading edge of the
wing near the head. Oh, yeah. As they're gaining height, they are drifting
backwards because we are sitting in a very windy place. Yeah, it's pretty windy
here. There's always a wind here. Today we have the Levante winds. What does
that mean? The easterly winds. OK. We have a lot of wind turbines in the area.
It's about 18% of the Andalusians requirement of energy. So that's quite a big
chunk. From this point, we must be able to see at least 100 if you count the
ones in the distance. Yeah, there are more or less about 800 wind turbines. So
Fundacion Migres, who we are partnered with, the Inglourious Busters are
partnered with, and we work with counting and monitoring the passage of soaring
and other migratory birds through the Straits, came up with an idea, thinking
about how about switching off the turbines to allow safe passage for the birds
at certain points. And that's exactly what happens now. We have ornithologists
who work for the power companies, trained by Fundacion Migres, watching if there
are any birds passing and then they switch off the turbines. And we've seen
someone coming in and out of a little hut on the hill. Yeah, several times
today, right? Yeah. So how long does it take to switch them off if birds are
approaching? Because obviously now there's a headwind, so they're moving quite
slowly, but there'll be times when they're arriving with a tailwind, they might
arrive quite quickly. Yeah, and it takes less than a minute. It was taking
longer, but the system has developed over time. And that affects the output of
energy by about 0.01%. So it's completely negligible for the power companies. If
you add up all the times the turbines are turned off in a year. Exactly, yeah.
Do you have any idea of how bad the problem was before the observation standard?
What sort of impact? Yeah, so take a species as an example, so griffon vulture,
which are particularly prone to flying into obstacles like that because they're
so big winged. Something like 370 collisions in a year. Of griffon vultures?
Yeah, and then the first year doing it down to about 70. So suddenly there's a
huge change in the impact on those birds. So how often do you see ospreys coming
through? Yeah, we see a lot of ospreys coming through. Not a lot like black kite
numbers, not like 18,000 in a day. Not thousands of them, but we'd expect a few
hundred in a season. But yeah, they're going ones or twos a day. Well, we've
seen two right crossing today, which is really cool. What is different about
their method of approaching the straights? Well, for one thing, they often are
solitary. So we're seeing lots of groups of honey buzzards and black kites going
together. And then the ospreys almost shun them and just go straight out. And
they power out as well. They make it look a lot easier compared to some of the
other soaring raptors. And I guess that's because they're used to being out over
water. And often one of the things we see, we actually see them before they
leave hunting along the coast as well. They sometimes even take a fish with them
across the straits, maybe have a little picnic in Morocco. The ospreys may
tackle the straight alone, but many bird species do it together. Gathering in
huge swirling flocks, spiralling up as high as they dare and then streaming out
over the sea. Oh, here's a, oh, that's really nice. Oh my God. One of the most
spectacular are the white storks. Yeah, a nice big group of white storks. That
is outrageous. It looks like an insect gathering. Can you see it to the left?
Let's look at the big sand dune just to the left of that. Oh my God, that is
unbelievable. And in front there, we've got some booted eagles. What, leading
the pack? They're coming this way, so that's good news. So hopefully they will
try and cross. That might bring them right over our heads, which is super
awesome. Oh my God, it's just so awesome. While in southern Spain, the team took
a day trip north to Seville, where a group called the Special K9 Unit are trying
to tackle an issue that's a real problem in the local area. Poisoning. Poisoning
has been one of the major threats. There's four cases of ospreys even being
poisoned. So between 92 and 2017, 21,260 animals across Spain were found dead
due to poisoning. So it's still a really big issue here. The poisons have been
illegal since the 90s, but it still happens. Local farmers and hunters, pigeon
fanciers, even beekeepers lay poison baits to try and keep predator numbers
down. My name is Jose Luis, I'm a trainer and guide dog trainer at the
Specialist K9 Unit. I've worked here for 17 years against the use of illegal
poisons. We went out with a team called K9 who were part of the anti-poisoning
programme, and their role is to go out with dogs. My dog's name is Abby. She's a
working German shepherd. They choose dogs which are very kind of reward
orientated, but they can be of different species. We are using Labradors,
Belgian Pastors, German Pastors and Border Collies. The dogs are a tool for the
authorities, and I'm a guide for the dogs in complicated places. And right now
we're using Labradors, Belgian Shepherds, German Shepherds and Border Collies.
We use dogs with a lot of mobility, as they need to be able to go for long
distances. The dogs are very well trained. They're trained to go out and
identify poisons from the smell, different sorts of poisons. When we went out,
they did find a hair that had been poisoned and had fallen into a well. We don't
know if the hair was baited, so if poison was put into the hair and the hair was
left there, or whether actually the hair has somehow picked up the poison, we
don't know yet. The problem with poison is it's indiscriminate. Four Osprey have
been found poisoned recently, but no one really knows if they were the intended
target. Is that from poison that's ended up in a water course that's then
poisoned a fish, and then there have been sick or dead fish that were easy to
pick up by the Osprey? Or was it fish that were baited? Whether people are
particularly trying to bait Ospreys that might be eating their fish is unknown,
but I'm hoping to find out more. Over this series, Sasha and the team have been
following three tagged birds from the Tweed Valley in Scotland, who've been
making the journey for the first time, fitted with GPS backpacks. Tweed, Kirk
and Glenn. Tweed has made it safely to Portugal and may remain there for the
winter. Kirk, we think, has perished, blown far west out to sea, off the coast
of Ireland. But their brother Glenn has been having a curious adventure. It was
just down in Cornwall, just roosting and just sort of mooching around a sort of
north-west tip of Cornwall near Hale. Diane Bennett, project officer at the
Tweed Valley Osprey Project, has been following his progress. And then just sort
of took off on this quite determined directional flight, as though heading down
south again. And then just nothing, just the data just stopped. The tracker
records his location every 15 minutes, but it only sends the data back to base a
few times a day, and only when it's in reach of cell towers. When a bird heads
out to sea, it's a nail-biting wait before we find out what they've been up to.
I mean, really, I'd just begun to think that something terrible had happened to
him. When I looked at the weather patterns on that day, what, 31km an hour winds
he had, not taking him across into France, but out to sea? Yeah, well, at the
point it had given no signal for 24 hours. We figured the chances were really
slim. And then we just had to wait until the data picked up again, and that
wasn't until very late last night that it all downloaded and we could see the
journey that he'd taken. It pinged a signal from a tiny little rock on the
northern tip of Spain. If you look at Glenn's route plotted onto a map, you'll
see him winding his way southwards out over the ocean. Then he takes a poker
straight line due south-west. He turns a perfect right angle, does a very short
journey north-west, and then another dead straight line back the way he came,
north-east. All perfectly straight, with perfect right angles in them. Three
sides of a long, thin rectangle. The team was flummoxed. What had he been up to?
I can only think from looking at the data that I think he's landed on a ship in
the middle of the night. And then there is an about turn. You would think, did
he jump off that ship onto another passing ship, going in the opposite
direction? I don't know. It's very strange. I can't really explain that. The
only possible explanation for that is that it has landed on the deck of a ship,
which is being programmed by GPS to do transects. It could be a survey vessel,
it's in particularly deep water. It could be a trawler doing mid-water trawling.
But either way, it's very clearly ended up on a boat somewhere. It's landed
there at about 9pm at night, so when it got dark. It's taken off again at about
9.30 the following morning, and then headed south to Spain. Has that boat saved
it? Before that, it would have been flapping solidly for about 24 hours, which
has got to be a long journey for a bird, even for a strong osprey. So landing on
a ship could have been exactly what it needed. In the end, the ship didn't give
it much of an advantage in terms of distance. It wasn't that much of an
advantage, really, because it went nicely south for him, but then turned north.
And then he's had to re-pick up the journey to come back south again. It's
possible if it was a trawler that somebody actually put out some fish for it, so
then it might have been a kind of advantage. Yeah, yeah. Anyway, that's really
good news, after a couple of very tense days. In the next episode, the birds and
the team reach Morocco. Now we can see many wetlands that disappeared in the
last years, or are disappearing right now when I'm talking to you, like what's
happening in Casablanca. Flight of the Ospreys was produced by Emily Knight and
Alasdair Cross, and the adventure continues at the same time all of next week.
Who would have thought it? Chelsea spins a good historical yarn after the news,
then we're off to Ambridge. I mean, when we're off to Ambridge. And Miles Jupp
stars as James Boswell in Boswell's Lives at a quarter past two. Meanwhile, this
service is available to stream on BBC Sounds.