TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-25-12H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 on Radio 4 and BBC Sounds. Tonight at 8. BBC News at 11 o'clock The UK and EU
appear to be on the brink of agreeing a new Brexit deal covering trade in
Northern Ireland. Talks between the two sides have been described as positive.
The current agreement sees some EU laws maintained in Northern Ireland with
checks on goods from the UK. The democratic unionists object to the arrangement
and have refused to join the power-sharing government as a result. Our political
correspondent Ione Well says getting the DUP on board with the new deal will be
one of the big challenges for Rishi Sunak. Part of these negotiations is not
only to resolve some trading barriers between Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, but also to try and make the DUP go back into government in Northern
Ireland. So one of the key tests is going to be whether or not they are happy.
They are concerned that any deal might still give too much sovereignty to the EU
over Northern Ireland. A fifth man has been arrested in connection with the
shooting of an off-duty police officer in Oma. Detective Chief Inspector John
Caldwell is critically ill after the attack on Wednesday. Investigators say they
are treating it as a terrorist incident and their main line of inquiry is
focusing on the dissident group the new IRA. Farmers have said they have been
warning for a year that food shortages were possible. Bad weather in Spain and
Morocco has disrupted imports of items such as tomatoes and cucumbers, while
British producers say high energy costs combined with last year's drought are
affecting production. UK health security officials are drawing up plans to deal
with the threat posed to humans by bird flu. An 11-year-old girl who contracted
the H5N1 variant of the disease in Cambodia has died. Specialist advisors known
as 50-plus champions have been introduced in job centres across the UK to try to
increase the number of people over 50 in work. The Department for Work and
Pensions says helping people in this age group to stay in the workforce benefits
them and the economy. There will be more on this story in Moneybox here on Radio
4 at midday. BBC News Yes, and just before that, on Radio 4 in half an hour,
Celia Hatton follows the story of some stolen Cambodian jewels which have
finally been returned to the country from Britain. She meets an archaeologist
who's using them to piece together Cambodia's lost past. And in the Seychelles,
the treasured Coco de Mer tree is a species that can only be found on two
islands there. But due to the economic impact of the pandemic, the region has
seen a rise in poaching of the tree's highly prized nut. We'll hear more from
our own correspondent in half an hour. But first, here's Ben Wright with the
Week in Westminster. Turnips made an unexpected appearance this week. The
Environment Secretary Therese Coffey told MPs that one response to the shortage
of imported salad was for Brits to cherish their own winter veg. Downing Street
played down suggestions that Brexit had anything to do with the lack of
tomatoes, blaming bad weather in Morocco and Spain instead. But Brexit is back
as the government tries to ripen a deal with the EU that might fix some of the
trading problems in Northern Ireland. In many ways, it felt like the old days.
Tory Brexiteers went into battle and plotted in corridors. The DUP dug in and
issued demands, while Number 10 tried to craft a compromise that might placate
all sides. There was still no sign of a deal by Wednesday and in the Commons
Labour's leader, Sakeer Stama, urged the Prime Minister to stand up to his own
MPs. It's the same old story. The country has to wait while he plucks up the
courage to take on the malcontents, the reckless, the wreckers on his own
benches. But I'm here to tell him he doesn't need to worry about that because we
will put country before party and ensure that Labour votes to get it through.
Sakeer Stama invited Rishi Sunak to accept that a revised deal would still mean
Northern Ireland follows some EU law, an invitation the Prime Minister ducked. I
am a Conservative, a Brexiteer and a Unionist and any agreement that we reach
needs to tick all three boxes. It needs to ensure sovereignty for Northern
Ireland. It needs to safeguard Northern Ireland's place in our Union and it
needs to find practical solutions to the problems faced by people and
businesses. So what does the Prime Minister do next? We asked two Tory veterans
of previous Brexit rouse. The Conservative MP, Conor Burns, was Boris Johnson's
Minister of State for Northern Ireland. Gavin Barwell served as Theresa May's
Chief of Staff in Downing Street and is now in the House of Lords. I asked him
why a deal seemed to have been delayed. So I think Rishi Sunak has got the same
problem Theresa May had, which is that he's got what he believes is the best
deal he can from the European Union. He's now got the difficulty of trying to
sell it both to the ERG and more importantly, I would say, to the DUP. And, you
know, I have a lot of sympathy actually both for the Prime Minister and for the
DUP. I didn't like the deal that Boris Johnson did because I thought it would
have this exact problem in terms of the RHC border and I understand entirely why
the DUP are upset about it. But I also have a lot of sympathy for the Prime
Minister because he's inherited this from his predecessor, but one and he's
trying the best he can to find a solution that can get devolved government in
Northern Ireland back up and running again and stabilise our relationship with
the EU. Conor, do you have sympathy for the fix the Prime Minister is in and do
you think that there is a workable compromise here? I don't just have sympathy
for the Prime Minister. I have empathy for the Prime Minister. I spent several
months last summer trying to unlock the talks process by engaging with the Irish
government and the commission. I had Tony Blair and Bertie Hern helping me in
that. I was a Northern Ireland minister at the time. But I admire what the Prime
Minister is trying to do. It is incredibly complicated. It is a lot more
complicated, frankly, from the front bench than it is from the back benches. But
the problem we have, and this is the challenge with the DUP, is this is not just
about the technical movements of goods around these islands and certification
and so on. To some degree, this is societal. The DUP unionism more generally see
in some ways the way the protocol has been interpreted and applied as separating
Northern Ireland off from the rest of the UK. But the challenge in Northern
Ireland is we don't have government. So the people of Northern Ireland are being
failed in the most fundamental sense that the assembly they elected isn't
functioning. And that assembly can't legitimise an executive to take decisions
in Northern Ireland by people electable and accountable to the people in
Northern Ireland. Mr Perten has stressed the need for an agreement that
addresses the practical problems faced by businesses in Northern Ireland. But
you know that for the DUP, for many Tory MPs, this is also about fundamental
principles of governance, giving Northern Ireland a proper say over the EU laws
that apply there. Gavin, do you have any sympathy with their position? I have
sympathy with the DUP's position, absolutely. I mean, ultimately what the DUP
wants, perfectly understandably, given their political ideologies, they want
Northern Ireland to be treated the same as England, Scotland and Wales. But the
problem is if you have a hardish Brexit of the kind that we have had, that means
checks when goods move between Northern Ireland. At the moment, if you try and
move goods from England to Ireland, there are customs checks and regulatory
checks. So if you want Northern Ireland to be treated exactly the same as
England, that's what it means unless you have a soft Brexit that avoids the need
for those checks. And the DUP haven't faced up to that fundamental choice. I
could get so frustrated about this, but we have never in this whole debate over
seven years faced up to the fundamental truth that there are really only three
solutions here. You either have a border between Northern Ireland and Ireland,
most people do not want that for very good reasons, or you have a soft Brexit
which limits some of the freedoms that many Conservative MPs want from Brexit,
or you have some special arrangements for Northern Ireland which the DUP are
going to feel very sensitive about. But there isn't some magic solution that
doesn't involve one of those three things. Gavin knows this as well as I do.
When we were in the EU, there was enforcement on the border on the island of
Ireland. The difference was that it was not enforced at the border. It was done
with certification and digital certification being sent ahead and the checks
were taking place away from the border. There are ways of doing this. I think
what I welcome overall by the re-engagement by the UK government with the
Commission, I was proud to play a small part in getting that process started
again, which culminated last September at the British Irish Association
Conference in Oxford when I met Vice President Setshavitch, is that there is
clearly now goodwill, a renewed degree of trust between the UK government and
the Commission. And I'm convinced with that goodwill and a little bit of
pragmatism, a solution to this is findable. Gavin, it feels like there's a
deadline hanging over this, the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement in
April. Talk of a presidential visit by Joe Biden. Is that deadline helpful, do
you think, in focusing minds on trying to sort this out? I think hard stops are
not helpful. So I can entirely see why this important anniversary, it would be a
good thing if when we reach that anniversary, devolve government and indeed the
other strands of the Good Friday Belfast Agreement will back up and running. But
I think you always have to be careful in negotiations, we experience this
ourselves with the article 50 deadline, you always have to be careful about the
danger of absolute deadlines, that sometimes they can push people in the wrong
direction rather than the right one. So as Conor was saying, if you view this
from the prism of the people who matter, the people of Northern Ireland, the
sooner we can get their government back up and running the better. There is a
need for speed, but you do need to be a little bit careful about imposing hard
deadlines and the effect that that can have. If you want to have a 25th
anniversary celebration, firstly, you should be celebrating when the
institutions born of the Belfast Good Friday Agreement are actually working and
delivering what they were intended to do. But secondly, there's a plethora of
dates you could choose to have a 25th anniversary in the course of the 25th
anniversary year, you could choose the date that the legislation was introduced,
you could choose the date the legislation came law, you could choose the date
when the Assembly sat for the first time or the executive sat for the first
time. I don't think it is helpful to fixate on a presidential visit on a
particular date in April. We've got to get a deal that is enduring beyond a
presidential visit, enduring and lasting and beneficial to the people of
Northern Ireland and to stable government. Just finally, is this a defining
moment for the Prime Minister, Conor? And should he plough on with a deal, if he
thinks it's workable, it will make a difference even if it ignites a bust up
with some of his own MPs? Look, I think this is the remaining grit in the oyster
of the UK and the EU, recalibrating, resetting our relationship with the UK
outside the EU and forming a durable bond of friendship and partnership between
the European Union and the United Kingdom. I admire the way the Prime Minister
has got into the detail of this. I wish him well on it, but I would be reluctant
to say it's a defining moment. It's a very, very important part of the work that
is sitting in his intro that he needs to try and resolve. Conor Burns and Lord
Barwell. While Westminster grapples with the fallout of Brexit on the union, in
Scotland the largest party of independence is fighting over its future. The
early skirmishes in the race to replace Nicola Sturgeon as SNP leader and
Scotland's first minister have been brutal, particularly for Kate Forbes, the
finance secretary, who lost several backers and angered equality campaigners
after saying she would have voted against gay marriage had she been in Hollywood
when it was passed. The other candidates are Scotland's Health Minister Humza
Yousuf and Ash Regan, who quit the Scottish Government over the Gender
Recognition Reform Act. I talked to one of her supporters, the SNP MP Joanna
Cherry, and asked for her thoughts on this week's for Rory. I don't know Kate
well, but I know her a bit and I know she's a person of integrity and she's
widely respected across the party, but I think she's handled her interviews
badly and I think she was a bit politically naive. And like many people, I
obviously didn't like her answers, speaking as someone who's a lesbian. And I
think what she said has no doubt damaged her campaign, but I don't think that
means she should be pilloried or as some of the SNP's more intolerant members
have suggested suspended from the party and investigated. Her views are rooted
in her membership, of course, of the Free Church of Scotland. Do you think it's
possible for someone with such a socially conservative outlook to lead the SNP?
Well, provided she doesn't try to impose her views on the rest of us via
legislation, then yes, I mean, I'm a person of faith myself, but if I wish she
was, she lapsed Catholic, no great fan of the Free Church of Scotland. But on
the other hand, I am a fan of freedom of religion and freedom of belief, and I
don't think people should use their political roles to impose their beliefs on
others. Traditionally in the SNP, we've always had conscience votes on issues
like abortion. I disagree with Kate on abortion, but I respect her right to have
a conscience vote on it. Likewise, actually back in 2014 when Alex Salmond was
first minister and we voted on it, well, I didn't vote with it, our MSPs voted
on gay marriage, Alex gave them a conscience vote. Kate wasn't there. There were
some SNP MPs who voted against it. There were MSPs, some who abstained and Hamza
Yousuf absented himself from the chamber. Does the way that Kate Forbes words
have sort of backfired on her to sort of reveal an intolerance within the party?
I'm afraid there is an intolerance within the party, but it's something that
grew up fairly recently. The intolerance has largely grown up around the issue
of the Gender Recognition Reform Bill. Our 2021 manifesto committed us to reform
the Gender Recognition Act to make it easier for trans people to get a gender
recognition certificate while at the same time respecting the rights of other
groups. Unfortunately, the self-identification policy that was voted through but
has now hit the buffers didn't fulfill that manifesto promise because it didn't
take on board the potential impacts on the rights of women and girls and LGBT
people. Now, I'm somebody who at an early stage, about three and a half years
ago, started to raise concerns about the policy of self-identification. When I
continued to do that, I was vilified within the party, sacked for my front bench
role, have been the target of some very misogynistic and lesbophobic abuse from
some of the young men in the party, and also a party member threatened to rape
me and was convicted of doing that, of making that threat. And the leadership
have not spoken out or taken any steps to try and make the debate less
intolerant. And I was very disappointed this week when Kate was under attack
from some of the same people that have attacked me. I called for some elder
statesperson in the party to speak out and try and bring people to heel. And
that didn't happen. Just on the Gender Recognition Reforms, which have done so
much, I think, to cause, you know, deep division within the party, you are out
of step with the SNP, aren't you? Even the Scottish Parliament, on this issue,
but it was passed. I'm not out of step with the SNP, Ben. The SNP never voted
for a policy of self-identification at conference. But the reform was passed
overwhelmingly in December by the Scottish Parliament. Yes, on a whipped vote in
most parties and without proper discussion of the implications for Human Rights
and the Equality Act. Nicola Sturgeon's lifelong mission, of course, was to lead
Scotland to independence. She hasn't managed to. Do you think her leadership was
a failure? Well, look, Nicola Sturgeon is an outstanding politician, a great
campaigner. She's won umpteen elections and a great communicator. And I can tell
you that many of my constituents and many people in Scotland really appreciated
her calm and clear leadership during the COVID crisis. She also passed some
really important legislation from the point of view of redistributing wealth in
Scotland and tackling poverty. And also things like mitigation of the bedroom
tax. But I also think she's left some significant policy headaches for her
successor in the area of the NHS and social care, education, transport and
energy policy. She has, of course, failed to get a second referendum or to lead
the country to independence. But it's not her sole failure. Yeah, I think the
SNP has a bit of a tendency to be a bit of a messiah complex. First of all, they
put all their hope in Alec, then they put all their hope in Nicola. Leadership
should be team based and great social change comes about because of movements,
not because of one individual. Joanna Cherry, as Rishi Sunak hopes to strike a
deal with the EU, it also seems he wants to find a deal to end the strikes for
nurses anyway. The Royal College of Nursing has halted its walk out in England
next week, while they and the health secretary try and come up with a compromise
on pay. But unions representing ambulance workers and junior doctors still have
further strikes planned. I brought together two members of the Health Select
Committee, the Labour MP and former nurse Paulette Hamilton and its Conservative
Chair, Steve Brine. I asked Steve if he was relieved there will be talks. This
is very good news. The question is, I guess, what's changed? I've always said
that I think the landing strip for the ending of these strikes is for the
independent NHS pay of your body to report promptly. I suspect that what has
caused these talks to happen, the strikes to be suspended and this sort of grown
up conversation is something around backdating beyond April 1st. And I think
that is the landing strip where we can end these strikes. But these strikes have
also proved to have high public support. The Prime Minister has recently
promised to bring down NHS waiting lists, a key pledge. I mean, the government
had to blink, didn't it, if it wanted to meet that promise? Well, it depends on
who you think has blinked. I mean, I think public support is wide but thin for
these strikes. And actually taking the gun away from the head on strikes and
suspending the strikes was a smart thing to do. Wishing to talk in a more wider,
broader direction about, let's say, backdating, I think is the smart thing to
do. And you know what? I don't care if you call it U-turn. I don't care if you
call it blink. I'm just relieved as we started the discussion that we're in this
place. And I think so is the whole NHS because we want to get back to the day
job, which is dealing with these backlogs. Paulette, you're a former nurse. Do
you think that your former colleagues in the RCN were right to sit down and
negotiate now because other unions representing other parts of the health
service haven't been invited into these talks? Well, from day one, if you
remember, the RCN has made it absolutely clear that they would stop these
strikes if the government would negotiate. And I think it's absolutely the right
thing that the Royal College of Nursing is now talking to the government. But I
also believe that the government needs to talk to the other unions. Why are the
government only talking to one union? It would make more sense to me to get them
all in and to try and get this sorted out. The TUC has warned the government not
to play divide and rule with public sector workers. Paulette, do you think
that's what's happening here? Absolutely. I do believe that they're dividing and
ruling and it's not going to work. I just feel they have done the tests and the
nurses are the ones that, you know, there is a lot of public sympathy for the
nurses and they felt if we can sort the nurses out, perhaps the other unions,
you know, we will get away with it. No, it won't work. They have got to, they
have got to, and I say that twice, speak to the unions. They've got to sit down
round the table and they've got to negotiate this out because the people who are
suffering are our constituents and they are not prepared to suffer anymore.
They've had enough. Steve, this is not divide and rule. At the end of the day,
the nurse cohort, represented largely by the RCN, is just the biggest cohort. So
it seems like the logical place to start, but I'm very sure the government will
be talking to all the unions. The bigger picture here is how do we not get here
again next year? So it's about the pay review body, its independence and the
faith that the unions, the opposition, MPs, the NHS itself and its staff have in
that pay review process. It's taken a hell of a knock in recent months. That
needs to be rebuilt. The government says that it believes in that process. I
believe in that process. I think most reasonable people do, but the credibility
within it needs rebuilding and that needs to happen now. Paulette, do you trust
the pay review process to sort out the next settlement? Labour, what we'd say is
the pay review bodies has to have more emphasis. It needs to be widened where
it's looking at recruitment and retention, issues which have become a real
problem under the 13 years of conservative failure, unfortunately, in public
services. It's not enough anymore to set them the narrow targets because my
concern, and Steve will tell you, has been how independent has this independent
review body been? And Steve, we are expecting an NHS workforce plan, aren't we,
very soon, which will presumably feed into this discussion about pay. There's a
massive workforce shortage, which these strikes in a way have amplified. What
are you hoping from that workforce plan and how much money is it all going to
take? If you ask the NHS what it needs, it will give you the answer what it can
afford. And what we need to do is look at what the NHS needs to be able to do
all the things that it wants to do and that the public want it to do. But when
it comes to pay, if you fill all of these vacancies, then the NHS has still got
to pay for them. And so the real big question here is what sort of NHS do we
want in the future? What sort of NHS can we afford? What sort of NHS are we
prepared to pay for as a society and how much therefore do we pay the staff
within it? Well, let me ask you, the Treasury and NHS England have been clear
there's no more money on the table for this extra cash that nurses may be
getting. So won't extra money for nurses and doctors in the end harm patients
because this is going to be coming out of existing budgets? At this moment in
time, my colleagues, many of them I've worked with for many years, they cannot
afford to feed their families. They have been put on pay freezes for a number of
years. They cannot afford to carry on the way they're going. We have to
negotiate. And remember, we may not get to the point where everybody agrees
totally. But negotiation is what it says on the packet. We win some, we lose
some, but we have to talk to people, not bury our heads in the sand. Paulette
Hamilton and Steve Bryan. One thing that might help the Chancellor find some
extra cash to offer public sector workers were new figures this week showing
that government borrowing is about £30 billion lower than expected. Jeremy Hunt
will deliver his first full budget next month and economists will be watching
closely. Chief among them will be Paul Johnson, director of the Institute for
Fiscal Studies, who this week published a new book, Follow the Money, which
dives into the world of tax and spending choices. I brought him together with
Kitty Usher, once a Treasury Minister under Gordon Brown, now the Chief
Economist at the Institute of Directors. I asked her why this week's figures
were so much rosier than forecasts at the end of last year. Well, it turns out
that the OBR was a bit too pessimistic about its growth forecast and the economy
is actually a bit more robust, while still not very robust, than they were
expecting. So, of course, if you've got more economic activity, you've got more
companies making profits, you've got a bit more income coming in to the coffers.
So, although interest rates are rising, which means government debt is more
expensive, they're getting more tax receipts in than was expected. So, it's an
indication that the economy is not in such a dire state as we thought at the end
of last year. Paul, how surprised were you by these figures and how big an
impact could they have when the Chancellor comes to deliver his budget next
month? One thing it clearly does is give him some political room for manoeuvre,
can say that there's more money around. It does look like some forecasters are
improving, getting more optimistic about the medium term. The Bank of England
was incredibly pessimistic. I mean, extraordinarily pessimistic back in the
autumn and has moved to being only pretty pessimistic now. But the OBR could
decide to kind of move in the same direction. It was nowhere near as miserable
as the bank back in the autumn and the Chancellor asked me an extremely great
fall for that. And it shows the fallibility of these economic forecasts in the
first place, doesn't it? Absolutely. And I mean, there's the old joke that if
you want to know what's going on in the economy, ask an economist. But if you
want to be totally confused, ask two. And it really wasn't helped by the fact
that last autumn, the Bank of England actually, in effect, put out two forecasts
as well. So, that made three in total, all of which were entirely different, but
all of which, as Paul just said, looked like they were a bit too pessimistic.
And of course, Paul, there are many people demanding that the Chancellor spends
money at the moment from increasing public sector pay through to money on public
services, defence spending, trying to soften the impact of energy bills into the
future. I mean, he's being heavily lobbied right now, isn't he? And I think
these figures will increase the determination of people to see him spend money
on their thing. Absolutely. I mean, we will obviously come off the back of a
long period of relatively low growth in public spending. And indeed, some bits
of the public sector are still got less money than they had back in 2010. So
yes, there's an awful lot of pressures, both short and medium term for higher
spending, but in a world where we're already heading to a level of tax, which is
the highest, it's essentially been in peacetime history. So we've got this kind
of very difficult concurrence of very high levels of borrowing, very high levels
of tax. And it appears not enough spending, at least not enough as far as a lot
of people doing the kinds of lobbying that you're describing are concerned. You
have just, haven't you, Paul, published a book this week tackling some of these
bigger questions about how we tax and spend as a country. Because of course,
come Budget Day, we are used to hearing your sober assessment of the numbers and
whether the Treasury's books add up. Why have you decided that you want to tell
a bigger story? Well, I mean, I suppose I've thought about it for a long time.
And actually, I've been put off from writing anything by what I think is what
you'll see in the book, which is I don't have a big theme. I don't have a theme
which says we can sort it all out by taxing the rich, or we can sort it all out
by shrinking the state, or we can sort it all out by having a universal basic
income, or whatever it is. I'm afraid the theme of the book is, this is really
quite difficult, that there aren't any terribly easy answers. Nevertheless, it
does strike me that there are lots of things that we could do to make things
better. The fact that over time, we've hammered further education and vocational
education, which are areas we know are important to both social mobility and
economic progress. We've chosen to distance ourselves from our nearest market,
the European Union, we've not managed to change planning laws, all of which
have, you can understand there are trade offs, there are benefits from all of
those things. But in my view, we've been on the wrong side of that trade off by
not looking for economic success. And one of the results of that is that the
current cost of living prices comes off the back of more than a decade of no
earnings growth, or very little, pretty much the first time since the Napoleonic
Wars that we've had a period like that. And that's because the economy has been
doing so poorly. And that at least is in part because I think we've made a
series of short term decisions which have not prioritised some of the things
that really matter. I think Paul's put his finger on something really important
here. And it's the relationship between the short term and the long term. So the
conversation I think is missing at the moment is if we spend money on higher or
further education or investment incentives for business, you know, at what point
does that raise the sustainable rate of growth in the economy? Because if we're
able to do that, that then solves all the other problems, because it brings in,
as we said before, greater tax receipts, and it brings down the level of
government debt. And there doesn't seem to be a kind of ready reckoner or a
consensus at all as to the best way to direct government spending if your aim is
to raise the long term ability of the country to generate growth. And is it a
problem with the politicians, do you think Paul? Or is it what you know, is
sometimes called by this government the blob? Is it Whitehall? No, it really
isn't the organs of the state. It really is politicians and actually voters. I
mean, let's be honest about this. If you're thinking about reforming things like
council tax and other parts of the tax system, there's no resistance from any
blob. That's a lack of courage on the part of politicians. And Liz Truss talked
about the anti growth alliance or whatever you call it. Well, that's very much
not the think tank world or the civil service world or anyone else. I mean,
we've all been talking about some of the policies for growth for a very long
time. But you don't get that just by doing a 40 billion pound unfunded tax
change. You do it by a series of long term reforms to all of the things that
we've been talking about. And that word long term, as Kitty was saying, is so
important. Government is actually really powerful in the long term in terms of
the shape of the economy. Government finds it really hard and shouldn't really
try actually to make a big difference to growth in the short term. But of
course, that's not how the political cycle works. And I think that's one of the
sort of political or political economy barriers to getting good policy. Paul
Johnson and Kitty Asher. Well, that's it for this week. I'm off to make a turnip
salad. Digging through next week's politics will be Bloomberg's Emily Ashton.
The Week in Westminster was presented by Ben Wright. The editor was Ed Chivers.
Now, looking ahead to Moneybox after the news, here's Paul Lewis. Thanks,
Danielle. The government is trying to help over 50s get back to work. Moneybox
gets exclusive access to a job centre in Shrewsbury to see how. What people are
beginning to realise is we're an ageing country and the 50 plus cohort will be
one of the largest demographics in the workforce. Vulnerable customers are being
left for months with a prepayment meter that won't let them pay for the
electricity they're using. And how can savers take advantage of rising interest
rates to earn more on their savings? Moneybox in half an hour. Paul, thank you.
And now from our own correspondent presented by Kate Aidy. Good morning. Today
we're on Estonia's border with Russia, where the easy flow of traffic between
the two countries has all but judder to a halt. Stolen jewels have recently been
returned to the Cambodian capital. We hear from an archaeologist who's piecing
together fragments of a remote past. In Chile, wildfires have ravaged homes in
the country's central and southern regions. We hear from those who fled the
flames but lost everything. And we're in the Seychelles, off the coast of East
Africa, where knots of the Kokodome, a rare species of palm tree, are hotly in
demand. First, the impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine has been acutely felt
by several countries that were once part of the former Soviet Union, not only
due to the influx of refugees but also politically, where split loyalties have
been exposed. One of the key vehicles Moscow has used to exploit divisions is
energy. Last year, it cut its gas supply to Moldova by half, sending costs
soaring. Last weekend, thousands of pro-Russian protesters took to the streets
of the capital, Kishinao, to vent their frustration with the pro-Western
government. Lucy Williamson has been in a village in a Moldovan enclave
surrounded by pro-Russian forces, where residents explained they feel torn
between East and West. The ferry across to Moldova to Naur is a windswept
platform topped with a brightly painted cabin, with Moldovan flag flapping in
the wind, white railings dipping and tilting against the water. A thin line of
vehicles crawls on board. Elderly women huddle at the back with baskets, watched
over by a pilot whose face looks as if it has seen all weathers and all times,
his eyes encased in wrinkles, hands folded as if in prayer on the engine block.
This ferry across the River Nista is the only link connecting Moldova with its
most isolated community, a tiny enclave encased inside a breakaway region
controlled by pro-Russian forces. As rhetoric builds about Russia's intentions
towards Moldova, the people living in Molovat and Naur are all too aware of
their isolated position, surrounded by the region known as Transnistria.
Everyone's afraid there will be war, Maria Grisha told me. A pensioner who lives
on the main street through this sleepy enclave, she's old enough to remember the
early 90s when pro-Russian forces fought the Moldovan army for control of this
area. People don't care who's in charge here, she said. They just want peace,
but the politicians are going to drive us into a full-blown war with Russia.
Earlier this month, Russia's foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, referred to
Moldova as potentially the next Ukraine. Since then, Moldova has said it fears
Russia is planning to send military-trained saboteurs into the country to wrest
control from its pro-Western government. Romania has promised to offer whatever
support Moldova needs. In the deserted main street of Molovat and Naur, they are
watching all this with concern. Of course we're afraid, says Maria's friend
Lubova. I hope we won't be the next Ukraine. I hope we won't become refugees,
because if we do, there's nowhere to run. We're surrounded by water. The Nista
River curves around the village, which sits at the tip of a peninsula jutting
out from Transnistria's long, thin strip of territory. People here are Moldovan
citizens, many of them speak Romanian as well as Russian. But loyalties to
Moscow and Kishina overlap, woven through with memories of the past and fears
for the future. People here have vivid memories of the fighting in the early
90s, but many also have a degree of nostalgia for the decades before that, when
the whole territory was under Soviet control. It was really good before the
collapse of the Soviet Union. Maria Osaki told me, we had factories, we had
people coming here to visit. Now everyone goes abroad to work. Prices here are
really high now and our salaries are so low. But on this side of the river, we
can still manage. We're better off here than in Moldova. Thanks to Russia's
support, residents of Transnistria benefit from cheap gas and lower food prices
than in Moldova. Many in Moldovan-controlled Molovatynur choose to shop there.
Nikolai, who's 66, was smoking a cigarette outside the local café. We wedged
between Moldova and Russia, he told me. Everything's cheaper in Transnistria,
even though we don't like it there, we prefer to shop in Moldova. The war in
Ukraine has put pressure on Moldova's divided population. The country's
residents are split between those who speak Russian and get their news from
Russian media and those who speak Romanian and look to NATO and the EU. For
years, good relations with Moscow brought financial benefits for everyone, but
there are deep divisions over how to secure the country's values, identity and
future. Moldova's elected president, Maya Sandhu, came to power a few years ago
with a clear plan to take the country towards EU membership. Earlier this week,
she reiterated her intention to bring Europe home to Moldova and take Moldova
into the European family. It was a message of defiance to Moscow. The residents
of Moldovatynur are feeling increasingly isolated. Transnistria is really
sticking up for us, said Maria Osaki, but Moldova is a disappointment. People
from Moldova are afraid to come over the river to talk to us. They have a border
control post there now. They check our bags. I don't understand why. Across the
water in the Moldovan capital, Kishinao, the government is facing renewed
protests organised by a pro-Russian opposition party led by a fugitive
politician convicted of fraud. Bussed in from across the country, each with
their own tale of financial struggle, the protesters paraded before Parliament
last week, shouting down with the president. President Sandhu has warned
repeatedly in recent weeks that Russia has set its sights on Moldova and is
making its intentions felt through prices, protests and propaganda. But far from
uniting Moldova against it, the response from some here is let them come. Lucy
Williamson The Estonian easternmost city of Narva sits on the country's border
with Russia, and the two countries are separated by a river of the same name.
The country is also no stranger to tensions between Russia and some European
countries. During the Middle Ages, it was ruled by countries including Denmark
and Sweden and ended up as part of the Russian Empire in the 18th century. After
an earlier period of independence shortly after the First World War, it regained
independence when the Soviet Union collapsed. But the legacy of its time under
Soviet rule has cast a long shadow, and its population is still wrestling with
the implications of the nearby conflict, says Nick Robinson. Nick Robinson It is
still called the Friendship Bridge, although no one would call the countries on
either side of its 150-metre span friends. Certainly not my guide, 29-year-old
Denis Larchenko, the youngest member of Narva's city council. He's a proud
Estonian. He points to the Russian city of Ivangorod on the other bank of the
river and tells me he'll never make the journey. It's too dangerous, he says.
People used to crisscross this bridge freely. Estonians to buy cheap Russian
cigarettes, alcohol and petrol. Russians to buy Tommy Hilfiger and other
designer goods that are sanctioned back home. And to have a good night out. Now
few can, or do, make the journey. Trucks used to flow through one of the main
trading arteries between these two countries. Now trade has slowed to barely a
trickle. The Friendship Bridge looks decidedly unfriendly. Not that it is at all
clear here who is on which side, in a city where identities are blurred, or like
borders, can change over time. Denis's parents, like almost everyone else in
this city, are Russian speakers. They, like most of their generation, struggle
to believe that Mother Russia, the nation that defeated the Nazis, could or
would now be the aggressor. That's not what they were being told by the Russian
TV channels they watch. It simply was not logical, as one person I met on the
train to Narva put it to me. The Estonian government has now banned those
Russian news channels and set up their own. Young people like Denis, who are
born in an independent Estonia, who speak its language and who relish its
freedom, prosperity and democracy, tell them that they have been lied to. We
were arguing quite a lot for the first days, he recalls. My mother told me, it's
all propaganda there are no Russian soldiers in Ukraine. He has now, he says,
persuaded his mum. Or so she tells him. Maybe like others I spoke to, she simply
wanted to avoid an awkward family row. Another local told me that he and his
wife avoid the subject of the war when they visit their parents. Not so their
leaders. Estonia's Prime Minister Kaya Kallis is NATO's leading hawk. She
reminds anyone who'll listen that only last year Vladimir Putin praised Peter
the Great for having captured the city of Narva back in the 18th century. Denis
was listening. The rhetoric was the same as about Crimea, he says. It was a land
of Russia. Everyone here started to shake and asked, what will be the next step?
Will he come to Narva? Now, Narva is closer to St. Petersburg than it is to
Tallinn, the Estonian capital. That's why British troops along with their French
and Danish allies paraded here recently. These days, their presence is more than
merely symbolic. They're not here simply as a deterrent. They are training to
fight. The commander of Britain's contribution, Colonel Dye Bevan, posts photos
on social media of his soldiers fighting on skis in snow carpeted forests,
clearing trenches and training with their commando tanks in what some call the
cold wet jungle. We are, he notes, with the precision of a military man always
within firing range wherever we are in this tiny country. His Estonian opposite
number, General Veka Vela Parma, is impatient with those who say that it is now
time to talk, time to compromise. Whether in business or in war, Russians don't
understand the concept of a win-win outcome, he tells me, they only understand
winning or losing. Russia, he says, must now lose. He speaks with the knowledge
and the feeling of someone whose country was occupied by the Soviet Union for
decades, a country in which pretty much everyone from the prime minister down
was brought up knowing of the horrors their families lived through. Kyacallis'
mother, her grandmother, her great grandmother were all shipped off to Siberia.
This is a country newly haunted by its past. What I asked one man I met trudging
through the snow along the riverbank in Narva on a bitterly cold night, what do
your Russian friends and family make of you now? They think I'm a traitate, old
me. Narva is the new frontier in what increasingly feels like the new Cold War.
Here, as elsewhere, you have to choose whose side you're on. Nick Robinson.
Imagine studying a subject for years that was inaccessible to you, an extinct
species perhaps, and then suddenly discovering that it still exists, and better
yet, you can experience it up close. That's what happened to some archaeologists
and art historians in Cambodia who've gleefully discovered that fine jewellery
from the 12th century has suddenly resurfaced in London. Under the Khmer Rouge
regime in the 1970s, in which as many as two million Cambodians were killed,
several antiques were looted and sold through dealers in Asia to buyers in
Europe and the US. Finally, Cambodians have a chance to reconnect with their
lost history. Celia Hatton tells us the story. Sunetra Song picked up the piece
of gold jewellery in front of her as if it could split apart at any moment. It
looked, at first, like a brooch or a belt buckle. It was quite flat and small,
about the size of a playing card, and yet Sunetra held it gently with two hands,
cupping it in her palms. We're not sure yet what this was used for, she said
softly. We think it might have been the decorative piece from the front of a
crown. Then she pointed at a dark red gemstone set in the gold. If you look
carefully, there's a figure carved into the stone, she marvelled. They were very
good craftsmen back then. She was smiling, and yet almost everything about this
scenario felt wrong. Sunetra is an art historian and an archaeologist. She wrote
her master's thesis on Angkorian jewellery from the era when Cambodia's Khmer
Empire was at its height around the 12th century. She's in the middle of a PhD
now in London. And yet, until recently, she'd hardly had any contact with real
Angkorian jewellery. So imagine what it was like for Sunetra to learn that the
jewellery she'd documented still existed in real life. Some of these crowns,
earrings and necklaces had actually made it through the centuries in Cambodia,
through occupations by Vietnam, Japan and France, and more recently, through
three decades of civil war that began in the 1970s. And even more surprising,
some jewellery had resurfaced in London. The collection, all 77 pieces of it,
was part of an illicit trove assembled by a known antiquities smuggler, a
British man named Douglas Latchford. Cambodian investigators now understand that
Latchford was the mastermind behind a global looting network, snatching
antiquities from Khmer empires and funneling them to eager buyers overseas. He
died in 2020 while awaiting trial in the US. That's how Sunetra and I came to be
sitting with part of Latchford's hidden hall. He'd stashed it in London for
decades. After he died, his family pledged to return his collection to Cambodia.
The location of our meeting also felt off kilter, inside a high-security
warehouse in South London. We had to pass through prison-style gates and show
our passports to get anywhere close to the room where the jewellery was kept. It
was laid out on tables that had been covered on soft, white paper, like an
operating theatre. With bright light shining overhead, the whole room felt
sterile, worlds away from the jewellery's original home in the monumental,
majestic temples of Angkor. A few days after, the jewellery was flown back to
Phnom Penh. When the gold was unpacked inside the country's National Museum,
Buddhist monks were on hand to celebrate the return. The jewellery connects
Cambodians to their ancestors. Some of it was made to adorn temple statues which
are believed to be living gods. A satisfying end to a long saga? Yes, in some
ways. But the story doesn't stop here. So many stolen Cambodian antiquities are
still overseas, in museums and private collections. Researchers told me they
simply don't know how much Angkorian jewellery was sold by Latchford and his
network. Even if they pinpoint where the treasures might be, there's no
certainty they'll be able to bring them back. Inside Cambodia, there are
problems too. The country's authoritarian leader, Hun Sen, is up for re-election
in July, though there's little chance he'll lose. Independent media outlets and
any meaningful opposition parties have been dismantled. The last outspoken radio
station was just shut down. So it's no surprise the jewellery's return is being
painted as a political victory for Hun Sen and his family. One of the Prime
Minister's sons was on hand in London to witness the jewellery's formal handover
to the Cambodian authorities. That's what Cambodia's immediate future looks
like. But archaeologist L'Nitre Sung is focused on piecing together the past.
Back in the London warehouse, she picked up a pair of heavy gold earrings to
show me. These are from the 8th century, we think, she says. But they're very
similar to ones from 500 BC. Now we have the actual objects to look at. We can
try to prove that link. All of this shows that the rumours about Cambodia's past
are true, she explains. Once, we were very, very rich. Celia Hatton. Wildfires
burning in central and southern Chile are some of the worst the country has
faced in years. Acres of forests have been decimated, crops ruined, thousands of
homes destroyed and more than 25 people have died. Chile's Interior Minister
said temperatures had soared to record-breaking levels and over a matter of days
the fires destroyed forest and woodland that would typically be lost in a year.
And there are now concerns the fires could reach more densely populated areas.
Jane Chambers witnessed the impact of the flames when she was driving through
the region. Driving along in our blue VW campervan, it was the smell that hit me
first. And it wasn't just the dirty clothes from our camping trip. The bitter
taste hit the back of my throat and tickled my nostrils, making me want to
cough. I looked out of the window and saw thick clouds of black smoke billowing
out across the golden stubble of the wheat fields on both sides of the motorway.
It's autumn here in the southern hemisphere and the harvest has just been taken
in. Far up in the sky, tiny aeroplanes were buzzing over the fires, frantically
trying to put them out. It's not an easy task. The blazes started on the 2nd of
February and are still going on. There have been hundreds of different fires
ravaging thousands of acres of land and forests across the regions of Nuble,
Biobio, Maule and Arraucania in Chile's south. People in rural communities
scattered across the land, including local wine growers, have lost their houses
and their livelihoods and some have lost their lives. You hear their stories on
the news every day. I'm haunted by what happened to one mother and her small
daughter who fled the flames in their tiny village. A neighbour stopped them and
offered them shelter. They sat in the shallow end of his swimming pool for over
three hours while the fires roared all around them, burning homes to the ground.
All three of them survived, but now they have nothing. In Santa Juana in
southern Chile, 11 people were killed, including 38-year-old Yesenino Munoz de
Ras, who died while battling the flames, leaving her daughter and husband to
mourn her. Firefighters are all volunteers in Chile and the country is fiercely
proud of them, but they often lack the resources to deal with a growing number
of fires. Some people complain they were left to save their houses by
themselves. Operations are underway to help, with local schools and community
centres acting as refuges. Canned food, warm clothes and nappies are just some
of the supplies they've asked for. The fires leave devastated, bleak landscapes
behind. My family and I were driving home to Santiago from Puatamont, which is
nearly 650 miles south of the capital. Along the way, glossy green forests
suddenly turn to sways of charred ashes, with the burnt tree trunks now leafless
sticking up like jagged white bones. Ruta Cinco is the main highway in this
long, skinny country, and once you come off it, there aren't many other options.
But traffic was at a standstill and both sides of the motorway were closed as
desperate fire services with sirens blaring indignantly screeched past hapless
holiday makers and lorry drivers. We turned down a little side-row to escape the
heavy traffic, the smoke billowed closer. The road here was just dirt-track
riddled with rocks and potholes. Our sat-nav stopped working and we went back to
old-fashioned real-world map reading, trying to dodge the fires and somehow get
back onto the motorway further up, bypassing the blazes. Small children and
villagers looked bemused as a parade of four-by-four trucks and vans, city
slickers out of place, filed through their tiny streets. One small boy,
grinning, waved us in the right direction, towards yet more dirt-track roads.
Finally, back on the main road, I thought about how sad it is for this beautiful
country I call home. The perfect storm of high temperatures, high winds and
months of belly any rain means that just one cigarette butt or a spark from a
campfire is all it takes to set off such destruction. There's even evidence that
some of the incendios, as they're called in Spanish, has started on purpose.
Rumours fly. Are the guilty straight-up paramaniacs who burn things for a
thrill, or companies trying to cash in on their insurance, or people wanting to
buy up the land cheaply once it's been burnt and then use it for other purposes.
The government's cracking down with tough prison sentences for arson and
promises to rebuild all the communities affected. Offers of more firefighters
and superjet water tankers are coming in from the US, Spain and neighbouring
countries. Politicians here know the worth of the country's magnificent national
parks, which attract tourists from all over the world, but are currently closed
to prevent more fires. All I know is that Chile needs all the help it can get.
Jane Chambers And finally, we're in the Indian Ocean archipelago of the
Seychelles, where the Coquille de Mer tree holds an enduring mystique. The trees
can only be found in two of the islands and are strictly monitored by the
government as a result. Audrey Davies came across them on a recent visit and
discovered how the economic pressures of the pandemic posed a threat to the
species and its much prized nut. Victorin You don't put a lion in a tin, is the
slightly awkward metaphor my host Victorin uses to explain why Seychelles'
famous endemic palm tree, the Coquille de Mer, should be protected. It was his
response to a suggestion by the tourism board that nuts from the tree should be
harvested and made into ice cream. He thinks its commercialisation would only
endanger it further. Victorin I meet Victorin Laboudin-Lon at his NGO's office,
surrounded by trees dozens of metres high. He's fended off many such threats to
the mythical but endangered Coquille de Mer palm tree over four decades. The
Coquille de Mer produces the world's biggest nut. Its shape, oddly, resembles a
woman's pelvis and it's highly prized. Washed up on the shores of the Arabian
Peninsula, it was once thought to grow on underwater trees. Later, it was said
only emperors ate it. So for some, the idea of Coquille de Mer ice cream would
be a tantalising one. The jelly inside an immature female nut is said to taste
like one of the sweetest coconut waters you've ever had. But Victorin's worried.
Victorin We don't have enough trees to go into such commercial business, he
says. There are around 25,000 trees. They grow naturally on only Pralan and
nearby Curius. The environmental organisation Nature Say Shells estimated that
the population of this palm dropped by almost a third in past decades. Poaching
is a further threat. Where we are, in the forested Valais de May, a UNESCO
heritage site in the centre of Pralan, I spot a sign in black letters on a
bright red board above a bus stop, reading, Together we can stop Coquille de Mer
poaching. A tourist guide called Paul tells me that while poachers sometimes
just take the individual nuts, they've also been known to chop down whole trees
loaded with them to gain a veritable bounty. The nuts can be sold for hundreds
of dollars to foreigners who want the shell as a shapely piece of decorative
art. Or, Paul says, to people in Asia who prize the edible kernel for its
supposed aphrodisiac powers. Trees can be grown freely on private land and with
a permit, the nuts can be taken out of the country. But anyone caught pinching
them from the wild faces two years in jail. One of the reasons for this severe
penalty, Paul tells me, is because there's only a small likelihood of trees even
germinating. If it does, it takes 25 years to grow and the seed another seven
years to mature. The female nut is said to reach 35 kilograms in weight, much
heavier than its male counterpart. It'll kill you if it falls on your head, Paul
warns. So you can't kill it, but it can kill you, I respond. In 2020, the
Seychelles Islands Foundation that manages Valais de May recorded about 50 cases
of poaching of the coca de mayre. It thought economic pressures from the
COVID-19 pandemic were a factor, as tourism, the Seychelles' principal industry,
dried up in the pandemic. The foundation has staff here, guarding the trees day
and night against poachers. Still, they can do little about other threats like
invasive species, human development and forest fires. Coming out of the
pandemic, tourism has revived. The government says more than 300,000 foreign
visitors arrived during 2022, more than three times the local population. But
prosecutions for poaching of the coca de mayre are rare. It's an elusive goal,
says Victorin. Like other conservationists on the islands, he believes displays
of the coca de mayre shell around the country's tourist spots, like souvenir and
art shops, create a demand that can lead to its unsustainable exploitation. In
response, Victorin has led campaigns to replenish plants and land. On the
Seychelles' main island of May, Chirin Francis, the Department of Tourism's
principal secretary, explains to me how her department always tries to balance
economic interests and conservation. She says they are mutually reinforcing.
Conservation is very expensive, Chirin says. Where are we going to get this
money from the tourism industry? And flipping it around, she says, the
environment forms part of our what we sell as a destination, so we cannot allow
the foundation to crumble. And with Seychelles aiming to receive half a million
visitors a year in future, conservationists will have to hope that the tourist
and coca de mayre populations can both thrive on these small islands. Rudry
Davis, and that's all we've got time for. We'll be back again next week on both
Thursday and Saturday morning. Do join us. And our correspondent was presented
by Kate Aidy. The producer was Serena Tarling. On BBC iPlayer. Step right in.
Perfect timing. The East End is ever-changing. What is this? Scooter? The order
has entered the 1960s, nearly eight years late. But the midwives of Nanata's
house are forever constant. You've a home here now, and purpose, and people who
love you. Call the midwife. We will be with you every single day. Step of the
way.