TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-03-02-07H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 This is BBC Radio 4. Good morning, it's six o'clock on Thursday the 2nd of
March. This is Today with Amol Rajan and Nick Robinson. The headlines this
morning, WhatsApp messages published by the Daily Telegraph suggest the former
Health Secretary Matt Hancock sought to overturn government policy to keep
schools in England open as Covid cases soared towards the end of 2020. He says
the messages are a partial account spun with an agenda. Police are continuing to
question a couple following the discovery of a baby's body near Brighton. Also
in today's programme I've been speaking to the great historian of post-war
Britain, Peter Hennessey, about the state of our nation today and the five
urgent challenges he believes we must face up to. We really do need to move as a
polity and a society and a country in a global context to shift that on,
otherwise the 20s will drift away and there are so many crucial clocks ticking
that we can't waste another decade. Plus diagnosed with autism and unable to
read until he was 18. Now Jason Arday has become Cambridge University's youngest
black professor. We'll be hearing his extraordinary story. And Charlie Hickson,
author of the Young Bond books, wants you to get involved in 500 Words, the
BBC's story writing competition for children. The BBC News is read by Jane
Steel. Newly released WhatsApp messages involving the former Health Secretary
Matt Hancock suggest he sought to have schools in England closed as the number
of Covid cases rose towards the end of 2020. In the latest messages published by
the Daily Telegraph, Mr Hancock told an aide they needed to fight a rearguard
action to overturn the government's decision supported by the Education
Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson to keep them open. Here's our political
correspondent David Wallace-Lockhart. In December 2020, Matt Hancock was pushing
behind the scenes for schools in England to be closed for most pupils due to
concerns about Covid cases. The Education Secretary Sir Gavin Williamson
disagreed. WhatsApp messages published by the Daily Telegraph appear to show
Matt Hancock telling his adviser that Sir Gavin had won the day, but he still
hoped to prevent what he called a policy car crash with pupils spreading the
virus. He said it was time to fight a rearguard action for a rational policy. On
January 5th 2021, schools in England were closed as part of a lockdown. A
spokesperson for Matt Hancock called the latest leaked messages, partial
accounts obviously spun with an agenda and stressed that Mr Hancock's focus was
saving lives. A post-mortem examination is to be carried out on the body of a
baby found by police searching for the missing child of Constance Martin and
Mark Gordon. The remains were discovered in an area of woodland near Brighton,
close to where the couple were detained on Monday. Frankie McCamley reports from
Brighton. The development was announced at an urgent news conference yesterday
evening, shortly after police said there had been a significant update. Officers
confirmed a baby's remains had been found in woodland in Brighton, close to
where Constance Martin and Mark Gordon were arrested on Monday. Local residents
have left candles next to a police cordon where searches were carried out
earlier in the week. In the woodland nearby, a police tent has been erected as
the investigation continues to find out exactly what happened to the infant. Ms
Martin and Mr Gordon remain in police custody after being arrested on suspicion
of gross negligence manslaughter. The Manchester Arena Inquiry will publish its
third and final report on the bombing this afternoon. 22 people were killed in
the blast in 2017 after a concert at the venue by the singer Ariana Grande. This
latest report will focus on the role of the security services and what they knew
about the bomber Salman Abedi. The government plans to build additional free
schools in England for children and young people with special educational needs
and disabilities. Ministers are also boosting numbers of special needs
coordinators and educational psychologists. Charities say the system is in
crisis, with children who need support facing long delays before receiving it.
This is education correspondent Elaine Dunkley. There's been a large rise in
demand for specialist school places and children face long delays in getting
support. The government plans to train more than 5,000 specialist staff to help
diagnose needs earlier. An extra 33 special free schools will be built in
England, on top of 49 already approved. £2.6 billion will be invested over three
years to create new places in special schools and high needs funding will be
increased to more than £10 billion by next year. Teaching unions welcome the
plans but are concerned about how long it will take to bring in the policies.
The Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis says a committee of experts will
investigate the cause of Tuesday night's rail crash in which two trains collided
head on. 43 people are now known to have died and dozens were seriously injured.
Mr Mitsotakis blamed what he called tragic human error. The Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi has urged G20 foreign ministers to find common ground at
the start of a meeting in Delhi that's likely to focus on the conflict in
Ukraine. He said countries should not let the issues they disagreed on get in
the way of the ones they could solve together. Our correspondent Leila Nathu
reports from Delhi. Prime Minister Modi did not make a direct reference to the
war in Ukraine but in a rare address in English he acknowledged that discussions
here in Delhi would be affected by geopolitical tensions. But he called on G20
foreign ministers, which include those from Russia, China, the US and the UK, to
focus on issues that united them. European countries and the US indicated they
would use the meeting to condemn Russian aggression while Russia is expected to
take aim at Western nations. The schedule for today includes sessions on food
security, development cooperation and humanitarian assistance, a reflection of
India's effort to focus discussions on the needs of developing nations. The Duke
and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed they've been asked to vacate their home in
the UK. Frogmore Cottage in the grounds of Windsor Castle was given to the
couple by the Queen in 2019. The UK's biggest story writing competition for
children is returning to the BBC after three years. The corporation is seeking
volunteer judges for the 500 words contest. It's asking teachers, teaching
assistants and librarians to sign up online. Jane, thank you very much indeed.
Six minutes past six, let's head to the BBC Weather Centre. Alan Willett is
waiting for us there. Morning, Alan. Good morning, Nick. Hello. Good morning.
The driest February for 30 years, the headline this morning. That's across
England. As for today, it's fairly dry, similar weather to yesterday, slightly
less windy and therefore less chilly, slightly fewer showers. Let's start across
East Anglia, the south east of England and the Midlands where the skies have
stayed clear overnight. So it's frosty to start, but lifting with some sunshine
to around about eight degrees this afternoon, locally 10 with the best of the
sunshine. I do think the cloud will fill in a little more this afternoon across
East Anglia. It's still a bit breezy right on the south coast, I think, so still
a chill here. Further west across southwest England and Wales, slightly more
cloud around to start, the odds shower, but those will ease. The cloud will tend
to break up with a bit more sunshine coming through as the day goes on and
temperatures get up to about eight, possibly nine degrees Celsius. So I think
fewer showers, a little bit more brightness compared with yesterday. Northern
England, I think here the cloud will probably stay quite thick, particularly
northeast England down to Lincolnshire. A few showers on and off, all be them
rather light through the day, just making it feel a chilly six or seven degrees.
Best chance of any brightness I will be to the west of the Pennines, for
example, and the Fells. So just a few showers around here as we'll see for
Northern Ireland where the cloud is also thickest. The showers, especially
southern and eastern areas, but again around about seven degrees with a thick
cloud for most today and for Scotland, finally frosty to start in the north and
the west, the Northern Isles keeping the sunshine here, a little bit more cloud
in the east and the south. And again, a few light showers around even into the
central belt, temperatures about six to eight degrees Celsius. Helen, thank you
very much indeed. More from you throughout the programme, of course. It's eight
minutes past six. Let's have a first look at this morning's papers and what's on
the news websites. For a second day, then, the Daily Telegraph leads on the leak
of pandemic WhatsApp messages, this time suggesting that Matt Hancock mounted
what's described as a rearguard action to close schools in England, despite the
then education secretary Sir Gavin Williamson battling tooth and nail to keep
them open. Writing in the Telegraph, Sir Gavin ponders whether he should have
resigned when it was announced that schools would close for a second time as he
felt so personally upset about it. He says his plea to put pupils first was
ignored, leaving him absolutely crushed and devastated. He says that what was
most upsetting was that he felt it wasn't done for the right reasons, that in
the first lockdown, there was no choice but to obey medical advice. But further
into the pandemic, data showed low levels of pupil absence due to Covid. The
Telegraph quotes the journalist that leaked the messages, Isabel Oakeshott,
saying the closure of schools was the most egregious travesty of the pandemic,
adding she was motivated in leaking the messages due to what she describes as
the appalling disregard for the well-being of young people. Ms Oakeshott was
given copies of the messages while Mr Hancock wrote his book, Pandemic Diaries.
The Guardian says by entrusting 100,000 official WhatsApp messages to a
journalist known to be an outspoken critic of lockdowns, confidence in the Covid
inquiry has been undermined. We'll be talking to Isabel Oakeshott at nine
minutes past seven. The online-only independent dubs a furore the WhatsApp war,
adding that Rishi Sunak is now under pressure to fast-track the inquiry to
provide answers raised by the leak. Focusing on the early allegations that Mr
Hancock rejected advice about testing procedures for care homes, the Metro says
grieving families are sickened. The Mirror calls it the tragic betrayal. The
Times reports that millions of patients will be offered help to come off
antidepressants and painkillers under an NHS drive to tackle addiction to
prescription pills. It says the plan aims to avoid a US-style opioid crisis and
will recommend patients instead be sent to art, music or gardening classes. The
Eye has an exclusive front page story reporting that UK chickens may be
vaccinated against bird flu as a way of trying to stop it spreading to humans.
Meantime, the Mail says that Carrie Johnson, the wife of Boris Johnson, has
appealed to the Justice Secretary not to allow the release of a man jailed for
the killing of his estranged wife halfway through a 26-year sentence. The paper
says Mrs Johnson believes the law is letting women down. The reaction of the
Duke and Duchess of Sussex to being told to give up Frogmore Cottage also
attracts front page coverage. The Daily Express quotes an ally of the couple
describing it as like a cruel punishment. It says King Charles has dealt the
couple a crushing blow in what royal insiders describe as an act of revenge. The
Sun says they are stunned and its front page includes a mocked up eviction
notice from King Charles saying it takes effect immediately after one's
coronation and the reason is your ghastly book, the appalling Netflix series and
making the United States your country of primary residence. Coming up to 11
minutes past six now. Ukrainian forces are still in control of what appears to
be Vladimir Putin's main target, the eastern city of Bakhmud, just still in
control. Let's speak to our correspondent in Kiev, Victoria Zuhan. Morning to
you. How concerned are Ukrainian ministers about the plight of Bakhmud? Good
morning. Could you please repeat about what they are concerned? About the
control of Bakhmud. Well there are huge concerns about this very town in, you
know, in the level of Ukrainian authorities and President Zelensky just recently
said, announced that the situation is extremely difficult and that Russia, he
said, is destroying, quote, everything. And it's also very important for the
public and for the pundits because, well, first of all, there is very little
information about this very town and what is going on. So Russia claims its
successes and there is information that Ukrainian troops may be soon facing
partial or even full insert in circumvent, but Ukrainian authorities do not
confirm Russian successes. And even today's report from the general staff of
Ukraine says that Russia keeps attacking there, but Ukrainian army has repelled
those attacks. There was one Ukrainian member of parliament who was talking
about the possibility of retreat. In other words, that it may not be worth the
human cost of trying to defend Bakhmud. Well that idea has been circulating for
a month because the fierce battles for Bakhmud have been going on since summer
and many people have been raising the issue whether it was worth retreating from
Bakhmud. Well, first of all, because Ukrainian army is known for really trying
to save its troops. There are not so many resources available to Ukrainian army
compared to Russian army. And second of all, it's been a part of a strategy of,
as they say, keeping the front line, well, not straight, but they try to
maintain the line under control. So sometimes strategically it's easier to
retreat and to continue battle in the future rather than lose the troops in
encirclement. So indeed, such ideas have been widely discussed in Ukraine for a
long time. Victoria Zuhan in Kyiv. Thank you. Thirteen minutes past six, the
long awaited plan to improve provision in England for children and young people
with special educational needs and disabilities is being announced today. And
Elaine Dunkley is our education correspondent. Morning, Elaine. Good morning.
What are they announcing then? Well, first of all, when it comes to special
educational needs provision, there are a lot of families, schools and charities
using the word crisis. And today the government has announced its SEND
improvement plan almost a year after a review was first published as part of a
Green Paper consultation. So let's first of all look at what a crisis looks
like. Well, children not receiving support, families pushed to the limit as they
navigate a complicated system, increasing demand and not enough funding,
mainstream schools struggling to cope, special educational needs schools
oversubscribed, long waiting lists and many children out of school missing out
on education. Now, as part of the plan to tackle this, the government has
announced 33 new special free schools will be built, which will provide
thousands of additional specialist places for children with SEND. The Department
for Education says £30 million will also go towards short breaks, providing
respite for families of children with complex needs. There'll be a new national
standard across England and plans to train 5000 early years special educational
needs coordinators and 400 educational psychologists to help earlier diagnosis
in mainstream schools. The Department for Education says £2.6 billion will be
invested over the next three years to create new places in special schools and
high needs funding will be increased to over £10 billion by 2024. And also the
number of supported internship places will double by 2025 with £18 million of
funding attached to it. That's interesting. There's a lot going on, isn't there?
And I know this has been long awaited. And I'll be speaking a bit later in this
hour to a parent who's had to navigate this system and also to Steve Crocker,
who's the president of the Association of Directors of Children's Services.
What's the reaction been so far then, Elaine, to these announcements? Some of
the changes have been welcomed, but the Disabled Children's Partnership has said
parents have been waiting years for the government to fix the broken SEND
system. But the reaction of many to today's plans will be, is that it? You know,
I think one of the big issues is of course funding. But also the other issue is
trust. Many families feel badly let down by the current system and will be
concerned that this is more about saving money than children getting the right
support. I asked the Education Secretary, Gillian Keegan, whether she could
guarantee that children who needed education, health and care plans will get
them. Now, an EHCP is a legal document that outlines the support a child should
get. And it comes with funding attached. And she said, yes, they should. But
children shouldn't need one. Parents shouldn't have to battle with local
authorities to get one, because mainstream schools should be providing whatever
it is the child needs. So, for example, speech and language therapy or more
tailored one to one support. But of course, this is going to make parents
nervous, because there's no guarantee that this is what their child will end up
with. And it also takes away that legal right to that specific support outlined
in the document. And also, do schools have the resources to meet need? The other
issue is whether the government understands the gravity of the situation. A few
weeks ago, I did an investigation into overcrowding in specialist schools. And
the government doesn't have data around the scale of the problem. We found that
52% of specialist schools are oversubscribed. And there's also an issue about
how long this will take to build new schools to train staff. And there's also an
issue around accountability. The government is talking about a national standard
to stop the variations in provision across England. But this should already be
in place because there's a Children and Families Act. And so what campaigners
want is local authorities to abide by the law and understand it. And they need
to be properly funded. I'll put some of that to, I've got a parent, Linda, I'll
be speaking to in a moment. And also, as I say to this, this, this figure from
the Children's Department in Hampshire, who I'll be speaking to in the next half
an hour or so. Elaine Dunkley, our education correspondent. Thank you so much.
We're going to be hearing from the schools minister as well. 17 minutes past
six. We're just under two weeks to go till his budget. What a business is hoping
the Chancellor will deliver for them. Sean's got that and the rest of the
business news this morning from Powys. Morning, Sean. Yes, morning, Nick. I'm at
a site of industrial legend. The heritage here is quite incredible. This
clothing factory in Newtown, the largest town in Powys in mid Wales. It's the
Royal Welsh Warehouse. And what I have in front of me, once I've walked in the
building with all the stained glass windows at the front, is a very traditional
clothing factory. Twenty odd sewing machines lined up at the desks, you can
imagine. People sat at them working away on the clothing from baby grows to PPE
being made here now. This site actually was where the first business in the
world started selling mail order goods. It's the Price Jones building. It was a
building that was built back in 1879. And since then, well, the industry has
kept going. It's famous more recently for having Laura Ashley here, who was a
big employer in the nearby village of Carno. But of course, Laura Ashley
recently went into administration, which is sort of how we've got to the
business Fashion Enter that is here today. And the director of Fashion Enter is
Jenny Holloway, who's hosting this morning. Thanks, Jenny. Morning to you. Good
morning. Hi, Jenny. So how did you come about being here with Fashion Enter?
Sometimes I'm used to seeing robots galore in modern manufacturing places, but
this is a very traditional setup. It certainly is. And the ladies here are
absolute experts in their stitching skills. So it's like a community all to
itself. But why did it come about? Laura Ashley was here in the area and that
didn't work. So what did you decide to do? Well, when it went into liquidation,
we decided to come down and have a look at the machinery that was up for sale,
because obviously, you know, you can pick up some bargains. But what I didn't
expect to see and to meet were these amazing women that had 30, 40, and I think
Rachel got 46 years experience in stitching skills. Like you can't let that go.
Like you've just got to be able to keep that expertise together. So we decided
without a business plan and without proper forecasting, but we said we would
open up a factory here in Newtown and we did. And you're a social enterprise
doing that with it. So when you see, you're going to be talking to businesses
quite a lot in the next few weeks about what they want to hear from Jeremy Hunt,
the Chancellor, the budget is in just under two weeks time on the Wednesday in a
couple of weeks. What the economy is doing right now, I mean, how is business
for you and what could be done to, does anything need to be done to help you
along? It certainly has been very tough. In particular, you know, we've got some
heavy duty three phase machines here, so they're energy guzzlers. Certainly in
London, our energy bills have gone up by threefold. So if we could have a social
energy tariff, that would be fantastic, because we are genuinely supporting
people with skills and getting back into work with our educational side. It
would also be good if we could support younger people coming in, people,
parents, guardians that have got children. So if we could have free childcare
places for children one, two years old, that would be really advantageous. And
of course, the R&D tax credits, you know, they're going to be reduced in April,
and it would be fantastic if that could be extended. So there is an incentive to
invest. If we don't invest, if any company doesn't invest, it's going to die. I
mean, all of that sounds like it costs a lot of money and definitely the mood
music from the government in recent months has been, we don't have a lot of
money. No, but we have to invest for the future. You know, there are ways of
having money with it back within the economy. And if we don't invest in jobs and
safeguarding of jobs, then it's just going to make things worse with job centre
allowances, etc. So we've got to find the right tools to get money back into the
economy. I've got Judith here with me as well. Judith, morning to you. What do
you do here at Fashionenta? I'm a supervisor and a technician. Excellent. And
so, how's work, how's home for you at the minute? You know, we talk about the
price rises, we talk about wage rises if they're happening or not. How's your
budget settling out? Well, everybody's struggling, I think, you know, and if
they don't do anything with these electricity prices and everything, we're all
going to struggle even more. So when you hear, you know, the current plan is
that the energy bills, there's a limit at the minute, isn't there, on how much
houses are charged for the energy they use. But that's going to be going up on
April the 1st. There's been some confusing announcements this week, but that's
what will happen for a lot of households. What do you make of that? Should
Jeremy Hunt be thinking any differently? Definitely. They should be putting a
closure on it and not allowing it to inflate anymore. And why is that? What
difference does that make to you at the minute if your bills would be going up
even more over the next year? Everybody's going to struggle. You know, we've got
no more money coming in and we'll be just paying out more money and I can't
afford to give up work. You know, I could retire, but I can't afford to retire
because I like to help my family and that. And so do you find that a sacrifice
to work? Would you like to retire at the moment? I'd love to retire. So are
there other sacrifices you're having to make budget-wise at home at the moment?
Yes, you've got to tighten your belt, you know. You don't go out as much, you
don't go out for meals and different things like that. And that has a ripple
effect in the local economy I guess as well when that happens. I mean, Jenny,
when you have your staff, you know, I've been chatting to a few this morning,
very, very similar situations. Have you been able to put up wages to keep up
with all the price rises? Well, we have a bonus system called Galaxius and that
is, it incentivises to make more. But the problem is if we're not making more,
if the orders aren't flowing in, then it makes it incredibly difficult. But they
certainly do deserve to have regular salary increases because it's such a
skilled job, people just don't realise that. Got Mark Tucker here with me as
well, who's managing director of RM Group, which is an engineering business in
Newtown. Got 65 employees, is it Mark? Yes, we have indeed. Good morning. Mark,
for you as a manufacturer, what kind of stuff do you make? We build machinery
and we're a robotics and automation integrator. So you'd be looking here and
thinking this is it. There's some opportunity, yes. And many businesses you look
at, you probably, it's the name of the game for you, is to try and improve that
productivity. Are we set up to be improving our productivity as much as we ought
to be? Not at all. Not at all. I mean, we have, statistically, we have very poor
productivity in the UK because we traditionally have gone down a labour focused
route and not automated as the rest of Western Europe. And we need encouragement
from the government to head down that path. It is taking place. There are labour
shortages, which is forcing investment, but it needs to be encouraged more. And
those encouragements are being reduced already. We've talked about R&D, we've
talked about investment allowances, all those are being reduced by the
government currently, which is, I believe, a fundamental mistake. So when Jeremy
Hunt stands up in a couple of weeks' time, what's the priority? What do you
think we should be hearing from him? Well, I'd like to hear him reverse those
decisions that have been made already to help us all. All businesses, not only
our own business, but our marketplace, the food and drink industry needs to
invest more and more and to become more productive. And are you seeing that
with, I don't know, the changes in those credits or the investment environment?
Are you seeing that impact the conversations you're having about future orders
at all? Yeah, there is definitely a potential slowdown in that activity. I mean,
the lack of, the inconsistency of some policies of late in recent years and all
the COVID, Brexit, all those changes have made long-term planning, medium-term
planning very, very challenging for all businesses. And how does that impact
Newtown, you know, your 65 employees and other businesses around? It's hugely
challenging. This town has struggled with the changes historically and we're
actually enjoying some success through exports now because of the strength of
the pound. So we're okay I think, but we could be doing so much better. Mark,
thank you so much. Mark Tucker there, Managing Director of RM Group. Joining me
from another beautiful building, Broadcasting House in London, is Gervais
Williams, Head of Equities at Premier Miten. Gervais, you grew up not too far
from here. Morning to you. That's right, absolutely. I remember getting in the
harvest from my parents' farm for many years. Excellent. Well, we're going to be
talking more about the agricultural industry after that at seven o'clock.
Gervais, when you see the state of the economy at the minute, we have Andrew
Bailey, the Governor of the Bank of England, talking yesterday, warning, as some
put it, that interest rates may have to rise again to tackle inflation. How is
the economy getting on for places like Newtown and regions like Paris at the
moment? And what is Andrew Bailey thinking needs to happen to try and improve
things? Well, the whole point about inflation is it does really affect
particularly those on the lowest incomes. And so, it's a very regressive feature
of the economy. So, the government is going to be bearing down on inflation. I
think they're absolutely right to do so. It does involve being tight with cash
at the moment, but most particularly, interest rates have already risen. Their
effect is beginning to become more apparent and I think that will lead to
interest rates peaking out in the next few months and potentially coming down
later this year. I don't think Andrew Bailey of the Bank of England is expecting
them to cut later this year, but I think we will see the economy, not just in
the UK, but the US weakening and that will lead to interest rate cuts later this
year. So what did you take from what he had to say then? Why has it sort of
changed people's thinking at least what the Bank of England are thinking at the
moment? Well, most particularly, I think he's just been being very cautious
because he doesn't want to cut too early and allow inflation to continue to
persist. So, he's being very safety first in his position. I think that's
absolutely right. But we'll see how the economy develops later this year and if
it does slow, unfortunately, that will mean potentially some job losses, but
most particularly, we also have scope to cut interest rates later this year.
Well, and those job losses, would you expect that to occur over the course of
the year? And I just wonder, being in a town like I'm in this morning, how
disproportionately will do smaller towns get affected by prices maybe going up
not quite as fast, interest rates might not need to go up anymore. But if we're
seeing more job losses, can economies be hit in different parts around the
country? For sure. And we've already seen many of the large sort of technology
companies in the US perhaps cutting jobs. But actually, I think the
manufacturing jobs, particularly the manufacturing jobs in the UK are better set
actually. Most particularly, I think we're going to go through a period of
rebalancing, reshoring, bringing manufacturing back to the UK to support the
businesses like we've heard from Jenny and Jonathan and Mark. And they will
actually find that actually things are going to get better. So hopefully, we
will see a rebalancing that will drive productivity improvement, allow us
particularly to pay wages, which actually are growing even ahead of inflation on
a sustainable basis. Jervais, thank you. Jervais Williams, the head of equities
at Premier Mitre. So yeah, after seven, I'll be looking at the agricultural
sector here, whether it's food shortages, or what needs to happen next. Green
investment is a big issue for a lot of businesses around here. Looking forward
to that. 29 minutes past six now. Gary's here with the sports. Nick, good
morning. Grimsby and Sheffield United produced cup upsets, Arsenal of five
points clear at the top of the Premier League. Let's round up a night of
interesting results where League 2 Grimsby reached the quarterfinals of the FA
Cup with a 2-1 win at Southampton. Gammon Hollahan scored both their goals from
the penalty spot. I just back this group every time to cause upsets. And we've
shown it against higher opposition in the cup all season. So I just had a funny
feeling. Obviously, you don't expect it to go the way it does. But yeah, just a
special night. Sheffield United also caused a surprise, defeating Tottenham 1-0.
In the other ties, Manchester United beat West Ham 3-1, and Burnley defeated
Fleetwood. Connor Roberts scored the game's only goal in the 90th minute. The
draw for the quarterfinals of the FA Cup was made after those matches, and Ian
Dennis reports. The story of the night, undoubtedly the shock at Southampton.
The first fourth-tier side to reach the quarterfinals since Cambridge United in
1990, as Grimsby Town knocked out a side 64 places above them. 1939 was the last
time they reached the last eight, and their reward is another trip south to face
Brighton and Hovalbion. Tottenham suffered a fifth-round exit for a fourth
successive season. Sheffield United deserve winners and will be at home to
Blackburn in an all-championship tie. Vinson Company will return to the Etihad
to face Manchester City, and the only all-Premier League quarterfinal will be
Manchester United at home to Fulham. Arsenal are now five points clear at the
top of the Premier League. Martinelli scored twice in the 4-0 win over Everton,
and here's manager Mikel Arteta. I'm delighted with the win, with the way we
played after the first 25 minutes. I think in the first period we had some
difficulties. Obviously, they are really physical, they are really well
organised to be fair, and they are really difficult to play. But once we scored
the first goal, I think the game unlocked. We started to get much better rhythm,
attack much better, space it, much better organisation as well to not allow them
to run, and we deserved to win the game. Liverpool defeated Wolves 2-0. Van Dijk
and Salah scored their goals. Dawid Milan scored 114 not out, as England
defeated Bangladesh by three wickets with eight balls to spare in the first one-
day international. Milan will be my guest at 8.25 this morning. Let's give you
the tips. One for Ludlow at 3 o'clock, number two, Java Point, and then we're
off to Taunton, 4 o'clock, number seven, Camulus. Thank you, Gary. Now, ready
for... Explore the world of arts and culture on Front Row. The atmosphere
changes, the hair starts to stand up on the back of your neck. The biggest news
and interviews. It was an absolute dream of mine to perform on a stage.
Alongside live discussions, debates and the latest reviews. She's a series of
contrasts which I thought were quite fascinating. I loathed it. I can't
recommend it enough because it's so thoroughly entertaining. Join Samira Ahmed
and me, Tom Sutcliffe, for Front Row. You are a national treasure. Live every
Monday to Thursday evening on Radio 4 at 7.15. And you can listen to past
episodes on BBC Sounds. Now the time is 28 minutes to 7. You're listening to
Today on BBC Radio 4 with Nick Robinson and Amol Rajan. Here's a summary of the
news from Jane Steele. WhatsApp messages involving the former Health Secretary
Matt Hancock reveal he fought to overturn a government decision which kept
schools open as Covid infections rose towards the end of 2020. The messages, the
latest to be published by The Daily Telegraph, include Mr Hancock telling an
aide they needed to launch a rearguard action against the policy. It was
eventually reversed despite the Education Secretary at the time, Gavin
Williamson, wanting them to stay open. A spokesperson for Mr Hancock called the
messages a partial account spun with an agenda. Police in Sussex say a post-
mortem examination will be carried out on the body of a baby found during a
search for the missing child of Constance Martin and Mark Gordon. The remains
were discovered in an area of woodland near Brighton. The couple have been
arrested on suspicion of gross negligence manslaughter. The Manchester Arena
Inquiry will publish its third and final report on the bombing this afternoon.
22 people were killed in the blast in 2017. This latest report will focus on the
role of the security services and what they knew about the bomber, Salman Abadi.
The Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis says a committee of experts will
investigate the cause of Tuesday night's rail crash in which two trains collided
head-on. Forty-three people are now known to have died and dozens were seriously
injured. Mr Mitsotakis blamed what he called a tragic human error. The
government has announced plans to build 33 new free schools for children in
England with special educational needs and disabilities. Forty-nine have already
been approved. Ministers also say more than 5,000 specialist staff will be
trained and £2.6 billion will be invested to deliver new places in special
schools. The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have confirmed they have been asked to
vacate their UK residence. Frogmore Cottage, which is in the grounds of Windsor
Castle, was given to the couple by the Queen in 2019. Reports that Prince Andrew
has been offered the home have not been confirmed. Jane, thank you. It's 26
minutes to seven. To close or not to close schools? That was one of the
thorniest, the most consequential questions faced by ministers during the
pandemic. And the latest of the WhatsApp messages from Matt Hancock, produced in
the Daily Telegraph, reveals that he fought the then Education Secretary Gavin
Williamson to keep schools closed. Let's talk to our chief political
correspondent, Nick Erdely. What did we learn this morning, Nick? Well, there's
a battle playing out to define what happened during the pandemic and who made
the right decisions when. And today, there are some remarkable messages about
the decision to close schools in January 2021. You might remember that there was
a pretty shambolic week or so where ministers were on this programme saying that
schools would definitely stay open and within a week, they were all closed in
England. We've got more of a sense of how that happened now. Matt Hancock making
clear that he thought Gavin Williamson was battling tooth and nail to keep
schools open, but saying that there needed to be a rearguard action to ensure
that a different policy was arrived at. I mean, there's some extraordinary
messages between Mr Hancock and an aide where they're criticising Mr Williamson,
talking about him freaking out, saying he isn't being rational. And there is an
account from Mr Williamson, an account, a contemporaneous one, saying that he
talked about resigning at the time and doesn't feel that schools were closed in
January 2021 for the right reasons. But it is all a battle now, I think, Nick,
to define what happened and to argue over who got what right at what point.
These messages are fascinating not just for the reason that you've spelt out,
but also for the light they shine on the way ministers deal with each other and
deal with their advisers. We like to try and get beneath the bonnet and try and
find out what's going on in government. And we did know that a lot of these rows
were playing out. But the level of detail about the conversations between
ministers is really quite extraordinary. I've never read anything like it. We
also see this morning Gavin Williamson and Matt Hancock criticising teaching
unions, saying that they're looking for excuses not to work. We've got ministers
questioning the rationale for the rule of six and under 12s. We've got the Prime
Minister having to have a percentage, Prime Minister at the time, Boris Johnson,
having percentages explained to him by his then aide, Dominic Cummings,
questioning the merits of shielding for over 65s. A lot of these debates were
playing out in public at the time, but the extent to which we knew what was
going on in government has really increased vastly as a result of these leaks.
They are an extraordinary account of what was going on in government. Nick
Hurdley, thanks. I think there may be a lot of ministers now discovering the
disappearing messages function on WhatsApp. And not just ministers. It is now 23
minutes to seven. This afternoon we'll see publication of the third and final
report into the events at the Manchester Arena almost six years ago. 22 men,
women and children were killed when Salman Abedi blew himself up as people were
leaving after an Ariana Grande concert. A public inquiry has been going on for
almost three and a half years. Two of the three reports have already come out.
The first focused on the planning for the concert. It was highly critical of the
police and security working that night. The second report criticised the
emergency services response. Our reporter Nick Gant has been covering the story
since that night in May 2017 and joins us now. Nick, good morning. Good morning.
So this third report then is looking at Salman Abedi himself, the radicalisation
of Salman Abedi. And it's going to ask if the attack could have been prevented.
But much of what was learned will probably never become public, will it? We want
to hear what it says. It's all top secret. Much of what was heard during, it was
two and a half years of actual evidence being given and three and a half years
of the whole inquiry. Most of what relates to today was heard behind closed
doors with only the chairman, a man called Sir John Saunders, and his lawyers
hearing it. But given how critical Sir John has been in the past about the
emergency services and the planning for the event, it's possible he'll try and
push it as far as humanly possible in terms of what he's allowed to say. So I'm
hoping we'll hear what MI5 knew about Salman Abedi. Why was he allowed to travel
to and from Libya without being questioned? We might find out the extent to
which he was already known to the Secret Service. And we might hear how he was
radicalised. Now last week I met his former headteacher. This was the first time
that Ian Fenn has spoken about Abedi since Mr Fenn appeared at the public
inquiry. Now when Abedi was at his school, Ian was Manchester's anti-extremism
czar. And I asked him if he thought his former pupil was acting alone when he
carried out the bombing. The father was clearly, in my opinion, grooming his son
to do what he did. There's no way Salman did this on his own. Salman would have
had to have been very carefully groomed and moulded from being a feckless,
lacklustre, rather lazy, you know, good for nothing, into being somebody with a
purpose of killing himself and as many other people as possible. That doesn't
happen overnight. And Nick, today marks the end of two and a half years of
hearings. Has this inquiry done enough to give bereaved families the answers
they've been looking for? That's the most important thing, isn't it? It's what
it's all about. It's what the report was and the inquiry was set up to do. 22
people murdered, hundreds injured, thousands upon thousands affected. What
happened at Manchester Arena has repercussions for years to come. I went there
to see a show on Monday evening with my daughters. We had to go through high-
tech scanners, police dogs sniffing people as they go in, CCTV cameras and
security staff everywhere. It's totally different to how things used to be. But
for everyone who was there on that night almost six years ago, who had relatives
there, life will never be the same again. Now Kelly Brewster was one of the
girls who died that night. Her sister Claire can't see any way that what happens
today will help. We feel completely let down as a family at every level.
Everybody failed to protect us on that night and we will never ever forgive any
of them. It is definitely closing a chapter but I can't say that we'll ever move
on. We've lost too much. Claire Booth there, whose sister Kelly Brewster was
killed at that Ariana Grande concert. And I've been speaking to Nick Garnett,
our correspondent. It's now 19 minutes to seven. Let's take a look at the
morning's front pages. The Telegraph leads, of course, on its latest revelations
from the Matt Hancock messages. Gavin Williamson, Sir Gavin as he is now, writes
that he perhaps should have quit when he was ignored in his pleas to keep
schools open in January 2021. He writes, the weekend before schools were due to
go back before the Christmas holidays we were being told it was absolutely OK
for them to return that morning. Boris saying schools must stay open, only for
that advice to completely change in a four hour period. By lunchtime, he was
having to say schools must close. It is a reminder of some of the chaos that was
experienced. Quite interesting talking of chaos to see how newspapers deal with
someone else's scoop. No mention on the front page of the Daily Mail of that
story. You have to turn to page eight. I haven't checked in the times yet. Shall
we do this quickly? Oh, I'm having to go quite a long way through the paper. No,
still haven't found it. Page 12 in the Times. It is on the front page of the
Guardian with the headline confidence in Covid inquiry hit after leak of Hancock
messages. You're bringing back some good and mostly some bad memories of a
former life. On Thursdays, I try to mention some of the stuff that's in
Britain's more newsy magazines. There's lots of great writing around. I
mentioned some more in an hour. Worth mentioning a couple of pieces quickly.
First, a very interesting feature in The Economist's 1843 magazine. It's got the
headline Oxford University's other diversity crisis and the sub headline. Good
luck trying to become a professor if you don't have family money. The writer
Emma Irving makes the point that the upper echelons of academia in this country
are very hard to reach for those from poorer backgrounds. And also Prospect
magazine's got a long, detailed essay on its cover by David Normington, former
permanent secretary at the Home Office, on how to fix a small boats crisis. It's
definitely one for the wonks. And I mean that very much as a compliment, it's
got a detailed plan really for a more effective immigration policy. And it
mentions a bit about his thoughts on Rwanda. More about our magazines in about
an hour from now. At 17 minutes to seven, let's turn to events yesterday in
Parliament. The Labour leader said the row over the former health secretary's
pandemic WhatsApp messages is a ghoulish spectacle for families across the
country. He concentrated on the cost of living at Prime Minister's question
time. And also yesterday in Parliament, there were some housekeeping tips from a
Conservative MP. Susan Hume now reports. As Matt Hancock has learned, you can't
rely on a ghostwriter to show the same discretion and loyalty as, say, your
doctor or your dog. The pandemic WhatsApp messages the former health secretary
shared with the journalist Isabel Oakeshott to help him write his memoir are now
everywhere. In the Commons, the Labour leader didn't get into the details about
the decisions on Covid testing and care homes. Instead, he thought that with the
Covid inquiry getting underway. Families across the country will look at this
and the sight of politicians writing books, portraying themselves as heroes or
selectively leaking messages will be insulting and ghoulish spectacle for them.
At the heart of this is every family who made enormous sacrifices for the good
of the country or who tragically lost loved ones. The country deserves better.
So when would the Covid inquiry report? The prime minister was determined to
keep this very much at arm's length. He has mentioned it one or two times before
that he was a lawyer in a previous life, that there is a proper process to these
things. It is an independent inquiry. It has the resources it needs. It has the
powers it needs. And what we should all do in this house is let them get on and
do their job. Speaking of the pandemic, Sir Keir Starmer said the UK was the
only country among the G7 developed economies still poorer than before Covid.
After 13 years of Tory failure, the average family in Britain will be poorer
than the average family in Poland by 2030. That's a shocking state of affairs.
If the Tories limp on in government, we're going to see a generation of young
people learning to say Auf Wiedersehen Pet in Polish, aren't we? Rishi Sunak may
have missed the reference. He was only three when the 80s comedy drama where
British construction workers go off to find work in Germany was first broadcast.
But he was interested in Eastern Europe. The biggest impact on households'
living standards is the energy crisis that we're suffering at the moment as a
result of an illegal war in Ukraine. I just remind the honourable gentleman what
we are doing to ease people through that. Because of our energy price guarantee,
right now the government is paying over half of a typical household energy bill.
And he said that was the most generous energy support scheme in Europe. The SNP
Westminster leader Stephen Flynn turned to the Prime Minister's words, promoting
the deal he struck with the EU over Northern Ireland. Stephen Flynn wondered if
Scotland could have that too. Yesterday the Prime Minister said that EU single
market access was special, exciting and attractive. If that's the case, why is
he denying it to the rest of us? Rishi Sunak did not repeat his comments about
the benefits of the EU single market, replying instead. It's disappointing the
honourable gentleman is seeking to play politics with the situation in Northern
Ireland. Northern Ireland as he well knows has a unique place in the United
Kingdom. Back on the cost of living, Labour's Ruth Cadbury had read about a
recent glittering fundraiser for the Conservative Party. There's been a 26%
increase in people sleeping rough. Meanwhile a Conservative Party donor spent
£25,000 on a crystal encrusted portrait of the Prime Minister and another paid
£40,000 for a shooting trip. Doesn't this show just how out of touch the
Conservative Party is on the cost of living crisis? The Prime Minister had
nothing to say about his portrait but said rough sleeping was still 35% down on
its peak in England. In a debate later, the Conservative Deputy Chair Lee
Anderson doubled down on his previous claims that it's possible to cook a meal
for just pence, something that's earned him the nickname 30p Lee. He said people
needed support to cook cheap, nutritious meals but... People now are so
dependent on food banks, it's like a weekly shop for them. They go and I had one
particular family I was helping, really, really helping and they were going to
the food bank two or three times a week to get the groceries and then I see them
in McDonald's two or three times a week and I'm thinking my goodness, I don't
want to stop the little children going for a treat once again, once in a while,
but it's all about priorities. He said he'd heard this nonsense that junk food
was cheaper than fresh food but it was not. Susan Hewon reporting there on
Yesterday in Parliament. More as ever you can hear at Harper's Date on Digital
Longwave and Lee Anderson who you just heard there is my guest on Political
Thinking this week. This returns to that story about a new plan, a new plan
across England for children with special educational needs and disabilities.
This is obviously of huge interest to all those families, in particular those
parents who have been navigating what's often a very difficult and torturous
system. Among those parents is Linda from Devon who I spoke to a short time ago
and she told me about her experiences of trying her utmost to secure support for
her eight-year-old twins. We just want to be parents but we have to fight
constantly for the very basics of education for our children. The paperwork
mountain alone is so bureaucratic and we're expected to do it on our own as well
as understanding the law and complicated processes involved to attain a
placement at the right school with the right provision and the right support for
our children's needs. And what have you had to do just for people who are
parents who haven't had to go through this just give us a sense of what you have
had to do to get that attention and get that provision that service that your
children need and as you say deserve. It's impossible to hold down a job when
you're spending your life fighting for your children. My husband has sacrificed
his career changing jobs four times over the past eight years and taken pay cuts
in order to have the flexibility of working hours because of the lack of
support. As our children, they both have high care needs. My husband has
developed a health condition due to continuous stress of the way of life and
lack of rest. Knowing that this battle, this same battle, will continue year
after year for the rest of our lives whilst this torturous system destroys our
physical and mental health. Statistically, the stress of this relentless battle
for parent carers means parents are far more likely to split. This cannot be our
lives. This cannot be our family's future. Well huge thanks to Linda from Devon
for making time to speak to us this morning and explain some of the enormous
challenges she's faced as have many other parents. Steve Crocker is president of
the Association of Directors of Children's Services. He's also director of
children's services at Hampshire County Council and Isle of Wight Council and he
joins us now. Steve, good morning. Good morning. It's absolutely heartbreaking
as I mean you must have heard so many of those stories. It's heartbreaking to
hear what parents like Linda have to go through and it does feel to a lot of
people like a rather grim verdict on us as a society if we're letting down
people in such need. Why do you think the provision for children who as Linda
says deserve better has been so bad for so long? Yeah that's right and my
sympathies to Linda. It sounds really awful actually. I think the thing that I
would want to say is that this is a system at the moment that is working for no
one. We've heard from parents it's not working well enough for children and
actually for local authorities that have to administer this system it's not
working well for us either. We don't want to be in a situation whereby we're not
able to provide good enough support for children such as Linda's. So I think and
the root cause of that is the changes that were made in the 2014 Act which
essentially flooded the SEN system and so an example I've got I can use from
Hampshire is that between 2000 and 2014 we had a pretty constant rate of
children who were supported through a statement of special needs. It was just
under 5,000. We're now supporting 15,000 children with special needs. That's
tripled and that's as a direct result of the policy reforms in 2014 and what
that ended up doing is meaning that none of us around the country are quick
enough in responding to parents, we haven't got enough schools for them to go to
and so the system is struggling. That is a very useful bit of context on the
history. I want to get your kind of insight reading whether or not you think
what's being announced today is going to help, will it? Yeah, well I think this
is a step in the right direction and as Association of Directors of Children's
Services we welcomed the moves within the response to the Green Paper. There's
lots of good stuff in here, for example national standards and bans and tariffs
for independent schools and special schools so we're positive about that. What
we would say is that it doesn't quite go far enough. When we looked at the
beginning of the year we had three areas of policy that the government were
progressing. One was around the independent review of social care. There was
this Green Paper and there was a White Paper on schools. So we've had positive
progress on the independent review of social care, we've had positive progress
in this Green Paper but we don't yet have enough progress around mainstream
schools and the key to this is enabling more children to be well taught in
mainstream schools so that we can really focus special provision on those
children who most need it. Steve Crocker, it's clear and it sounds like
something that the government will hear clearly and also possibly respond to.
Steve Crocker, President of the Association of Directors of Children's Services.
Thanks for joining us. It's coming up to six minutes to seven now. Scientists
believe they've discovered a stop-go or traffic light mechanism in genes that
could help to speed up the design of drugs to treat cancer. Let's talk to the
man who understands it, Christian Hellin, Chief Executive and President of the
Institute of Cancer Research in London. Good morning to you. Your research is
into something called epigenetics. Why do they matter? Good morning. So what I'd
like to explain a bit first is that I'm working in an institute of cancer
research which is where we try to actually make the discoveries that defeat
cancer and what you have to see is that this is part of the bigger picture where
some of our research is around fundamental understanding of how cancer develops
and some around how can we develop new cancer therapies and we do think that and
do believe that what we're doing is important for understanding the fundamentals
of cancer biology, actually trying to understand the mechanisms leading to
cancer. So the epigenetics work how? Yeah, so what my laboratory is really doing
is trying to, we're experts in epigenetics and this epigenetics, what it does
really is the control system that decides when DNA is red and not red. And why
is that important? Well that is important for the specialization of our cells
and how we develop. So our DNA is the same in every single cell but something
has to control whether the DNA is red or not and therefore by having this
control system we can develop different type of cells which is not our organism.
So is the hope that cancer drugs could, if you like, and it's rather crude, turn
the traffic light from green to red, could reverse the process? Yes, that is
exactly what we're doing in cancer in reality. So what we're trying to do is to
understand what is going wrong in the cancer cells that basically make them
continue to grow or start growing when they're not supposed to grow or continue,
as I said, growing. And what we try to do in cancer, basically treating cancer
patients, is to turn those traffic lights off. And that is, this is probably the
big success we've had the last 15 to 20 years to develop new cancer drugs.
However, cancer is extremely complicated and very good at finding ways to go
around it. So in this way we have to better understand it to get better drugs
out there and we have to understand the mechanism for how these drugs, they
work. And this is partly what we're doing in my laboratory. So to be clear, this
is not that you have discovered a new drug, you may not discover one. This is a
sort of foundational understanding to way in which the genetics of cancer works.
Well, epigenetics in fact, not genetics. Well, so we're doing, as I said, two
types of research. One is kind of fundamental discovery research. The other
research is really aimed at generating new drugs, if you want. And we do believe
that the fundamental research, which we also call textbook science, is something
which is really understanding. This is where the big discoveries are coming
from. Without that, we didn't have CRISPR technology, we didn't have the mRNA
vaccines, we did not have the immunotherapies and so on. This is coming from
basic science. Christian, this is part in that direction. President of the
Institute of Cancer Research there, thank you very much for joining us. Three
minutes to seven, let's get the weather with Helen. Morning. Good morning, Amol.
Hello there, good morning. So we've had one of the driest Februaries for 30
years in England. Little rain on the horizon for the rest of this week as well.
The detail there, let's start across East Anglia, Southern England and the
Midlands where we have got some clear skies. We have got some frost this morning
as we head out, but at least there'll be some sunshine. Taking a little while to
come through in parts of the South Midlands and into East Anglia, but it should
do so. And we may just pick up a bit more cloud later in the day. But with the
lengthier spells of sunshine here, temperatures as high as 10 degrees, more
likely 8. Across Wales, we will see the cloud breaking as well after a rather
cloudy start with a few light showers around, but a little bit more sunshine
than yesterday. As the cloud breaks up to reveal that sunshine, 8 or 9 will be
our high here today. Northern England, I think we'll find the cloud persisting a
little longer actually with some showers around, fewer than yesterday and
lighter breezes, but still only a chilly 6 or 7 here. And similarly so for
Northern Ireland, quite a few showers actually around in eastern areas at the
moment. Where the skies have stayed clear further west, there will be a little
bit of brightness, but on the whole around about 6 or 7 degrees Celsius, our
high. And finally to Scotland, well we have got frost here too as well across
the north-west, the northern isles and it's where we'll have the best of the
sunshine, but there will be some frost on the cars. Elsewhere though, eastern
and southern parts, it's really quite thick clouds, some outbreaks of rain
around, mostly light and less breeze than yesterday, but it's still only going
to be a chilly 6 or 7, perhaps 8 in the north. Winds generally lighter, but
still quite keen for the English Channel coast. So still quite cool, but for
many, still dry. Thank you very much indeed Helen. off to be in a prison
officer.