TRANSCRIPTION: BBC4/2023-02-21-04H00M.MP3
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 So stay with us, I'd look, is next. This is the BBC World Service, the world's
radio station. Coming up on Outlook, Gerex today grew up on a tiny French
island, dreaming of adventure. I was going on sea on my own when I was like six,
seven years old and my boot and I was just going out fishing. And my dream was
to cross ocean. At 21 he decided to sail the world with just a chicken for
company. I was thinking to have a pet with me. I think about a hand to have
fresh eggs and I say, oh yeah. And when I stopped to Canada with Ireland, I met
Monet and we fell in love together. He and Monique ended up travelling for
years, visiting both poles. It was to be a harsh Arctic winter. I know I will
have a very hard experience to be stacking the ice. I can mean that I have no
way with no communication, with no sun for 70 days. It's very hard. That was
when Monique came into her own. Their story after this. This is Danielle the
hour of Yetska with the BBC News, hello. President Velotimiers Olensky has said
a world order based on rules and humanity. Depends on how events play out in
Ukraine. Speaking after President Biden's highly symbolic unannounced trip to
Kiev, he said Ukraine's victory over Russia depended on resolve and he saw such
determination in Mr. Biden. For his part, Mr. Biden said America would back
Ukraine and its fight against Russia for as long as it took. Our international
editor Jeremy Bowen reports from the Ukrainian capital. President Biden arrived
here by train like all the other leaders who visited Kiev. The Americans warned
the Russians at the weekend that the visit was happening but tried to keep its
secret at home. President Zelensky welcomed his guest at a brief ceremony at his
official residence. Thank you very much for coming Mr. President. The huge
moment that's supporting the Ukraine and what can I say? He said President Biden
was visiting at the most difficult time for Ukraine. President Biden responded
with strong words of support. Russia's aim was to wipe Ukraine off the map.
Putin's war of conquest is failing. The President of Belarus, Alexander
Lukashenko, has ordered the formation of a new territorial defense force, saying
every man should know how to handle weapons. His defense minister said the force
should have at least 100,000 volunteers and be present in every village in town.
Mr. Lukashenko is a close ally of Vladimir Putin and has allowed Russia to use
Belarus as a base for attacks on Ukraine. Rescue services in Turkey are again
searching for people trapped under rubble after a new tremor in the southeast
near the border with Syria. This is the same region where 46,000 people were
killed two weeks ago by a much larger earthquake. Officials say three people
died and 200 were injured. Some structures weakened earlier have collapsed,
including a bridge. A spokesman for Turkey's disaster and emergency management
authority said it had been difficult when the tremor first started. It was very
shaky, we hardly stood up, it was very difficult. But in the camp, everything is
fine, we checked the tents, everybody was fine. We were expecting that, so right
now we are expecting more. So everybody should be more prepared about this. The
number of people killed by flash floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil
has risen to 40. Rescuers are searching for survivors after record rainfall
devastated a stretch of coast in Sao Paulo State. President Lula de Silva has
visited the worst hit area around the city of South Sebastian. If each one of us
works alone, we do less work. That's why we need to stick together. That's why
we need to share the good things and the bad things because together will be
much stronger and we'll recover quickly. You're listening to the world news from
the BBC. Israel's Parliament has voted to push ahead with a highly controversial
overhaul of the judicial system, proposed by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's
religious nationalist government. Tens of thousands of people gathered in the
streets outside to protest against the plan. The opposition in Parliament vowed
to fight for what it called the Soul of the Nation after the bill was approved
in a first reading. Two top Spanish transport officials have resigned over a
botched order for new commuter trains that proved to be too wide to fit through
non-standard tunnels in the mountainous northern regions of Australia and
Cantabria. Anapisaro has more details. Two managers of the Royal League
companies in charge of the project have already been sacked since the oversized
drain scandal broke earlier this month. The latest heads to roll are the boss of
Spain State Rail Operator and the Secretary of State for the sector. The
Minister for Transport apologized to the regions involved and said there would
now be a delay of two or three years for the new rolling stock, 31 trains
costing nearly $300 million. While the government argues diagnosing the mistake
in a design stage will avoid financial loss, costs may yet rise. A United
Nations torture monitoring agency has cancelled a visit to Australian detention
centres because two states have barred unhindered inspections. New South Wales
and Queensland have refused permission for the panel to check some prisons and
mental health patient facilities. The Australian government said it was deeply
disappointed at the cancellation. Botswana says it has seen a big jump in rhino
poaching. The tourism minister told Parliament that 138 rhinos were killed over
the past five years, though numbers dropped sharply last year. Official figures
say just two animals were poached in the five years to 2017. The minister
attributed the rise to continuing international demand for rhino horn,
especially in East Asia. BBC News. Hello, I'm Joe Figeon. Welcome to Outlook,
the place to come for excellent company. Today, courtesy of French adventurer
Girek Sude and a very special chicken called Monique. She's a red-roared island
from Canaris Island, so she was picking Spanish and she learned how to speak
French, so that's good. And she's a very nice hand, very courageous and very
adventurous. She most certainly is. Together Girek and Monique sailed around the
world. They crossed the Atlantic, travelled to the North and South Poles across
the Cape Horn, back to the Caribbean, and home to Brittany, on the northwest
coast of France, to a tiny privately owned island called Ivanac, where this
story begins, long before Monique entered the picture. It's where Girek grew up
in the only house on the island and with just the sea for entertainment. This
island make me, you know, my parents get divorced when I was seven years old and
I was living with my dad. As only one house, so was my family house and my dad
house, and maybe I learned how to swim before to work actually. And I was always
in the water and so I spent all my time on this island and I was growing on sea,
on my own, when I was like six, seven years old. My boot and I was just going
out fishing and my dream, since a little, was to have a boot and just to cross
ocean to describe new country, new culture. So, just you and your dad on this
island? Actually, it was just my dad and me and one of my sisters, actually I've
got six sisters, but I'm the youngest. Okay, so just you and one sister and your
dad on this little island, I mean your dad must have been a huge figure in your
life then. Oh yeah, it was like my, my example, because he was a very brave man,
he had a lot of character, he was very respect from all the people and he was
always in, you know, always smiling, always happy and he said before and it told
me so much story about sailing across Atlantic and this is why I want to do that
after, no. So he had already sailed across the Atlantic. Yeah, yeah, it was a
very good friend with a very good sailor in France called a Jean-Riguelle, and
yeah, he showed me so much picture about this trip and I was just, I was just
dreaming to do the same when I was older, no. You say you were out sailing by
yourself from the age of six, so I mean your dad must have had quite a lot of
trust in you, I'm guessing. Yeah, a lot of trust of me, it lived me a lot of
freedom, I don't know if I can say too much, I remember like my family, my
sister said to my dad, you must be careful to your son because you leave him
like on, but whether go out on the sea and something can happen, but it was
believing in me, I learned that this is like a school for me and this is how I
grow up and I think I get a lot of maturity very quickly too. So yeah, I'm
seeing him very lucky to grow up on this island and to have a dad like him. And
if the bear could go on to name his sailboat after the island, but he had to buy
one first and that meant making some money, which he did first opportunity he
got. I was not good in school and was very hard for me to be focused on
something hard to be outside because I was a hip active. Yes, hyperactive, yeah.
Couldn't stop going. Yeah, exactly. And then he didn't change a lot actually
from that. And when I was 18, I quit school. I fly to Australia, I arrived there
actually with no money at all. I was sleeping on the street, I didn't know how
to speak English, I don't know nobody is there. And my dream was to like to to
make some money to buy this boat and to learn how to speak English. On the
beginning was quite hard and I did a lot of different job with my first salary,
I bought a push bike for like a bicycle and I did also Swiss or Australia was
very nice experience. And when I was 20 years old, I come back and I bought my
my selling boat. So you buy a boat which you plan to sail across the Atlantic
solo in tell us a little bit about this boat. So yeah, I was looking for a boat
like a strong boat to be safe inside you know because sometimes on the sea you
can hurt like a container, you can hurt some piece of wood. And so it was very
important for me to have like a steel boat. But the trouble of the steel is like
corrosion, you know the rust. And when I buy my boat, I was thinking to make a
good deal but very quickly I make some boats inside the hole because it was full
of rust. And I start with this boat in very, very bad condition and all the
people around me tell me, no you can go like that, just not possible, it's just
too dangerous. Maybe you will sing. And so I start my trip with a boat in very
bad condition and with like no more and no experience on sailing actually
because I did a lot of windsurfing when I was young. But I never sail on my own
more than maybe two or three hours on this boat. You'd gone out for two or three
hours alone on this boat and now you were going to cross the Atlantic and who
knows what? Yeah, this is true and you know when I start, no communication on
the boat actually and something happened was not possible for me to call
anybody. And remember my parents told me if something happened, can you call
someone to take you to rescue you? I say yeah of course not only because they
know my boat was not in very good shape. And they told me if something happened
in the middle of the ocean, can you call it, can you make an emergency? And I
said yeah of course and had nothing of that because I'm not there to buy this
kind of stuff. So and no communication on the beginning for the few months. I
wonder what your parents would have said if you'd been honest about that before
setting off. I don't know but I didn't start with something very hard to because
my dream was to sail in ice in order to green on everything like that. But I was
thinking to start from something quite easy. So this is why I cross the Atlantic
after I was to Caribbean because you've got the good wind, with the wind pushing
you, with the wind and currents. So he says often in early January 2014, how did
money come to join you on that journey? When I start my trip, I was thinking to
have a pet with me to have a companion board. And I was thinking to have a dog
to have a cat but I was just telling to myself this is too complicated. And
after a few weeks I think about a chicken to have fresh eggs and I say oh yeah
this will be very nice. And I ask some people around me and friends like farmers
and they told me if the chicken is a handful, you will have no eggs. So I was
very disappointed and I start my trip on my own from friends. And when I stopped
to Canada with Ireland just before to cross the Atlantic, I met Monique and we
fell in love together. You met and fell in love with Monique. And you thought
right, okay she can come, she can be my only company. Yeah exactly and she was
very brave actually and first day she made me an egg. And so we cross the
Atlantic together in 28 days and she gave me 25 eggs and she was just free
working on the day. And sometime we took some stress because I was chewing the
boat and on like quite bad weather. I saw waves coming and I just saw Monique
drifting from the deck and at the last moment she gave a small flapping with his
wing. And she just stay on board and she come back so wet. So she had good sea
legs did she? Oh yeah, she, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean like a city advantage
of having a chicken on board in that, you know, if she's going to lay eggs
you've got a fresh food supply. And I guess if she doesn't lay eggs and you get
fed up she could always make you a, you know, another kind of meal. Yeah
exactly. Now I can say that on the, yeah on the beginning I say maybe I will hit
her, maybe she will fall in the water. But very quickly she come a very good
friend and I was very close from her and I was laughing about her and we share
everything, how meal. And she was coming, you know, on my legs when I was
chewing the boat when I was reading, when I was sleeping, sometime I wake up.
She was just so close for my face. No, but so funny. And so this is why we
decide to keep going. So, okay, those are the benefits of having a chicken on
board. I can see some disadvantages too. For example, a chicken is going to
create a lot of unpleasant mess all over your boat. When it's on the deck
outside of the boat, it's fine, you know, you just take a bucket of water. But
when she do that inside the boat like on your computer, like on the food, that's
not very nice. But it's also too mouths to feed. Yeah, but she was eating some
food, you know, so I'd feed on board, but money can eat everything. What was
very funny actually when we cross how first ocean, she was eating flying fish.
Wow, so flying fish would leap into the air. Yeah, like sometimes hundreds of
flying fish, like just flying next to the boat, sometimes they're just coming
straight away on the deck. I was liking to the flying fish and sometimes was
like a competition between money and me. Who were the first one to get the
flying fish and she was just much more frustrated than me. And she was winning
the most of the time. And she eats the flying fish, let's steal alive. Straight
away in this mouse was so funny. Is it normal for a chicken to eat fish? I don't
know, was my first chicken actually. So I think she's very special, me what's
funny too, like after the eggs was testing little bit salty and like fish was
not bad actually. What about swimming? Did you ever check out whether money
could actually swim? Yes, not on the beginning, but when we cross that logic and
when we arrive in Caribbean in some part, I teach how to swim, I teach how to
serve, to win surf and actually she do a lot of sport now. Okay, but I've got
some questions about that. So number one, how do you teach a chicken to swim? So
she likes so much water actually and when we were on the beach in Samba, she was
coming in the water because she was following me all the time like a dog, you
know. I just take her on my hand and I pulled like I drove her very slowly on
water and she was just moving this leg and she was just coming next to me. And
windsurfing? Yeah, and windsurfing too and surfing actually and she liked very
much the water and I think was very important for me to teach her how to swim
because if from the boat she will following the water and that happened few
times after actually. And she know if she following the water and she will wait
for me somewhere now would come grab her. Wow, so would she go out on the
surfboard with you? She didn't have her own surfboard surely. No, no, no, no,
she was coming on with me like on the big surfboard like a stand up paddleboard.
She was always want me to take her in every activity I can. This chicken sounds
quite incredible, I have to say. Yeah, she's incredible. So you crossed the
Atlanta, you find that, you know, very easy. Until you set yourself a bigger
challenge, which is to go to Greenland and spend the winter there frozen into
the ice. Now, why did you want to do that? Well, why, but a dream, you know,
I've got so many dreams actually and was a dream to sail to Greenland and to be
stuck in the ice. Yeah, in middle of nowhere, far away from people and to be on
how own, to be cut off the world actually. And this is what we did to be cut off
from the world. You wanted no contact with the world. Yeah, no contact is good.
I think some time to just spend some time for yourself. You've got no people on
you, you've got no internet. And for me, it was very important to be far away
and to be on my own with money. You arrive before the big freeze. So, you know,
you've got time to stock up and this, that and the other. But can you describe
for us as your approaching Greenland, your first site of ice bags? Yeah,
remember like the first ice bag we see like maybe one or two days before we
arrived in Greenland and the Oroha Brouellis? Oh, the Northern Lights. Fabulous.
Yeah, Northern Lights, yeah, exactly. Yeah. And so, we arrived in south of
Greenland and the plants were to sail on the west part and going north. We were
so exciting, you know, because we arrived from far away with money. We start
with no experience, with both in very bad condition. And now we just arrived in
Greenland sailing through the ice to this huge piece of ice bag. We just sailed
in Greenland with still no experience. And so, it was just amazing to see like
the big mountains after weeks of sailing and the ice and all the animals. And it
was so nice experience. And we stopped in many villages to learn with people
actually had to be careful because they never saw a chicken alive because like
in Greenland, 70% of the year, the land is the same. The land is just frozen.
So, there are no chickens there. There are only a fun, only a chicken you would
see. It's on the plate, you know, ready to eat. And so, they eat everything
there. So, had to keep money very close for me. What did people think of her?
Well, there was a very happy to see a chicken. All the people want to test the
eggs. And I remember some kids was a bit scared of money, actually. Because,
yes, there are no life chickens. I think money may be the first chicken to come
in Greenland. I think she should have been a bit scared as well because, you
know, as you say, a lot of animals end up on the plate in Greenland, including.
You try to seal meat and dolphin meat for the first time and probably the last
time. Yeah, probably the last time. Yeah, exactly. Because they don't have the
same animals than us and they are far away from everything. And like the nature,
it's very hard. And, yes, the condition is very difficult. They will catch
everything they can to try to survive. And one of my first meal I was invited by
a green-nonded people. And they give me exactly some dolphins, they eat well.
And seal too. But, of course, I didn't want to eat that. But I had no much
choice and was actually a good experience. But they have a lot of respect for
animals too. And with the seals, like they will kill seals. And they will keep
everything on the animal, they will keep the skin to do gloves, shoes. They will
eat the stomach, they will eat the eyes, everything. You didn't eat a seal eye,
did you? No, no, I didn't. But I tried the liver. The seal liver. Oof, what was
that like? Yeah, it's not so good, you know, when you see what is it. They eat
that straight away, still a little bit hot, like candy for them. They like that
so much. And dare I ask, what was the dolphin meat like? Well, yeah, a lot of
grease and was very hard for me. Because when the to me was a dolphin, I was
like, oh no, I can't do that. It's not just not possible. They were all washing
me. And I said, okay, well, I had to be polite. And it has no choice to eat
that. And yeah, a lot of grease was not good at all. And of course, the other
animal that was on your radar that you were going to need to be aware of, at
least were polar bears, you needed to be prepared. So you needed a gun. Yeah, to
make some noise in case if it's polar bear comes. Right. Okay, just to make the
noise. How did you get hold of a gun? You know, it's so easy. In Greenland, it's
the biggest island in the world. As I only 70,000, maybe less people on the
island. So all the small village are on the coast. There may be 50, 100 people,
200. And on the small village, there are only one shop when you can buy your
food. And in the same shop, you can buy your gun. And every people can buy your
gun, actually. It is very strange because you've got like the fruits. And next
to the fruits, you've got the roof. So on the first village called Kocortok in
south of Greenland, was taking some food. And in the same time, I bought a gun
to protect me. So the winter is setting in. The ice is getting thicker. You need
to go and find your isolated spot to settle in for the winter. I mean, I wonder
what the villagers said to you about your plan of cutting yourself off
completely. What was their advice to you? But they didn't understand too much
why I wanted to do that, but it was not easy to speak with them because they
don't know how to speak French, of course. And they don't know much to speak in
English. So it was very hard for me sometimes to have a conversation with them.
I guess you don't speak Greenlandic. No, no much. I had to learn a few words.
How do you say hello, how are you? So it's a hello, hello, how young he? So you
can open a conversation. Yeah. So before you set off then for your remote,
overwintering spot, you've got a last chance to make some phone calls. Your last
phone call was to your father. What kind of conversation did you have with him?
I just told him, so this is like a big day, so I'm studying my new adventure, my
new life. I was waiting that scene so long and I was so happy, and I know he was
so happy. And actually the plan was to my dad to come to see me after that. So
maybe in around June. And so that's it. And actually at this moment I had a set
a little fun, and I was keeping a few minutes to call him when I arrived on the
spot. Okay, so you set off for this spot a few miles away from the village where
you'd been staying. How did you feel on arriving there? Like you said, it's been
your dream. Did it feel like that when you got there? Yeah. Oh yeah. So I was a
few hours from the first village, and I find a small bear there. I was thinking
he was a good spot, but he was not so much protected from the wind. I was so
happy. And yeah, I was waiting that scene so long and had to have a fight, a lot
to arrive. And for me was a big accomplishment. But I knew it would be very hard
because I will have some maybe bad condition. But from the first day, I had a
very bad news from a friend who arrived from the village. So this was a villager
you'd met in the village where you'd been staying before. And this is the very
first day, full day that you'd spent in your winter spot. So he arrives by boat
to tell you what. Yeah, so I arrived by boat after a few hours of like, saying
him, and I was very surprised to see him, but I was great. I was great, I didn't
know. And we know try to tell me something, but I didn't understand why he
wanted to tell me. So he come on board and he show me this fun and add a message
of my sister. And when I read this message, I just learned from my dad, just
passed away the first day when I arrived on my bed to start this new challenge.
I was very, very difficult for me. I was not prepared for that. And for me, it
was a hard thing. I never have to live in my life, actually. We'll take a short
break for the news, but when we come back, we hear how Gerek grieving for his
father and struggling to deal with icebergs and high winds and solitude came to
rely on his pet chicken Monique to keep him going. This is Outlook. This is the
BBC World Service, meeting the Vietnam War veterans who left America and retired
to the country they fought in. 50 years ago, all the 20 nights of March, all
American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. Today is more group of US
veterans. Now in their 70s, have returned to Lip Day permanently. I was
expecting people to hate me when I came back. People welcomed me, like, I just
left the day before. I am now far. And I'll be finding out why they choose to
retire in Vietnam. You're ashamed of what you've seen and what you did. I say
this is the only thing that makes sense, me living in Vietnam. I came back to
find the war. I kind of explained it as when you're a little kid. You've got a
monster under the bed. I had to look under the bed. And the monster wasn't
there. No place like NAM. Saturday at 12 GMT. Coming next on Outlook, Gerek
Sudet is sailing around the world with his pet chicken Monique and has just
settled into the pack ice ready for an Arctic winter when he learns his father
has died. I had to turn my sadness to something positive. And I was just telling
to myself, you're not on your own anymore. You're with Monique. How Monique kept
Gerek alive through the dark winter months after the news? BBC News with
Danielle Yowovietzka. President Zelensky has reaffirmed his belief that Ukraine
will defeat the Russian invasion after President Biden visited Kiev to show
America's enduring support. He said the outcome of the war would determine the
fate of the rules based international order. China's Foreign Minister has said
Beijing is deeply worried about the escalation of the war and the danger it
could spiral out of control. Chingang said certain countries should immediately
stop fueling the fire. A new earthquake has caused panic and several deaths in
the quake-stricken border region of Turkey and Syria. Rescuers of once again
have been searching for people trapped under rubble. Structures already weakened
have collapsed, including a bridge. Israel's parliament has given initial
approval to a highly controversial overhaul of the judicial system, proposed by
Benjamin Netanyahu's religious nationalist government. The vote was preceded by
intense protest inside and outside the Knesset. The number of people killed by
flash floods and landslides in southeastern Brazil has risen to 40 record
rainfall devastated a stretch of the coast in Sao Paulo state during carnival
celebrations. There's been an outcry in Colombia after a former member of the
National Truth Commission went into hiding because of death threats. Laina
Polacios played a leading role in the Commission's report on atrocities
committed during the long internal conflict. A United Nations torture monitoring
agency has cancelled a visit to Australian detention centres after New South
Wales and Queensland barred unhindered inspections. Two top Spanish transporter
officials have resigned over a botched order for new commuter trains. They
proved to be too wide to fit through tunnels in the mountains of Asturius and
Cantabria. And Park Keepers in New York have captured an alligator that was
spotted in a lake in Brooklyn. Hello, welcome back to Outlook. I'm Joe Fijon.
We've been hearing about the extraordinary adventures of Gerek Sudem, a young
Frenchman who set off from Brittany in a rickety boat to sail around the world
with just a chicken for company, a Rhode Island red called Monique, who were
taken to the high seas like a natural. The two of them had made it to Greenland.
It had been Gerek's dream to spend an Arctic winter without human company or
communications, packed into the ice in the everlasting nights until the return
of the sun. On his last day in a village, he called his beloved father and told
him how happy he was. His father was very proud. And the very next day, a
villager sailed for hours to bring him the news that his father had died of a
heart attack. Conditions as they were, there was no way he could go home. I was
just too far away to come back to France for a nother to keep going. So I had to
turn my sadness to something positive and make me stronger. And I was just
telling to myself, you're not on your own anymore, you're with Monique and your
dad is with you. You have to fight stronger. When you say your dad is with you,
what did you mean? You know he's in the sky, I say, so maybe he's just next to
me. He will help me because I was very hard for me. And in this situation, you
just want to be with your family. And for me, it was just not possible. I know I
will have a very hard experience to be stuck in the ice. He made it a no way
with no communication, with no sun for 70 days. And you're the first day, you
learn, then you just lost your dad. It's very hard, you know? Okay, I've got
Monique for company, but Monique is a chicken. I mean, I know that she had been
a great companion to you, but how could she help you in that situation? Because
she was with me, I was speaking to Monique all the time, and I'm sure she was
understanding me. And she was like, yeah, a companion. She was like, you're bad,
you know? And I think it would be very different if she would be not with me. I
was very happy to have her and to have this eggs too, because actually on this
trip, I only take some rice, because I was thinking to catch fish. That was no
fish at all. And so I survived because of the eggs of Monique too. And yes, she
gave me lots of love. We can say. So she gave you sort of psychological support
and kept you nourished. Exactly. Yeah, she gave me 106 eggs in the 130 days
taking the ice. And this was a chicken you'd been told wouldn't lay because
she'd be too stressed. And she clearly wasn't stressed. Oh, no. No. No, I think
she's the best chicken in the world, and I think she's a more happy chicken in
the world too. What did she make of the extreme cold? So Monique had a cabin
outside, and when we planned to go to Grinnan, I make a cabin inside. The boat
too sheds the choice to go out or inside. But when it was very cold, she was
inside the boat, of course. How cold did it get? We had some time like, minus 60
degrees Celsius. That's ice the course on your nose, whether, isn't it? Yeah,
no, it's over here. You had to move because if you don't move, you're just
frizz. You made Monique a jumper. Yeah, I made a Monique a jumper, exactly. It
was a Christmas present for Monique, and I made a slag. For Monique too, she,
when the weather was not too bad, I'd take her on the slag. You went out
sledding with your chicken. Yeah, exactly. You've got quite a lot to deal with
on this boat stuck in the ice, not least, you know, the emotional things that
you're going through. But also the very practical problems. When the pack ice is
breaking up, you've got icebergs appearing by the boat. You've got terrible
winds. You mentioned that the wind was really bad where you were. Were you
scared? Yeah, actually, yeah, we had very bad condition, and sometimes the wind
was just pushing the ice bag next to how good. And no visibility is the most of
the time. Well, I said before 70 days with no sun, so it was very dark. And so,
like, the boat was full of ice, and had to break the ice all around the boat
every day. And take me maybe to our fondepan was very hard. And we had a huge
storm arrived, and the waves was coming under the ice. And the ice was quite
thick, actually, maybe 40 to 60 centimeters. And after a few hours, all the ice
break, like a huge puzzle. And the boat was like squeezing, I just said to me,
okay, no, this is something will happen, not very nice. So we have to take off
some piece of wood from the boat to try to make a small cabin on land. So if I
was on the dry suit with a tent sleeping bag, like just ready to last the boat,
you know? Ready to go and camp on land with Monique, and you managed to avoid
that? Yeah, we were very lucky one more time, because after hours I was the wind
turn, and the ice came out from the bay, and we've been on the water again on
free water. You started out thinking this was your dream, and it sounds awful,
frankly. Yeah, but I think this experience was a harder and better one. It was
so interesting, but very stressful, because by a few times I was thinking to
last my boat, and to last everything. Including your life, did you think you
might lose your life? Yes, and no, because I always try to stay positive, but I
was not always sure about the end of the story, but we always fight, and yeah,
we just try to stay optimistic. As you say, 70 days without seeing the sun. What
was it like to see the sun rising for the first time? Oh, yeah, it was very,
very nice. Oh, yeah, I think we were crying. It's really, you know, I hesitate
to use the word sweet, but it does actually sound really sweet. You always say
we. You never say I. Monique is with you every step of the way, huh? Oh, yeah,
yeah, she part of the family. Yeah, we did that together if I would be on my
own. Maybe it would be very different, and maybe something bad will happen, you
know. So, yeah, we did that together. Yeah, it's more than a chicken. It's, she
does sound like more than a chicken, I have to say. So after 130 days in that
place, the ice breaks up, you're back on the open sea. You're off around the
north and west coast of North America briefly imprisoned by Canadian coast
guards on your way. For bringing a firearm into the country, there's gun that
you'd, that you'd got to scare off polar bears. How did that go? When we left
from Greenland with Monique, the plans was to do the northwest passage. We had
to stop in Canada. And when I stopped to, to a smaller, small village called
Pointland, the custom asked me some question. You've got drugs on board, you've
got like, gurn, you've got animals. And I said, no, I don't have that. No, don't
worry. They told me, okay, we will come on board to check everything. And I
said, oh no. And when we arrived on my boat, Monique was just working on the
day. You know, and had my rifle inside the boat and there was not very happy.
When you lied. Yeah, when I lied, exactly. They didn't like that you lied. Yeah,
I think so they said, okay, no, we will keep your boat. And you have to go to
jail. You know, I said, oh no, that's a bad news. And after like six, seven
hours they take me out from the jail. They give me someone on the phone and I
told him I was a bad person. You know, I'm just a young French man, you know.
And it was very nice and it told us, okay, you will go back on your boat with
Monique. And we will give you back your rifle because we know it's very
important to have that not pull in case something happened. Why do you think
they showed you mercy in that way? Maybe they were thinking on the beginning, I
was maybe a terrorist or something like that. And they checked my website and
this Yokea bore. They are just a young man with his pet and they just want to
have a to have fun and to describe the world. So they said you're going to need
this gun. Did you actually come across any polar bears on your trip? Yeah, yeah.
We saw polar bear like swimming next to our boat. Maybe one or two meters was
just crazy. But I just keep Monique safe because I was thinking, is a polar bear
so Monique, or they will maybe want to test it? But you didn't have to fire your
gun. No, no, no, no, of course no, no, no. So you continued on your journey and
you did make it through the Northwest Passage. Between the Pacific and the
Atlantic, the Northwest Passage is a pretty terrifying sale, I'm guessing. And
you became the youngest sailor to navigate it solo. And indeed, Monique, the
only chicken to go through it as far as anybody knows. What is it like? So yeah,
exactly Monique, it was the first chicken who did the Northwest Passage. So I
was very happy about that. And yeah, the sailing into the Northwest Passage was
quite difficult because there are no much people going there actually. And the
charts are not very inaccurate. So maybe two times we touch with the bottom of
the boat. And there are a lot of drifting ice too. So sometime you have to climb
on top of your mast. You can fly your drone to see a small passage. What it's
hard when you sail like on your own, you have nobody to steer your boat.
Monique, sometime come help me on steering. But it's not so helpful. I've got
autopilot on my boat. But when you're too close from the North Pole. When you're
that close to the North Pole, yeah. Yeah, the autopilot don't work. So you have
no choice to stay outside and to steer your boat. And so it was very, very
difficult for me because I didn't sleep with many quidines in Northwest Passage
in 32 days, something like that. And I didn't sleep so much on this trip. So
sometime I had a hallucination on bone. I was thinking there was people on my
boat because I didn't sleep. So I was just too tired. Continuing your journey
then. So you sail all the way south to Antarctica. And from there to Cape Town
and then North to the Caribbean. And finally back home to Brittany. I mean, this
was a trip that you'd set out across the Atlantic. And you'd ended up covering
45,000 miles over five years. Yeah. I mean, some marriages don't last that long.
And you've spent all this time with Monique. Quite an adventure you've had
together. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Because I'm the beginning, we didn't know so much
where we will go for how much time we will take, how trip and we just want to
keep going to, yeah, to describe everything we can. And all the while, all
through this journey, you're taking all these photos and posting them on social
media, getting a huge following people just delighted with what you're up to.
But all of those photos that you took, do you have a favorite? If I've got far
right, but we saw so many nice things, you know, like in North, we saw like the
polar bear, we saw whales and in the South, been to Antarctica to see the
penguin. But I think one of my best picture, it's a Monique working on the ice
next to the boat in Greenland. I was with my camera and Monique was just so
happy to work on the ice and actually was little bit windy. And she had the wind
coming in her, in her wing. And she was almost like sleeping on the ice, you
know? Sleeping on the ice. How can you tell when Monique is happy? I know her,
she's almost smile, you know? Actually, she's always happy, you know? Just one
time she was not very happy. This one I left her when I was in San Francisco,
had to leave Monique for a few weeks and she was making a depression because she
didn't see me and she was in a bad mood, but when I come back she was much
better. What was it like to get home to Brittany after that long, long trip?
Well, it was so nice to arrive after so much experience and I was talking about
Brittany to Monique since the beginning and I was telling to Monique, you will
see when there we will come to France and I will show you Brittany's island. You
will love it, I'm sure. How does she like the island? Yeah, she likes that so
much. No, she's got some friends too on the island. And that's very funny
because Monique, like something, will her friend just on the beach to take the
seaweed and to go like almost fishing, you know? So always cross from water,
this is a secret for Monique. And when you say she's got friends are these
chicken friends? Yeah, chicken friend, exactly, yeah, and a dog too. And a dog
too. And one other new occupant of your island, your partner who is about to
have a baby? Yeah, exactly, yeah. Are you worried that Monique is going to be
jealous of the competition for your affections? I hope not. I think Monique will
take care of how new baby I'm sure about that. And she will share all this
story. You know, she's got so much to say. She allowed into your house. Yeah, of
course. And you still go out on the boat together? Yeah, we're still going out
on boat together. I just come back actually from crossing the mountain on the
rowing boat. But I did not know how to do it. I think Monique will take care of
how new baby I'm sure about that. And she will share all this story. You know,
she's got so much to say. She allowed into your house. Yeah, of course. And you
still go out on the boat together? Yeah, we're still going out on boat together.
I think she's not going to do anything on a rowing boat. But I didn't take
Monique with me because the boat was too small and it was too dangerous. So I
think now we can say Monique is quite retired on the smaller island in Brittany.
After all your years with her getting to know her, do you have some some chicken
wisdom to pass on? No, but what I say is if his Monique did it, all the people
can do it. Give your dream because a chicken can live your dream. Exactly. Look
what Monique just did it. So if you want to do something in your life, you just
have to fight for that. Try to to enjoy and to keep going. Yeah, fighting and to
never give up. How long could she live? They can leave like for it's hard to
say. But I think the average it's 10 years, 13 years, some time can be like 20
years. Actually. So yeah, I'm very very close from her and I hope she will leave
for 100 years. Gerreks, who day? Speaking to Outlook at the close of 2021. Soon
afterwards he became a father to a little girl called Mae. Her middle name is of
course Monique. Monique the chicken is now nine years old less active than she
was, but enjoying her retirement. Gerreks tells us he's now in training for next
year's Vondae Globe challenge. The famous solo and unassisted race around the
globe without any stops. Thanks for listening. Do come back tomorrow for another
fabulous story. Music BBC World Service And now, witness history with me, Ilona
Tolo. Today I'm taking you back to the newly reunited Germany of 1991 and the
vote to decide which city would become the country's capital. It's the 20th of
June 1991 and the German Interior Minister Wolfgang Shuybler is at the makeshift
government building, the Vasavek, in Bonn. He's about to give one of the most
important speeches of his career. I thought so, but I'm the new ones in film.
And then about 45 minutes before the session, I got myself a coffee and lit up
my pipe. And I thought about how to start my speech, because the beginning is
the most important part. After World War II when Germany was split into two
halves, lawmakers decided that the small and unheralded city of Bonn should
become the temporary capital of West Germany. And it stayed that way as it
became clear that the division of the country between capitalist West and
communist East was there to stay. Bonn thrived as the capital of West Germany,
which underwent an economic miracle to recover from the Second World War. The
world looked at a small, modest Bonn, which was a citizen Yunnimch, who would
later become the mayor of the city. We know Elizabeth was visiting a student of
Kennedy, Mikhail Gorbachev, and so on and so on, and a lot of people in the
citizens of Bonn passed in the splendor, and they did well because the federal
government provided jobs, prosperity, and lively cultural life. Berlin, located
east of the border, was separated in two by the Berlin Wall. This giant scar
across the landscape of Germany. Political aggression and a pretty nasty piece
of calculated inhumanity to boot. But in 1989, the fall of the Wall made
headlines around the world. Baldozers breaking holes in the Berlin Wall, the
most sinister 45-quarter in the world. The Iron Curtain opened. Re-unifying
itself. But what's more order in Europe is now collapsing. Yes, I am happy.
Baldoz, I think it's marvelous. The end of the Wall marked the end of communism
in East Germany, and set the stage for reunification. But after so long apart,
bringing the country together was going to be very complex, and would require
immense political will. One issue which is still dividing the country, which
city should be its capital. The contest is between Berlin, which was the capital
until Hitler's downfall, and born which has been the seat of parliament and
government since 1949. Both sides collected arguments. Many German thought that
the former power centre of the Third Reich, Berlin, was not suitable as a
political centre of the new democratic Germany. The residents of the Führen-
Chancellor Adolf Hitler. The case for it is its history. The case against it is
also its history. The bond was standing for modesty and democratic reality,
while Berlin stood for a view of the state that was obedient to the authorities.
Wolfgang Schoibler was an unlikely ally for the Berlin side. He was a veteran
West German political operator and minister. Most West Germans supported Bonn,
and they outnumbered voters in the East. But Schoibler's are moving the capital
as an important step in successfully reunifying the country. You know how it is,
as long as we're doing well, we don't want anything to change. And that was the
starting position for the debate. It was suspenseful till the end. On the 20th
of June 1991, a decision was due by parliamentary vote, with a final debate
first. At Bonn or Berlin for the Bundestar, German parliamentarians vote today
on their future capital. Berlin's Mayor, Eberhard Deepkin, he speaks as if
Bonn's arguments will prevail. They want to consolidate the Bonn Republic. I
think that's against history. The member of Parliament from the north on at
Eastern Germany would be pre-dominantly for Berlin, and those from southern and
western Germany would be pre-dominantly for Bonn. Of course, they had precounted
how everyone planned to vote, so they were pretty sure they would have the
majority. The day became quite an event in Bonn. Crowds gathered at the
marketplace in front of the historic town hall. We had a big screen with a live
broadcast of the debate. We were relaxed, that's it, at the end of the day it
would be Bonn. Up to this point, Wolfgang Schoibler had not been expected to
intervene in the debate at all. But he surprised everyone by standing on the
floor of the parliament and making an impassioned plea on behalf of Berlin. A
West German politician publicly backing the East German city. This debate wasn't
about Bonn or Berlin, about West Germany or South Germany. It wasn't about
regional interests. It simply was about the future of Germany in a United
Europe. Berlin is in the middle of Europe, and that's why it is the only right
place for the capital. The reaction was immediate. His speech had struck a
nerve. I immediately felt a strong reaction for the MPs. At the end, the Berlin
supporters got up from their seats and gave me a standing ovation. In
Saichabundis-Tach, it was clear that many had been won over. The vote was now
going to be very close indeed. From Germany where the parliament was just voted
by 17 votes to move the seat of government from Bonn to Berlin. The parliament
president, Peter Sussmut, announced the result and the market grew quiet. For
out of people in Bonn, the world collapsed. What can we do now? But, according
to your niche, the people of Bonn quickly adapted to this new reality, which he
ascribes to the character of the Rhineland, the area around the city. In
Rhineland, we have ever seen it is like it is. We drink our beer, a kolch, a
two, or three, or five, maybe ten. And the next day, we have to think about what
we can do. A different Bonn, a new Bonn. The Bonn is talked to side that Bonn
would get financial aid to compensate for the loss of jobs and investments. But
that wasn't all. The United Nations came to Bonn, and now we are proud to be
Germany's United Nations city. That fits with our stories. A structural change
has done Bonn well. The government has gone on the United Nations have come.
Meanwhile, hopes that putting the capital in Berlin would kickstart a revival of
the East, which had lagged behind economically under communism, haven't been
fully realized. Inequality between East and West remains a persistent problem in
German politics. But Berlin's status as the capital is a constant reminder of
the fact that Germans never want their country to be divided again. That was the
right decision. Whenever I'm in Berlin giving a speech, I tell Berliners to be
more aware of their responsibility as a capital. The beauty of it all is that
today this decision is no longer questioned by anyone. Complaining is not our
business. Everything turned out okay for Bonn at the end. A few people say, oh,
in former times, all wars on a better way, but the world is changing and Bonn
has to change too. Proud to be a Bonn at. You'd nimch ending that edition of
Witness History. It was presented by me, Ilona Tolar, and it was a whistle-down
production for the BBC World Service. You're listening to the BBC World Service,
where our series, the invention of Russia, continues. To understand it now, we
need to understand its past. The principle way in which they controlled that
enormous space was through fear. In episode two, it was able to dispose of
Poland, then it went home to defeat Napoleon. Russia had become a European
superpower. The invention of Russia. Wednesday at 930 and 20 GMT. In half an
hour, we are in this studio.